Cognitive Neuroscience Society
21st Annual Meeting, April 5-8, 2014
Marriott Copley Place Hotel, Boston, Massachusetts

2014 Annual Meeting Program
Contents
2014 Committees & Staff  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2
Schedule Overview .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  3
Keynotes .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5
2014 George A. Miller Awardee .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  6
Distinguished Career Contributions Awardee .  .  .  7
Young Investigator Awardees .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  8
General Information  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10
Exhibitors .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13
Invited-Symposium Sessions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 14
Mini-Symposium Sessions  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 18
Poster Schedule .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 32
Poster Session A  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 33
Poster Session B  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 66
Poster Session C  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 98
Poster Session D  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 130
Poster Session E  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 163
Poster Session F .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  195
Poster Session G  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 227
Poster Topic Index .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  259
Author Index .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  261
Boston Marriott Copley Place Floorplan  .  .  .  .  272

A Supplement of the Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Cognitive Neuroscience Society
c/o Center for the Mind and Brain
267 Cousteau Place, Davis, CA 95616
ISSN 1096-8857 © CNS
www.cogneurosociety.org

2014 Committees & Staff
Governing Board

Mini-Symposium Committee

Roberto Cabeza, Ph.D., Duke University
Marta Kutas, Ph.D., University of California, San Diego
Helen Neville, Ph.D., University of Oregon
Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University
Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D., University of California,
Santa Barbara (ex officio)
George R. Mangun, Ph.D., University of California,
Davis (ex officio)
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan
(ex officio)

David Badre, Ph.D., Brown University (Chair)
Adam Aron, Ph.D., University of California, San Diego
Lila Davachi, Ph.D., New York University
Elizabeth Kensinger, Ph.D., Boston College
Gina Kuperberg, Ph.D., Harvard University
Thad Polk, Ph.D., University of Michigan
Daphna Shohamy, Ph.D., Columbia University
Marty Woldorff, Ph.D., Duke University

Program Committee

Kevin LaBar, Ph.D., Duke University (Chair)
Marvin Chun, Ph.D., Yale University
Sabine Kastner, Ph.D., Princeton University
Eleanor Maguire, Ph.D., University College London
Cathy Price, Ph.D., University College, London

Ken Paller, Ph.D., Northwestern University (Chair)
Brad Postle, Ph.D., University of Wisconsin-Madison
(Co-Chair)
Marie Banich, Ph.D., University of Colorado
Roberto Cabeza, Ph.D., Duke University
Manuel Carreiras, Ph.D., Basque Center on Cognition,
Brain and Language, Spain
Michael Chee, M.B.B.S., Duke University-NUS Graduate
Medical School, Singapore
Isabel Gauthier, Ph.D., Vanderbilt University
Kia Nobre, Ph.D., University of Oxford

Poster Committee
Tobias Egner, Ph.D., Duke University (Chair)
Signe Bray, Ph.D., University of Calgary
Evangelia Chrysikou, Ph.D., University of Kansas
Brian Gonsalves, Ph.D., University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign
Brian Haas, Ph.D., University of Georgia
Hauke Heekeren, Ph.D., Freie Universität Berlin
Matthew Jerram, Ph.D., Suffolk University
Janice Snyder, Ph.D., University of British Columbia
Rebecca Spencer, Ph.D., University of MassachusettsAmherst
Nicholas Turk-Browne, Ph.D., Princeton University

2

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Young Investigator Awards Committee

Founding Committee (1994)
Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D., University of California, Santa
Barbara
George R. Mangun, Ph.D., University of California, Davis
Steve Pinker, Ph.D., Harvard University
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan
Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University
Art Shimamura, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley

Administrative Staff
Kate Tretheway, Executive Director
Sangay Wangmo, Administrative Assistant

TM Events, Inc. Meeting Staff
Tara Miller, Event Director
Kerry Bosch, Meeting Planner
Carmen Conroy, Event Associate
Luisa Conroy, Event Associate
Becky Gazzaniga, Event Associate
Linda Hacker, Event Associate
Dana Hurt, Event Associate
Shawna Lampkin, Event Associate
Brenna Miller, Staff & Volunteer Manager
Melissa Tell, Event Associate
Jeff Wilson, Website & Program Manager
Shauney Wilson, Submissions Manager

Schedule Overview
Saturday, April 5
11:00 am – 3:00 pm 	

Exhibitor Check-In, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

11:00 am – 7:00 pm	

Onsite Registration & Pre-Registration Check In, 4th Floor Registration Desk

2:00 – 3:00 pm	

Keynote Address – Suzanne Corkin, Open to the Public, Grand Ballroom Salon A-F

3:00 – 3:30 pm	

Coffee Service, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

3:00 – 5:00 pm 	

Poster Session A, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

3:00 – 7:00 pm	

Exhibits on Display, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

5:00 – 6:00 pm 	

George A. Miller Prize Lecture –Jon Kaas, Grand Ballroom Salon A-F

6:00 – 7:00 pm 	

George A. Miller Prize & Welcome Reception, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

Sunday, April 6
7:30 am – 7:00 pm	

Onsite Registration & Pre-Registration Check In, 4th Floor Registration Desk

8:00 – 8:30 am	

Continental Breakfast, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

8:00 – 10:00 am	

Poster Session B, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

8:00 am – 7:00 pm	

Exhibits on Display, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall,
Closed during lunch, Noon - 1:00 pm

10:00 am – 12:00 pm	

Mini-Symposia

	

1 - The Relational Memory Theory: Inspiring Novel Predictions Two Decades Post-Inception,

	

Salon F

	

2 - Contributions of alpha-band oscillations in cognition, Salon E

	

3 - Putting Person Perception in Context: Insights from Social Neuroscience, Salon D

12:00 – 1:00 pm	

Lunch Break, Exhibits Closed

1:00 – 3:00 pm	

Poster Session C, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

2:30 – 3:00 pm	

Coffee Service, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

3:00 – 5:00 pm	

Invited Symposium 1 - The Broader Applicability of Insights from Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience - Silvia Bunge, Chair, Grand Ballroom Salon A-F

5:00 – 6:00 pm	

Distinguished Career Contributions Award Lecture – Marsel Mesulam, Grand Ballroom
Salon A-F

6:00 – 7:00 pm	

Distinguished Career Contributions Reception, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

Monday, April 7
7:30 am – 7:00 pm	

Onsite Registration & Pre-Registration Check In, 4th Floor Registration Desk

8:00 – 8:30 am	

Continental Breakfast, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

8:00 – 10:00 am	

Poster Session D, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

8:00 am – 5:00 pm	

Exhibits on Display, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall,
Closed during lunch, Noon - 1:00 pm

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

3

Schedule Overview	

2014 Annual Meeting

10:00 am – 12:00 pm	

Mini-Symposia

	

4 - The neuroscience of social networks, Salon F

	

5 - A New Look at Neural Representation in the Prefrontal Cortex, Salon E

	

6 - Prediction, adaptation and plasticity of language processing in the adult brain, Salon D

12:00 – 1:00 pm	

Lunch Break, Exhibits Closed

12:00 – 1:00 pm 	

NIH Funding: Training and Research Grant Opportunities, Kathy Mann Koepke, NICHD, Salon D

1:00 – 3:00 pm	

Poster Session E, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

2:30 – 3:00 pm	

Coffee Service, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

3:00 – 5:00 pm	

Invited Symposium 2 - Symposium on Consciousness, Wolf Singer, Chair,
Grand Ballroom Salon A-F

5:00 – 6:00 pm 	

Young Investigator Awards Lectures – Daphna Shohamy and David Badre,
Grand Ballroom Salon A-F

6:00 – 7:00 pm	

Keynote Address – Marlene Behrmann, Grand Ballroom Salon A-F

Tuesday, April 8
7:30 am – 5:00 pm	

Onsite Registration & Pre-Registration Check In, 4th Floor Registration Desk

8:00 – 8:30 am	

Continental Breakfast, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

8:00 – 10:00 am	

Poster Session F, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

8:00 am – 5:00 pm	

Exhibits on Display, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall,
Closed during lunch, Noon - 1:00 pm

10:00 am – 12:00 pm	

Mini-Symposia

	

7 - Mechanisms of Memory Consolidation During Sleep, Salon F

	

8 - MEG, EEG and fMRI based functional connectivity analysis: Relevance to cognition, Salon E

	

9 - Oscillatory mechanisms of attentional control, Salon D

12:00 – 1:00 pm	

Lunch Break, Exhibits Closed

1:00 – 3:00 pm	

Poster Session G, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

2:30 – 3:00 pm	

Coffee Service, 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

3:00 – 5:00 pm	

Invited Symposium 3 - Mechanisms of Response Inhibition, Yuko Munakata, Chair,
Grand Ballroom Salon A-F

NIH Funding: Training and Research Grant Opportunities
Monday, April 7th, 12:00 - 1:00pm, Salon D
This presentation will highlight current NIH training, career development, and
research funding opportunities available to CNS investigators. The NIH Program
Director will present an overview of relevant funding opportunities, as well as a
brief overview of the grant application, review, and funding processes, providing
hints for successful grant writing along the way. Come learn how to advance your
research with federal support!
Speaker: Kathy Mann Koepke, NICHD

4

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Keynotes
Suzanne Corkin

Professor of Neuroscience, Emerita,
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
Saturday, April 5, 2:00-3:00 pm, Grand Ballroom Salon A-F

Permanent Present Tense: The Unforgettable life of the
amnesic patient, H.M.
At age 27, Henry Molaison (H.M.) received an experimental operation to alleviate intractable epilepsy. Bilateral removal of his medial temporal lobe structures
left him with a dense amnesia but preserved intellect. I will highlight results
from 55 yrs of behavioral and imaging studies showing that short-term, longterm, declarative, and nondeclarative memory rely on different brain circuits.
H.M. died in 2008, leaving his brain to Mass General and MIT for further study.
He continues to illuminate the science of memory.

Marlene Behrmann

Carnegie Mellon University

Monday, April 7, 6:00 – 7:00 pm, Grand Ballroom Salon A-F

Distributed circuits, not circumscribed centers, mediate
visual recognition
Increasingly, the neural mechanisms supporting visual cognition are being
conceptualized as a distributed but integrated system, as opposed to a set of
individual, specialized regions each subserving a particular visual behavior.
Consequently, there is an emerging emphasis on characterizing the functional,
structural and computational properties of these broad networks. In this talk, I
will present a novel theoretical perspective, which elucidates the developmental
emergence, computational properties and vulnerabilities of integrated circuits
using face and word recognition as a model domain, and I will offer empirical
data from developmental studies, ERP, fMRI and neuropsychology to support
this account. Additionally, I will argue that, rather than being disparate and independent, these neural circuits are overlapping and subject to the same computational constraints. Specifically, the claim is that both word and face recognition
rely on fine-grained visual representations but, by virtue of pressure to couple visual and language areas and to keep
connection length short, the left hemisphere becomes more finely tuned for word recognition and, consequently, the right
hemisphere becomes more finely tuned for face recognition. Thus, both hemispheres ultimately participate in both forms
of visual recognition but their respective contributions are asymmetrically weighted.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

5

2014 George A. Miller Awardee
Congratulations to Dr. Jon Kaas for
being awarded this honor!
Dr. Kaas will accept this prestigious award and deliver his
lecture on Saturday, April 5, 2014, 5:00 – 6:00 pm, in the
Grand Ballroom Salon A-F. Reception to follow at 6:00 – 7:00
pm in the Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall.

Sensorimotor processing streams involving
posterior parietal, premotor and motor
cortex of primates: Comparative studies
Jon Kaas
Distinguished Centennial Professor
Psychology Department, Vanderbilt University
Many studies have focused
on the important issue of
how posterior parietal
cortex of humans and
macaque monkeys is functionally organized and
related to motor and premotor cortex in mediating
basic motor behaviors such
as reaching, grasping, and
looking. Our approach has
been comparative, studying at prosimian galagos,
New World monkeys, and
Old World macaques, and
relating our results to those published on humans. Our principle method of investigation has been the use of electrical
micro-stimulation to reveal as many as seven subregions or
domains of posterior parietal cortex with matching domains
in frontal motor cortex where different complex motor
behaviors are evoked in anesthetized or awake primates.
We have used anatomical tracers to reveal cortical and subcortical connections of domains identified by micro-stimulation, and optical imaging of cortical activation during
micro-stimulation of domains. We have also determined the
behavioral consequences of reversibly deactivating specific
domains with a cooling chip or muscimol during micro-stimulation of other domains. Interactions between domains
were studied by stimulating two at once. Our results allow a
number of strong conclusions. (1) All primates have a large
region of posterior parietal cortex where similar spatial
arrangements of domains exist for reaching, running or
climbing, looking, body and head protection, bringing hand
to mouth, and grasping. In contrast, posterior parietal cortex
is poorly developed in the non-primate relatives of primates,
and does not appear to have this organization. (2) Domains
matching those in posterior parietal cortex are found in
6

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

motor and premotor cortex. Matching domains are preferentially interconnected, and arranged in a hierarchy from
posterior parietal cortex to premotor cortex, and then to
motor cortex. (3) Posterior parietal cortex domains vary in
the sources and amounts of direct and indirect inputs from
visual areas and somatosensory areas. (4) Interactions
between domains in posterior parietal cortex or frontal
motor cortex are complex, but they are often antagonistic,
suggesting that domains mediating different behaviors
mutually suppress each other in a race to allow one behavior
to emerge over others.

About the George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive
Neuroscience
The George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience was established in 1995 by the Cognitive Neuroscience Society to honor the
innovative scholarship of George A. Miller, whose many theoretical advances has so greatly influenced the discipline of cognitive
neuroscience. The first ten years of the prize were funded by generous support from the James S. McDonnell Foundation.
The Prize is awarded to the nominee whose career is characterized by distinguished and sustained scholarship and research at
the cutting-edge of their discipline and that has in the past, or has
the potential in the future, to revolutionize cognitive neuroscience.
Extraordinary innovation and high impact on international scientific thinking should be a hallmark of the recipient’s work.

Previous Winners of the George A. Miller
Lectureship
2013 	
2012 	
2011 	
2010 	
2009 	
2008 	
2007 	
2006 	
2005 	
2004 	
2003 	
2002 	
2001 	
2000 	
1999 	
1998 	
1997 	
1996 	
1995 	

Fred H. Gage, Ph.D., The Salk Institute
Eve Marder, Ph.D., Brandeis University
Mortimer Mishkin, Ph.D., NIMH
Steven Pinker, Ph.D., Harvard University
Marcus Raichle, Ph.D., Washington University School of Medicine
Anne Treisman, Ph.D., Princeton University
Joaquin M. Fuster, Ph.D.,
University of California, Los Angeles
Steven A. Hillyard, Ph.D.,
University of California, San Diego
Leslie Ungerleider, Ph.D., National
Institute of Mental Health
Michael Posner, Ph.D., University of Oregon
Michael Gazzaniga, Ph.D., Dartmouth College
Daniel Kahneman, Ph.D., Princeton University
William Newsome, Ph.D., Stanford University
Patricia Churchland, Ph.D.,
University of California, San Diego
Giacommo Rizzolatti, Ph.D.,
University of Parma, Italy
Susan Carey, Ph.D., New York University
Roger Shepard, Ph.D., Stanford University
David Premack, Ph.D., CNRS, France
David H. Hubel, Ph.D., Harvard Medical School

Distinguished Career
Contributions Awardee
Congratulations to Dr. Marsel
Mesulam for being awarded this honor!
Dr. Mesulam will accept this prestigious award and deliver
his lecture on Sunday, April 6, 2014, 5:00 – 6:00 pm, in the
Grand Ballroom Salon A-F. Reception to follow at 6:00 – 7:00
pm in the Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall.

Primary Progressive Aphasia and the
Language Network
Marsel Mesulam, M.D.
Ruth Dunbar Davee Professor of Neuroscience and
Director of the Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer’s
Disease Center at Northwestern University
Primary
progressive
aphasia (PPA) is a clinical
syndrome
diagnosed
when three core criteria
are met. First, there should
be a language impairment
(i.e., aphasia) that interferes with the usage or
comprehension of words.
Second, the neurological
work-up should determine that the disease is
neurodegenerative, and
therefore
progressive.
Third, the aphasia should arise in relative isolation, without
equivalent deficits of comportment or episodic memory.
The language impairment can be fluent or non-fluent and
may or may not interfere with word comprehension.
Memory for recent events is preserved although memory
scores obtained in verbally mediated tests may be abnormal.
Minor changes in personality and behavior may be present
but are not the leading factors that bring the patient to medical attention or that limit daily living activities.

There are different clinical variants of PPA, each with a characteristic pattern of atrophy. The underlying neuropathological diseases are heterogeneous and can include Alzheimer's
disease as well as frontotemporal lobar degenerations. Each
PPA variant has a preferential (but not absolute) association
with a specific cellular type of pathology. The relationship
of clinical variant to underlying pathology is probabilistic
so that novel biomarkers are playing an increasingly more
important role in surmising the nature of the underlying
neuropathology.

About the Distinguished Career
Contributions Award
The Distinguished Career Contributions (DCC) award
honors senior cognitive neuroscientists for their distinguished career, leadership and mentoring in the field of
cognitive neuroscience. The recipient of this prize will give
a lecture at our 21st annual meeting at the Boston Marriott
Copley Place Hotel in Boston, MA.

Previous Winners of the Distinguished
Career Contributions Award
2013	
	

Robert T. Knight, M.D., University of California,
Berkeley

2012	

Morris Moscovitch, Ph.D., University of Toronto

This distinctive clinical pattern is most conspicuous at the
initial stages of the disease, and reflects a relatively selective
atrophy of the language network, usually located in the left
hemisphere. Asymmetry of neuronal loss is the biological
hallmark of PPA and persists until death. Its determinants
are unknown but may include a familial vulnerability of the
language network, as reflected by the higher prevalence of
learning disability in patients and their first degree relatives.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

7

Young Investigator Awardees
YIA special lectures take place on Monday, April 7,
5:00 – 6:00 pm, in the Grand Ballroom Salon A-F.

Congratulations to the 2014 Young
Investigator Award Winners
Daphna Shohamy, Ph.D., Columbia University
David Badre, Ph.D., Brown University
The purpose of the awards is to recognize outstanding contributions by scientists early in their careers. Two awardees,
one male and one female, are named by the Awards Committee, and are honored at the CNS annual meeting. Each
award includes $500 US to be used by the winners toward
travel costs to the meeting, or for any other purpose.

How different forms of learning guide
decisions
Daphna Shohamy
Columbia University
Learning is central to adaptive behavior. From robots
to humans, the ability to
learn from experience
turns a rigid response
system into a flexible,
adaptive one. How are
decisions shaped by past
experience? What are the
neurobiological and cognitive mechanisms that allow
everyday experiences to
change the way we perceive and act in the world?
Work in my lab aims to address these questions. We take as
a starting point a longstanding idea in cognitive and systems neuroscience: that the brain learns in different ways by
using multiple specialized learning systems. Implicit learning of habits is thought to depend on the striatum and its
dopaminergic inputs, while explicit memory for specific
episodes depends on the hippocampus. Surprisingly, however, despite progress in mapping these different forms of
learning to different areas in the brain, the separation of
learning into distinct systems has left open crucial questions
about the nature of the interactions between them, the kinds
of representations they build, and their role in guiding decisions. Work in my lab has made progress on these questions
by adopting an integrative approach that draw on neuroscience to make predictions about how different forms of
learning guide behavior. These predictions are tested with

8

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

behavioral, imaging, patient, and pharmacological studies.
Together, results emerging from this work challenge the
traditional view of learning systems and advance understanding of the mechanisms by which multiple forms of
learning interact to guide decisions and actions.

About Daphna Shohamy
Daphna Shohamy is an Associate Professor in the Department of Psychology at Columbia University and a member
of the Kavli Center for Brain Science. Work in Shohamy's lab
investigates the neural mechanisms of learning, memory and
decision making in humans with an emphasis on how these
processes interact. She received her Ph.D. in Neuroscience
from Rutgers followed by a postdoctoral fellowship at Stanford University. Dr. Shohamy is the recipient of a National
Science Foundation Career Development Award (2010), the
Association for Psychological Science Janet Spence Award
(2011), Columbia's Distinguished Faculty Award (2012), and
a Young Investigator Award from the Society for Neuroeconomics (2013).

2014 Annual Meeting	

Hierarchical organization of the lateral
prefrontal cortex
David Badre
Brown University
The prefrontal cortex (PFC)
is known to be necessary
for flexible and adaptive
behavior. However, the
functional organization of
the PFC, if any, remains
controversial. In this talk I
will describe a line of
research
testing
the
hypothesis that lateral
frontal cortex may be organized hierarchically along
its rostro-caudal axis. Evidence from human fMRI
and lesion studies of rule following and learning will be
presented that support functional differences between rostral and caudal frontal cortex. I will then discuss recent work
suggesting that this apparent hierarchical functional organization may emerge from overlapping loops between lateral
frontal cortex and the striatum.

Young Investigator Awardees

About David Badre
David Badre received his B.S. from the University of Michigan in 2000, and his Ph.D. from the Department of Brain
and Cognitive Sciences at MIT in 2005. Following a postdoctoral fellowship at the University of California, Berkeley, he
joined Brown's Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and
Psychological Sciences as Assistant Professor in 2008. He is
also an affiliate of the Brown Institute for Brain Science and
a trainer in the Neuroscience Graduate Program. His lab at
Brown focuses on the cognitive neuroscience of memory
and cognitive control with an emphasis on frontal lobe function and organization.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society Student Association Student
Social Night
Sunday, April 6th, 7:00 pm, Meet in Marriott Copley Place Reception Area
Come and join us for the annual CNSSA Student Social Night, Sunday April 6th, after the
Distinguished Career Contributions Award reception. We will meet at 7:00 in the conference
hotel reception area (look for signs), and walk out to a nearby bar/restaurant around 7:15.
There will be no cover charge and light snacks will be provided at the restaurant (cash bar).
This event is open to all students and post docs of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society.
More information will be posted on the Cognitive Neuroscience Society Student Association
Facebook page (http://www.facebook.com/CNSStudentAssociation). We look forward to
meeting you!

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

9

General Information
Abstracts

Tuesday, April 8

Poster abstracts can be found in the printed program and in
a PDF version which is downloadable from www.cogneurosociety.org.

	

Continental Breakfast, 8:00 – 8:30 am, Exhibit Hall

	

Coffee Service, 2:30 – 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

ATM
An ATM is located on the first floor of the hotel for your
convenience.

Audiovisual Equipment for Talks
LCD projectors (e.g., for PowerPoint presentations) will be
provided in all rooms where spoken sessions are scheduled;
however, computers will NOT be provided. Presenters must
bring their own computers and set them up BEFORE the
start of the session in which they are presenting. Presenters
are strongly encouraged to arrive in the scheduled talk room
a minimum of 30 minutes before their talk so that they can
set up and check their equipment.

Baggage Check
For assistance with luggage, packages and other items,
please see the Bell Desk located near the Front Desk.

Business Center
The Business Center is located on the second floor of the
elevator lobby. The following services are available: copy
service, fax service, messenger service, overnight delivery/
pickup, and post/parcel.

Catering
Catering will be available during the conference and is
included in the registration fee. Please refer to the table
below for the catering times.
Saturday, April 5
	

Coffee Service, 3:00 – 3:30 pm, Exhibit Hall

	
	

GAM and Welcome Reception, 6:00 – 7:00 pm,
Exhibit Hall

Sunday, April 6
	

Continental Breakfast, 8:00 – 8:30 am, Exhibit Hall

	

Coffee Service, 2:30 – 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

	

DCC Reception, 6:00 – 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

Monday, April 7
	

Continental Breakfast, 8:00 – 8:30 am, Exhibit Hall

	

Coffee Service, 2:30 – 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

10

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Certificate of Attendance
A Certificate of Attendance is printed on the back of your
Name Badge. To have your Certificate of Attendance
signed, please visit the CNS Registration Desk, located on
the 4th floor of the Boston Marriott Copley Place Hotel. If
you require any changes, we will be happy to email a copy
after the meeting. See also, Receipts.

Chair People
Please ensure that you are available in your presentation
room at least thirty minutes before the start of the session.
Session chairs are asked to keep the talks on time.

Contact Us
To contact us onsite, visit the CNS Registration Desk, located
on the 4th floor of the Boston Marriott Copley Place Hotel,
or send an email to meeting@cogneurosociety.org.

Disclaimer
The Program Committee reserves the right to change the
meeting program at any time without notice. Please note
this program is correct at the time of print.

Drink Tickets
Each Attendee will receive two drink tickets. They can be
redeemed for alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverages at the
GAM and Welcome Reception on Saturday or at the Distinguished Career Award in Cognitive Neuroscience (DCC)
Reception on Sunday. Lost drink tickets cannot be replaced.

Exhibit Hall
The conference exhibit is located in the 3rd floor Back Bay
Conference and Exhibition Hall of the Boston Marriott
Copley Place Hotel. Located in this room are the posters,
exhibit booths, and catering. The Exhibit Hall is open to all
attendees at the following times:
Saturday 	
Sunday	
Monday	
Tuesday	

3:00 – 7:00 pm
8:00 am – 7:00 pm
8:00 am – 5:00 pm
8:00 am – 5:00 pm

Please note the room will close and lock sharply and there
will be no admittance until the following day.

2014 Annual Meeting	

General Information

Facebook

Message Center

Find us on Facebook. Search for “CNS Annual Meeting,”
and like us!

Messages for meeting registrants can be left and retrieved
at the CNS Registration Desk on the 4th floor of the Boston
Marriott Copley Place Hotel. A bulletin board will be available for announcements and job postings.

Hotel
The Boston Marriott Copley Place Hotel is our exclusive
Hotel for the CNS 2014 Annual Meeting and where all CNS
2014 meeting events will be held. Boston Marriott Copley
Place Hotel, 110 Huntington Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts, 02116 USA.

Hotel Restaurants
Champions Sports Bar, enjoy a daily breakfast, an all-American grill menu and a wide selection of group bites, plus signature cocktails and 36 beers on tap.
Connexion Lounge, stop off for late afternoon fare or a glass
of wine.
Starbucks, known for its coffee, pastries and signature
drinks made to order. Whether you stop in for a quick
breakfast or for a caffeine fix throughout the day, you’ll find
a casual atmosphere waiting.

Internet Access
CNS attendees will receive complimentary wireless internet
in their guest room, when reserved within the CNS block
and before March 12, 2014.
Free internet terminals are located on the 4th floor near the
CNS Registration Desk. Internet terminals are available
during the meeting registration hours on Saturday, Sunday,
Monday, and Tuesday when not needed for onsite registration. See Onsite Meeting Registration.
Complimentary hotel wireless access is available in the
Lobby and public areas.

LinkedIn
Find us on LinkedIn. Search for “Cognitive Neuroscience
Society (CNS)” under groups, and join our group!

Lost & Found
The meeting Lost and Found is located at the CNS Registration Desk on the 4th floor of the Boston Marriott Copley
Place Hotel.

Member Services
The member services desk is located at the CNS Registration
Desk on the 4th floor of the Boston Marriott Copley Place
Hotel. The member services desk will be open at the following times:
Saturday, April 5 	
Sunday, April 6 	
Monday, April 7 	
Tuesday, April 8 	

11:00 am – 5:00 pm
7:30 am – 6:30 pm
8:00 am – 6:30 pm
8:00 am – 12:30 pm

Mobile Phones
Attendees are asked to silence their mobile phones when in
sessions.

Name Badges
The Boston Marriott Copley Place Hotel and Convention
Center is open to public access. For security purposes,
attendees, speakers and exhibitors are asked to wear their
name badges to all sessions and social functions.
Entrance into sessions is restricted to registered attendees
only. Entrance to the Exhibit Hall is limited to badge holders only. If you misplace your name badge, please go to the
CNS Registration Desk on the 4th floor of the Boston Marriott Copley Place Hotel for a replacement.

Parking
The Boston Marriott Copley Place Hotel offers secured and
covered Valet parking. Parking is $49.00 a day for hotel
guests. Parking is very limited. The valet fee includes in/out
privileges and self-parking. Offsite parking is available for
$37.00 a day. (Rates are at time of print.)

Phone Charging Station
There will be a small phone charging station located at the
CNS Registration Desk on the 4th floor of the Boston Marriott Copley Place Hotel.

Photo Disclaimer
Registration and attendance at, or participation in, the
Cognitive Neuroscience Society meetings and other activities constitutes an agreement by the registrant/attendee to
CNS’s use and distribution (both now and in the future) of
the registrant's or attendee's image in photographs of such
events and activities.

Poster Sessions
Poster sessions are scheduled on Saturday, April 5, Sunday,
April 6, Monday, April 7, and Tuesday, April 8. The presenting author must be present during the assigned session
and other authors may be present to answer questions. The
poster sessions are in the 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and
Exhibition Hall of the Boston Marriott Copley Place Hotel.
Badges are required at all times. Do not leave personal items
in the poster room.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

11

General Information	

2014 Annual Meeting

Printed Program

Transportation

One copy of the printed program is available to each
attendee who requested one. If you would like a second
copy please check in at the CNS Registration Desk on the
4th floor of the Boston Marriott Copley Place Hotel on the
last day of the event. Every effort has been made to produce
an accurate program. If you are presenting at the conference,
please confirm your presentation times as listed in this program. Attendees also have the option to view the program
by downloading it from our website.

Taxis - Taxis are available outside each airport terminal
building. Journey time to/from downtown Boston is 20-30
minutes depending on traffic. Fare to downtown locations
from the airport, eg hotels is $25-$50.

Press Room

Fares subject to change without notice.

Contact Lisa Munoz, CNS Public Information Officer (cns.
publicaffairs@gmail.com) for more information.

Receipts
You received two receipts via email, one at the time of purchase and a second with your registration confirmation.
Please email the registration desk if you require an additional copy. See also Certificate of Attendance.

Receptions
The GAM & Welcome Reception will be held in the 3rd Floor
Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall, from 6:00 – 7:00
pm on Saturday, April 5, directly following the GAM Lecture honoring Jon Kaas winner of the 20th Annual George
A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience.
The DCC Reception will be held in the 3rd Floor Back Bay
Conference and Exhibition Hall, from 6:00 – 7:00 pm on
Sunday, April 6 directly following the DCC Lecture honoring Marsel Mesulam, winner of the 3rd Annual Distinguished Career Contributions in Cognitive Neuroscience.

Registration
The CNS Registration Desk is located on the 4th floor of the
Boston Marriott Copley Place Hotel. The Registration Desk
will be open at the following times:
Saturday, April 5	
Sunday, April 6	
Monday, April 7	
Tuesday, April 8	

11:00 am – 7:00 pm
7:30 am – 7:00 pm
7:30 am – 7:00 pm
7:30 am – 5:00 pm

Smoking
Smoking is not permitted in or outside any of the meeting
rooms or the exhibition hall.

Speakers
All speakers must register and wear name badge to present.
Please ensure that you are available in your presentation
room at least thirty minutes before the start of the session.
See also Audiovisual Equipment for Talks.

12

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Discounted Shuttle Service - Save 10% off your roundtrip
reservation made and paid online. Visit www.supershuttle.
com and use discount code TMEVN. SuperShuttle and ExecuCar offer services nationwide.
Subway service fee: 2.5 USD (one way).

Twitter
Follow CNS Annual Meeting (@CNSmtg). Our Hashtag this
year is #CNS2014

Website
www.cogneurosociety.org

Wireless
See Internet Access.

Exhibitors
2014 Exhibitors

Exhibit Hours

Visit our exhibitors in the 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference
and Exhibition Hall.

Exhibit Hall open to all attendees:

ANT North America	
Athena Diagnostics, Inc.	
BIOPAC Systems	
Brain Vision LLC	
Cedrus Corporation	
Compumedics Neuroscan	
Cortech Solutions, Inc.	
Electrical Geodesics, Inc.	
Jali Medical	
Neuroelectrics	
NITRC	
Nordic NeuroLab	
Paradigm	
Psychology Software Tools	
Rogue Research, Inc.	
Rogue Resolutions	
SensoMotoric Instruments, Inc.	
Sinauer Associates, Inc., Publishers	
Smart Eye	
Society for Neuroscience	
SR Research, Ltd.	
The MIT Press	
VPixx Technologies, Inc.	
W.W. Norton & Company	

Saturday		
Sunday 	
8:00 am – 12:00 pm	
Monday 	
8:00 am – 12:00 pm	
Tuesday 	
8:00 am – 12:00 pm	

3:00 – 7:00 pm
1:00 – 7:00 pm
1:00 – 5:00 pm
1:00 – 5:00 pm

Exhibit Hall closed for the day - no entry:
Saturday	
Sunday	
Monday	
Tuesday	

7:00 pm
7:00 pm
5:00 pm
5:00 pm

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

13

Invited-Symposium Sessions
#

Title

Date

Time

Location

1

The Broader Applicability of Insights from Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience

Sunday, April 6

3:00 - 5:00 pm

Grand Ballroom Salon A-F

2

Consciousness

Monday, April 7

3:00 - 5:00 pm

Grand Ballroom Salon A-F

3

Mechanisms of Response Inhibition

Tuesday, April 8

3:00 - 5:00 pm

Grand Ballroom Salon A-F

Invited Symposium Session 1
THE BROADER APPLICABILITY OF INSIGHTS
FROM DEVELOPMENTAL COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE
Sunday, April 6, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom Salon A-F

Chair: Silvia Bunge, UC Berkeley
Speakers: John D. E. Gabrieli, Margaret Sheridan, Martha J.
Farah, Helen J. Neville
The burgeoning field of developmental cognitive neuroscience is yielding important insights into how the human
brain develops and changes with experience. These findings
are proving to be of great interest not only to other scientists,
but also to practitioners and policymakers from various corners of society. What have we learned so far that warrants
consideration by those in a position to shape policy and
practice in education, healthcare, or the judicial system? In
this symposium, leading cognitive neuroscientists will discuss the potential applications of their research.

TALK 1: COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE AND EDUCATION
John D. E. Gabrieli; Massachusetts Institute of Technology
One goal of cognitive neuroscience is to discover properties
of the human brain that are relevant for education. I will discuss two studies involving partnerships with schools, which
both encourage the study of issues that are relevant to educators and also expand the representation of children from
a wide variety of backgrounds in neuroimaging research.
In one study, we aimed to discover brain differences in
pre-reading kindergartners that predict reading ability after
the onset of reading instruction. Over 1400 kindergartners
were screened in 19 diverse schools, and 180 participated
in neuroimaging. One finding with diffusion tensor imaging is that the volume and fractional anisotropy of the left
arcuate fasciculus is positively correlated with phonological awareness, an oral language ability strongly related to
learning to read. This finding suggests a structural basis of
behavioral risk for dyslexia that predates reading instruction. A second study in over 1300 8th graders examined the
relations between statewide school assessments and measures of fluid cognition. The school that a student attended
accounted for up to 34% of variance on math test scores, but
14

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

had little influence on measures of processing speed, working memory capacity, or fluid reasoning. Neuroimaging in
53 diverse 8th graders indicated that better performance on
state tests was associated with greater parietal activation
on a working memory task. These findings suggest a dissociation between crystallized cognitive skills that can be
enhanced by some schools, and fluid cognitive skills that do
not appear to be enhanced by current curriculum.

TALK 2: EFFECTS OF EARLY, PROFOUND DEPRIVATION
ON BRAIN AND BEHAVIORAL DEVELOPMENT
Margaret Sheridan, Charles A. Nelson; Harvard Medical
School, Boston Children's Hospital
Many aspects of postnatal brain development depend
critically on experience for development to proceed normally. In this talk we will discuss what happens to children
whose postnatal experience violates what we have come to
expect as a species. The Bucharest Early Intervention Project (BEIP) was a randomized clinical trial of foster care as
an intervention for early institutionalization. A total of 136
children who had been abandoned at birth and placed in
various institutions in Bucharest, Romania were targeted for
study, along with a sample of 68 children who lived with
their biological parents in the greater Bucharest community.
Following an extensive baseline assessment (average age 22
month), half the institutionalized children were randomly
assigned to high quality foster care created by the research
team and the other half to care as usual (institutional care).
This sample has been carefully studied through the first 12
years of life. Key findings covering a variety of domains
(including but not limited to executive functions, memory,
and brain development) will serve as the focus of this talk.

TALK 3: SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS AND THE
DEVELOPING BRAIN
Martha J. Farah; University of Pennsylvania
Childhood socioeconomic status (SES) predicts many
important life outcomes, from physical health to academic
achievement. Why is childhood SES so influential? The
answer involves the effects of early life SES on brain development. SES is associated with differences in daily life stress,
environmental stimulation and parenting practices. On the
basis of research with animals and humans, these differ-

2014 Annual Meeting	

ences appear to shift children onto different developmental
trajectories. In this presentation I will review converging
research results from a number of labs indicating the neural
correlates of childhood SES studied through behavioral
tests, structural and functional MRI and electrophysiology.
I will discuss what is known of the mechanisms by which
SES shapes brain development, the later reversibility of
these effects, and the role of SES-linked brain and cognitive
differences on various life outcomes. I will conclude by considering whether and how developmental neuroscience can
play a role in child policy.

TALK 4: NARROWING THE SOCIOECONOMIC GAP IN
ACHIEVEMENT
Helen J. Neville; University of Oregon
Employing information from research on the neuroplasticity
of selective attention and on the central role of successful
parenting in child development, we developed and rigorously assessed a family-based training program designed to
improve brain systems for selective attention in preschool
children. One hundred forty-one lower socioeconomic status
preschoolers enrolled in a Head Start program were randomly assigned to the training program, Head Start alone,
or an active control group. Electrophysiological measures
of children's brain functions supporting selective attention,
standardized measures of cognition, and parent-reported
child behaviors all favored children in the treatment program relative to both control groups. Positive changes were
also observed in the parents themselves. Effect sizes ranged
from one-quarter to half of a standard deviation. One and
two years after post-test the children retain mature brain
indices of attention. One year later parents in the intervention group have significantly reduced debt (only 6 % are in
debt) compared to the control parents who remain at 28% in
debt. These results lend impetus to the further development
and broader implementation of evidence based education
programs that target at-risk families. In a society committed
to equal opportunity for all, many will find the opportunity
to reduce the gaps between lower and higher socioeconomic
children rewarding.

Invited Symposium Session 2
CONSCIOUSNESS

Monday, April 7, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom Salon A-F
Chair: Wolf Singer, Ernst Strüngmann Institute for Neuroscience in cooperation with Max Planck Society, Max Planck
Institute for Brain Research, Frankfurt Institute for Advanced
Studies (FIAS)
Speakers: Wolf Singer, Victor A.F. Lamme, Olaf Blanke, Melanie Boly
A few decades ago search for the neuronal correlates of
consciousness (NCC) was considered both as technically
intractable and philosophically questionable. Searching for
a material substrate of phenomena accessible only from the
first person perspective appeared as epistemically problem-

Invited-Symposium Sessions

atic. The development of non-invasive imaging technologies
and the availability of intracranial recordings from patients
alleviated the technical problems and conceptual advances
in the field of social neuroscience paved the way for the
assessment of subjective states. The scientific study of NCC
has since become a major branch of Cognitive Neuroscience.
The aim of the symposium is to review the state of the art,
identify unresolved questions and to also examine what
can be learnt from the investigation of altered states of consciousness.

TALK 1: CONSCIOUSNESS: UNITY IN TIME RATHER THAN
SPACE?
Wolf Singer; Ernst Strüngmann Institute for Neuroscience
in cooperation with the Max Planck Society, Frankfurt, Max
Planck Institute for Brain Research, Frankfurt, Frankfurt Institute for Advanced Studies, FIAS, Frankfurt
The search for neuronal correlates of consciousness (NCC)
often relies on comparisons of neuronal response patterns
associated with conscious and non-conscious processing,
respectively, that are evoked by physically identical stimuli.
With this approach it is not always easy to clearly segregate
the NCC proper from processes that just permit access to
consciousness such as fluctuations in excitability in sensory
pathways or from processes that follow conscious experience such as storage of perceived items in working memory.
This problem can be reduced but not eliminated by determining the precise temporal sequence of events with electrophysiological techniques and to modulate access to consciousness by varying independently sensory evidence and
priors. Experiments based on recordings in human subjects
and animals will be described that were designed with these
caveats in mind to test the hypothesis already formulated
by Sherrington that “the unity of conscious experience does
not require convergence in space (anatomical convergence)
but in time” (temporal convergence). The results of these
experiments are compatible with the view that the NCC is
a particular dynamic state of widely distributed networks
rather than the activation of circumscribed cortical areas.

TALK 2: WHEN IS A NEURAL REPRESENTATION A
CONSCIOUS ONE?
Victor A.F. Lamme; Dept. of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam Brain and Cognition (ABC), Amsterdam,
Netherlands
There is now considerable agreement on the fact that conscious visual processing requires recurrent or re-entrant
interactions between widespread neural assemblies. Strong
controversy exists, however, on the necessary extent of these
interactions. Some argue that they must involve the fronto-parietal network, enabling a broadcasting of information
to the whole brain. Others, however, claim that recurrent
interactions localized to the visual cortex suffice for a conscious visual percept. Further broadcasting is then only
required for attention, access and report, functions that go
beyond the generation of conscious experiences per se. The
difference has great consequences for understanding the
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

15

Invited-Symposium Sessions	

neural basis of consciousness, the interpretation of patient
data (e.g. in vegetative state), and for age-old and fundamental questions about consciousness, such as its presence
in animals or machines, the issue of qualia, or its molecular
basis. Recent data on the controversy, obtained using EEG,
fMRI, TMS, and pharmacological interventions will be discussed.

TALK 3: MULTISENSORY BRAIN MECHANISMS OF
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS
Olaf Blanke; Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience, Center for
Neuroprosthetics & Brain Mind Institute, Swiss Federal Institute
of Technology (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland
Experiences happen for someone, the subject or self, and are
felt as “my” experiences. Past work has indicated that subjective aspects of consciousness, in particular the fact that consciousness is bound to the self, is based on the multisensory
signal integration of visual, tactile, and proprioceptive stimuli in temporo-parietal cortex. Other prominent research,
however, highlighted the importance of another source of
bodily stimuli for self-consciousness, that is, the processing
of interoceptive (bodily) signals in the insula and medial
parietal cortex. I will present studies that investigated three
key elements of bodily self-consciousness (body ownership,
self-location, first-person perspective) by exposing subjects
to ambiguous multisensory exteroceptive information about
the location and appearance of their own body. Jointly with
brain imaging, these studies have shown that activity in a
network of brain regions centering in the temporo-parietal
cortex reflects bodily self-consciousness. I will then present
recent data that show that interoceptive (cardiac) signals are
integrated with such exteroceptive multisensory signals and
that they are equally powerful modulators of bodily self-consciousness and recruit insular cortex. Extended by data from
neurological patients, these behavioral and neuroimaging
findings show that bodily self-consciousness is based on the
integration of specific multisensory bodily signals within
key regions in temporo-parietal and insular cortex and that
such integration includes signals from the inside and from
the outside of the human body. I will argue that these brain
mechanisms are not only crucial for self-consciousness, but
also an important building block for the subjective, first-person properties of perceptual consciousness.

TALK 4: BRAIN CONNECTIVITY (AND COMPLEXITY) IN
DISORDERS OF CONSCIOUSNESS
Melanie Boly; Dept. of Neurology, University of Wisconsin,
Madison
The present talk will review recent results obtained using
functional neuroimaging in patients with severe brain
damage (e.g., in coma, vegetative state and minimally conscious state) using resting state EEG and fMRI paradigms as
well as measurements of responses to non-invasive sensory
and electromagnetic stimulations (the latter using TMS)
coupled to high density-EEG recordings. Overall these
studies suggest that 2 key ingredients could be necessary for
the human brain to generate consciousness: both preserved
16

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

brain activity differentiation, and preserved long-distance
recurrent connectivity. Experimental results obtained using
similar techniques in other unconscious states (i.e., anesthesia, generalized seizures, and deep sleep) will be reviewed
and compared to coma studies. Practical and conceptual
implications of these results will be discussed in light of
recent theories of consciousness, especially the information
integration theory.

Invited Symposium Session 3
MECHANISMS OF RESPONSE INHIBITION

Tuesday, April 8, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom Salon A-F
Chair: Yuko Munakata, University of Colorado Boulder
Co-Chair: Christopher Chatham, Brown University
Speakers: Jeff Schall, Sara Jahfari, Yuko Munakata, Adam
Aron
How do we stop ourselves during ongoing action -- when
making insensitive comments, reaching for tempting desserts, or darting into a busy intersection? This symposium
will present advances in understanding the neural mechanisms supporting response inhibition, and address ongoing
debates about the theoretical implications of such findings.

TALK 1: NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS OF
STOPPING
Jeff Schall; Vanderbilt University
This presentation will survey years of research elucidating
the neurophysiological processes mediating performance of
the stop task. Single-unit recordings in multiple laboratories
in both macaques and rats have distinguished a variety of
patterns of modulation in cortical and subcortical structures.
Particular neurons in motor circuits instantiate the racing
GO and STOP processes. These neurons are located in primary motor and premotor cortex (for limbs) and in frontal
eye field and superior colliculus (for eyes) as well as the
basal ganglia. The identification of such neurons with the
GO and STOP processes is verified through an interactive
race model that fits performance like the Logan race model
and replicates observed neural dynamics. Other neurons in
these circuits respond to the stimuli guiding the actions but
do not modulate in a manner or time necessary to be identified with the racing GO and STOP processes. Meanwhile,
neurons in medial frontal cortex monitor countermanding
performance and indirectly influence the neurons mediating
the GO process to adjust performance. These neurons are
located in supplementary motor area (for limbs), supplementary eye field (for eyes) and anterior cingulate cortex.
The role of medial frontal circuits can be incorporated
computationally as executive control of the interactive race
model accounting for variation of performance according to
stimulus, response and reward history. Overall, this body
of work in conjunction with research using noninvasive
measurement and manipulation methods provides a powerful example of translation across levels of description from
computational model to neural circuits.

2014 Annual Meeting	

TALK 2: VISUAL INFORMATION SHAPES THE DYNAMICS
OF CORTICO-BASAL GANGLIA PATHWAYS DURING
PERCEPTUAL RESPONSE SELECTION AND INHIBITION
Sara Jahfari, Lourens Waldorp, Richard Ridderinkhof, Steven
Scholte; University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Action selection often requires the transformation of
visual information into motor plans. When information is
transformed fast, response inhibition might require the
suppression of prepared muscle activity and processing
of visual input. We examined how the quality of visual
information influences fronto-basal ganglia routes associated with response selection and inhibition. Human fMRI
data was collected from a stop-task with faces containing
low-, high-, or all spatial frequencies. Drift-diffusion model
analysis indicated that the removal of spatial frequencies
slowed information accumulation, and decreased cautiousness. On go-trials, effective-connectivity analysis
showed action selection to emerge through the “direct” and
“indirect” pathways, with projections from prefrontal and
visual cortex into the basal ganglia. Importantly, slowed
accumulation increased connectivity from both dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex and fusiform face area into the putamen.
Concurrently, presupplementary motor area connectivity
into putamen, and lateral occipital connectivity into subthalamic nucleus were weakened to allow lowered criteria.
During stop trials, both visual and prefrontal cortex projected directly into the basal ganglia. Notably, only when a
stop signal followed unfiltered faces (with the highest drift
rate) the optimal model contained additional connections
from prefrontal to visual cortex. Inspection of individual
differences related stronger prefrontal-visual connectivity to
faster inhibition times. Therefore, prefrontal to visual cortex
connections might suppress the fast flow of visual input
for the go-task, such that the inhibition process can finish
before the selection process. Together, these results indicate
response selection and inhibition within the basal ganglia
to emerge through top-down adjustments from prefrontal-,
and bottom-up evaluations from sensory cortex.

Invited-Symposium Sessions

in childhood are influential for outcomes. Children showed
better response inhibition after practicing going again in
response to signals, compared to children who had actually
practiced stopping ongoing actions (under conditions that
minimized proactive monitoring demands). These findings
demonstrate the importance of proactive monitoring processes in developing response inhibition, inform theoretical
debates regarding the role of rIFC, and suggest promising
new directions for intervention.

TALK 4: THE RIGHT INFERIOR FRONTAL CORTEX IS PART
OF A NETWORK FOR BRAKING RESPONSE TENDENCIES
Adam Aron; UC San Diego
Damage to the right inferior frontal cortex (rIFC) affects
the ability to stop responses, and this was interpreted as
disruption of a neurocognitive inhibitory control function.
Consistent with this, many neuroimaging and several electrophysiological studies have revealed activation of the
rIFC in stopping paradigms, but questions have been raised
whether this reflects a putative inhibitory control function
or something else such as attentional processing. In this talk
I will survey new evidence, discuss ongoing controversies,
and provide an updated theory. I will propose that the rIFC
(along with one or more fronto-basal-ganglia networks) is
best characterized as a brake. This brake can be turned on in
different modes (totally – to outright suppress a response;
or partially – to pause), and in different contexts (externally
by salient signals; or internally by goals). This will affirm
inhibitory control as a key component of executive functions, show that it relies upon rIFC and associated networks,
and explain why rIFC disruption could sometimes underpin
impulse response control disorders.

TALK 3: TESTING THEORIES OF STOPPING THROUGH
INTERVENTION
Yuko Munakata; University of Colorado Boulder
Many theories of response inhibition focus on cognitive and
neural processes specialized for stopping per se. However,
recent work suggests that a core component of mature inhibitory control, supported by the right inferior frontal cortex
(rIFC), is the ability to proactively monitor the environment
for signals that indicate the need to inhibit. We used the
Stop Signal task to test a counterintuitive implication of this
framework for intervention: the practice of responding a
second time if a signal appears should improve the subsequent ability to stop when the same signal appears, because
of the common demand to proactively monitor for the signal,
and despite the mismatch in trained motor actions. We
tested this prediction in 7-9 year-old children, given greater
plasticity in childhood and suggestions that interventions

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

17

Mini-Symposium Sessions
#

Title

Date

Time

Location

1

The Relational Memory Theory: Inspiring Novel Predictions Two
Decades Post-Inception

Sunday, April 6

10:00 am - Noon

Salon F

2

Contributions of alpha-band oscillations in cognition

Sunday, April 6

10:00 am - Noon

Salon E

3

Putting Person Perception in Context: Insights from Social Neuroscience

Sunday, April 6

10:00 am - Noon

Salon D

4

The neuroscience of social networks

Monday, April 7

10:00 am - Noon

Salon F

5

A New Look at Neural Representation in the Prefrontal Cortex

Monday, April 7

10:00 am - Noon

Salon E

6

Prediction, adaptation and plasticity of language processing in the
adult brain

Monday, April 7

10:00 am - Noon

Salon D

7

Mechanisms of Memory Consolidation During Sleep

Tuesday April 8

10:00 am - Noon

Salon F

8

MEG, EEG and fMRI based functional connectivity analysis: Relevance to cognition

Tuesday April 8

10:00 am - Noon

Salon E

9

Oscillatory mechanisms of attentional control

Tuesday April 8

10:00 am - Noon

Salon D

Mini-Symposium Session 1
THE RELATIONAL MEMORY THEORY: INSPIRING
NOVEL PREDICTIONS TWO DECADES POST-INCEPTION
Sunday, April 6, 10:00 am - Noon, Salon F

Chair: Deborah Hannula, University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee
Co-Chair: Melissa Duff, University of Iowa
Speakers: Neal Cohen, Alison Preston, Jennifer Ryan, Howard
Eichenbaum
Two decades have passed since the relational memory
theory, a neurobiological framework that outlines representational properties of memories mediated by the hippocampus and adjacent medial temporal lobe (MTL) cortical structures, was proposed (Cohen & Eichenbaum, 1993). Since its
inception, this theory has inspired novel hypotheses about
how exactly MTL subregions contribute to memory, with
the hippocampus itself said to mediate relational memory
binding and representation. Relational memories were characterized by three fundamental properties that distinguish
them from rigidly bound or unitized representations mediated by MTL cortical structures - they cannot be derived
from past experience, they exhibit compositionality, and
they can be flexibly accessed and used. Results from recent
investigations motivated by the relational memory theory
suggest an extended reach of the hippocampus beyond
long-term declarative memory to the domains of working
memory, inferential reasoning, binding across time, language, and online processing. The speakers in this sympo18

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

sium will discuss the neural mechanisms and functional
properties of relational memory, highlighting new findings
about the role of the hippocampus in the spatial-temporal
organization of experiences, building flexible memories that
permit novel inferences, and contributions of the hippocampus to memory performance at far shorter time scales than
traditional accounts would suggest. A converging methods
approach will be emphasized, as speakers will discuss evidence from behavioral, neuroimaging, and neuropsychological investigations conducted with non-human animals,
special populations, and neurologically intact individuals.
Our intent is to highlight how far we have come, and how
the relational memory theory has been instrumental in this
process.

TALK 1: THE FUNCTIONAL PROPERTIES AND FUNCTIONALITIES OF RELATIONAL MEMORY
Neal Cohen; University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Relational memory supports the ability to acquire, retain,
retrieve, and flexibly use knowledge about facts and events.
The hippocampus, in interaction with prefrontal cortex and
neocortical processing and storage sites, provides (1) the ability to form representations of all manner of (even arbitrary
or accidental) relations, binding together the constituent elements of experience; (2) a relational database critical not just
for the creation, but also for the maintenance, updating, and
integration of memory representations; and (3) rapid and
automatic reactivation of elements of the relational database
that are related to information currently being processed.
Findings over the last twenty years have established that the
ability of hippocampus and relational memory to support

2014 Annual Meeting	

the updating, integration, and flexible use of memory can be
used in service of many aspects of cognition and behavior,
beyond the traditional domain of conscious recollection and
long-term memory. Relational memory processing can occur
and contribute even on time-scales usually associated with
working memory, capable of rapidly constructing, comparing, combining, and recombining on-line relational memory
representations in service of flexible cognition and adaptive
control of behavior. In so doing it provides a critical foundation for many aspects of spatial cognition and navigation,
inferential reasoning, language, decision-making, creative
thinking, and the guidance of adaptive choices.

TALK 2: HIPPOCAMPAL AND PREFRONTAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE FORMATION OF INTEGRATED MEMORY
NETWORKS
Alison Preston; The University of Texas at Austin
Much memory research to date has focused on how our
brains encode and retrieve memories for individual experiences. However, in the real world, it is rare that a decision
can be made on the basis of a single memory alone; rather,
the vast majority of decision and action requires drawing
upon knowledge derived across multiple events. Relational
memory theory proposes that the ability to extract new
information across distinct episodes results from the formation of integrated memory networks, in which individual memories are connected to one another in terms of the
people, places, and things they have in common. These networks would then allow memory to extend beyond direct
experience and anticipate the relationships among events.
In a series of human fMRI studies, we examine these predictions by having subjects learn overlapping associations (AB,
BC) and later testing them on the inferential relationships
among items (AC). Using pattern information analysis, we
show that prior memories (A items) are reactivated during
new BC learning, with the degree of reactivation relating to
inference performance. Moreover, hippocampal and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) encoding activation
tracked trial-by-trial reactivation of prior memories during
new learning as well as subsequent inference. Finally during
a rest scan following BC encoding, medial temporal lobe
and VMPFC connectivity was enhanced relative to baseline
rest, potentially reflecting post-encoding integration. Collectively, our data show that the hippocampus and VMPFC
play key roles in constructing integrated memory networks
and further demonstrate that these integrated memories are
used in service of future decisions.

TALK 3: HIPPOCAMPAL RELATIONAL BINDING ACROSS
SPACE AND TIME
Jennifer Ryan; Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, University
of Toronto
The hippocampus has a critical role in the binding of relations among distinct elements across space and time into
a lasting representation. Such hippocampal relational
memory binding is engaged rapidly and obligatorily, and
the resultant representations may be used in service of

Mini-Symposium Sessions

multiple cognitive operations and over a variety of delays.
Behaviorally, the formation of relational representations is
reflected in increases in eye movement behavior, suggesting that eye movements may serve as the conduit by which
information is integrated. On a neural level, findings from
magnetoencephalography have shown that theta oscillations mediate hippocampal binding of relational representations. Specifically, increases in theta power track increases
in binding demands and are predictive of subsequent visuospatial memory performance. Damage to the hippocampus,
as observed in amnesia, disrupts eye movement binding
behavior, reduces binding-related increases in hippocampal
theta power and impairs memory for visuospatial relations,
even over short delays. Similarly, aging, which is associated
with a decline in hippocampal volume, results in altered eye
movement binding behavior, reduced hippocampal theta
power and relatively impaired memory for visuospatial
relations.

TALK 4: THE NEURAL BASIS OF RELATIONAL MEMORY
Howard Eichenbaum; Boston University
I will discuss efforts to identify the neuronal mechanisms
that underlie relational memory, specifically the nature of
neuronal representations that can relate elements of memories in support of our ability to remember specific episodes
and to integrate new experiences into networks of memories. Evidence from multiple approaches will be reviewed,
indicating (1) separate anatomical pathways that converge
onto the hippocampus the contents of memories and the
spatial-temporal organization of experiences, (2) fundamental roles for the hippocampus in both spatial and temporal
organization of memories, and (3) physiological evidence
on how events are linked within a spatial and temporal
organization. These studies reveal that relational memory
is a product of a unique representational scheme within
hippocampal networks that encodes all manner of relations
among experiences and supports the flexible and inferential
expression of memories.

Mini-Symposium Session 2
CONTRIBUTIONS OF ALPHA-BAND OSCILLATIONS IN COGNITION
Sunday, April 6, 10:00 am - Noon, Salon E

Chair: Heleen A. Slagter, University of Amsterdam
Speakers: Ali Mazaheri, Heleen A. Slagter, Bradley R. Postle,
Markus Bauer
Historically, alpha-band oscillations have been thought to
represent the activity of the visual cortex in an idle state.
However, a growing body of research, mostly in the domain
of visuospatial attention, suggests that alpha-band dynamics play an active role in information processing, including
selection among competing brain networks, facilitation
of information processing within task-relevant networks,
as well as "task-positive" functions related to short-term
memory. This symposium will present new empirical eviCognitive Neuroscience Society

19

Mini-Symposium Sessions	

dence and theoretical views on the pivotal role of alpha
oscillations in cognition. Mazaheri will start with a general
introduction to the topic and show that alpha oscillations
can be regarded as a general mechanism for information
selection that operates across sensory modalities. Slagter
will consider the relationship between pre-stimulus alpha
oscillations and early stimulus selection processes (P1 and
N1 attention effects), and propose that these neural mechanisms are dissociable and reflect qualitatively different
aspects of attention. Next, Postle will present TMS-EEG data
providing causal evidence for the notion that alpha oscillations may subserve multiple functional roles, including
long-range effective connectivity and possibly the binding of individuated object identities to specific locations.
Finally, Bauer will discuss the neurochemical basis of alpha
oscillations and its implications for alpha's functional role
in cognition. Collectively, these talks will present current
debates and open questions in the study of the role of alpha
oscillations in cognition to a broad audience. They will also
highlight important avenues for future research.

TALK 1: REGION-SPECIFIC OSCILLATORY ALPHA
ACTIVITY SERVES TO SUPPRESS DISTRACTING INPUT
ACROSS VISUAL AND AUDITORY MODALITIES
Ali Mazaheri; University of Amsterdam
There have been a number of studies suggesting that oscillatory alpha activity (~10 Hz) plays a pivotal role in attention by gating information flow to relevant sensory regions.
The vast majority of these studies have looked at shifts of
attention in the spatial domain and only in a single modality
(often visual or sensorimotor). I will present a series of studies which investigated the role of alpha activity in the suppression of a distracting modality stream. We used a crossmodal attention task where visual cues indicated whether
participants had to judge a visual orientation or discriminate the auditory pitch of an upcoming target. The visual
and auditory targets were either presented simultaneously
or alone, allowing us to behaviorally gauge the "cost" of
having a distractor present in each modality. We found that
the preparation for visual discrimination (relative to pitch
discrimination) resulted in a decrease of alpha power in the
early visual cortex, with a concomitant increase in alpha/
beta power) in the supramarginal-gyrus, a region suggested
to play a vital role in short-term storage of pitch information
The changes in alpha-power in the modality-relevant-cortices had direct consequences on performance on a trial-bytrial basis. Our work adds to increasing evidence that the
top-down (i.e. attentional) modulation of alpha activity is
a mechanism by which stimulus processing can be gated
within the cortex. Here, we find that this phenomenon is
not restricted to the domain of spatial attention and can be
generalized to other sensory modalities than vision.

20

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

TALK 2: FACILITATION AND INHIBITION IN ATTENTION:
FUNCTIONAL DISSOCIATION OF PRE-STIMULUS ALPHA
ACTIVITY, P1 AND N1 COMPONENTS
Heleen A. Slagter; University of Amsterdam
Attention - the ability to attend to some things while ignoring others - can be best described as an emergent property
of many neural mechanisms, facilitatory and inhibitory,
working together to resolve competition for limited processing resources and control of behavior. To gain a better
understanding of how attentional inhibition and facilitation
are neurally implemented, here, participants continuously
attended to one and the same hemifield for 80 minutes while
their brain activity was recorded using EEG. We reasoned
that the consistent assignment of relevance to one hemifield
would allow us to better separate inhibitory and facilitatory
attentional effects. Indeed, in striking contrast to previous
studies which typically observed bilateral attentional modulations of early sensory processing when subjects alternated
between attending left and right, we found perfectly lateralized P1 and N1 components and attentional modulations
to, respectively, ipsilateral (P1) and contralateral (N1) posterior regions. This finding substantiates the idea that the
P1 reflects inhibition and the N1 amplification. The fact that
these early potentials only occurred over one hemisphere
moreover indicates that they may not reflect exogenous
sensory signals, as generally assumed, but top-down modulations of feed-forward sensory processing. Moreover, in
further contrast to previous studies, greater pre-stimulus
alpha activity was observed over relevant vs. irrelevant
posterior regions, supporting proposals that alpha power
reflects active inhibition only required when irrelevant
regions compete for attentional resources. Together, these
findings suggest a functional dissociation between pre-stimulus alpha, the P1 and N1, and highlight the influence of
statistical task structure on attentional control dynamics.

TALK 3: SIMULTANEOUS (R)TMS AND EEG REVEALS
MULTIPLE FUNCTIONAL ROLES FOR ALPHA-BAND
OSCILLATIONS
Bradley R. Postle, Stephen Emrich, Jeffrey S. Johnson, Bornali
Kundu; University of Wisconsin, Madison, North Dakota State
University
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) offers a means to
test causal hypotheses about functions supported by frequency band-specific dynamics in the EEG. One previous
study, for example, has provided confirmatory evidence
for an inhibitory role for alpha-band oscillations in posterior visual circuits, with repetitive (r)TMS-induced changes
in alpha-band power negatively related to rTMS-related
changes in visuospatial short-term memory (STM) performance. Here, we will present more recent work highlighting "ask-positive" functions of alpha-band oscillations. In
one study, individual differences in delay-period alphaband power were positively related to the strength of the
TMS-evoked response in prefrontal cortex, when TMS
was delivered to superior parietal lobule during the delay

2014 Annual Meeting	

period of a spatial STM task. Because this effect was largely
attenuated during the ITI, this provides evidence that alphaband oscillations underlie behaviorally specific patterns of
effective connectivity in the dorsal control network. In a
second study we used delay-period rTMS to effect a causal
test of a hypothesized role for alpha-band oscillations in
binding individuated object identities to specific locations.
During a variant of the change-detection task - STM for the
color-in-location of squares within an array - we delivered
rTMS at 10Hz to the inferior IPS. Our results revealed a positive association between rTMS-related change in delay-period alpha-band power and rTMS-related change in STM
capacity. They thus provide causal evidence for a role of for
posterior alpha-band oscillations in supporting visual STM
performance, perhaps by maintaining the bindings between
stimulus dimensions in STM.

TALK 4: FEEDFORWARD AND FEEDBACK INFLUENCES IN
VISUAL ATTENTION TASKS: EVIDENCE FOR FUNCTIONAL
AND NEUROCHEMICAL DISSOCIATIONS BETWEEN
ALPHA AND GAMMA-OSCILLATIONS
Markus Bauer; University of Nottingham, University College
London
There is abundant evidence for the involvement of both
alpha- and gamma-oscillations in selective attention. Despite
the regular co-occurence of these spectral phenomena we
provide evidence here that they reflect distinct phenomena.
While it is known that attentional modulation of alpha-oscillations occurs in the prestimulus-period and that of
gamma-oscillations in the post-stimulus period, this could
in principle be attributed to different neuronal excitation
states (stimulus on/off), known to have opposite effects
on these frequency-bands. Here, we provide clear evidence
that this is not the case and that instead alpha- and gamma-oscillations are modulated separately and are caused
by different top-down signals with different functional
characteristics: whereas alpha-oscillations represent mere
prediction-signals, gamma-oscillations appear to respond
to exogenous and endogenous attentional components. This
dissociation resonates with the differential sensitivity we
have recently found for these frequency bands to cholinergic
neuromodulation. More specifically we have shown that the
cholinergic system, which has been closely associated with
attentional performance, specifically enhances attentional
alpha-/beta-lateralization in visual cortex. I will discuss the
presumed pathway and mechanisms how alpha-oscillations
are modulated by attentional top-down signals and how
this may impact processing of upcoming stimuli.

Mini-Symposium Sessions

Mini-Symposium Session 3
Sunday, April 6, 10:00 am - Noon, Salon D

PUTTING PERSON PERCEPTION IN CONTEXT:
INSIGHTS FROM SOCIAL NEUROSCIENCE
Chair: Jonathan Freeman, Dartmouth College
Co-Chair: Jay Van Bavel, New York University
Speakers: Jay Van Bavel, William Cunningham, Reginald Adams, Jonathan Freeman
Many prominent models of face and person perception
ignore the role of the social context. This mini-symposium
features emerging social neuroscience research to shed new
light on how various forms of social context shape perceptual and evaluative responses to other people using a wide
range of methodologies (univariate and multivariate fMRI,
EEG, MEG, modeling, behavioral). The first two presentations will focus on the role of social motives. Jay Van Bavel
will explore how the motivational context of identifying
with a social group impacts the Fusiform Face Area and
early (P100) perceptual responses to in-group and out-group
faces, suggesting that initial components of face perception
are highly malleable. Wil Cunningham will show how processing goals shape evaluations of other people, reflected
in amygdala and anterior cingulate activity. The final two
presentations will focus on the impact of perceptual contexts, such as facial cues that contextualize focal perceptions.
Reginald Adams will discuss how eye gaze contextualizes
facial emotion to signal threat value (e.g., direct-gaze fear
and averted-gaze anger convey ambiguous threat). He finds
exacerbated amygdala responses to threat-ambiguous vs.
threat-specified combinations that vary as a function of
neural temporal dynamics, suggesting earlier processing
of threat-congruent information. Jon Freeman will examine
how stereotypes lead multiple social categories (sex, race,
emotion) to mutually interact and shape each other's perception, implicating fusiform regions involved in face perception and prefrontal regions involved in stereotype access
and top-down visual predictions. Together, this mini-symposium will help illuminate the fundamental role that the
social context plays in person perception.

TALK 1: SOCIAL IDENTITY SHAPES SOCIAL PERCEPTION
AND EVALUATION: EVIDENCE FROM BEHAVIORAL,
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY AND NEUROIMAGING
EXPERIMENTS
Jay Van Bavel; New York University
Correctly identifying group members is critical for successfully navigating the social world. I will present behavioral,
electroencephalography, and neuroimaging experiments
that demonstrate the dynamic influence of social identity
on perception and evaluation. We assigned people to one
of two mixed-race groups and had them respond to faces
of Black and White in-group and out-group members. This
allowed us to compare the effects of a minimal social identity
with a salient social category-race. Across methodologies,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

21

Mini-Symposium Sessions	

assigning people to mixed-race groups eliminated ostensibly automatic racial biases by leading people to categorize
others on the basis of their group membership. Specifically,
group membership influenced BOLD activity in core (Fusiform Face Area) and extended (amygdala) components of
the face processing network, emerged as early as 100 milliseconds (P100), and shaped consequential downstream
behavior (automatic evaluations and recognition memory).
This pattern was evident despite the fact that the intergroup
distinction was arbitrary, there were no visual cues to distinguish groups, and exposure to the faces was equivalent and
brief. Behavioral experiments confirmed that in-group bias
was mediated by visual attention and moderated by social
motives (e.g., the need to belong). However, multi-voxel
pattern analyses of BOLD data revealed that membership
in a mixed-race group does not make the visual system "color-blind" to race. Taken together, this program of research
suggests that ostensibly automatic forms of racial bias are
not inevitable, but are sensitive to seemingly trivial social
identity motives that shape the value of social targets.

TALK 2: SHAPING AMBIVALENT RESPONSES IN PERSON
PERCEPTION
William Cunningham; University of Toronto
An important aspect of person perception involves our
ability to generate useful evaluations that are contextually
appropriate. This is particularly important when one's evaluation can shift dramatically, from positive to negative, as
in the case of ambivalent attitudes. That is, although people
can have objective ambivalence (defined as the existence of
conflicting representations), this ambivalence is often times
solved by aspects of the situation. Yet, in other situations,
ambivalence remains when the situation cannot resolve the
ambiguity (subjective ambivalence). In two fMRI studies,
I will present data showing how ambivalent attitudes are
resolved either through a giving participants a goal to attend
to positive or negative features of ambivalent people (Study
1), or how the context of evaluation can resolve ambivalence
(Study 2). Specifically, modulation of amygdala and anterior
cingulate activation to ambivalent targets were modulated
by goals and context. These data support the idea that "topdown" processes inhibit or emphasize parts of the associations to prevent subjective ambivalence and generate more
univalent responses.

TALK 3: AMBIGUITY AND THE TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF
THREAT-RELATED ATTENTION
Reginald Adams, Kestutis Kveraga; The Pennsylvania State University, Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging,
Harvard Medical School
In this talk, we present research examining the intersectional
impact of compound facial cues on attention. Early on, using
fMRI, we found greater amygdala responsivity to ambiguous
(e.g., direct gaze/male fear) versus clear (e.g., averted gaze/
female fear) combinations of threat cues. This work helped
to resolve a long standing puzzle in the literature as to why
amygdala activation was consistently found to fear displays,
22

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

yet not to anger displays, when anger (at least when coupled with direct gaze) is arguably a clearer signal of threat.
We have since also found the opposite pattern of results,
with greater amygdala activation to clear- versus ambiguous-threat cues. In an effort to address this apparent discrepancy, we examined whether different adaptive attunements
across the temporal stream moderate these effects. Using a
dot-probe paradigm, we found greater attentional orienting
to rapid presentations of clear combinations of threat cues,
and greater sustained attention to ambiguous threat-cue
combinations. Paralleling these effects, again using fMRI,
we likewise found greater amygdala responses to clearthreat cues when rapidly presented (33ms and 300ms), and
to ambiguous-threat cues when presented for more sustained times (1s, 1.5s, 2s). Using MEG, we then examined
the neurodynamics of threat perception as it unfolds. Our
findings implicate magnocellular "action-related" vision in
the processing of clear threat cues, and parvocellular "analysis-related" vision in the processing of ambiguous cues.
These findings support an adaptive dual-process framework
that favors quick and efficient attentional orienting toward
threat-congruent information and later attentional maintenance required to process threat-ambiguous information.

TALK 4: PERSON PERCEPTION AT THE INTERSECTION OF
MULTIPLE SOCIAL CATEGORIES
Jonathan Freeman; Dartmouth College
Individuals effortlessly categorize other people along any
number of social dimensions, such as sex, race, and emotion. Although often assumed to be independent, in this
talk I will propose that these dimensions may intersect in
meaningful ways. I will discuss neuroimaging, behavioral,
and computational-modeling studies documenting systematic interactions between multiple social dimensions,
either due to bottom-up (shared facial cues) or top-down
(shared stereotypes) factors, or both. Using a mouse-tracking technique that records hand movements en route to
category responses, I discuss evidence that certain social
dimensions become perceptually linked. For example, it
was found that stereotypes lead Black faces or male faces
to partially activate the angry category and appear angrier
(even when they express no anger), which was corroborated
by computational simulations of the categorization process.
Neuroimaging studies involving correlational analyses
between mouse-tracking and neural data suggested that the
medial and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices play dissociable
roles in instantiating these social category interactions and
subsequently inhibiting them, thereby allowing faces to
be perceived accurately. Finally, multi-voxel pattern analyses characterized the inherent overlap of these different
social category representations (e.g., male, Black, anger) in
lower-level fusiform regions involved in face perception
vs. higher-order prefrontal regions involved in stereotype
access and top-down visual predictions. Taken together, this
research demonstrates that perceptions of social categories
are not independent but rather systematically interact, and
implicates both bottom-up and top-down processes in driv-

2014 Annual Meeting	

ing social category interactions. The findings bolster recent
intersectional and dynamic-interactive frameworks of social
categorization.

Mini-Symposium Session 4
Monday, April 7, 10:00 am - Noon, Salon F

THE NEUROSCIENCE OF SOCIAL NETWORKS
Chair: Kevin Ochsner, Columbia University
Speakers: Lisa F. Barrett, Emily B. Falk, Dharshan Kumaran,
Kevin N. Ochsner
Humans are a fundamentally social species that evolved to
live and thrive in social groups. For decades, sociologists
and ethologists have studied the nature and characteristics
of these groups in terms of their network size, structure and
an individual's status within them. Until recently, however,
little was known about the brain systems governing how we
recognize, represent, and act on the basis of own and others
status in our social networks. This symposium will highlight
how cognitive neuroscience has begun to shed new light on
these issues by showing how variables that quantify the kind
of social network(s) to which we belong - and our status in
them - relate to brain structure and function. Lisa F. Barrett
will describe how individuals who are members of larger
social networks show structural and connectivity changes in
brain systems for emotion and social behavior. Emily Falk
will explain how being a connector that links individuals in
a friendship network is related to neural markers of the ability to influence other's opinions. Dharshan Kumaran will
focus on the fundamental importance of memory systems
in allowing individuals to make precise assessments of the
social rank and affiliations of others. Finally, Kevin Ochsner
will present data documenting how the recognition of who
is popular in our networks is supported by the concerted
activity of brain systems for affect, social cognition and
social perception. Together, these talks illustrate the value
of combining the methods of sociology, psychology and
cognitive neuroscience.

TALK 1: THE ROLE OF AMYGDALA STRUCTURE AND
CONNECTIVITY IN SOCIAL COGNITION
Lisa F. Barrett, Kevin C. Bickart, Bradford C. Dickerson; Northeastern University, Massachussetts General Hospital
This talk will present data from three studies in which we
examined the relation of amygdala structure and connectivity to social network size and complexity. Using structural
MRI, Study 1 demonstrated the first evidence that amygdala
volume uniquely predicts the size and complexity of social
networks in healthy adults. Using resting-state functional
connectivity analysis, Study 2 demonstrated that healthy
adults who have larger and more complex social networks
not only have larger amygdala volumes but also amygdalae with stronger functional connectivity within several
intrinsic brain networks. Study 3 used structural MRI and a
newly developed and validated clinician-based rating scale
to demonstrate that atrophy in large-scale brain networks

Mini-Symposium Sessions

anchored in the amygdala predicted specific social cognitive
impairments in a sample of frontotemporal dementia (FTD)
patients. From these studies, we have discovered that the
amygdala is a component of at least three partially distinct
anatomical networks that are important for forming and
maintaining social bonds. These findings provide a powerful componential framework for understanding the neural
underpinnings of social cognition.

TALK 2: SOCIAL NETWORK STRUCTURE MODULATES
NEURAL PROCESSES INVOLVED IN SUCCESSFUL
COMMUNICATION AND MESSAGE PROPAGATION
Emily B. Falk, Matthew B. O'Donell, Christopher N. Cascio,
Joseph B. Bayer; University of Pennsylvania, University of
Michigan
The opinions, behaviors and recommendations of others
fundamentally affect human decision-making. At a macro
level, sociologists have shown that there is variation in
the extent to which people are connected to others and in
positions to exert such influence. However, relatively little
is known about the neural mechanisms that lead people
to share information and what positions them to be successful in persuading others. In a series of studies we have
examined the neural processes that promote being a good
"idea salesperson" and how these processes interact with
broader social environments, including one's position in
their social network. We have combined fMRI data gathered during tasks relevant to social influence and message
propagation with network data analyzed using tools from
social network analysis (SNA). SNA provides a rich set of
measures and techniques to quantify the size, structure
and scope of an individual's social environment as well as
operationalizations of sociological concepts such as opportunities for information brokerage. We find that individuals
with more opportunities for information brokerage show
increased activity in mentalizing and affective systems that
respond to social cues when making recommendations and
receiving social feedback about their recommendations.
Neural responses within these same brain systems are also
associated with successful message propagation and being
a good "idea salesperson". The combination of neural and
SNA metrics offers a powerful way to analyze links between
mechanisms involved in message propagation and the positions occupied by individuals in their social networks.

TALK 3: THE NEURAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING
KNOWLEDGE OF SOCIAL STRUCTURES
Dharshan Kumaran; University College London
Primates have a range of highly developed cognitive abilities that enable individuals to meet the challenging pressures of living in large social groups. In this talk, I will focus
on the fundamental importance of memory in prospering in
such an environment: whilst perceptual cues (e.g. body posture) may provide a coarse heuristic with which to rapidly
evaluate others, detailed knowledge of social structures (e.g.
hierarchies, networks) - gradually accrued through a history

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

23

Mini-Symposium Sessions	

previous interactions and experiences - is needed to make
more precise assessments of rank and affiliations. I will
present a series of experiments in which we used a range
of experimental paradigms (e.g. involving "navigation"
through one's own real social network, learning of a social
hierarchy involving unfamiliar others) in combination with
functional and structural brain imaging (fMRI and VBM).
Together, I will argue that this work provides insights into
the neural substrates underpinning knowledge of complex
social structures at several different levels: the brain regions
involved (e.g. hippocampus, amygdala, medial prefrontal
cortex, superior temporal sulcus), putative computational
mechanisms that may underlie learning, and the nature
of the representations and information coding schemes
involved.

TALK 4: NEURAL SYSTEMS TRACKING POPULARITY IN
REAL WORLD SOCIAL NETWORKS
Kevin N. Ochsner, Noam Zerubavel, Peter Bearman; Columbia
University
Successfully navigating our complex social world requires
understanding the relative status of members of our groups.
Sociologists and social psychologists have historically
emphasized two kinds of status that have important implications for behavior: power-based status, where individuals vary in their control over resources and outcomes, and
affiliation-based status, where individuals vary in the extent
to which they are liked by other group members. To date,
the majority of neuroscience research has focused on power-based hierarchies rather than affiliation-based popularity.
Here we present the first imaging research to examine the
neural systems tracking the popularity of members of realworld social networks. To do this we first used social network analysis (SNA) to determine the relative popularity of
individuals in in the context of a friendship-based network
to which they belonged. We then had members of each network view photographs of other group members and asked,
on a trial-by-trial basis, how brain activity parametrically
scaled with the popularity the target group member viewed
on that trial. We found that activity in three kinds of brain
regions tracked target popularity: systems involved in affective evaluation (e.g. vmPFC, amygdala, ventral striatum),
social cognition (e.g. dorsal MPFC, TPJ), and social perception (e.g. FFA). Importantly, activity in the affective evaluation systems mediated the relationship between target popularity and activity in other brain regions, suggesting that a
history of learning about the affective outcomes associated
with popular individuals organizes our responses to them.
These data have implications for models of affect, person
perception and group behavior.

24

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

Mini-Symposium Session 5
Monday, April 7, 10:00 am - Noon, Salon E

A NEW LOOK AT NEURAL REPRESENTATION IN
THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX
Chair: Earl Miller, M.I.T.
Speakers: Jonathan Wallis, Earl Miller, Mattia Rigotti
The traditional view of the cortex is like clockwork: Different areas and even individual neurons each have their
own specific functions, often organized about sensorimotor
information. But from recent work in the prefrontal cortex
(PFC), a different view is arising. There are gradients of representations with a large degree of overlap and many multifunctional "mixed selectivity" neurons. We will present
evidence for this and discuss its implications. In the first part
of the symposium, we will discuss gradients of representations in the PFC. David Badre will show that the human
PFC is organized along a hierarchy of rules. Jon Wallis will
show that more anterior regions of the monkey orbitofrontal
cortex (OFC) encode value in a more abstract form than in
posterior OFC. Next, we will turn to the overlap in PFC representations and the mixture of signals on the neuron level.
Earl Miller will show that the monkey PFC contains large
proportions of multifunction mixed-selectivity neurons
whose representations change with task demands, a property that underlies mental flexibility. Finally, Mattia Rigotti
will discuss the computational advantages of mixed selectivity. Their high-dimensionality may endow PFC neurons
with the flexibility to learn a wide range of tasks, but at the
same time they are susceptible to noise, sometimes causing
errors.

TALK 1: GRADIENTS OF FUNCTION IN ORBITOFRONTAL
CORTEX
Jonathan Wallis; University of California at Berkeley
Several studies have argued that the frontal lobe is organized along a gradient of abstraction, with progressively
more abstract information encoded by progressively more
anterior frontal areas. In addition, a prominent theory of
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) organization argues that there is
a valence gradient, with positive outcomes encoded medially and negative outcomes encoded laterally. To test these
ideas, we trained two monkeys on a task that required them
to use secondary reinforcement (tokens that could later be
exchanged for juice) in order to learn optimal behavior. We
could reward the subject by giving them a token and punish
the subject by taking tokens away. This enabled us to test
whether OFC contained an abstraction gradient (secondary
reinforcement is more abstract than primary reinforcement)
and/or a valence gradient. We found no evidence to support
the valence gradient: throughout OFC, neurons encoding
reward were interspersed with those encoding punishment.
In addition, there was no evidence that neurons encoding
secondary reinforcers were located more anteriorly to those
encoding primary reinforcers. However, neurons in the posterior OFC tended to encode the value of either the second-

2014 Annual Meeting	

Mini-Symposium Sessions

ary or primary reinforcer, whereas neurons in anterior OFC
encoded the value of the reinforcer independent of whether
it was secondary or primary. Thus, although our results are
not what we expected, they are nevertheless consistent with
a more abstract value signal encoded in more anterior OFC
regions.

encodes the individual task-related variables. The model
explains the PFC neural recordings collected in (Warden,
Miller 2009) and analyzed in (Rigotti et al 2013).

TALK 2: FLEXIBLE NEURONS FOR A FLEXIBLE MIND

PREDICTION, ADAPTATION AND PLASTICITY OF
LANGUAGE PROCESSING IN THE ADULT BRAIN

Earl Miller; Massachusetts Institute of Technology
The picture emerging from many years of neurophysiological investigation of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is that of a
highly adaptive, non-linear, system. Many neurons do not
have fixed functions; they seem to have "mixed selectivity".
PFC neurons are tuned to mixtures of multiple task-related
aspects. This is in contrast to typical sensory or motor cortical neurons that are selectively activated by relatively few,
often related properties (e.g., spatial location, direction of
motion, edges, etc.) and whose activity is thought to always
"mean" the same thing like "leftward motion there". Instead,
many PFC neurons have more extensive and eclectic inputs
from a wide range of external (sensory, motor) and internal (values, memories, etc.) information sources. The result
is a large population of neurons that can participate in
many functions, the "meaning" of their activation changing
depending on behavioral context: the task at hand. I will
show examples of this mixed selectivity and argue that they
are key to a hallmark of intelligence: mental flexibility.

TALK 3: UNDERSTANDING ERRORS IN COMPLEX
COGNITIVE TASKS: THE ROLE OF MIXED SELECTIVITY
Mattia Rigotti; Columbia University
Prefrontal cortex (PFC) neural activity is characterized by a
striking diversity: in animals engaged in cognitive behavior, PFC neurons are reliably but idiosyncratically tuned to
mixtures of multiple task-related aspects (mixed selectivity).
The responses of individual neurons are consequently difficult to interpret, but these interpretative difficulties readily
dissolve when we take a neural population perspective.
This approach reveals that mixed selectivity at the level of
individual neurons is a signature of high-dimensionality at
the level of population activity. The importance of high-dimensionality resides in the impressively large repertoire
of downstream response functions that it accommodates.
We recently showed (Rigotti et al. Nature 2013) that such
computational advantage is probably important for subserving the cognitive functions ascribed to the PFC, since
the dimensionality of the activity patterns is predictive of
animal behavior, as it collapses in error trials. Surprisingly,
the selectivity to individual task-related variables does not
appear to decrease during errors. We present a model of
the neural responses that reconciles these seemingly contradictory observations. We show that the mixed selectivity
component of the response greatly contributes to the dimensionality of the patterns of activity but is fragile to noise.
In the error trials this component is most strongly affected,
impairing the ability of the animal to perform the task. However, the non-mixed component, which is more robust, still

Mini-Symposium Session 6
Monday, April 7, 10:00 am - Noon, Salon D

Chair: Gina Kuperberg, Tufts University & MGH
Speakers: T. Florian Jaeger, Matthew H. Davis, Kara D. Federmeier, Gina R. Kuperberg
This mini-symposium focuses on adaptation and plasticity
of language processing in the healthy adult brain. It explores
the idea that prediction in language is inherently linked to
language adaptation and learning. We bring together several leaders who will discuss these relationships from different perspectives, presenting data collected using multiple
techniques. First, Florian Jaeger, together with Dave Kleinschmidt, will situate the relationship between prediction and
learning in a changing environment within a rational "ideal
observer" framework, discussing data from computational
Bayesian models. Second, Matt Davis will discuss a series
of magneto-encepholography (MEG) and functional MRI
(fMRI) experiments suggesting that the brain's adaptation
to degraded speech depends on the accuracy of prior predictions, linking these findings to predictive coding models
of neural processing. Third, Kara Federmeier, together with
Eddie Wlotko, will discuss a large body of electrophysiological research examining the impact of prediction violations
at the levels of semantic, lexical, and perceptual features,
highlighting how quickly we adapt to such errors, and how
this varies across the lifespan. Finally, Gina Kuperberg will
discuss electrophysiological and fMRI studies examining
prediction at the semantic-syntax interface, suggesting that
the certainty of our predictions can directly influence the
neurocognitive mechanisms we engage to comprehend realworld events in different discourse contexts. This symposium is timely and important. It revisits key questions about
the architecture of language comprehension in the brain
in the light of core computational and neural principles of
learning, adaptation and executive function.

TALK 1: EFFICIENT LANGUAGE UNDERSTANDING IN A
VARIABLE WORLD: PREDICTION AND ADAPTATION
T. Florian Jaeger, Dave F. Kleinschmidt; University of Rochester
Whether reading, listening, or viewing sign language, the linguistic signal comprehenders receive is perturbed by noise.
This makes language understanding a problem of inference
over noisy input. The ideal solution to this problem is to take
advantage of prior (top-down) knowledge in predicting the
signal, thereby facilitating efficient inference of the intended
message. In line with such ideal observer models, prediction
is an essential part of language processing. However, producers differ in their realizations of linguistic sounds as well
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

25

Mini-Symposium Sessions	

as lexical and syntactic preferences. As a consequence the
statistics required for efficient prediction actually differ (i.e.,
are subjectively non-stationary) between environments (e.g.,
between speakers/writers). How then is efficient prediction
even possible? We propose that the brain achieves this by
a) recognizing previously encountered environments (e.g.,
a familiar speaker or experimental testing room), b) generalizing across environments based on similarity to previous
experience, and c) implicitly learning the statistics of novel
environments (e.g., a new speaker). That is, not only do we
continuously learn, but we do so while imputing and updating structure over linguistic environments (e.g., groups of
speakers that share an accent or dialect). We discuss existing
evidence that supports this view and present a computational framework that guides future work on how the brain
integrates prediction errors by learning at multiple levels of
representation. Language is an ideal domain to pursue the
question of how we navigate a variable world, because of its
comparatively well-understood rich structure.

TALK 2: PREDICTIVE MECHANISMS SUPPORT RAPID
ADAPTATION AND SLOW CONSOLIDATION IN LEARNING
TO UNDERSTAND SPEECH
Matthew H. Davis; University of Cambridge
Processes of learning and adaptation are key to successful
perception and comprehension of the degraded, novel, and
ambiguous speech that we encounter in our everyday life. I
will here contrast two forms of learning: (1) rapid adaptation
processes that operate over the course of minutes to enhance
comprehension of ambiguous or degraded speech, and (2)
episodic encoding and overnight consolidation processes
that integrate novel input into longer-term knowledge
during overnight sleep. Behavioural and neuroimaging
evidence shows both learning processes operate at phonetic,
lexical, and semantic levels. I will argue, however, that key
neural computations supporting these different forms of
learning are distinguished not by the level of the comprehension system that is modified, but rather by the accuracy
of prior prediction at the time that variant input is heard.
Rapid adaptation is achieved by reinforcing accurate predictions and suppressing inaccurate predictions for upcoming speech sounds, words or meanings. Thus, adaptation
is enhanced when prior knowledge permits more accurate
predictions: if listeners hear degraded spoken words after
seeing their written form (cf. Sohoglu et al, 2012, J Neuroscience), or ambiguous words are presented after disambiguating contexts (Rodd et al, 2012, Cerebral Cortex). In contrast, novel and hence unpredicted speech sounds, words
or meanings are encoded by hippocampal, episodic mechanisms (Davis & Gaskell, 2009, Philosophical Transactions),
and online predictions are only modified after overnight
consolidation (Gagnepain et al, 2012, Current Biology). I will
propose a predictive coding account of speech perception
and learning that unifies these different neural mechanisms.

26

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

TALK 3: BETTER OR WORSE THAN EXPECTED? ERPS
REVEAL DYNAMIC MODULATION OF PREDICTIVE
PROCESSING MECHANISMS DURING LANGUAGE
COMPREHENSION
Kara D. Federmeier, Edward W. Wlotko; University of Illinois,
Tufts University
Current views of language comprehension have been
importantly shaped by compelling electrophysiological
evidence that language processing can be facilitated by
expectations for semantic, lexical, and perceptual features of
likely upcoming words. This evidence for facilitative effects
of prediction is complemented by findings of processing
consequences when predictions are disconfirmed. Prediction thus requires processing resources, whose deployment
may be difficult for some people (e.g., older adults) and
may be disadvantageous in some processing circumstances.
Our research shows that multiple language comprehension
mechanisms are implemented in parallel and that the brain
adapts its use of these mechanisms, not only over the longterm, in response to changing neural and cognitive abilities
with age, but also over the short-term, in response to situational and task demands. For example, when the utility
of prediction for comprehension is reduced, by repeatedly
substituting unexpected synonyms for strongly expected
words, electrophysiological signatures of predictive comprehension are diminished. However, when participants are
given an additional task for which prediction can be beneficial, indices of predictive processing reappear for those
same stimuli. Our results thus show that the brain evaluates
the utility and/or success of a predictive mode of comprehension on the fly and dynamically adjusts comprehension
strategies vis-a-vis the situational and task context, such that
resources can be allocated to most effectively achieve comprehension aims. We link these results to emerging understandings of domain-general mechanisms of cognitive and
neural control.

TALK 4: COMPREHENDING EVENTS IN CONTEXT:
LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION IS LANGUAGE LEARNING
Gina R. Kuperberg; Tufts University, Massachusetts General
Hospital
Comprehending language requires us to decode rapidly-unfolding sequences of letters or sounds in noisy environments. Some have proposed that, to meet this challenge,
we use our stored linguistic and real-world knowledge to
predict upcoming information ahead of bottom-up input.
Others, however, have argued that prediction is counterproductive: why predict, only to be proved wrong? This
controversy may stem from several assumptions about
the nature of prediction: that prediction necessarily equals
lexical prediction, that it is necessarily an all-or-nothing
phenomenon, and that inaccurate predictions necessarily
lead to inefficient comprehension. I will summarize evidence from multimodal neuroimaging studies suggesting
that these assumptions are wrong. First, we can predict at
the level of syntactic and coarse semantic features, which
can map on to one another ahead of the bottom-up input,

2014 Annual Meeting	

thereby predicting event structure(s), without necessarily
committing to specific lexical forms. Second, these predictions are probabilistic, generated with various degrees of
certainty. Third, the neurocognitive mechanisms engaged
when these predictive semantic-syntactic mappings are violated depend on the certainty with which they were generated, and equate to the neural costs of unifying an incoming
word into its context. I discuss two general implications of
this framework: (1) the spatiotemporal patterns of neural
activity evoked by an incoming word in context depend on
the representational level and the certainty of our prior predictions; (2) language comprehension is language learning:
the costs of our prediction errors are what drive us to adapt
to our wider statistical environment in a continuous attempt
to refine these predictions.

Mini-Symposium Session 7
Tuesday, April 8, 10:00 am - Noon, Salon F

MECHANISMS OF MEMORY CONSOLIDATION
DURING SLEEP
Chair: Susanne Diekelmann, University Tuebingen, Germany
Speakers: Ken A. Paller, Jessica D. Payne, Rebecca L. Gómez,
Susanne Diekelmann
It is a relatively new insight that sleep facilitates the consolidation of newly acquired memories. Sleep after learning
typically leads to better memory performance at a later
retrieval test compared to equivalent periods of wakefulness. Although current evidence overwhelmingly suggests
that sleep consolidates memory, we are only starting to
understand the psychological and neurophysiological
mechanisms underlying this intriguing effect. The present
symposium provides an overview of hot topics and new
opportunities for understanding mechanisms of sleep-dependent memory consolidation in humans. The first contribution by Ken Paller (Northwestern University) introduces
memory reactivation during sleep as a presumed consolidating mechanism and shows that it is possible to trigger
specific memories during sleep by using auditory cues that
are associated with single memory contents. The second talk
by Jessica Payne (University of Notre Dame) reports data on
the role of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep for the consolidation of emotional memory, indicating that physiological
reactivity to emotional stimuli at encoding channels the preferential consolidation of this information during subsequent
REM sleep. The third talk by Rebecca GÃ³mez (University
of Arizona) examines the role of sleep in the abstraction of
underlying rules from newly learned material in infants and
young children, showing that sleep might serve different
functions for memory abstraction during development. The
fourth contribution by Susanne Diekelmann (University
Tuebingen, Germany) discusses how sleep, particularly
slow wave sleep, preferentially consolidates memories
that are relevant for future behavior, such as prospective
memory for intended actions.

Mini-Symposium Sessions

TALK 1: TARGETED MEMORY REACTIVATION DURING
SLEEP
Ken A. Paller; Northwestern University
A fundamental feature of memory is the propensity for
changes in storage after initial encoding. Recent findings
favor the possibility that memory consolidation during
sleep might be instrumental for determining the nature of
long-term memory, by actively maintaining the memories
that we carry through our lives. In other words, the information that is ultimately available for retrieval may tend to
be that which is reactivated during sleep. Some support for
this idea comes from studies of healthy elders and patients
diagnosed with amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment. We
showed, for example, that overnight retention of verbal
information was related to intervening slow-wave sleep,
and that defective slow-wave sleep can contribute to age-related memory impairment. What factors determine which
information is reactivated and what memories we keep or
lose? Studies of young, healthy individuals have shown
that memory processing during sleep can benefit memory
storage, particularly for information that is valued for future
use. Moreover, we can proactively determine what memory
processing takes place during sleep. We used subtle auditory
cues during slow-wave sleep to promote the reactivation of
specific spatial associations and of specific skills. Research
elucidating the mechanisms of this targeted memory reactivation provides important clues about memory consolidation during sleep and about how we can make the best use
of this understudied aspect of memory function. Moreover,
novel applications of methods of targeted memory reactivation offer potential advantages, and may prove helpful
for applications when learning is critical for recovery from
disease or for overcoming maladaptive prior learning.

TALK 2: EMOTIONAL MEMORY AND PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL REACTIVITY FOLLOWING A NIGHT OF SLEEP
Jessica D. Payne; University of Notre Dame
Negative objects are typically better remembered than the
neutral backgrounds on which they are placed, while neutral objects and backgrounds tend to be remembered equivalently. This preferential reinforcement of negative arousing
stimuli within scenes is known as the emotional memory
trade-off effect, and it has been shown to increase following
periods of sleep. Here we examined 1) the sleep stage correlates of this selective benefit to emotional objects within
scenes, 2) whether the degree of physiological reactivity (as
measured by heart-rate deceleration) to images at encoding
would predict subsequent memory for these objects, and
3) whether physiological reactivity in response to scenes at
encoding would be depotentiated following sleep compared
to wakefulness. Results suggest that preferential memory
for emotional objects was associated with rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, that the degree of heart rate deceleration
to negative scenes at encoding predicted selective memory
for negative objects, but only in the sleep group, and that
sleep globally depotentiated physiological reactivity to both
negative and neutral scene components. These results sugCognitive Neuroscience Society

27

Mini-Symposium Sessions	

gest that selective emotional memory consolidation during
sleep is largely associated with time spent in REM sleep, that
larger visceral reactions to negative pictures at encoding set
the stage for this preferential memory for negative objects
following a night of sleep, and that sleep has a net depotentiating effect on physiological reactivity to images, regardless
of valence.

TALK 3: THE (COMPLICATED) ROLE OF SLEEP IN
ABSTRACTION IN INFANTS AND YOUNG CHILDREN
Rebecca L. Gómez; University of Arizona
Abstraction is a crucial form of learning involving retention
of key aspects of experience while enabling generalization
to new information. This ability is critical for infants and
young children who must generalize to similar but not identical instances to those encountered during learning (e.g.,
a familiar grammatical form instantiated in novel vocabulary or a new referent for an existing word). We investigate
contributions of sleep to abstraction in children for whom
memory structures are developing. At 15 months of age, a
period of less mature memory, sleep in an interval immediately after learning enables abstraction of a linguistic rule
and portability of that rule to new vocabulary after a 4-hour
delay. With increased maturity of memory structures the
relationship between sleep and abstraction becomes more
complex. Preschoolers (2-3 years of age) who successfully
form an abstraction during learning must sleep soon afterwards to demonstrate abstraction 24 hours later. However, in
preschoolers unable to form an abstraction during learning,
immediate sleep may be disadvantageous: the high levels of
NREM sleep characteristic at this age appear to contribute to
consolidation of irrelevant details and an inability to abstract
later. The findings suggest that sleep plays different roles for
memory and abstraction at different points in development
perhaps as a function of the learning systems most involved,
with cortical systems prevailing in infancy as compared to
increased hippocampal functioning thought to come online
in early childhood.

TALK 4: THE ROLE OF FUTURE RELEVANCE IN SLEEP-DEPENDENT MEMORY CONSOLIDATION
Susanne Diekelmann; University Tuebingen, Germany
Memories are of the past but serve to regulate future behavior. While sleep is well known to benefit the consolidation
of memories for past events, the role of sleep for memories
of future relevance is less well understood. Recent research
provides initial evidence that consolidation processes
during sleep are not non-selective but target preferentially
those memories that are relevant for future behavior, such
as memories for which participants expect a retrieval test
and memories that are associated with monetary reward. In
a series of studies, we have also shown that the prototype of
future-relevant memory, prospective memory for intended
actions, is especially facilitated by sleep. Sleep improves the
ability to execute intended actions after a delay of two days,
and this improvement specifically depends on slow wave
sleep rather than REM sleep. Sleep thereby enhances both
28

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

components of prospective memory, (i) to remember that
something has to be done and (ii) to remember what has
to be done. Moreover, the facilitative effect of sleep on prospective memory is particularly evident under conditions
of reduced attentional resources at retrieval, suggesting
that sleep strengthens intentional memory representations
so that the intention automatically comes to mind at the
appropriate time without the need for additional attentional resources. This evidence collectively indicates that
some memories gain preferential access to sleep-dependent
memory consolidation based on their relevance for future
behavior.

Mini-Symposium Session 8
Tuesday, April 8, 10:00 am - Noon, Salon E

MEG, EEG AND FMRI BASED FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY ANALYSIS: RELEVANCE TO
COGNITION
Chair: Satu Palva, Neuroscience Center, University of Helsinki
Speakers: Satu Palva, Nathan Weisz, Joerg Hipp, Jonathan
Power
Recent advances in functional neuroimaging have highlighted the role of inter-areal interactions and functional
connectivity in human cognition. Non-invasive electrophysiological recordings with electro- and magnetoencephalography (EEG / MEG) with excellent temporal resolution permit
the monitoring of functional connectivity in the sub-second
time-scale of human cognitive operations. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) recordings have further
revealed a reliable and spatially detailed organization of
human functional networks during rest. This symposium
will discuss recent results which show that when MEG and
EEG are combined with source reconstruction techniques
and graph theory metrics, large-scale functional connectivity and inter-areal synchronization can be revealed in several temporal scales and anatomical networks. The strength
and spectro-anatomical patterns of these inter-areal interactions predict the behavioral task-performance in perceptual,
working memory, and attention tasks. We also present data
showing that plastic changes in congenital blindness are
associated with changes in local and large-scale neuronal
interactions during rest and an auditory task. Further, we
will discuss the spatial organization of fMRI-derived human
functional connectivity and ways to identify important
nodes in correlation networks and examine the differential
impact, in cognitive terms, of human brain lesions in different parts of the network. Our symposia attempts to argue
that the rich hierarchy of functional connectivity in sub-second time-scales may underlie the integration of information
across brain regions to mechanistically support human
cognition. We will further argue that both sub-second timescale connectivity observed with MEG and slow BOLD fluctuations in fMRI predict sensory and cognitive impairments
and plasticity of neuronal networks.

2014 Annual Meeting	

TALK 1: INTER-AREAL SYNCHRONY IN FRONTO-PARIETAL
AND SENSORY NETWORKS UNDERLIES PERFORMANCE
IN WORKING MEMORY AND ATTENTION TASKS.
Satu Palva, Sheng Wang, Roosa Honkanen, Santeri Rouhinen,
J. Matias Palva; Neuroscience Center, University of Helsinki
Attention and working memory (WM) are associated with
large-scale neuronal activity distributed across the cortex.
Neuronal mechanism underlying the coordination of this
anatomically distributed processing into introspectively
coherent cognition has remained largely unknown. Synchronization of neuronal activity in beta- and gamma- frequency bands gives rise to transient neuronal assemblies
that may through relational coding beget the coordination
and integration of distributed processing. I will present data
investigating the functional role of local and large-scale
neuronal interactions in attention and working memory
(WM). We have estimated inter-areal synchronization and
local oscillation amplitudes from concurrent MEG and EEG
recordings in individual cortical anatomy by using source
reconstruction techniques and graph theory metrics during
visual WM and attention tasks. The strength of inter-areal
synchronization in several distinct anatomical networks and
sub-second time-scales predicts the task-performance and
individual variations in behavioral accuracy and capacity of
both attention and WM. To estimate neuronal correlates of
multi-object visual attention, we used fMRI based sub-network structures to identify the strength of synchronization
in distinct subsystems. These data reveal that the behavioral
performance and attentional capacity is mainly predicted by
concurrent synchronization in fronto-parietal and sensory
networks. We have furthermore observed that both local
and inter-areal synchronization during working memory
retention period in task-relevant visual and fronto-parietal
regions are correlated with and predict the performance
and features maintained in visual working memory task.
Together these data reveal that local and inter-areal synchronization in several sub-second time-scales may mechanistically underlie the performance in human attention and
WM tasks.

TALK 2: PRE-STIMULUS FUNCTIONAL NETWORKS
FORM PREDISPOSITIONS FOR UPCOMING CONSCIOUS
PERCEPTS OF NEAR-THRESHOLD STIMULI
Nathan Weisz, Julia Frey, Sabine Leske, Thomas Hartmann,
Philipp Ruhnau; Center for Mind and Brain Sciences, University of Trento, Italy, Department of Psychology, University of
Konstanz, Germany
Near-threshold (NT) stimuli are often used to study neural
processes associated with conscious experience. An increasing amount of works show that already prior to stimulation
reduced alpha power in task-relevant regions are predictive of perceiving the NT stimulus. This has been mainly
interpreted within the context of the functional inhibition
hypothesis, stating relevant areas to be in a state of relatively
reduced excitability. In a series of MEG studies, we show
that reduced alpha power prior to hits is accompanied by
increases on network measures that imply a stronger inte-

Mini-Symposium Sessions

gration of the respective regions in a distributed functional
network. Our findings argue for pre-established pathways
of neural communication that form "windows" to upcoming conscious access. The lecture intends to introduce this
framework and will exemplify how the combination of
functional connectivity and graph theory to MEG data helps
to gain deeper insights into the predispositions of conscious
perception.

TALK 3: ALTERED NEURONAL INTERACTIONS IN THE
CORTEX OF THE BLIND
Joerg Hipp, David J. Hawellek, Andreas K. Engel, Markus
Siegel; Center for Integrative Neuroscience (CIN), University
of Tubingen, Center for Neural Science, New York University,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
In congenital blindness, the brain develops under severe
sensory deprivation and undergoes remarkable plastic
changes in both structure and function. However, the neuronal mechanisms that underlie this altered functional state
remain largely unknown. I will present MEG experiments
investigating local and large-scale neuronal interactions
in the visual cortex of the blind during resting, and in an
auditory task. Comparing resting activity in the blind and
sighted visual cortex revealed dramatic differences in
neuronal interactions that dissociate from effects in local
signal power. Furthermore, we found specific oscillatory
processes that reflect non-visual auditory processing in the
visual cortex of the blind, and found that these processes
were functionally coupled with the auditory cortex. This
work reveals intact electrophysiological activity in deprived
visual cortex and suggests that it is functionally integrated
into a larger network serving non-visual functions.

TALK 4: HEALTHY BRAIN NETWORK ORGANIZATION
PREDICTS COGNITIVE OUTCOMES AFTER BRAIN
LESIONS
Jonathan Power, David Warren, Joel Bruss, Natalie Denburg,
Haoxin Sun, Steve Petersen, Daniel Tranel; Washington University in Saint Louis, University of Iowa
The systems-scale organization of the human brain has
become much better understood in the last decade, largely
because of the realization that task-associated regions display correlated spontaneous fluctuations in fMRI BOLD
signal. Several groups have now partitioned the human
cortex into 1-2 dozen distributed systems, many of which
have (partially) known functional attributes (e.g., the visual
system, the dorsal attention system, etc.). Here, we will
discuss one such strategy for partitioning the brain into
functional systems. We then identify locations (target locations) in the brain that 1) are proximal to elements of many
systems, and 2) exhibit spontaneous BOLD correlations to
many systems. We predict that lesions to such locations may
disrupt interactions among different systems, leading to
broad and potentially severe impairments in cognition. We
then test this hypothesis by examining the behavioral and
cognitive profiles of subjects with focal, stable brain lesions
at target locations. We contrast the effects of lesions at target
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

29

Mini-Symposium Sessions	

locations with the effects of lesions at control locations that
do not possess either of the properties mentioned above,
but which have been previously identified as "cortical hubs"
using methods we have argued against. Lesions to target
locations (N=19) uniformly produced widespread impairment across many cognitive domains that far exceeded
the deficits predicted by traditional neuropsychological
principles. In contrast, lesions to control locations (N=11)
uniformly produced impairment in one or few cognitive
domains, in accord with clinical expectations. These preliminary results substantiate our predictions and suggest
revisions of current understanding of brain hubs.

Mini-Symposium Session 9
Tuesday, April 8, 10:00 am - Noon, Salon D

OSCILLATORY MECHANISMS OF ATTENTIONAL
CONTROL
Chair: Tom Marshall, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Nijmegen (Netherlands)
Co-Chair: Ole Jensen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition
and Behaviour, Nijmegen (Netherlands)
Speakers: Lisa Payne, Tom Marshall, Saskia Haegens, Clayton
Curtis
The alpha rhythm is the most prominently observable feature in human EEG and MEG. Originally believed to reflect
"cortical idling", a body of evidence suggests that alpha in
fact reflects functional inhibition. Specifically, alpha oscillations in sensory cortex are believed to reflect active inhibition of task-irrelevant information and of task-irrelevant
brain-regions, allowing efficient communication between
task-relevant regions and processing of task-relevant
information. In this framework, alpha reflects a top-down
inhibitory drive whereas gamma-band oscillations reflect
active processing. This interaction between high and low
frequency oscillations may represent a fundamental mechanism by which the brain operates as a network, however the
mechanisms by which the alpha rhythm is generated locally
in sensory cortex, the mechanisms controlling its deployment, its spatiotemporal scope, and the interaction between
alpha and gamma oscillations are not yet fully understood.
In this symposium we will draw on a range of methods scalp and intracranial EEG, MEG, laminar recordings from
non-human primates, and non-invasive brain stimulation
(TMS) - to attempt to characterize the oscillatory mechanisms which manifest attentional control. Particularly,
we will address the following questions: 1) Which brain
regions exert top-down control allowing alpha oscillations
to be deployed in a task-appropriate manner? 2) What is the
underlying neurophysiological mechanism by which the
sensory alpha rhythm is generated? 3) What is the spatial
and temporal specificity of the active inhibition produced
by alpha? 4) How can the interaction between alpha oscillations and gamma oscillations be characterized?

30

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

TALK 1: ALPHA-BAND OSCILLATIONS PROTECT
SELECTIVE AUDITORY AND VISUAL PROCESSING
Lisa Payne, Chad Dube, Robert Sekuler; Brandeis University,
Waltham, MA, USA
Change in cortical alpha band oscillations (8-14 Hz) has
been used as a marker of attentional control. We demonstrated that cued, intentional ignoring of task-irrelevant
information gives rise to increased electroencephalogram
(EEG) alpha-band power for auditory, linguistic, and visual
stimuli. In experiment one, subjects' attention was directed
either to an auditory attribute of spoken words or to an
orthographic attribute of printed words. Right-lateralized
posterior alpha band power increased after a cue to ignore
the spoken word, consistent with previous results of auditory selective attention. During a word recognition test after
all trials had been completed, subjects performed at chance
for recall of voice gender for words they had been cued to
ignore. Strikingly, when subjects were cued to ignore the
font of a printed word, alpha oscillations increased over
left fronto-temporal regions commonly associated with
verbal processing. In experiment two, subjects' attention
was directed either to the first or second of successive, briefly-presented study Gabors. A cue preceding each Gabor
signified whether that Gabor should be remembered or
ignored. After a brief retention period, subjects reproduced
the spatial frequency of the to-be-remembered Gabor. When
the to-be-ignored Gabor appeared second in the sequence,
pre-stimulus, posterior alpha power predicted the degree
to which that task-irrelevant stimulus distorted subsequent
recall of the to-be-remembered stimulus. Together the
two sets of results demonstrate that timely deployment of
attention-related alpha-band oscillations can aid short-term
memory by filtering out task-irrelevant information.

TALK 2: A CAUSAL ROLE FOR FEF IN TOP-DOWN
CONTROL OF ALPHA AND GAMMA OSCILLATIONS
DURING ATTENTIONAL ALLOCATION
Tom Marshall, Ole Jensen, Til Ole Bergmann; Donders Institute
for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands
Directing attention produces frequency-specific modulation
of neuronal oscillations in sensory cortex; anticipatory alpha
band activity decreases contralaterally and increases ipsilaterally to attention, whereas stimulus-induced gamma band
activity increases contralaterally and decreases ipsilaterally
to attention. We investigated the role of the Frontal Eye
Fields (FEFs) in providing top-down control of these modulations. Previous research has suggested that the right FEF is
dominant; right FEF disruption produces stronger effects on
both attention and perception. We inhibited activity in left
FEF, right FEF, or vertex (control) in separate sessions using
continuous theta burst stimulation (cTBS), before measuring magnetoencephalography (MEG) whilst participants
performed a cued spatial attention task. Individual FEF sites
were functionally localized using fMRI. Analysis of the control condition revealed characteristic modulations of alpha
and gamma oscillations: anticipatory alpha power decreased
contralaterally and increased ipsilaterally to attention; stim-

2014 Annual Meeting	

ulus-induced gamma power increased contralaterally and
decreased ipsilaterally to attention. cTBS produced site- and
frequency-specific disruptions of these effects: right FEF
cTBS inhibited anticipatory alpha modulation in the right
hemisphere; left FEF cTBS inhibited alpha modulation in
the left hemisphere. Stimulus-induced gamma modulation
in left hemisphere was increased following right FEF cTBS,
whereas left FEF cTBS produced no effects. Thus, whilst the
alpha effects were symmetric, the gamma effects were specific to right FEF stimulation, suggesting that the previously
reported right-hemisphere dominance in this network is
mediated by high-frequency stimulus-induced oscillatory
activity. These data demonstrate a causal role for FEF in the
direction of visual attention by top-down control of both
alpha and gamma oscillations.

TALK 3: LAMINAR PROFILE OF THE SENSORY ALPHA
RHYTHM
Saskia Haegens; Columbia University College of Physicians
and Surgeons, New York Cognitive Neuroscience and Schizophrenia Program, Nathan Kline Institute, Orangeburg
Recent work suggests that oscillatory brain activity in the
alpha band (8-14 Hz) reflects functional inhibition and plays
an important role in attention. However, the underlying neurophysiological mechanisms remain fairly ill-understood.
Here, we studied the laminar profile of the alpha rhythm
in primary visual (V1), somatosensory (S1) and auditory
(A1) cortex of the macaque monkey. We used linear-array
multi-electrodes to record laminar profiles of spontaneous
and sensory event-related local field potentials (LFP) and
multi-unit activity (MUA) in S1, V1 and A1. We examined
the laminar profile of the alpha rhythm both in the LFP
signal and in its second derivative, the current source density (CSD) signal, which helps to localize underlying current
generators. First, we asked in which layer alpha activity
is most prominent. In accordance with earlier reports, we
found that in the LFP profiles, alpha was strongest in infragranular layers. However, based on the CSD profiles, alpha
was strongest in supragranular layers. Next, we showed
that the reference location substantially affects the LFP but
not the CSD spectra. We propose that the LFP signal partly
reflects volume-conducted activity, while the CSD allows us
to zoom in on local generators, hence leading to this seemingly surprising difference. We then asked how alpha interacts with neuronal processing as reflected by MUA, and
found that granular MUA aligned with supragranular alpha
phase. Furthermore, we explored how different attention
conditions affect alpha activity per layer. We conclude that
the laminar pattern of alpha band activity might be more
complex than generally assumed.

Mini-Symposium Sessions

time. In contrast, phasic changes in neural activity during
working memory have remained largely unexplored.
Here, we examine phasic changes in the power of gamma
oscillations during working memory maintenance. We
acquired intracranial electroencephalography recordings
from the posterior parietal cortices of human patients with
pharmacologically intractable epilepsy performing a memory-guided saccade task. Significant cross frequency coupling
was observed between gamma power and the phase of
alpha oscillations. In addition to sustained, spatially specific
changes in gamma power, we also observed phasic changes
in gamma power during the working memory delay period,
with the phasic changes in gamma power occurring at
predominantly frequencies in the alpha range. The results
suggest that phasic high frequency power changes are
involved in working memory maintenance. Low frequency
(phase-locking) oscillations and cross frequency coupling
could be mechanisms employed to mediate the timing and
amplitude of high frequency localized activity. We hypothesize that these phasic changes - the periodic coupling
between local populations of neurons in parietal cortex
and spatially separated regions of cortex - are the means
by which top-down attention signals coordinate large-scale
brain networks.

TALK 4: PHASIC CHANGES IN GAMMA POWER AND THE
MECHANISMS OF WORKING MEMORY
Clayton Curtis, Sangita Dankedar; New York University
Past research on the neural mechanisms of working memory
has almost exclusively focused on persistent neural activity,
which is thought to integrate perception and action over
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

31

Poster Schedule
Poster sessions are scheduled for Saturday-Tuesday in the 3rd Floor Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall of the Boston
Marriott Copley Place Hotel. All attendees must present their CNS 2014 name badge to enter the exhibit hall. Do not leave
personal items in the poster room.
The presenting author must be present during the assigned session. You may post your materials on the board assigned to
you at any time after the “Set-up Begins” time (listed below), but before the beginning of the assigned poster session. You
must remove your poster promptly no later than the time listed above in “Take-down Complete.” Any posters left up after
the “Take-down Complete” time may be discarded.
Only registered poster presenters, wearing a CNS 2014 meeting badge, for the current session and exhibitors will be allowed
in the exhibit hall during set up and take-down hours. All other attendees will be turned away at the door. No attendee or
exhibitor will be allowed to enter the exhibit hall after the Closed for the Day- No Entry hours.
Please remove your poster promptly at Take-Down Completed time, so that the next presenter may set up their poster.
Poster
Session

Date

Setup
Begins

Session
Begins

Session
Ends

Take-Down
Completed

A

Saturday, April 5

2:30 pm*

3:00 pm

5:00 pm

7:00 pm

B

Sunday, April 6

7:30 am*

8:00 am

10:00 am

12:30 pm

C

Sunday, April 6

12:30 pm*

1:00 pm

3:00 pm

7:00 pm

D

Monday, April 7

7:30 am*

8:00 am

10:00 am

12:30 pm

E

Monday, April 7

12:30 pm*

1:00 pm

3:00 pm

5:00 pm

F

Tuesday April 8

7:30 am*

8:00 am

10:00 am

12:30 pm

G

Tuesday April 8

12:30 pm*

1:00 pm

3:00 pm

5:00 pm

* Please note that only scheduled registered poster presenters may enter the exhibit hall during the half hour set-up time.
All other attendees may only enter when the exhibit hall opens.

Peoples Choice Poster Award
Vote for your favorite poster during each Poster Session. One winner
will be selected per session to receive a $125 Award! Voting will take
place at the Exhibit Hall entrance. Winners will be posted each morning at the Member Service Desk.
Sponsored by:

Graduate Student Award

Congratulations to our 2014 Graduate
Student Awardees:
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

Christine Brennan
Shaun Patel
Alexander Schlegel
Jake Kurczek
Eric A. Reavis
Katherine Rice
Cassie Ford

Postdoctoral Fellow Award

Congratulations to our 2014 Postdoctoral Fellow Awardees:
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

Nathan Rose
Martin Klasen
Jane Wang
Matthew Bezdek
Trevor T-J Chong
Michael Bonner
Xing Tian

Be sure to check out their poster
presentations!

32

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A
ATTENTION: Nonspatial
A1
CONTRIBUTIONS OF SUPPRESSION TO OBJECT BASED SELECTIVE ATTENTION Jane Couperus1, Colin Quirk1; 1Hampshire College —

Object-based attention studies have shown that facilitation spreads across
objects (Egly, Driver, and Rafal, 1994), enhancing processing to unattended
locations on attended objects. However, less is known about suppression
in object-based attention despite previous research suggesting suppression
contributes to space-based attention (Couperus and Mangun, 2010). This
investigated suppression during object-based attention. Twenty adults
(ages 18-22) completed an object-based attention task similar to Egley et al.
(1994). Participants were asked to identify the orientation of a target object
at one of four ends of two rectangles. The target location was validly cued
on 70% of trials. The remaining 30% of targets were located on either the
same object or a different object. Participants completed 2 blocks of trials;
one containing a target and a distractor on either the same or different
object for 70% of trials and the other in which only 30% had a distractor. As
in previous studies, results show the spread of attention across the attended
object when no distractor was present (F(2,38)=24.31, p<.001). Moreover,
participants were faster when no distractor was present during a block
where distractors were frequent and the location of the target was validly
cued (F(2,38)=4.24, p=.023). However, when a distractor was present, participants were faster to targets located on the different object as compared
to the same object when invalidly cued to location (F(3,57)=68.05, p<.001).
These data indicate that suppression within an object may be stronger than
across objects, suggesting a biased competition model of visual selective
attention for object-based attention.

A2
THE EFFECTS OF DISTRACTION ON THE ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MEASURES OF SELECTIVE ATTENTION. Elise Demeter1, Marty

Woldorff1; 1Duke University — Previous work demonstrates right frontal
regions activate when attentional control is challenged by a continuous,
flickering, global distractor (dSAT task, Demeter et al., 2011). However,
questions remain about the precise role of these regions and the timing and
sequence of the brain’s response to distractors. Here, we leveraged the high
temporal resolution of electrical brain recordings (EEG) during a novel distraction version of the Rapid Serial Visual Processing task (dRSVP task) to
investigate the transient modulation of attentional focus induced by brief,
unpredictably occurring distractor stimuli. Participants covertly attended a
rapid stream of nontargets (letters) and relatively infrequent targets (numbers, button-press responses) presented above fixation. A brief checkerboard distractor appeared below fixation every 500-1050 ms. Behaviorally,
target detection was impaired when distractors were presented co-temporaneously. Event-related potentials (ERPs) time-locked to the target onsets
revealed an early frontocentral positivity followed by a larger P3-like positivity largest at midline parietal electrode sites. These effects were reduced
in missed targets relative to detected targets, and the P3-like positivity was
further reduced in missed targets when distraction was present. ERPs timelocked to the distractor onset revealed a right-lateralized frontal negativity,
the right-left asymmetry of which correlated with participants’ distractor-related behavioral impairment - i.e., participants who showed greater
right-than-left frontal negativity also showed less impairment from distraction. This work demonstrates the usefulness of the dRSVP task for studying
the mechanisms of distraction, selective attention, and attentional control
and supports the idea right frontal cortex is involved in maintaining attentional focus in the face of distraction.

A3
THE SUSTAINED POSTERIOR CONTRALATERAL NEGATIVITY
(SPCN) INDICATES RE-ENTRANT TARGET PROCESSING IN
VISUAL CHANGE DETECTION Daniel Schneider1, Sven Hoffmann1,
Edmund Wascher1; 1Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and
Human Factors — The present study investigated the attentional mecha-

nisms that contribute to the detection of visual feature changes between
stimulus displays by means of event-related lateralizations (ERLs; i.e. contralateral minus ipsilateral activity) of the electroencephalogram (EEG).
Participants were instructed to respond to a change of luminance in either
of two lateralized stimuli that could randomly occur alone or together
with an irrelevant orientation change of the same or contralateral stimulus.
Response times and accuracy were decreased when relevant and irrelevant
feature changes were presented contralateral to each other (lateral distractor condition) compared to the remaining stimulus conditions. On EEG
level, we were interested in the co-variation of posterior ERLs reflecting the
visuo-spatial processing of the lateralized stimulus material and response
times. Since ERLs cannot be obtained in single-trial EEG data, we introduce a new vincentization method for estimating response time dependent
ERLs. These analyses revealed that the continuation of the sustained posterior contralateral negativity (SPCN) that followed EEG correlates of visual
selective attention (N2pc) covaried with response times within feature
change conditions. Since comparable posterior scalp topographies were
observed for earlier ERL deflections and SPCN, this sustained component
might reflect the re-activation of sensory areas in order to form a stable
spatial representation of relevant information in visual short-term memory
that can serve as a template for response selection and the initiation of
goal-directed behavior.

A4
ERP EVIDENCE CHALLENGING HIERARCHICAL PROCESSING
MODELS OF SELECTIVE ATTENTION Katherine Mott1, Brittany Alperin1,

Eliza Ryan1, Phillip Holcomb2, Kirk Daffner1; 1Harvard Medical School/Brigham
and Women’s Hospital, 2Tufts University — Many theories of selective attention suggest that early selection involves filtering stimuli based on fundamental physical characteristics such as color. Late selection involves processing more complex features within an attended dimension to identify
specified target forms. In the current study, ERPs were used to investigate
this hierarchical processing model. Fifty-five subjects with high and average
executive capacity participated in a visual oddball task. Letters were presented in an attend or ignore color, and specified letters within the attend
color were designated as targets under low and high task loads. The posterior selection negativity (SN), an index of early selection, was robustly produced when measured conventionally by comparing ERP responses under
the attend vs. ignore condition. A negative-deflecting component within
the SN temporal window was also identified by computing the difference
between target and nontarget letters, which was strongly left-lateralized, of
similar magnitude in response to stimuli presented in the attend or ignore
color, and smaller under high task load. Executive capacity correlated with
the amplitude of the target-nontarget SN, but not the attend-ignore color
SN. Higher executive capacity and larger target-nontarget SN amplitude
independently predicted greater accuracy. These results are not consistent
with a hierarchical model of selective attention, but suggest that complex
features associated with target forms are processed early and in parallel
with operations involved in selection based on attention to a readily identifiable characteristic like color. Processing indexed by this preliminary discrimination between target and nontarget stimuli appears to augment task
performance and depend on capacity-limited resources.

A5
MOTIVATIONAL SIGNIFICANCE DOES NOT SELECTIVELY MODULATE EARLY VISUAL DISCRIMINATION PROCESSES IN A DIFFICULT DISCRIMINATION TASK Emma P Shaw1, George A Buzzell1,

Craig G McDonald1; 1George Mason University — The occipital-temporal N1
component of the event-related potential (ERP) has been shown to index a
stimulus discrimination process modulated by top-down control. Although
previous studies have expanded current knowledge of the discrimination
process indexed by the N1 component, the selectivity of top-down control
for targets and non-targets in relation to the motivational significance of
the stimuli remains unclear. In the present study, a difficult perceptual discrimination task was utilized in which participants discriminated between
two equiprobable stimuli (Gabor patches of differing spatial frequency).
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

33

Poster Session A	
In order to examine the influence of motivational significance on the sensory discrimination of stimuli, participants were required to alternate
between responding only to targets (one-handed response condition) and
responding to both stimuli (two-handed response condition). As expected,
analysis of the ERP data revealed that the P3 was enhanced for targets in
the one-handed response blocks, indicating that targets were indeed of
greater motivational significance for this condition. However, there was
no difference in N1 amplitude when comparing targets to non-targets for
either response condition, suggesting that motivational significance does
not selectively modulate the sensory discrimination process. The data suggest that when stimulus discrimination is difficult, there is a general activation of top-down control for both task-relevant and task-irrelevant stimuli.
These findings are in line with the similarity gain model of feature-based
attention.

A6
EVIDENCE FOR SPATIAL AND NON-SPATIAL FORMS OF VISUAL
PROCESSING IN THE PARAHIPPOCAMPAL PLACE AREA Jonathan

S. Cant1; 1University of Toronto Scarborough — Recently, I demonstrated that
the scene-sensitive PPA is more active for judgments of the material properties of objects (whether an object is made of soft or hard material; Cant &
Goodale, 2011), compared to judgments of their shape. This appears inconsistent with the view that PPA is specialized for processing scenes, since
the single objects used did not invoke scene imagery. But material-property
judgments are important in scene processing as they can affect the strategies used to recognize and navigate through an environment (soft or hard
terrain affects the posture and stability used to navigate through a scene).
Thus, the material-property task in my previous study may have invoked
a type of processing in PPA that is distinct from its role in processing the
geometry of scenes. Specifically, these findings suggest that PPA represents
scenes by processing both spatial (shape) and non-spatial (material) aspects
of the environment. To investigate this possibility, I used fMRI to examine activity in PPA while participants made shape and material-property
judgments of both objects and scenes (images consisted of a central object
located within an indoor scene). Replicating my previous results, activation was higher for judgments of object material compared with object
shape. But importantly, activation for both shape and material judgments
of scenes was higher than activation for judgments of object features. This
demonstrates that PPA does indeed process both spatial and non-spatial
aspects of scenes, and that the processing within this region is specialized
for visual features of scenes, not single objects.

ATTENTION: Spatial
A7
THE CAPTURE OF ATTENTION BY REWARD-ASSOCIATED
OBJECTS Sarah E. Donohue1, Jens-Max Hopf1, Mandy V. Bartsch1, Mircea A.

Schoenfeld1, Hans-Jochen Heinze1, Marty G. Woldorff2; 1Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, 2Duke University — Reward and attention are two highly
intertwined cognitive processes, with reward-associated stimuli tending
to receive increased attentional allocation. For example, when reward is
associated with a low-level feature (e.g., color), the speed and magnitude
of attentional shifts to items with that feature are enhanced. It is unknown,
however, whether the shift of attention to complex objects can be similarly
modulated as a function of their reward associations. Here, we used magnetoencephalography (MEG) in 24 participants to investigate how the shift
of attention to an object might be modulated by such reward associations.
Participants were bilaterally presented with two squares of different colors,
each containing an embedded object image, and instructed to shift attention to a particular color (e.g., blue) and perform a discrimination task on
the squares’ corners. The embedded objects were randomly selected from
either a rewarded category (e.g., clothing) or unrewarded category (e.g.,
furniture), and when the target stimulus contained a reward-category
object, participants could earn extra money for a correct response. We
observed that when an object from the rewarded category was embedded
in the target stimulus, the attentional-shift-related N2pc MEG response
(peak latency ~250 ms) was earlier and larger, suggesting that the reward
association had induced a more rapid and robust shift of attention to the
target. Conversely, when the rewarded object was present in the nontarget

34

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
(distractor) stimulus, the N2pc to the target was later and smaller. Together,
these data suggest that complex objects can rapidly capture attention when
associated with a reward.

A8
THE TEMPORAL CASCADE OF NEURAL EVENTS UNDERLYING THE
IDENTIFICATION OF AND FOCUSING OF ATTENTION TOWARDS A
VISUAL TARGET IN A DYNAMIC VISUAL SCENE. Marissa Gamble1,

Brittany Zulkiewicz1, Marty Woldorff1; 1Duke University — Previously, we
investigated auditory Target search in a dynamic acoustic environment
with temporally and spatially distributed sounds (Gamble & Woldorff, In
Revision) and found ERP evidence of a rapid mechanism for identifying
pitch-deviant auditory Target stimuli. This very early (60 ms) Target-specific bilateral differentiation, relative to acoustically equivalent Nontarget deviant stimuli, occurred 70 ms prior to the onset of the focusing of
spatial attention reflected by the lateralized N2ac component (Gamble &
Luck, 2011), suggesting that incoming stimuli were compared to a bilateral
auditory Target template to facilitate rapid identification. To investigate
whether a similar early Target identifying mechanism existed in vision, we
created an analogous temporally and spatially distributed visual paradigm
where participants had to identify a pre-defined Target popout. Ten 50
ms-duration ellipses were presented (16 ms ISIs), randomly to the left and
right of fixation. Eight of the ten ellipses were grey, with one blue and one
red. Participants had to identify the Target-color ellipse, focus their attention to it, and discriminate its orientation. The results showed an attentional-shift-related N2pc ERP component contralateral to the Target, starting
at ~160-180 ms and lasting for 300 ms. Importantly, we also found an early
Target-Nontarget differential activation ~40 ms prior to the N2pc onset,
namely a bilateral occipital negativity, followed by a centrally distributed
positivity. Analogous to our previous finding in the auditory domain, these
results indicate the presence of a bilateral visual target-template that facilitates target identification during visual search, prior to a shift of visuo-spatial attention.

A9
MULTIFOCAL ATTENTION MODULATES EARLY VISUAL PROCESSING WHEN ATTENTION IS DIVIDED ACROSS HEMIFIELDS (BUT
NOT WITHIN A HEMIFIELD) Viola S. Störmer1, George A. Alvarez1, Patrick

Cavanagh1,2; 1Harvard University, 2Université Paris Descartes — It is much
easier to divide attention across hemifields than within a hemifield (Alvarez & Cavanagh, 2005). For example, two moving targets can be tracked
much faster when they appear in opposite hemifields (bottom-left and bottom-right), than when they appear within the same hemifield (bottom-left
and top-left). Using EEG, we investigated whether this across-hemifield
advantage is evident at early cortical processing stages or at later processing stages. We assessed target and distractor processing in early visual
areas by recording the steady-state visual evoked potential (SSVEP) over
occipital scalp sites while participants performed a tracking task. Target
processing was continuously facilitated relative to distractors when participants tracked one target in each hemifield, but these attentional modulations disappeared when both targets were tracked in the same hemifield
(F(1, 11)=6.22, p=0.03). These effects were not due to differences in task difficulty, because performance was matched across the tracking conditions
by adjusting target speed. To investigate later processing stages, we examined the P3 component over central-parietal scalp sites that was elicited by
the test probe at the end of the trial. The P3 amplitude was larger for targets
than distractors (F(1, 11)=7.26, p=0.02), regardless of whether attention was
divided across or within hemifield, indicating that higher processing stages
were not constrained by visual hemifield. These results show that selective
attention facilitates early visual processing of multiple targets when they
are presented separately in the left and right visual hemifields, but fails to
similarly modulate early areas when they appear within the same hemifield.

A10
READING ABILITY AND TOP-DOWN ATTENTIONAL CONTROL

Jessica Green1, Mario Liotti2, John McDonald2; 1University of South Carolina,
2
Simon Fraser University — The event-related potential (ERP) markers of
voluntary visuospatial attention have been well documented - frontal and
parietal lobe control processes followed by preparatory modulations of

2014 Annual Meeting	
visual cortex in advance of the target. There can, however, be large variation between subjects in both behavior and ERP measures in these tasks.
Based on one prominent theory of dyslexia that postulates that reading
deficits stem from abnormalities in the attention system, we hypothesized
that some of this variability may result from between-subject differences
in reading ability. To test this hypothesis, we examined top-down attentional control in a group of Low-ability Readers (LR) identified by a dyslexia screening measure along with a control group of High-ability Readers
(HR). All of the participants were university students, fluent in English,
and none had been previously diagnosed with any learning disabilities. HR
individuals showed significantly larger amplitude ERPs to attention-directing cues than LR individuals, both in terms of fronto-parietal control processes and visual preparatory activity. Moreover, the HR group showed an
effect of reading direction on both behavioral performance and ERP measures - performance was better when attention was shifted in a left-to-right
direction and differential ERP responses were seen for left and right shifts
of attention. In the LR group, however, no such reading direction bias was
evident. Our results suggest that reading and attention abilities are tightly
linked even in those without reading disabilities and individual differences
in reading ability can account for much of the variability observed in voluntary visuospatial attention.

A11
CONVERGENCE OF SUPERIOR PARIETAL, ORBITOFRONTAL AND
LATERAL PREFRONTAL INPUTS INTO THE HUMAN STRIATUM
Kevin Jarbo1, Timothy Verstynen1; 1Carnegie Mellon University — Reward contingencies have been shown to constrain the allocation of spatial attention
in object selection tasks (Lee & Shomstein 2013), suggesting an integration
of spatial, reward and executive processes during reinforcement learning.
Previous work has already shown a convergence of reward and executive
control information in the striatum through overlapping projections from
orbitofrontal and lateral prefrontal cortex (see Haber & Knutson 2010).
It remains unclear whether spatial attention areas of parietal cortex also
project directly to this convergent zone of reward and executive function.
Using deterministic tractography on diffusion spectrum imaging data of 60
healthy human participants, we visualized white matter connections from
orbitofrontal, lateral prefrontal and parietal cortex into the striatum. We
observed consistent termination fields in the striatum from all cortical areas
tested (FDR-corrected p < 0.05), along with several areas with convergent
cortical inputs in both the caudate and putamen. More specifically, maps of
the termination fields within the striatum showed a high degree of overlap
in ipsilateral cortical projections from the superior parietal lobule, orbitofrontal cortex and dorsolateral prefrontal areas. The overlapping anatomical
connectivity follows patterns sometimes reported in non-human animal
tracer studies and provides a structural framework that may underlie the
integration of reward, executive control, and spatial attention information
during reinforcement learning.

A12
RIGHT-HEMISPHERIC
PROCESSES,
INTERHEMISPHERIC
TRANSFER, AND PSEUDONEGLECT: A QUANTITATIVE EEG
STUDY Stephanie Simon-Dack1, Kristina Hernandez1, Keisha Woodall1, Chris-

topher Thomas1, Gabrielle Andrick1, Zachary Bailey1, Heather Daly1, Heather
Helminger1, Kirsten Shirley1, Benjamin Stettler1, Andrew Davis1, Tom Holtgraves1; 1Ball State University — The goal of the current study is to examine electrophysiological (EEG) recordings in participants at rest and correlate these with a behavioral measure of interhemispheric transfer (IHT).
A review of the literature demonstrates that right-to-left hemisphere (RH)
IHT can often be negative, such that a condition requiring information
to cross the corpus-callosum (CC) before a response is generated seems
to occur faster than a condition that does not require a transfer. It was
hypothesized that individuals demonstrating a robust negative RH IHT
would also demonstrate differential non-task specific EEG activity at rest
that correlates with behavioral processes (i.e., individual differences in
neural function). Furthermore, it was hypothesized that these individuals would be more likely to demonstrate right-hemispheric dominance in
other spatial processes. In this case, we expected these same participants
to demonstrate increased pseudoneglect, a phenomenon in which people
tend to over-attend to the left side of space that is most likely due to high
right hemispheric activation. Preliminary results are replicating previously

Poster Session A
collected pilot data that suggest participants with a negative RH IHT have
lower beta frequency EEG rhythms relative to those with a positive RH
IHT. Furthermore, these participants appear to be demonstrating increased
pseudoneglect, indicating that right-hemispheric activation and beta frequency neural firing patterns may be, in part, responsible for the puzzling
negative RH IHT phenomenon.

A13
DEVELOPMENTAL INVARIANCE IN IMPLICIT SEQUENCE LEARNING Caroline Lejeune1, Murielle Wansard1, Thierry Meulemans1; 1Department of

Psychology, Behavior and Cognition, University of Liège, Belgium — This study
was intended to test the age invariance hypothesis on implicit learning abilities using the serial reaction time paradigm and focusing on the comparison of second-order conditional (SOC) sequences of two different lengths
(8 and 12 elements). A total of 128 participants from 4 age groups (4 years, 7
years, 10 years, and adults) were tested. The results showed significant and
similar learning effects in 4-, 7-, and 10-year-old children, as well as adults.
The learning effect was more pronounced for the 8-element sequence than
for the 12-element sequence for all age groups, suggesting that the shorter
sequence was better learned than the longer one. In addition, the degree
of explicit sequence awareness was comparable between age groups and
sequence lengths. These results, showing that 4-year-old children are able
to learn 8- and 12-element-long SOC sequences as well as adults, provide
further support for the hypothesis that implicit learning abilities are developmentally invariant.

A14
PLEASANT EMOTIONAL INDUCTION AFFECTS OUR PERCEPTION OF THE FOREST, NOT THE TREES: AN ERP INVESTIGATION
DURING A GLOBAL/LOCAL TASK. Nicolas Poirel1,2, Grégory Simon1,

Mathieu Cassotti1, Arlette Pineau1, Olivier Houdé1,2, Virginie Beaucousin3;
1
LaPsyDÉ, Unité CNRS 3521, Université Paris Descartes, Université de Caen,
PRES Sorbonne Paris Cité, 2Institut Universitaire de France (IUF), Paris, 3EA
2027, Laboratoire de Psychopathologie et Neuropsychologie, Université Paris
8 — Our visual environment consists of global structures (e.g., a forest)
that are composed of local parts (e.g., trees). Converging paradigms using
compound stimuli (large global letters composed of small local letters)
evidenced that global information is processed in automatic and effortless
manner, whereas processing local information is more difficult and effortful. The present event-related potential (ERP) paradigm investigates the
impact of pleasant emotional induction on global and local visual processes.
Indeed, it has been showed that emotional events are processed in specific
brain areas but also modify our perception of the visual environment, by
influencing brain activity as soon as the primary visual areas. Using a rapid
display of letter compound stimuli, pleasant emotional induction lead to
reduced occipito-temporal N2 amplitude during global task (in comparison
to global control task without emotional induction), whereas pleasant emotional induction had no effect on occipito-temporal N2 amplitude during
local task. In agreement with the view that pleasant emotional context
broaden the scope of attention the present results further suggest that processing global information in a pleasant emotional context requires even
less neural resources as early as 230-330 msec post-stimuli. On the other
hand, during the more difficult and effortful local task, emotional induction
had no effect on the amplitude of N2. Taken together, these results show
that emotions do not affect in an all-or-none manner visuo-attentional process: ERPs reveals that pleasant emotional induction affects our perception
of the global forest, not the local trees.

A15
LINKING SOCIAL ATTENTION WITH EVERYDAY SOCIAL FUNCTIONING Dana Hayward1, Jelena Ristic1; 1McGill University — It is well doc-

umented that gaze direction causes shifts of attention. However, it remains
unclear whether this attentional effect relates to social functioning in daily
life. Data with clinical populations (i.e., individuals with autism spectrum
disorder; ASD) suggest that a reduced interpretation of the social meaning
of gaze in individuals with ASD might result from their susceptibility to
irrelevant perceptual changes in the environment like pupil motion, which
often accompany gaze shifts. Thus, typical individuals who are less socially
competent might also be more susceptible to irrelevant changes in the perceptual environment, which in turn may reduce their ability to attend to a
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

35

Poster Session A	
social gaze cue. Thirty-nine undergraduate students completed: (i) a gaze
cuing task, in which an irrelevant perceptual change entailed presenting
gaze cues as either an onset or an offset; (b) the Autism quotient questionnaire, which measures social competence in typical populations; and (c)
the Social network questionnaire, which measures social network size. Performance of socially competent participants did not vary with the tasks’
perceptual changes. However, in agreement with clinical data, less socially
competent participants showed reduced magnitudes of social orienting
when the task contained an irrelevant perceptual change, i.e., when cue
onset and offset trials alternated. Furthermore, their scores on both questionnaires accounted for a significant amount of variability in their social
orienting magnitudes under conditions of perceptual change. These data
link social attention and social functioning and show that performance of
typically developing individuals with lower social competence mirrors performance measured in clinical populations.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
A16
SUBSEQUENT MEMORY EFFECTS IN REPRESSIVE COPING Lauren

Alston1, Nathan Bartlett1, Andrea Shafer1, Anthony Singhal1, Esther Fujiwara1;
University of Alberta — Repressive coping is a combination of low self-reported anxiety and high defensiveness. In contrast to self-report, repressors show high physiological arousal during stress. Cognitively, repressors
are thought to show increased early attention towards threat followed by
avoidance (vigilance-avoidance). Memory reductions for threat information have been less consistent. Relationships between attention and memory
in repressors have never been tested directly. Participants (N=107) were
exposed to a stressful mental arithmetic task during which skin conductance
levels (SCL) and self-reported mood were measured. These were combined
to an index of “autonomic-response dissociation (ARD)”: High ARD scores
indicate under-reported physiological arousal (repressive coping). Participants incidentally encoded negative and neutral pictures presented alone
or with scrambled distractors while eye-tracking was recorded, followed
by surprise free recall and recognition tests. ARD positively correlated with
picture viewing time, regardless of valence. ARD was unrelated to memory
quality (free recall, d-prime). Subsequent memory effects were calculated
by subtracting viewing durations of later not recalled/not recognized pictures from viewing durations of later recalled/recognized pictures. ARD
selectively correlated with the size of the subsequent memory effect in free
recall of negative solitary pictures, and less pronouncedly so, in recognition
memory of negative solitary pictures. Thus, people with high ARD (repressors) did not show avoidance but spent longer looking at all pictures and
this was selectively more predictive of later memory only in the condition
with the highest threat-level, negative pictures without distractors. Overt
visual attention promotes rather than decreases memory for negative,
non-avoidable information as a function of repressive coping.
1

A17
WEAK REWARD SOURCE MEMORY IN DEPRESSION REFLECTS
BLUNTED ACTIVATION OF VTA/SN AND PARAHIPPOCAMPUS

Daniel Dillon1,2, Ian Dobbins3, Diego Pizzagalli1,2; 1McLean Hospital, 2Harvard
Medical School, 3Washington University in Saint Louis — Several studies
report a memory advantage for positive relative to neutral material in
healthy adults that is absent in depressed individuals. However, the neural
mechanisms responsible for this group difference are unclear. Therefore,
we performed functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) as healthy
and depressed adults completed an associative recognition memory experiment. Participants encoded drawings followed by reward or zero tokens,
and a source memory test immediately followed encoding. As expected,
the controls showed a reward source memory advantage but the depressed
group did not. Critically, analysis of the fMRI data from encoding revealed
significant Group x Token Type interactions in the ventral tegmental area/
substantia nigra (VTA/SN) and the right parahippocampus. In these
regions, controls showed stronger activation in response to reward versus
zero tokens, while depressed individuals showed the opposite pattern:
stronger responses to zero versus reward tokens. Moreover, compared to
the depressed group, the controls showed a significantly stronger VTA/

36

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
SN response to reward tokens. Within controls, the strength of the neural
response to reward tokens was positively correlated across the VTA/SN
and right parahippocampus, but no such correlation was observed in the
depressed group. Finally, in controls - but not depressed participants - the
magnitude of the difference in VTA/SN responses to reward versus zero
tokens predicted the size of the reward source (versus zero source) memory
advantage. Collectively, these findings suggest that poor memory for positive material in depression reflects blunted activation of the dopaminergic
midbrain and medial temporal lobe memory regions during encoding.

A18
EMOTIONAL TASK MANAGEMENT: FRONTOSTRIATAL MECHANISMS OF SWITCHING BETWEEN AFFECTIVE AND NON-AFFECTIVE TASK-SETS Crystal Reeck2, Amelia Abbott-Frey1, Tobias Egner1; 1Duke

University, 2Columbia University — Action plans are regularly updated in
response to changes in the environment or shifting priorities. While this
capacity to switch tasks has been extensively investigated, the impact of
affective salience on task-switching remains unclear. Numerous theories
suggest that processing the affective content of stimuli may be difficult
to inhibit, and this affective primacy leads to two divergent hypotheses
regarding task-switching. First, the prioritized processing of affective
features may enhance accessibility of affective task-sets, promoting faster
switches from non-affective to affective task-sets than vice versa. Conversely, research on task-switching has demonstrated that more dominant task-sets experience greater switch costs “counterintuitive asymmetric switch costs”). According to this work, dominant task-sets need to be
actively inhibited during performance of a less entrenched task, and this
inhibition must be overcome when switching back to the dominant task-set.
This perspective predicts slower switches to affectively-relevant tasks as
they must be released from inhibition. The present experiment adjudicated
between these two hypotheses by developing a paradigm that involved
switching between affective and non-affective task-sets. While undergoing
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), participants viewed face
stimuli and indicated either the gender (male vs. female, non-affective task)
or the emotional expression (happy vs. fearful, affective task) of the face.
Participants were slower to switch to the affective task, consistent with the
hypothesis that such switching involves overcoming previous inhibition of
the dominant, affective task-set. Activation in a right-lateralized frontostriatal network tracked these asymmetric task-switching effects, potentially
reflecting the disinhibition of affective processing when transitioning to the
affective task-set.

A19
DIFFUSE SHIFTS IN WHOLE-BRAIN FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
DURING TEMPORAL UNCERTAINTY Alea C Skwara1, Erik K Kastman1,

Stephanie F Sasse1, Leah H Somerville1; 1Harvard University — Unpredictability is a key environment feature that heightens salience detection and anxiety-related processes. In addition, physiological and subjective responses
of aversion are heightened when experiencing an unpredictable aversive
stimulus. The current study sought to determine whether dynamic changes
in functional connectivity differentiated uncertain and certain cues that
preceded a forthcoming image presentation. Healthy adult participants
underwent an fMRI scan during which they viewed negative and neutral
pictures preceded by a predictable (denoting when the picture would be
presented) or unpredictable cue (providing uncertain timing). The current
analysis focuses on cue period neural activity to identify differences in
connectivity in unpredictable versus predictable contexts within regions
differentially active during the cue period of the task. To do so, first-level
analyses estimated cue-related responses on a trial-by-trial basis and
“betacourses” were created by concatenating parameter estimates within a
trial type within a participant. Group analyses calculated differential condition-wise correlations indicating significantly different degrees of coupling for unpredictable, relative to predictable, cues. Unpredictable cues
led to increased connectivity between the amygdala and parietal regions,
parietal regions and the dorsal anterior cingulate and the posterior cingulate, and within regions of the prefrontal cortex. Subsequent analyses assess
the degree to which these coupling relationships influence the magnitude
of subsequent emotional response to aversive images, and modulation by

2014 Annual Meeting	
individual differences in trait anxiety. These findings suggest that distal
subcortical-cortical and cortical-cortical functional connectivity may be one
mechanism underlying heightened vigilance in uncertain contexts.

A20
THE NEURAL BASIS OF A SENSE OF HUMOR IN CHILDREN Jessica

M. Black1,2, Pascal Vrticka2, Allan L. Reiss2,3; 1Graduate School of Social Work,
Boston College, 2Center for Interdisciplinary Brain Sciences Research, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, 3Department
of Radiology and Pediatrics, Stanford University — Humor is a prototypical
human positive social state. Recent neuroimaging evidence suggests that
humor involves two core processes in both children and adults: incongruity
detection and resolution (cognitive humor component) and a subsequent
feeling of amusement or mirth (emotional humor component). In the present investigation, we asked the outstanding question of how a low versus
high sense of humor (SOH) was associated with brain responses in both
cognitive and emotional humor areas. 22 healthy children aged 6-13 years
watched funny versus enjoyable (positive but nonfunny) movie clips in
the fMRI scanner. We chose SOH as our primary, self-reported measure,
because a high SOH has been linked to reduced negative emotionality as
well as improved social, cognitive and physiological functioning in adults.
Moreover, as a SOH is believed to be acquired in childhood and to help
children cope with stressors during daily life, we were particularly interested in examining early developmental aspects of SOH on brain activity in
response to humor. Our findings (controlled for participant age, sex and IQ)
revealed that SOH in children almost exclusively affected brain responses
to funny (versus enjoyable) movie clips in cognitive humor areas, including
the temporo-parietal-occipital junction, posterior superior temporal gyrus,
anterior superior temporal gyrus, and prefrontal cortex. Within those areas,
there predominantly was a negative relation between SOH scores and brain
activity: the lower the children’s SOH score, the higher their brain activity
was to humor. We interpret these data that children with a low SOH need
increased cognitive effort to understand humor.

A21
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF EMOTIONAL-COGNITIVE DYSCONTROL IN ALS Martin Goldstein1, Michael Silverman1, Rebecca Bind1, Amy

Aloysi1, Bender Heidi1; 1Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai — Background: Cognitive and imaging data indicate that ALS can be complicated
by neuropsychological dysfunction. While a fronto-temporal dementia can
emerge, more commonly patients manifest subtler behavioral dyscontrol,
especially regarding emotional regulation. Prior studies have attributed
ALS-related cognitive impairment to executive dysfunction, presumably
secondary to prefrontal involvement. However, precise neural substrates
of ALS-related neurobehavioral dysregulation remain inadequately characterized. We designed a neuropsychological visual Go/No-Go fMRI
protocol aimed to specifically probe aberrant emotional regulation and
associated executive dyscontrol in ALS. Methods: 11 non-demented ALS
patients and 11 healthy matched control subjects, all right-handed, participated. Neuropsychological activation task involved serial presentation of
emotionally-valenced images in tilted or non-tilted manner. Discrimination of tilt/non-tilt attribute formed basis of Go/No-Go response selection:
subjects instructed to button press (or withhold) in response to tilted (or
non-tilted) stimulus. Task performance was concurrent with gradient EPIBOLD fMR image acquisition. Stimuli were positive, neutral and negative
selections from International Affective Picture System (Lange). All stimulus presentations counterbalanced for valance, arousal (high/low), and
presentation as Go or No-Go signal. SPM5 software employed for image
analysis (initial threshold p<.01). Present study focused on differential
neural responsivity to high vs. low arousal stimuli. Results: ALS patients
had reduced anterior cingulate, superior frontal, and caudate activity,
and enhanced visual cortex activation, while processing emotional visual
stimuli. Conclusions: ALS patients demonstrated reduced recruitment of a
fronto-striatal executive network, with simultaneous aberrant potentiation
of visual cortex, while processing emotional stimuli, suggesting a potential
neural mechanism for pathologic laughing and crying, and associated executive dyscontrol, in ALS.

Poster Session A

A22
COGNITIVE REAPPRAISAL AND STIMULUS AVAILABILITY BOTH
REDUCE CRAVING FOR UNHEALTHY FOODS Laura Martin Braunstein1,

Michael Grosz1, Esther Kim1, Melanie Silverman1, Jon Morgenstern1, Kevin
Ochsner1; 1Columbia University — Appetitive cues signal the opportunity to
obtain rewards and therefore can trigger craving or desire. The ability to
control these affective responses is important for wellbeing and the maintenance of goal-directed behavior and may vary as a function of context.
Although we know a great deal about explicit strategies for reducing craving such as cognitive reappraisal, less is known about how contextual factors like stimulus availability might influence craving and reappraisal success. Assessing reappraisal and availability simultaneously is important, as
emotion regulation occurs under different conditions in everyday life. We
probed the influence of both reappraisal and stimulus availability on craving for unhealthy foods in healthy participants. Using a 2 X 2 design, we
manipulated reappraisal (distancing or natural responding) and stimulus
availability (food was physically available or not) within-subjects. We predicted that reappraised and unavailable foods would elicit lower craving,
because distancing and inaccessibility would both reduce the appetitive
pull. Participants completed a computer task in which they viewed and
rated craving for food pictures while engaging in distancing or responding
naturally. Prior to the task, participants were shown all the available foods.
During the task, they were reminded which foods were available by the
color of the frame surrounding the picture. Both reappraisal and availability decreased craving, and there was no interaction. Reappraisal and availability seem to independently affect desire for foods, potentially by different mechanisms. Future work will explore the mechanism of availability’s
effect by testing whether it requires working memory and identifying the
underlying neural systems.

A23
NEURAL RESPONSES TO NEGATIVE OUTCOMES AND DECISIONS
TO PERSIST OR GIVE UP ON A GOAL Jamil Bhanji1, Megan Speer1, Mau-

ricio Delgado1; 1Rutgers University — Negative outcomes are an important
component of many learning endeavors but some outcomes prompt contrasting responses. For example, a student who fails a required class can
decide to persist with the original goal to complete the major (try again to
pass the class) or give up the goal (change majors). An important factor is
whether outcomes are perceived as controllable (due to willful choices such
as studying) or uncontrollable (due to uncontrollable factors such as unfair
test questions). How does the brain respond to controllable and uncontrollable negative outcomes and how do these responses lead to persisting or
giving up after negative outcomes? Participants in the present research
decided after every negative outcome to persist with a chosen goal or give
up on it for a lower value goal. Participants persisted more after controllable than uncontrollable negative outcomes. Consistent with previous observations, neuroimaging data showed decreased ventral striatum and medial
prefrontal cortex activity in response to negative outcomes. This decrease
was greater for controllable compared to uncontrollable negative outcomes. Moreover, the decrease in ventral striatum correlated with greater
persistence after controllable negative outcomes. In contrast, the medial
prefrontal cortex response correlated with negative affect experienced with
uncontrollable negative outcomes and mediated the relationship between
increased negative affect and the tendency to persist after uncontrollable
negative outcomes. The findings highlight the role of frontostriatal circuitry
in changing behavior based on negative feedback, and represent an important step toward understanding how people process setbacks and adapt
their behavior for future goal pursuit.

A24
HOW DO NEGATIVE EMOTIONS AFFECT INHIBITORY CONTROL
IN IMPULSIVE VIOLENT ADOLESCENTS? Chiao-Yun Chen1, Xin-Min

Bai1; 1National Chung Cheng University — Interpersonal violent behavior is
often induced by extreme emotional states. While there is increasing interest in the neurological bases of violent behavior, the effects of emotional
stimuli on such behavior are poorly understood. Repeated violent offenders are often described as having impairments in emotion and inhibitory
control and impulsive violent behavior could be a consequence of either
a greater generation of pre-potent responses or a deficit in inhibition of

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

37

Poster Session A	
such responses. These can be indexed using a stop signal task. If violent
offenders are characterized by higher behavioral activation system activity,
their go RTs on such a task may be lower than controls whereas if they
have lower inhibitory activity, their SSRT, which indexes inhibitory control,
might be elevated. We compared the effects of emotional stimuli on behavior in adolescents who had a history of impulsive violence using a stop
signal task to investigate how negative emotions affect inhibitory control
in this group. The SSRTs of impulsive violent adolescents in the negative
emotional condition were significantly longer than matched controls. This
shows this group may be either unable to regulate negative emotions arising as a result of errors in this condition or use such error information to
adjust their behavior effectively. This helps to characterize differences in
these individuals and may indicate avenues to help reduce the likelihood
that they will carry out violent acts.

A25
MINDFUL ATTENTION MODULATES IMMERSION IN STRESSFUL
THOUGHTS Lauren McDonough Lebois1, Esther Papies2, Romeo Cabanban1,

Karen Quigley3, Kaundinya Gopinath1, Lisa Feldman Barrett3, Lawrence Barsalou1; 1Emory University, 2Utrecht University, 3Northeastern University — An
fMRI experiment addressed the neural activity that contributes to experiencing an event as stressful, and in contrast, that which contributes to
mindfully attending to an event. Specifically, we compared neural activity
when participants were absorbed in their thoughts about stressful scenarios (immersion) to periods when they observed their thoughts as fleeting
mental states (mindful attention). Part of what makes thoughts stressful
is that they seem real, almost as if they are happening in the moment, and
because of this we hypothesized that immersion would involve the mental
reenactment of a stressful situation, such that the reenactment triggers
a stress response and negative emotion. Conversely, mindful attention
would prevent individuals from becoming immersed in stressful thoughts,
such that stress responses no longer result. Immersion in stressful scenarios
activated regions involving the senses (e.g. primary visual cortex), action
and the body (motor cortex, cerebellum), spatial processing (superior parietal lobule), self-referential and emotion processing (e.g., mPFC, temporal
pole). All these areas were significantly less active when participants were
mindfully attending to the same stressful scenarios, suggesting that mindful attention disabled stressful simulations. Instead, during mindful attention, an interoceptive circuit became active, including the middle cingulate,
motor, somatosensory areas, along with visual cortex. Notably, these differences were not evident when participants thought about non-stressful
scenarios, suggesting that affect is necessary for immersion and mindful
attention to have differential effects. These findings shed light on the mechanisms that contribute to reenacting stressful events, and also to those that
allow mindfulness to have therapeutic effects.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional
responding
A26
A SNEAKING SUSPICION: ERP EFFECTS OF SUBLIMINAL EMOTIONAL PRIMES ON THE PROCESSING OF NEUTRAL PICTURES

Marianna Eddy1,2, Nate Delaney-Busch2, He Pu2; 1U.S. Army Natick Soldier
Research, Development, and Engineering Center, 2Tufts University — In the
current study we presented masked positive, negative, and neutral images
from the International Affective Picture Set (IAPs) as primes for 33 ms,
immediately followed by images of common, everyday objects. Participants rated the valence of the target objects while event-related potentials
were recorded. Previous research suggests the P300 is sensitive to phasic
shifts in attention, likely reflecting the early stages of evaluative processing
of emotional stimuli, while the late posterior positivity (LPP) reflects more
subjective evaluation of the motivational significance of emotional stimuli.
In line with this distinction we found that the P300, specifically a frontally
distributed P3a, was more positive going for targets preceded by negative
primes than those preceded by neutral and positive primes (regardless of
how participants rated the target) while the LPP was not. When examining
ERP effects on the basis of how targets were rated, we found the opposite
pattern of effects with the P3a not being sensitive to the perceived valence
of the target and LPP showing a greater positivity for stimuli rated as more

38

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
negative or more positive than those rated as neutral. These results suggest
subliminal presentation of emotional images does influence perception of
common everyday objects, but only during the initial stages of processing.
In addition, we also replicated that the LPP is sensitive to perceived valence.

A27
FMRI AND ERP MEASURES OF REWARD REACTIVITY CORRELATE
WITH MIDBRAIN VOLUME Joshua Carlson1, Dan Foti, Eddie Harmon-Jones,

Greg Proudfit; 1Northern Michigan University, 2Purdue University, 3The University of New South Wales, 4Stony Brook University — Reward processing in the
brain can be measured by ventral striatal fMRI BOLD activation and the
amplitude of the feedback negativity ERP. We recently found that these two
neural measures of reward processing are correlated with each other, such
that increases in ventral striatal activity are associated with increases in the
amplitude of the feedback negativity. The midbrain dopamine system has
long been implicated in reward processing. However, there has been little
research into the possibility that structural variability in the midbrain may
be linked to functional variability in reward reactivity. In the current study,
we utilized a simple gambling task to probe fMRI and ERP measures of
functional reward reactivity and midbrain volume was assessed with structural MRI. Voxel-based morphometry was used to assess the relationship
between functional measures of reward reactivity and midbrain volume.
We found that as midbrain volumes increase, fMRI reward reactivity in the
ventral striatum and medial prefrontal cortex also increase. Additionally,
we found that as midbrain volumes increase, the amplitude of the feedback
negativity also increases. The relationship between midbrain volume and
feedback negativity amplitude is mediated specifically by activity in the
ventral striatum. In sum, we found that structural variability in the midbrain relates to variability in fMRI and ERP measures of functional reward
reactivity, which demonstrates convergence across neuroanatomical,
hemodynamic, and electrophysiological measures. This structure-function
relationship may play an important role in reward-related psychopathologies and the treatment of these disorders.

A28
PULVINAR AND ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX DEMONSTRATE
SELECTIVE AND DISSOCIABLE REDUCTIONS IN NEURAL
RESPONDING TO REPEATED SIMULATIONS OF EMOTIONAL
FUTURE EVENTS Karl Szpunar1,2, Helen Jing1,2, Daniel Schacter1,2; 1Harvard

University, Department of Psychology, 2Harvard University, Center for Brain
Science — People frequently simulate what might occur in the future.
Moreover, the tendency to repeatedly simulate future outcomes has been
identified as a predictor of the onset of anxiety and depression-related disorders. Nonetheless, next to nothing is known about how the human brain
processes repeated simulations of emotional future events. In this study,
we present a paradigm that can be used to study repeated simulations
of the emotional future in a manner that overcomes phenomenological
confounds between positive and negative events. The results show that
pulvinar nucleus and orbitofrontal cortex respectively demonstrate selective and dissociable reductions in neural activity in response to repeated,
as compared to non-repeated, simulations of negative and positive future
events. Implications for future research on repeated simulations of the emotional future in both non-clinical and clinical populations are discussed.

A29
EXAMINING EMOTIONAL HABITUATION TO REPEATED NEGATIVE
STIMULI IN BORDERLINE PERSONALITY DISORDER PATIENTS
AND HEALTHY CONTROLS: EVIDENCE FOR DIFFERENTIAL PATTERNS OF BEHAVIOR, NEURAL ACTIVITY, AND FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY Bryan T. Denny1, Jin Fan1,2, Xun Liu3, Stephanie Guerreri1,

Sarah Jo Mayson1, Liza Rimsky1, Antonia S. New1,4, Marianne Goodman1,4, Larry
J. Siever1,4, Harold W. Koenigsberg1,4; 1Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
2
Queens College, City University of New York, 3Institute of Psychology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, 4James J Peters VA Medical Center — Emotional habituation during repeated exposure to aversive stimuli is an adaptive process
and represents a key component of many desensitization-based psychotherapies. Borderline personality disorder (BPD) patients are characterized
by severe affective instability and have been shown to exhibit diminished

2014 Annual Meeting	
habituation responses, though the neural mechanisms supporting this
phenomenon remain unclear. We aimed to probe these mechanisms by
repeatedly presenting negative images to 19 BPD patients and 25 healthy
controls (HC’s) and recording behavioral and neural responses using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). We were particularly interested
in the role of insula and amygdala activity given their strong association
with emotion reactivity in prior work. Behavioral self-reports indicated that
HC’s habituated, whereas BPD patients did not. Neurally, while increasing
mid-posterior insula activity was parametrically related to greater self-reports of negative affect in both groups, BPD patients showed exaggerated
insula and amygdala activity to negative images overall relative to HC’s.
Further, repeated negative image presentation led to increased functional
connectivity between insula and amygdala in HC’s, but not BPD patients,
and this functional connectivity was correlated with increasing behavioral
habituation in both groups. Finally, dorsal anterior cingulate activity, previously implicated in salience detection, was shown to be recruited upon
repeated presentation in HC’s but not BPD’s, and the magnitude of recruitment negatively predicted individual differences in affective instability in
both groups. These results shed light on the neural mechanisms that subserve emotional habituation and suggest potential neurobiological substrates for the exaggerated affective instability and diminished emotional
habituation shown by BPD patients.

A30
SUBCALLOSAL CINGULATE DBS PRODUCES CURRENT- AND
LOCATION-DEPENDENT CHANGES IN AUTONOMIC AROUSAL

Cory Inman1, Patricio Riva Posse1, Steven Garlow1, Andrea Crowell1, Scott Danielson1, Helen Mayberg1, Stephan Hamann1; 1Emory University — Subcallosal
cingulate (SCC) deep brain stimulation (DBS) has shown preliminary longterm efficacy and safety for treatment-resistant depression (TRD). Immediate changes in mood and behavior during intra-operative testing have also
been observed. Spontaneous self-reported intra-operative effects include,
“feeling lighter, calmer,” and “more awake, more aware, more reactive,”
indicative of changes in autonomic arousal. Autonomic changes have been
observed within seconds of initiating acute stimulation tests during surgery and appear to correlate with the optimal white matter targets mediating long-term antidepressant effects. Skin conductance response (SCR)
and change in heart rate (HR) were measured during an acute stimulation
protocol performed 1- and 3-months post-operatively. Nine participants in
an ongoing study of SCC DBS for TRD were tested. To assess autonomic
effects of SCC DBS, time-locked changes in SCR and HR were recorded in
separate, sham-controlled experiments that varied either current amplitude
or stimulation location. As stimulation current amplitude was increased,
both measures of autonomic arousal (SCR and HR) increased. In addition, stimulation of optimal target versus non-optimal contacts increased
autonomic arousal. At both 1- and 3-months post-operatively, SCC DBS
causes a current- and location-dependent increase in autonomic arousal in
patients with TRD. These findings suggest that SCC DBS modulates activity
in brain regions involved in autonomic regulation. This is consistent with
known anatomical connectivity of SCC to cingulate cortex and brainstem in
humans and animals. Further, current- and location-dependent changes in
autonomic arousal with SCC DBS provide a novel strategy for examining
the interactions of affective experience and the autonomic nervous system.

A31
ERP EVIDENCE FOR EMBODIED EMOTION SIMULATION

Heath
Matheson1, Aaron Newman1, Ivy-Lee Kehayes1, Shannon Johnson1; 1Dalhousie
University — Background: Theories of embodied cognition propose that
understanding the emotions of other people entails a partial neurophysiological reenactment of emotional expression. Behavioural research shows
that interfering with overt simulations of emotional expressions with a concurrent motor task impairs expression recognition. However, it is unknown
when a concurrent motor task interferes with emotion processing. We
measured the N170, a face specific event-related potential, to investigate
the neurophysiological correlates of emotion simulation. Methods: Participants (n = 18) made emotion judgments of faces (happy vs. angry). On
some trials, participants performed a motor interference task, disrupting
the production of a smile (holding a chopstick in the teeth); on others, participants performed a control task that did not disrupt this process (holding
the chopstick in the lips). It was hypothesized that, in response to happy
faces, the N170 component would be modulated when participants held

Poster Session A
a chopstick in their teeth, therefore interfering with a happy simulation,
than when they held it in their lips; conversely, the concurrent motor task
would not alter the N170 to angry faces. Summary of Results: The N170
was larger when participants viewed happy faces with a chopstick in their
teeth than in their lips; the concurrent motor task did not affect the N170
to angry faces. Conclusion: Results suggest that the face-specific N170 is
altered when emotional simulation is blocked, demonstrating that simulation effects are reflected within the first 170 ms of face processing. We
conclude that embodied simulation of emotion begins at the earliest stages
of face processing.

A32
THE EFFECT OF REPETITIVE TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION TO THE LEFT DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX ON
SOCIAL EXCLUSION Bernadette Fitzgibbon1, Melissa Kirkovski1, Amity

Green1, Naomi Eisenberger2, Paul Fitzgerald1, Peter Enticott1; 1Monash University, Australia, 2UCLA — Social pain describes the experience of actual
or potential damage to one’s feeling of social connection or value and has
been shown to activate similar neural networks as seen in physical pain;
the experience that comes with actual or potential tissue damage. Although
etiologically dissimilar, brain stimulation methods applied to induce pain
relief may therefore also reduce the negative experience of social pain.
In this study, we used low-frequency (1Hz) repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) applied to the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC) in 18 healthy participants (8 active; 10 sham). Following stimulation, participants played the “Cyberball task”; an online ball-tossing
game where the subject is included or excluded. Following each condition,
participants completed a questionnaire exploring levels of social distress,
ostracism, group cohesion and mood. Compared to the sham rTMS group,
participants who underwent active rTMS reported increased behavioural
scores (i.e. more positive) in response to the inclusion condition. No differences were seen between groups in response to the exclusion condition.
In a secondary analysis, we explored whether there was a relationship
between trait empathy as measured by the Interpersonal Reactivity Index
(IRI) and behavioural responses following the Cyberball task. Within the
active group only, we found a relationship between greater negative mood
following the exclusion condition and lower scores on the perspective
taking subscale of the IRI. These pilot findings suggest left DLPFC rTMS
may increase positive emotion during social interactions in general and
highlight the need to further explore the effects of interpersonal differences
on rTMS response.

A33
AESTHETICS & AMUSEMENT: COMPARING DIVERSE FORMS OF
PLEASANT EXPERIENCE Christy Wilson-Mendenhall1,2, Nicole Betz1, Maria

Gendron1, Ajay Satpute1,2, Lisa Barrett1,2; 1Northeastern University, 2Martinos
Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital — Although
people feel pleasant (or positive) during many different activities, little
research has directly compared the diverse forms of pleasant experience.
We examined the hypothesis that different pleasant experiences (e.g., visual
aesthetics vs. conceptual amusement) are realized when common, shared
neural elements (i.e., the circuitry that supports salience and reward)
couple with other, distinguishing neural elements (e.g., the circuitry that
supports basic sensation vs. social inference). To test our hypothesis, we
made use of the simple visual and novel conceptual features of “droodle”
designs, which are meaningless visual designs that only become interpretable (and often amusing) when a caption is supplied. During an fMRI study,
aesthetic color versions of the designs were initially presented without
captions to evoke pleasant sensory experiences, and then verbal captions
were presented with the same designs (classic “droodles”) to evoke pleasant conceptual experiences. Participants rated the feeling evoked by each
design directly after viewing each block of images, and individuals’ ratings
were entered into amplitude modulation analyses to capture individual
preferences. The results supported our hypothesis, with activity in salience
(e.g., amygdala) and reward (e.g., ventral striatum) circuitry increasing as
the intensity of participants’ pleasant feelings increased, while viewing
the color designs and while viewing the conceptual designs. Moreover,
whereas posterior neural circuitry involved in visual processing was asso-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

39

Poster Session A	
ciated with the pleasant feelings evoked by the color designs, more anterior
neural circuitry involved in social inference was associated with the pleasant feelings evoked by the conceptual designs.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Self perception
A34
META-ANALYSIS OF FMRI REVEALS ROLE OF CLAUSTRUM IN
DISSOCIATION Matthew Jerram1, Samantha Bates1; 1Suffolk University —

Dissociation is defined by disruptions in integrated consciousness that can
range from normative, such as daydreaming, to pathological, such as symptoms found in PTSD and dissociative disorders. However, few neuroimaging studies have examined dissociative processes directly. The claustrum is
a thin sheet of gray matter near the insula that is hypothesized to coordinate
functioning of various cortical regions into coherent conscious experience.
Therefore, it is likely an important brain region in dissociation. The goal of
this study was to examine the neural correlates of dissociation through the
use of meta-analysis with a hypothesis of the involvement of the claustrum.
Meta-analysis was performed with GingerALE 2 using data extracted from
published studies examining dissociation using fMRI. Studies for inclusion
were identified through keyword search (such as (“MRI” AND “dissociation”) or (“MRI” AND “dissociative”)). Nine studies that examined dissociative processes directly during scanning were used in the analysis. Peak
voxels for significant clusters of these studies were entered into GingerALE
2, along with sample sizes, and activation likelihood estimate (ALE) maps
were obtained. These maps were thresholded at an error-corrected p<.05
for cluster-level inference. Meta-analysis revealed significant ALE clusters
in several regions of the brain, including the claustrum bilaterally, left postcentral gyrus, right caudate, right inferior frontal gyrus and left insula. The
results suggest the claustrum is an important brain region in dissociation,
which is consistent with its hypothesized functional role. Further, results
indicate the role of other important regions involved in abstract thought,
emotion regulation and interoception.

A35
INCREASED VENTROLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX ACTIVITY IN
RESPONSE TO POSITIVE SELF-JUDGMENTS AMONG SUICIDAL
ADOLESCENTS Sarah Henderson1, Amy Johnson1, Michael Milham2, Vilma

Gabbay1; 1Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 2Child Mind Institute —
Though past research has examined altered self-processing in adults
with major depression (MDD), little research has examined relationships
between these self-related thoughts and suicidality, particularly among
adolescents. Importantly, adolescents with low self-esteem report greater
suicidal ideation and an increased frequency of suicide attempts. The current study sought to examine neural responses to positive self-judgments in
suicidal and non-suicidal depressed adolescents, as well as healthy controls
(HC). Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), participants
viewed positive or negative trait adjectives and answered whether the
trait described them, was an objectively good trait, or contained the letter
“e.” Participants were divided into three groups according to Beck Scale
for Suicide Ideation scores: healthy controls (N = 19), non-suicidal MDD
(N = 14), and suicidal MDD (N = 9). The suicidal MDD group endorsed
(i.e., responded yes) significantly less positive traits about themselves than
the non-suicidal MDD group, who also endorsed significantly less positive
traits than the HC group. A whole-brain ANOVA using neural responses
to positive self-related judgments revealed increased activity in the precuneus, two clusters in the right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC),
and the left premotor cortex in the suicidal MDD group compared to HC.
Only the VLPFC clusters, however, showed significantly different activity
between all three groups: suicidal MDD group > non-suicidal MDD > HC.
Given the role of the VLPFC in inhibition, our findings extend previous
research demonstrating increased inhibition to positive stimuli among
depressed adults by suggesting that this up-regulated inhibition is also
associated with suicidality in adolescents.

40

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

A36
NEURAL CORRELATES OF INTEROCEPTION AND CONCEPTUALIZATION DURING RESPIRATORY LOAD Ian Kleckner1, Karen Quigley1,

Lisa Feldman Barrett1; 1Interdisciplinary Affective Science Lab; Northeastern
University; Boston, MA, USA — Certain emotion theories propose that one’s
affective state can be understood as a perception of both physiological and
exteroceptive sensory input that is formed when this input is conceptualized. Here, we explored the neural circuitry underlying the ability to
conceptualize a physiological stressor in different ways. Twenty-one participants completed an inspiratory breathing restriction fMRI task where
each participant alternated between thinking about (a) respiratory sensory
features (e.g., lungs, throat) or (b) an emotionally evocative scenario (e.g.,
suffocating) inspired by the fact that it was harder to breathe in for 30 sec.
We predicted that both conditions involve networks important for interoception (e.g., insula, somatosensory cortex) and networks important for
conceptualization (e.g., mOFC, PCC). As expected, we observed increased
BOLD signal in interoceptive regions including the dorsal mid insula and
somatosensory cortex during the interoception breathing load compared to
the exteroceptive baseline (counting a flashing “X”). Additional analyses
will consider behavioral ratings of valence, arousal, and task immersion
per trial to reveal how interoceptive sensations were perceived in the two
conceptualizations conditions.

A37
TRACKING THE TEMPORAL SIGNATURE OF THE AUDITORY SELF:
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INDICATORS OF PRE-REFLECTIVE
(EARLY) SELF-RELATED PROCESSING Christoph Justen1, Cornelia

Herbert2; 1German Sport University Cologne, Institute of Psychology, Department of Performance Psychology, Cologne, Germany, 2University of Tübingen,
Department of Psychiatry and Department of Biomedical Magnetic Resonance,
Tübingen, Germany — To successfully interact with our environment, it is
necessary to differentiate between self- and other-generated information,
also known as self-related processing. Especially the processing of movement information plays a major role in our daily lives as we are often
engaged in social physical activities requiring hand- and finger movements.
So far, studies on this topic have mainly focused on investigating reflective (late) self-related processing of movement-related unimodal visual or
multimodal stimuli. The present study used self- versus other-generated
movement sounds (finger snapping) and electroencephalography (EEG)
to examine the temporal and neural dynamics of pre-reflective self-related
processing based on complex (movement-related) auditory information.
Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded from 64 electrode sites while
healthy participants (N=8, 6 males, 2 females) listened to self or other-generated finger snapping sounds. Stimuli were presented during a passive oddball paradigm consisting of 2 blocks (“self” as standard, “other” as deviant
stimulus and vice versa). Block order was counterbalanced across subjects.
Preliminary data analysis revealed that electrophysiological responses
elicited by the subject’s self-generated finger snapping sounds were significantly different from those evoked by other-generated finger snapping
sounds. In particular, an early differentiation was observed between the
processing of self- and other-related movement sounds, starting already
in the time-window of mesogenous ERP components (between 100 to 250
ms). Topographic maps revealed that this early differentiation seems to be
most prominent at parieto-occipital electrode sites. Our findings provide
first evidence for an early, bottom-up driven differentiation mechanism in
the processing of complex self- and other-related auditory information.

A38
THE INFLUENCE OF SELF-AWARENESS ON EMOTIONAL MEMORY
FORMATION: AN FMRI STUDY Carla Pais-Vieira1, Erik Wing2, Roberto

Cabeza2; 1University of Aveiro, 2Duke University — Previous neuroimaging
studies have shown a strong influence of orienting tasks on activity associated with processing emotional stimuli. While limbic structures are widely
believed to support emotional processing and emotional memory enhancements under tasks that encourage an externally orientated evaluation of
emotion, studies on embodied affect have shown that encouraging an
internally orientated evaluation of one’s emotional state recruits additional
subcortical and cortical regions linked to interoceptive awareness. However, it is unclear how the self-awareness of emotion influences emotional

2014 Annual Meeting	
memory formation. In the present experiment, we explored how different
levels of emotional awareness during an episodic encoding task influenced
subsequent memory. In an event-related functional neuroimaging study,
participants were scanned while viewing emotional and neutral pictures
in two orienting tasks: Self-awareness (SA) and Perceptual (PE). Memories
for items were tested 2-3 days later. Behavioral results showed that SA-encoded pictures were better remembered than the PE-encoding pictures,
with emotional memory enhancements greatest for pictures with negative
valence. Functional neuroimaging results showed that, in contrast to PE,
emotional memory enhancements for the SA condition were associated
with engagement of the anterior insula/inferior frontal gyrus, the midbrain
and the basal ganglia. These findings suggest that Self-awareness influenced episodic emotional memory formation by recruiting brain regions
that are typically involved in detecting salience and homeostatic regulation
of emotional states. More generally, these results indicate that the neural
mechanisms mediating emotional memory formation may depend on how
affective information is initially processed.

A39
LISTENING TO OWN HEARTBEAT SOUNDS MODULATES SELFFACE RECOGNITION Jane Elizabeth Aspell1, David Kaneria1, James Pam-

ment1; 1Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge, UK — The multisensory basis
of bodily self-consciousness has typically been studied by inducing multisensory conflicts, most commonly between “exteroceptive” modalities, e.g.
vision and touch. Attention has lately turned to the contribution of interoceptive signals to self-consciousness, since these are also likely to play a
crucial role. Here we investigated whether self-related cardiac information
(the sound of one’s heartbeat) would affect performance on a self-face recognition task and whether this effect would depend on interoceptive sensitivity. Subjects (n=39) were fitted with digital stethoscopes connected to
loudspeakers and during different blocks, would either hear their real-time
heartbeat sounds or a recording of another person’s heartbeat. To measure
self-face recognition we presented subjects with movies (100/50 sec duration) of their own face morphing into that of another person (or vice versa).
They pressed a button when the face looked “more like other than self” (or
vice-versa). Interoceptive sensitivity was measured by recording subjects’
electrocardiograms and using a heartbeat discrimination task in which
auditory beeps were either synchronous or asynchronous with respect to
their heartbeats. We found the predicted bias in self-recognition (more
movie frames assigned to self) in the “own heartbeat sound” condition, but
only for subjects with low interoceptive sensitivity, and only for the “self
to other” morphing direction. We speculate that listening to own heartbeat
sounds promotes activation of self processing networks in the brain, which
facilitates self-recognition These results are consistent with growing evidence that self-representation in the brain is a multisensory process and
involves both interoceptive and exteroceptive modalities.

A40
SUBJECTIVE MEMORY COMPLAINTS ARE ASSOCIATED WITH
ALTERED DEFAULT MODE NETWORK IN COGNITIVELY NORMAL
OLDER ADULTS Patrizia Vannini1,2,4, Andrew Ward1,3, Sarah Wigman1,2,

Willem Huijbers1,3,4, Koene R.A Van Dijk1,3,4, Aaron P Schultz1,3,4, Rebecca
Amariglio1,2,4, Tamy-Fee Meneide1,3,4, Trey Hedden1,3,4, Dorene Rentz1,2,3,4,
Keith A Johnson1,3,4, Reisa A Sperling1,2,3,4; 1Harvard Medical School, 2Brigham
and Women’s Hospital, 3Massachusetts General Hospital, 4Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging — Subjective memory complaints are
common among older adults and frequently seen in preclinical Alzheimer’s
disease (AD), but very little is known about their neural correlates. Recent
fMRI studies show that a specific set of brain regions, collectively called the
default mode network (DMN), is important for intact self-awareness and
episodic memory. In this study we used resting state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (RS-fcMRI) to investigate the association
between intrinsic activity correlations in the default mode network (DMN)
and subjective measures of memory functioning. Clinically normal older
adults (n=205, mean age = 74.2, mean mmse = 29.1, Logical memory immediate recall mean= 14.9, Logical memory delayed recall mean = 13.6) were
administered the General frequency of forgetting subscale of the Memory
functioning questionnaire to measure subjective memory. The integrity of
the DMN was estimated by correlating RS-fcMRI time courses extracted
from a priori regions including the posterior cingulate, lateral parietal, and

Poster Session A
medial prefrontal cortices. A relationship between subjective memory complaints and functional correlations within the DMN, specifically the correlation between medial prefrontal cortex and the posterior cingulate, was
found to be significant even after controlling for age, logical memory score,
structural changes and subclinical depressive symptoms (rp=0.14, p=0.02).
These results provide further evidence that increased memory complaints
are related to DMN integrity in clinically normal older adults. This suggests
that subjective memory complaints may offer insight into early behavioral
and pathological changes in AD. More research is needed to ascribe a
pathological source for this network disruption.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Goal
maintenance & switching
A41
GRAPH THEORETIC MEASURES OF FRONTAL CORTEX CONNECTIVITY AT REST ARE SENSITIVE TO INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
IN EXECUTIVE FUNCTION Andrew Reineberg1, Jessica Andrews-Hanna1,

Marie Banich1; 1University of Colorado Boulder — Maintenance and adaptive
control of task sets requires brain circuitry with both efficient local processing capability and broad connectivity across the brain. Graph theoretic
measures of clustering coefficient and strength are proxy measures for such
characteristics. While these measures have been applied to task-induced
activations, how the connectivity profile of frontal cortex at rest relates to
executive function performance at later time points is still an open question. In the current study, we analyze resting-state fMRI data from ninety-one college undergraduates that completed a battery of tasks measuring
important aspects of executive function: inhibition of a prepotent response
(antisaccade task), task set shifting (category switching task), and working
memory updating (keep track task). We found that the connectivity profile of a number of lateral prefrontal nodes (including middle and inferior
frontal gyrus), as assessed by graph theoretic measures of strength (average
connectivity across all of that region’s connections) and clustering coefficient (a measure of local interconnectivity), was significantly associated
with common executive function (z-score average of the three tasks) but
not specific aspects of executive function (e.g., residualized set shifting and
updating). The results of the current study have important implications for
our understanding of individual differences in the brain at rest, particularly the functional role of lateral frontal regions that have previously been
implicated as sources of adaptive online control.

A42
BOLD-SIGNAL VARIABILITY DURING COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY AND STABILITY: EFFECTS ON TASK PERFORMANCE AND
TASK-SPECIFIC FUNCTIONAL EMBEDDING OF A REGION Diana

J.N. Armbruster-Genc1,2, Kai Ueltzhöfer1,2, Matthias Ekman3, Christian J. Fiebach1,2,3,4; 1Department of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt am Main,
Germany, 2Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Heidelberg /
Mannheim and Department of Neuroradiology, University of Heidelberg, Germany, 3Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4IDeA Center for Individual Development and
Adaptive Education, Frankfurt am Main, Germany — This study investigates
- using a novel analysis approach - the relation between BOLD-signal variability and behavioral performance in an fMRI-paradigm assessing both
cognitive flexibility (i.e., task switching) and cognitive stability (i.e., distractor inhibition; Armbruster et al., 2012), in a large sample of healthy human
subjects (n = 77). Results show that higher brain signal variability is beneficial for response times in both conditions. Task switching performance,
in terms of error rates, is improved in people with higher levels of brain
signal variability, while brain signal variability has a detrimental effect on
distractor inhibition performance. We hypothesized that the task-specific
functional embedding of a brain region may be a potential underpinning
of brain signal variability. Using graph theoretical network analysis, we
show consistently positive correlations between task-specific BOLD-signal
variability and degree, efficiency as well as betweenness in several prefrontal regions of interest. Importantly, this holds only for the task-specific
measures. Specifically, degree, efficiency and betweenness where analyzed
separately for the two task conditions, and no significant correlations
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

41

Poster Session A	
were found between signal variability in one condition and the functional
embedding of the respective region in the other condition. Taken together,
these findings show a differential effect of BOLD-signal variability on task
performance depending on the specific task demands. Our results replicate
and extend findings from a previous study using EEG during rest (Misic et
al., 2011), by demonstrating a positive relationship between BOLD-signal
variability and a region’s task-specific functional embedding.

A43
THE EFFECTS OF SACCADE TRIAL TYPE PROBABILITY ON RESIDUAL INHIBITION AND TASK SWITCHING COSTS Jordan Pierce1, Brett

McCardel1, Jennifer McDowell1; 1University of Georgia — Cognitive control
processes are implemented to manage incoming sensory information and
the allocation of neural resources to appropriate functions. Eye movement
circuitry involved in saccade production offers an excellent model for
studying cognitive control: basic visually-guided prosaccades are reflexlike glances towards a stimulus. Goal-directed antisaccades invoke cognitive control processes to generate a saccade to the mirror location of a stimulus. Thus, a correct antisaccade requires inhibition of a prepotent saccade
towards a cue and the generation of a response in the opposite direction,
but the same distance away from the center as a newly appearing stimulus.
By manipulating the proportion of prosaccade and antisaccade trials across
multiple runs, this study evaluated the corresponding differences in behavioral patterns. Fifty-four participants (n=41 females, mean age=19.3 years
(SD=1.3)) were recruited from an undergraduate student research pool.
Results indicated that the percentage of correct responses on prosaccade
trials decreased when there was a lower probability of prosaccades in the
run, yet the percentage of correct antisaccade responses was constant across
runs. Furthermore, increasing the probability of antisaccades in a run led to
slower reaction times for both saccade types, particularly following a previous antisaccade trial. This finding suggests that residual inhibition from
antisaccades slows performance of all subsequent trials, that this effect is
modulated by the overall probability of the occurrence of an antisaccade,
and that this slowing may or may not lead to differences in the percentage
of directionally correct responses depending on trial type.

A44
PHARMACEUTICAL MANIPULATION OF THE EFFECTS OF DOPAMINE AND NOREPINEPHRINE ON COGNITIVE CONTROL Marlies

Van Bochove1, Kees Van Heeringen2, Massimo Silvetti1, Lorenza Colzato3,
Wim Notebaert1, Tom Verguts1; 1Ghent University, 2Ghent University Hospital,
3
Leiden University — In daily life we constantly need to adapt our behavior. In situations that evoke multiple response options, we must overcome
our urge to execute the obvious but incorrect response and select the
appropriate although less obvious action. This is referred to as cognitive
control. Which resources are needed to enable us to adapt our behavior
to the environment, highly depends on the complexity of the situation. In
highly familiar situations, strengthening of existing knowledge might be
sufficient. In unpredicted situations new connections between situational
and response representations need to be formed. Both dopamine (DA) and
norepinephrine (NE) are known to influence cognitive control, although
it remains unclear which aspects are driven by DA or NE respectively. In
the current study we investigated two versions of the flanker task. In the
arrow flanker task we investigated adaptation to a familiar environment,
and in the novelty flanker task the adaptation to novel situations. To investigate mechanisms that might mediate adaptation, we added a binding task
and a probabilistic reward task. All tasks were executed (N = 20) under
3 pharmaceutical conditions, using Reboxetine to enhance NE-ergic function, Amisulpride to enhance DA-ergic function and a placebo. The order
of tasks and pharmaceutical conditions were counterbalanced over participants and the medication administration was double blind. We found that
both DA en NE modulate behavioral outcomes, but they modulate them in
opposite directions. We further report the effects on novelty, binding and
reward prediction.

A45
CONTEXT ORIENTED PERFORMANCE BIASES IN COGNITIVE
CONTROL Christopher Walker1,2, Nicola Polizzotto1, Raymond Cho1,2; 1University of Pittsburgh, 2Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition — Cognitive
control, the ability to guide goal-directed behavior, is comprised of a vari-

42

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
ety of cognitive components that are dynamically adaptive to variable
environmental contexts. In experimental settings, one important contextual
parameter is the distribution of trial type proportions. Long time course
performance biases can emerge as a function of event predictability, and
control must be exerted to overcome such biases. In a proactive control
task, we tested three task contexts as defined by trial type proportions in
a between-subjects design while collecting electroencephalographic (EEG)
recordings from 60 participants. High and low control demand trials were
presented in tasks where either 30, 50, or 70 percent (%) of trials were high
control trials. Behavioral analyses revealed task condition does not drive
behavioral differences per se. Across all trial proportions, response latencies were slower for high control compared to low control trials. However,
participants in the least predictable context (i.e. 50% high control) exhibited
a trend toward slower responding overall. By contrast, we observed the
highest error rates in the least likely trial types, and condition related differences were absent with even proportions. Analyses of induced power
demonstrated decreased tonic theta-band (4-8 Hz) rhythms in the 30% high
control group, while the 70% high control group exhibited increased tonic
gamma-band (30-80 Hz) rhythms. Taken together, these results provide
behavioral and electrophysiologic evidence that cognitive control mechanisms may produce differential biases that are sensitive to uncertainty and
the aggregate control demands in one’s environment.

A46
STIMULATION OF FRONTAL POLAR CORTEX DISRUPTS HIERARCHICAL CONTROL OF TASK SEQUENCES Theresa M. Desrochers1,

Christopher H. Chatham1, David Badre1,2; 1Brown University, 2Brown Institute
for Brain Science — In our daily lives, we perform sequences of tasks that
involve not only monitoring for the final end goal, but the intervening subgoals. Often, one proceeds through a task sequence despite limited cues
in the environment marking progress. In such situations, one must internally monitor progress through the sequence. In a previous fMRI study,
we showed that such sequential control involves the same rostral fronto-parietal networks that have been shown to participate in non-sequential
hierarchical tasks based on contingent rule structures. Specifically, while
participants repeatedly performed a sequence of four simple categorization
tasks (e.g.: color, shape, shape, color), we observed ramping activation in
the frontal polar cortex (FPC) within a sequence that reset at each initiation of the next sequence. This activity pattern suggested that FPC plays
a unique role in the hierarchical control of task sequences. However, the
necessary and specific contribution of this ramping activity to sequential
task control remains unclear. Here, we disrupted FPC during performance
of the same sequential task using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS).
We delivered single TMS pulses (d” 0.2 Hz) after the stimulus onset at one
or no positions of each repetition of the 4-task sequence. We found that
not only does stimulation reliably lengthen reaction times (RTs) on the
sequence position that the stimulation was delivered, but also increases
RTs at subsequent positions until the next sequence initiates. At the next
sequence initiation, RT returns to baseline. This suggests that the FPC plays
a necessary role in hierarchical control over task sequences.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring &
inhibitory control
A47
INJURED BRAIN REGIONS ASSOCIATED WITH DISINHIBITION

Kris Knutson1, Olga Dal Monte2, Selene Schintu3,4, Eric Wassermann1, Jordan
Grafman5, Frank Krueger6; 1National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, 2University of Turin, 3Lyon Neuroscience
Research Center, 4University UCBL Lyon, 5Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago,
6
George Mason University — Disinhibition is an inability to inhibit behavior,
which is often seen in frontal-temporal degeneration, Alzheimer’s disease,
stroke and other types of brain damage. Behavioral disinhibition leads to
social and emotional impairments including impulsive behavior and disregard for social conventions. We used voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping (VLSM) on Vietnam veterans with penetrating traumatic brain injury
(pTBI) to identify the effects of brain lesions on behavioral disinhibition
measured by the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI), a structured caregiver-based interview. Additionally, we compared uninjured veterans and the

2014 Annual Meeting	
pTBI veterans on demographic information and neuropsychological variables. Our results revealed that lesions in the frontal and temporal lobes,
gyrus rectus and insula were associated with greater disinhibition. Our
findings provide further evidence of the right frontal lobe’s involvement,
not only in motor and cognitive inhibition, but also in behavioral inhibition.

A48
MOTIVATED TO WIN: INFLUENCE OF MONETARY REWARD ON
NEURAL TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF ACTION MONITORING Narun

Pornpattananangkul1, Robin Nusslock1; 1Northwestern University — We examined the extent to which reward modulates neural-cognitive activity at
discrete action monitoring stages across time. A time estimation task was
employed while EEG data were recorded. Participants were instructed to
button-press 3.5 s after Cue onset and were later provided with feedback
on their performance. They received monetary reward for accurate performance on the Reward trials, but not on No-Reward trials. At the cue-evaluation stage, the reward cue led to a smaller N2 and larger P3 compared to the
no-reward Cue, suggesting that the reward cue affected positive-valance
evaluation and boosted attention to the cue. Next, at the motor-preparation
stage, the reward cue enhanced the Readiness Potential component (RP)
starting approximately 1 s before movement, indicating that the reward cue
enhanced motor-movement initiation processes. Later, at the subsequent
feedback-anticipation stage, the reward cue elevated Stimulus Preceding
Negativity (SPN), signifying that the reward cue elevated anticipation
of performance feedback. Following, at the feedback-reactivity stage, we
found a selective modulation of reward on a feedback-locked stimuli in
a reduction of Feedback-Related Negativity (FRN) during accurate-performance feedback, illustrating that the reward cue modified appraisal of
positive-valence information. Later, elevated feedback-locked P3 was associated with the reward-cue, but not the accuracy, feedback, demonstrating
that the reward cue influences an evaluative system sensitive to magnitude,
rather than valance, information. Lastly, we established parallel roles for
both reward and accuracy information on the Late-Positive Potential (LPP),
revealing a sustained processing of reward outcome and inaccurate performance information.

A49
INCREASED ERROR-RELATED BRAIN ACTIVITY IN OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER BEFORE AND AFTER COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORAL THERAPY Anja Riesel1, Tanja Endrass2, Lea Auerbach1,

Norbert Kathmann1; 1Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 2Otto-von-Guericke-Universität Magdeburg — Objective: Enhanced neural correlates of performance
monitoring represent one of the most robust findings to date in research
concerning obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Therefore, they are considered as a promising endophenotype for OCD. In line with that it has
been shown that the ERN is heritable, enhanced in unaffected family members of OCD patients and state-independent in pediatric OCD patients. The
purpose of the present study was to examine performance-monitoring in
adult OCD patients before and after cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) to
further elucidate whether enhanced error-monitoring qualifies as endophenotype for OCD. Method: Amplitudes of the error-related and correct-related negativity as electrophysiological indicators of performance monitoring were recorded from 60 patients and 60 matched healthy comparison
subjects while performing a flanker task. Of these patients 45 returned for
a second testing session after CBT; 39 comparison subjects participated a
second time after a comparable time interval. Results: At pretreatment,
patients with OCD were characterized by enhanced error-related negativity and correct-related negativity amplitudes compared to healthy subjects. This difference remained after treatment. Further, responders and
nonresponders did not differ in performance monitoring activity and both
groups showed enhanced indices of performance monitoring. No correlation to symptom severity and changes in symptom severity were observed.
Conclusion: These results provide evidence for state-independent performance-monitoring alterations in OCD. Even after successful treatment
OCD patients remain characterized by increased performance-monitoring.
This supports that overactive performance-monitoring could represent a
candidate endophenotype that indicates vulnerability for OCD.

Poster Session A

A50
COGNITIVE CONTROL AND OBJECT RECOGNITION IN HIGHLIGHTING Matthew Weber1, Sharon L. Thompson-Schill1; 1University of Penn-

sylvania — Highlighting, also known as the inverse base rate effect, is a
systematic distortion of association strengths arising from learning cue-response associations distributed unevenly in time. Behavioral and computational evidence indicates that highlighting arises from a redistribution of
attention over the cues. We investigated the neural underpinnings of this
effect using functional MRI; cues were pictures drawn from semantic categories known to engage object-selective regions of the ventral visual stream
(bodies, chairs, faces, locations). We find that the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is more engaged by the processing of highlighted cue-response
associations relative to associations learned without preconditioning, a
result evocative of previous neuroimaging studies on associative learning.
In addition, both fusiform gyri are less active for the newer associations,
potentially a signature of the reduced association between old cues and
new responses characteristic of highlighting. Our work adds to the evidence that cognitive control shapes object-recognition operations even in
simple associative paradigms.

A51
NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL MECHANISMS OF FLEXIBLE COGNITIVE CONTROL Jiefeng Jiang1, Tobias Egner1; 1Duke University — The brain

adjusts cognitive control settings on-the-fly to suit changing task-demands,
but how such flexible control is achieved is presently unknown. One possibility is that the brain predicts future task-demand (such as the likelihood
of conflict in a Stroop task) on the basis of prior experience, and adapts topdown control accordingly. We developed a Bayesian computational model
that achieves optimal conflict prediction by integrating temporally recent
and remote information about conflict occurrence as a function of environmental volatility: when the incidence of conflict (i.e., the proportion of congruent trials) remains stable, control adjustments rely more on remote than
recent conflict density to discount short-term noise. In a volatile scenario,
where the occurrence of conflict varies frequently, adjustments rely more
on recent than on remote conflict density to discount outdated information.
Based on successful model fits to behavior, we hypothesized that the brain
tracks volatility to predict conflict and guide control. We acquired fMRI
scans while participants (N=21) performed a face-word Stroop task with
varying conflict volatility. Trial sequences were processed by the Bayesian
model to generate trial-by-trial estimates of volatility and predicted conflict, and then regressed against fMRI signal. We found that activity in the
posterior parietal cortex and the caudate tracked volatility and predicted
conflict level estimates, respectively. Furthermore, we found that the fMRI
signal in the fusiform face area covaried with “conflict prediction error”.
These results support our hypothesis and shed light on the specific roles of
different brain regions in the flexible adjustment of cognitive control.

A52
VENTRAL STRIATAL AND DORSAL ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX
ACTIVATION REFLECT SUBJECTIVE CERTAINTY IN A DIFFICULT
VISUAL DISCRIMINATION TASK George A. Buzzell1,2, John R. Fedota1,2,

Jessica Braymiller3, James C. Thompson1,2, Raja Parasuraman1,2, Craig G.
McDonald1,2; 1George Mason University, 2Center of Excellence in Neuroergonomics, Technology, and Cognition (CENTEC), 3Mercyhurst University — While
the role of the ventral striatum in reward-based reinforcement learning has
been well characterized, its role in intrinsic motivation is less clear. Correctly performing a difficult task may be intrinsically rewarding and therefore may elicit striatal activation. Furthermore, such behavior is consistent
with the predictions of reward prediction error models of learning. However, the relationship between trial-to-trial fluctuations in subjective certainty and striatal activation is unknown. In addition, although the role of
the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) in performance monitoring is
well established, its relationship to subjective certainty remains understudied. In the present experiment, participants performed a difficult forcedchoice stimulus discrimination task in which they reported the certainty of
their response on each trial. In line with previous research, event-related
fMRI revealed that correct responses were associated with increased ventral striatal activation, whereas incorrect responses were associated with
increased dACC activation. This suggests that intrinsically motivated tasks

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

43

Poster Session A	

2014 Annual Meeting

can indeed elicit striatal activation in the absence of external rewards and
that the performance monitoring system was engaged on incorrect trials.
In addition, analysis of only correct responses as a function of subjectively
reported certainty showed that correct-sure responses were associated
with increased striatal activations, whereas correct-unsure responses were
associated with increased dACC activations. This suggests that the double
dissociation between striatal-reward and dACC-performance-monitoring
extends beyond the binary correct-incorrect classification and reflects the
subjective certainty of the individual.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory

A53
THE IMPACT OF INDUCED ANXIETY ON GO/NO-GO RESPONDING ACROSS MOOD AND ANXIETY DISORDERS. Marissa Krimsky1,

of California, Berkeley — The prefrontal cortex (PFC) is essential for higher-level cognition. Our mechanistic understanding of how the PFC contributes to higher-level cognition has been aided by identifying organizational
principles that explain PFC function. On the one hand, recent proposals
suggest that the PFC is hierarchically organized along its rostral-caudal axis
such that more rostral areas exert control over more caudal areas. On the
other hand, long-standing hypotheses suggest that the PFC is organized by
content with dorsal areas processing spatial information and ventral areas
processing identity information. How the rostral-caudal axis of control and
dorsal-ventral axis of content interact remains unclear. Here, we examined
the rostral-caudal and dorsal-ventral organization of the PFC by orthogonally varying demands on control and content while scanning participants
with fMRI. Distinct demands on control elicited dissociable caudal, mid,
and rostral activations in the PFC. Control over spatial content produced
preferentially dorsal activations in caudal and mid-PFC, while control
over verbal content produced preferentially ventral activation in caudal
and mid-PFC. However, the rostral PFC was insensitive to content. These
results indicate that the PFC has both dorsal and ventral rostral-caudal gradients that converge in the rostral PFC. These data further suggest that the
rostral PFC is the locus of domain-general cognitive control, while caudal
and mid-level areas of the PFC are more content-specific.

Lynne Lieberman2, Oliver Robinson3, Christian Grillon4; 1University of Miami,
2
University of Illinois at Chicago, 3University College London, 4National Institute
of Mental Health — The impact of anxiety is wide-ranging. It can be an adaptive response, promoting harm avoidance, but it can also negatively impact
certain cognitive functions, such as learning and concentration. The present
study examined the effect of induced anxiety on performance of a “go/
no-go” or “sustained attention to response task” (SART), designed to probe
distraction. Subjects were presented with frequent “go” stimuli, to which
they had to respond, and infrequent “no-go” stimuli, to which they have
to withhold responses. Errors of commission (missed no-go) are thought to
measure lapses of attention, such as off-task thinking, whereas go responses
are thought to measure habitual responding. Subjects performed this task
under two conditions: threat (unpredictable electric shock at any time) and
safe (no shock). A total of 40 subjects were tested in this experiment, n=
20 healthy controls, n = 14 individuals diagnosed with a current anxiety
disorder, and n = 6 individuals diagnosed with major depressive disorder. Across all groups, we noted a significant negative correlation between
anxiety potentiated startle and anxiety potentiated ‘go’ speed on the SART
task. Individuals exhibiting a larger startle response during threatening
conditions also responded faster during threat conditions. These results
suggest that threat of shock during SART promotes habitual responding
along a continuum across levels of anxiety. Critically, this effect was seen
as a continuous index irrespective of categorical diagnoses, supporting contemporary approaches towards the classification and treatment of anxiety
disorders.

A54
EYE-TRACKING MEASURES OF ATTENTIONAL BIAS IN
COCAINE-DEPENDENT SUBJECTS Nadeeka R. Dias1, Joy M. Schmitz1,

Nuvan Rathnayaka1, Stuart Red1, Anne B. Sereno1, F. Gerard Moeller2, Scott
D. Lane1; 1The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, 2Virginia
Commonwealth University School of Medicine — Cocaine-dependent subjects
(CDS) show evidence of attentional bias toward cocaine-related cues, and
this measure of cue-reactivity may be predictive of craving and relapse.
Studies show a competition between the higher-order cortical processes
(DLPFC, frontal eye fields) in voluntary eye control {i.e., anti-saccades (AS)}
and more reflexive saccades driven by involuntary midbrain (superior colliculus, supplementary eye fields) perceptual input {i.e., pro-saccades (PS)}.
Neuroimaging in CDS revealed activation in frontal regions during craving, in which reaction time (RT) was a key index of cognitive and motivational processing. We developed a novel attentional-bias task in which
CDS and healthy controls (CTL) were tested using eye-tracking technology
to measure saccadic performance on counterbalanced blocks of AS and PS
trials featuring cocaine-related and neutral images. Analyses of 87 subjects
(46 CDS, 41 CTL) indicate higher attentional bias in CDS vs. CTLs as measured by AS errors (looking toward the stimulus), both across all stimuli
(35% vs. 19% AS errors), and specifically in the presence of cocaine stimuli
(41% vs. 20% AS errors). Ex-Gaussian analysis of RTs revealed CDS display
longer RT latencies than CTLs (p<0.00, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test) during
AS trials featuring cocaine cues. These data demonstrate deficiencies in
inhibitory control, exacerbation of attentional bias, and loss of focus evoked
by cocaine cues, and additionally indicate CNS (visual processing) deficits
in CDS. These factors are strong predictors of relapse in addiction. This
saccade-based measure of attentional bias is expected to provide a unique
method by which to assess reactivity to drug cues and screen relapse-prevention interventions.

44

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

A55
THE ORGANIZATION OF PREFRONTAL CORTEX BY CONTENT
AND CONTROL: CONVERGENT DORSAL AND VENTRAL ROSTRAL-CAUDAL GRADIENTS Derek Nee1, Mark D’Esposito1; 1University

A56
A COMPUTATIONAL MODEL OF DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL
CORTEX William Alexander1,2, Joshua W. Brown2; 1Universiteit Gent, 2Indiana

University, Bloomington — Coactivation of anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) is commonly observed in neuroimaging studies of cognitive control. Although the regions are thought
to interact to support top-down control of behavior, the nature of this
interaction remains a topic of debate. It has previously been suggested that
ACC may signal the need for control which is then deployed by dlPFC,
that ACC indicates the need for shifts in attention to external stimuli or
task-sets associated with behavior which are then implemented by dlPFC,
or that dlPFC and ACC contribute independently to different forms of
control. One potential reason for the lack of clarity regarding interactions
between ACC/dlPFC may be due to the absence of a consensus regarding
the computational function of either region independent of its involvement
in a larger control network; a complete computational account for the function of one would provide critical constraints on the possible functions of
the other. Building on a recent model of ACC (Alexander & Brown, 2011),
we propose a new computational model of dlPFC, the Hierarchical Error
Representation (HER) model. The HER model states that dlPFC learns representations of error signals generated by ACC which are then associated
with task-related stimuli, while error representations maintained by dlPFC
are used to modulate predictive activity in ACC. In a series of simulations,
we show that the HER model is able to account for activity observed in
dlPFC in fMRI, lesion, and single-unit studies.

A57
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY AND FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING MEASURES OF BRAIN CONNECTIVITY IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA DURING WORKING MEMORY TASK PERFORMANCE Sarah Schipul1, Alana Campbell1, Aysenil Belger1; 1University of North

Carolina at Chapel Hill — Schizophrenia has been associated with disordered brain connectivity and impaired executive and emotional processing
in both functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI; e.g., Lynall et al.,
2010) and electroencephalography (EEG; e.g., Donkers et al., 2011). These
methods reveal different insights into neural patterns, and integrating the
two has potential to inform our understanding of brain communication
in schizophrenia. The goal of this study is to examine brain connectivity
measures in EEG and fMRI data collected during a working memory task

2014 Annual Meeting	
in individuals with schizophrenia and matched control participants. Participants completed separate fMRI and EEG sessions, during which they
performed a visual 1-back task with neutral and emotional images. Neural
synchrony was assessed by time-frequency analyses of the EEG data using
a complex Morlet wavelet transform. Functional connectivity was assessed
by correlation analyses of the fMRI activation timecourse in distinct regions
of interest. Preliminary analyses with 10 participants per group revealed
aberrant connectivity patterns in patients with schizophrenia. Neural synchrony analyses revealed diminished low (theta) and high (beta) frequency
power in the schizophrenia group, particularly for targets in emotional
conditions. Functional connectivity analyses similarly revealed weaker correlations between brain regions in the schizophrenia group, particularly in
pairs involving social perception regions (fusiform gyrus and amygdala).
These findings suggest aberrant brain connectivity in schizophrenia in networks involved in working memory. Impaired connectivity may be exacerbated under emotional conditions. Future analyses will include the full
set of participants and will directly examine the relation between EEG and
fMRI measures of connectivity.

A58
PREDICTING WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY USING SPECTRO-TEMPORAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE OSCILLATORY EEG

Pouya Bashivan1, Gavin M. Bidelman2,3, Mohammed Yeasin1; 1Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Memphis, 2Institute for Intelligent Systems,
University of Memphis, 3School of Communication Sciences & Disorders, University of Memphis — The aims of this study were to examine possible relationships between spectro-temporal characteristics of brain activity (EEG)
and individual working memory (WM) capacity. Event-related desynchronization (ERD) responses within Î±, and Î² frequency bands were examined
while participants performed a modified version of the Sternberg memory
task. Memory load was modulated by changing the number of visually
presented characters from 2 to 8 items. Independent Component Analysis
(ICA) was applied to isolate source activity within the brain signals during
the visual WM task. Source activity common across different load conditions was identified using cluster-based analysis of the ICA components.
This allowed us to isolate similar brain regions that were uniquely modulated by memory load. Results showed robust changes in duration of Î± and
Î² band activity with increasing size of the memory set. Empirical results
also displayed a strong correlation (r = 0.82, p < 0.002) between duration
of Î² activity in postero-central networks and individual memory capacity.
These associations were generally stronger than other response metrics
(e.g., evoked potential amplitude) that have been previously described as
neural correlates of WM. Furthermore, it was observed that the correlations
among Î± and Î² band activities were stronger in their differences (e.g., set
sizes 2 and 4) as compared to individual conditions. We infer that the timecourse of Î² activity plays a critical role in WM operations. These results
may help in characterizing personalized online load as well as individual
memory capacity.

A59
IGNORANCE IS BLISS: THE EFFECT OF TASK-RELEVANCE ON
PROACTIVE INTERFERENCE Kimberly Craig1, Saqib Rana2, Cindy Lustig2;
1

Mary Baldwin College, 2University of Michigan — How do we forget? Even
after a few seconds, forgetting can have a significant impact on information processing. Proactive interference (PI), or the ability of previously-processed information to disrupt current information processing, is often to
blame (Berman, Jonides & Lewis, 2009; Monsell, 1978). However, the factors which influence PI remain unclear. Theories of activation-strength
and similarity-based competition, while popular, do not fully explain this
interference effect. We hypothesize that in addition to similarity, task-relevance is an important factor in the creation of PI (Craig, Berman, Jonides
& Lustig, 2013). To investigate this question, we used a one-back task and
manipulated the task relevance of different features (number, color, shape)
of lure items that preceded the target. Participants viewed a series of items
presented one at a time, indicating by button press whether the current
item matched the item one-back. In Experiment 1, participants were either
instructed to respond based on the color or the number identity of the
stimulus. In key trials, similar color and/or number identity information
appeared in the two-back position, potentially creating similarity-based
interference. However, each of these stimulus features (color and number

Poster Session A
identity) only created interference when participants were told to attend to
that feature; when it was irrelevant it did not affect performance. In Experiment 2, we found the same pattern of results when comparing color and
shape information. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that
item similarity should create interference only when relevant to the task
being performed.

A60
CONTEXTUALLY RELEVANT DEFAULT NETWORK ACTIVITY FACILITATES WORKING MEMORY PERFORMANCE R. Nathan Spreng1,

Elizabeth DuPre1, Dhawal Selarka2, Juliana Garcia1, Stefan Gojkovic2, Judith
Mildner1, Kyle Kurkela1, Gary Turner2; 1Cornell University, 2York University —
Substantial neuroimaging evidence suggests that spontaneous engagement
of the default network impairs performance on tasks requiring executive
control. Here we investigate whether this impairment is context specific.
We hypothesized that activation of the default network might enhance performance on an executive control task if control processes are supported
by long-term memory representations. Using fMRI, we scanned 36 healthy
young adults on a novel 2-back task requiring working memory for famous
and anonymous faces. The task was designed to enhance and suppress the
default network during working memory for familiar and unfamiliar faces,
respectively. Behaviorally, we observed a facilitation effect, with improved
working memory performance on “enhancement” trials that required online
maintenance of famous face stimuli in the presence of anonymous face distractors. Critically, we also observed greater activation of the default network during these enhancement trials. As predicted, we observed reduced
activity in the default network during “suppression” trials that required
maintenance of anonymous faces in the presence of famous face distractors.
These data suggest that both enhancement and suppression of the default
network contribute to performance on a working memory task with high
executive control demands. Our findings provide the first evidence that
successful activation of the default network, as well as suppression, may be
critical for goal-directed cognition.

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
A61
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR THE FOURTH-GRADE
SHIFT? Gabriela Meade1, Donna Coch1; 1Dartmouth College — According to

a classic reading theory, one of the underlying contributors to the so-called
fourth-grade shift from “learning to read” to “reading to learn” is automaticity in word recognition (Chall, 1983; Chall, Jacobs, & Baldwin, 1990).
Here, we used the N400 component of the event-related potential (ERP)
waveform as an index of automaticity in word processing. We recorded
ERPs to familiar real words, pseudowords, unpronounceable letter strings,
and false font strings in groups of third-, fourth-, and fifth-graders and college students. Stimuli were presented singly, in list form, and participants
were asked to perform a semantic categorization task (press a button to
animal names). A shift in automatic word processing in fourth grade should
be reflected in a shift toward the adult pattern of “legal” stimuli (words and
pseudowords) eliciting a marked N400, while “illegal” stimuli (letter and
false font strings) do not. Instead, we found that all types of stimuli elicited
a marked N400 in the third-, fourth-, and fifth-grade groups. These data
do not support the theory of a fourth-grade shift in reading characterized
by the development of automaticity in word processing. Rather, the ERP
evidence suggests a long developmental time course, beyond elementary
school, for efficient single word processing.

A62
NEURAL INDICES OF PHONETIC ENCODING IN MONOLINGUAL
INFANTS AND CHILDREN: T-COMPLEX Valerie L. Shafer1, Yan H. Yu2,

Monica Wagner3; 1The Graduate Center, CUNY, 2William Patterson University,
St. John’s University — Infants are faced with the difficult task of identifying acoustic correlates of speech that will allow them to segment the speech
signal, and identify lexical units. Selective perception of the relevant cues
for speech perception begins to develop in the first year of life, and continues into grade school. The goal of the current analysis was to examine the
maturation of the T-complex sequence of peaks (Na, Ta, Tb) to a speech
sound in children from three months of age to seven years of age. The
3

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

45

Poster Session A	
results show that a clear negative peak, consistent with Na, at the left and
right temporal sites in most children between 100 and 200 ms differed from
the pattern found for the P1 obligatory peak. The Na peak showed a linear
shift earlier in time with increasing age. A clear positive peak (Ta), following Na and peaking between 120 and 200 ms was not consistently found in
most age groups of children. The Tb peak was only clearly present in the
adult groups at T8. Linear mixed-effect model revealed that age, latency,
and site have an effect on the T-complex (Na peak) amplitude, but sex and
hemisphere were not significant predictors for the T-complex amplitude.
Considering that poor T-complex responses have been observed in children with language impairment (Shafer, et al., 2011), our finding suggests
further investigation of the T-complex in infants and toddlers at risk for
language impairment will be of great interest.

A63
KINDERGARTEN PRE-READING SKILLS AND ERP MISMATCH
NEGATIVITY MEASURES PREDICT 1ST GRADE CONNECTED TEXT
READING FLUENCY Elizabeth S. Norton1, Sara D. Beach1, Abigail B. Cyr1,

Ola Ozernov-Palchik2,3, Kelly K. Halverson1, Nadine Gaab2,4, John D. E. Gabrieli1,5; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Boston Children’s Hospital,
3
Tufts University, 4Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Medical School, 5Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology — Early
identification of reading difficulties is associated with better academic outcomes; thus, efforts have been made to identify children at-risk for reading
difficulties in kindergarten. Previous predictive models have shown that
addition of neuroimaging measures can be more accurate in predicting
single-word reading than models that include only behavioral pre-reading
skills. Here, we examined how pre-reading skills, IQ, socio-economic status
(SES), and measures of the ERP mismatch negativity (MMN) response predict connected text reading fluency in 1st grade. In the fall of kindergarten,
children (n=40) completed measures of letter knowledge (LK), phonological awareness (PA), and rapid automatized naming (RAN), as well as an
ERP MMN paradigm with speech syllables. The same children returned
at the end of 1st grade for follow-up assessment, including the Gray Oral
Reading Test (GORT-5). We employed regression models predicting 1st
grade GORT-5 reading fluency scores. Model 1 was based on behavioral
scores. IQ and SES were not significant; however, RAN, PA, and LK, and
accounted for 59% of variance in fluency. Model 2 added measures of MMN
onset latency and mean amplitude and significantly improved prediction
over behavioral Model 1 (p=.02). Predicted scores derived from Model
2 beta weights allowed 96% correct classification of children as above or
below the 25th percentile for reading fluency in 1st grade. These findings
suggest that kindergarten pre-reading skills and ERP MMN measures can
yield a highly accurate model of 1st grade reading, and could potentially
be used to predict reading difficulties in children before formal reading
instruction begins.

A64
CROSSMODAL-RELATED ARCUATE FASCICULUS COHERENCE
PREDICTS LONGITUDINAL READING GROWTH Margaret M. Gullick1,

James Booth1; 1Northwestern University — Crossmodal integration of auditory and visual information (e.g., phonemes and graphemes) is a critical
skill for reading; the arcuate fasciculus may be particularly supportive of
reading generally and crossmodal processing specifically. We recently
demonstrated that arcuate fractional anisotropy (FA) was significantly
related to performance on a crossmodal word rhyme-judgment task in a
large sample of children, moreso than for unimodal auditory-only or visual-only performances. Here, we examine longitudinal data collected two
to three years after this initial visit from 17 of these children to determine
whether connectivity at Time 1 was predictive of reading outcome. Stepwise regressions revealed that Time 2 real-word reading score (identification and fluency raw score average) was significantly predicted by both
initial score (p<.001) and initial FA in crossmodal-related arcuate voxels
(p=.014); this FA relationship was significant even after hierarchically
partialling for variance accounted for by reading score and related skills
(pseudoword reading, phonological awareness) . Participants with greater
initial crossmodal-related arcuate FAs demonstrated higher Time 2 reading
scores. This relationship was crossmodal specific; neither unimodal auditory nor visual FA were predictive of Time 2 reading. Further, change in
real-word reading was predicted only by crossmodal FA, even after partial-

46

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
ling for other measures (p=.002): participants with lower Time 1 FA demonstrated greater reading score changes, potentially because there was more
room for improvement. As such, crossmodal-related arcuate coherence is
significantly predictive of reading outcomes even beyond that of standardized test measures. Arcuate fasciculus connectivity thus appears to support
crossmodal reading-related integration both initially and longitudinally.

A65
FUNCTIONAL NEUROANATOMICAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
EARLY READERS WITH AND WITHOUT DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA Joanna Christodoulou1,2,3, Jack Murtagh1, Tyler Perrachione1,4, Abi-

gail Cyr1, Kelly Halverson1, Patricia Chang1, Pamela Hook2, John Gabrieli1,3,5;
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2MGH Institute of Health Professions,
3
Harvard Graduate School of Education, 4Boston University, 5Athinoula A. Martinos Imaging Center — We examined the functional neuroanatomy of early
reading development in children ages 6-9 with developmental dyslexia
(n=31) and typically developing readers (n=25) using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). Groups did not differ on age, gender, or nonverbal cognitive abilities, and the group with dyslexia was significantly lower
performing on reading tasks. For the fMRI task, participants were shown a
sequence of words one after another and were asked to respond whenever
two consecutive words began with the same first sound. Children with dyslexia exhibited significantly reduced activations in left-lateralized regions
associated with reading and language, extending from left fusiform gyrus,
an area of the brain important for word recognition, to left-lateralized frontal cortex (superior, middle, and inferior gyri), temporal cortex (superior,
middle, and inferior gyri), and occipital cortex (superior, middle, and inferior gyri; lingual gyrus, parahippocampal gyrus). This finding highlights
the importance of the left fusiform gyrus in the context of the reading brain
network for single word processing in young readers.

A66
WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY DIFFERENCES IN EARLY READERS
WITH AND WITHOUT DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA Jack Murtagh1,

Joanna Christodoulou1,2,4, Abigail Cyr1, Tyler K. Perrachione1,3, Patricia Chang1,
Kelly Halverson1, Pamela E. Hook2, Satrajit S. Ghosh1, John D. E. Gabrieli1,4,5;
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2MGH Institute of Health Professions,
3
Boston University, 4Harvard Graduate School of Education, 5Athinoula A. Martinos Imaging Center, McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology — We examined white matter integrity associated
with early reading development in children ages 6-9 with developmental dyslexia (n=26) and typically developing readers (n=26) using diffusion-weighted imaging. Groups did not differ significantly on non-verbal
cognitive abilities, age, or gender; the group with dyslexia performed significantly lower on standardized reading assessments. DWI analyses of
the superior longitudinal fasciculus in two regions indicated significant
differences between the typically developing readers and the readers with
dyslexia based on fractional anisotropy (FA) values. For both the temporal
aspect (arcuate fasciculus) and the parietal aspect of the superior longitudinal fasciculus, typical readers showed significantly higher FA values than
readers with dyslexia. This finding provides support for early differences
in readers with dyslexia in white matter integrity in regions supporting
language processing.

A67
LONGITUDINAL LANGUAGE CHANGES AND MRI ANATOMY IN
CHILDREN WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER Tracey A. Knaus1,

Jodi Kamps2, Anne L. Foundas3; 1Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center - New Orleans, 2Children’s Hospital, New Orleans, 3University of Missouri,
Kansas City School of Medicine — Language ability is one of the strongest
predictors of prognosis and developmental course in children with autism
spectrum disorder (ASD). Abnormal anatomy and functional organization
of language-related cortical regions has been found in children with ASD,
although it is unclear whether brain structural differences are related to
changes in language abilities during early childhood development. The
purpose of this study was to determine whether changes in language ability over time are associated with language cortical anatomy and connectivity. Thirteen boys with ASD, ages 2-6 (mean=4.8, SD=1.2) were evaluated
and then re-examined at ages 7-10 (mean=8.9, SD=1.1). During the 2nd

2014 Annual Meeting	
evaluation, volumetric MRI and DTI scans were collected to evaluate gray
matter volume of anterior (pars triangularis, PTR; pars opercularis, POP)
and posterior (planum temporale, PT) language regions and the integrity of
the white matter connection (arcuate fasciculus, AF). All subjects had low
language abilities and 6 showed relative improvements in language while
7 had relative language decline. Language changes did not correlate with
current age, IQ, or ADOS scores, but were correlated with change in total
ADOS score (r=-.667, p=.018), with improved language associated with
improved autism symptoms. Language changes were also correlated with
right PTR (r=-.567, p=.043), with improved language associated with larger
volume. Correlations between change in language and AF microstructure
were not significant. Results further implicate atypical anatomy of anterior
(but not posterior) language regions in ASD. The association between language improvement and larger right PTR volume, may relate to the ability
of these individuals to compensate.

A68
DISTINCT NEUROANATOMICAL REGIONS OF EARLY READING
ABILITIES: A LONGITUDINAL VOXEL-BASED MORPHOMETRY
STUDY Ola Ozernov-Palchik1,2, Nora M Raschle1,3, Nadine Gaab1,3,4; 1Boston

Children’s Hospital, 2Tufts University, 3Harvard Medical School, 4Harvard Graduate School of Education — Phonological awareness (PA) and rapid naming
(RAN) are among the most reliable predictors of reading achievement in
preschool and kindergarten. The relationship between these skills has been
debated and several theories have emerged to explain the unique role of
each in typical and atypical reading development. However, it remains
unclear (a) whether PA and RAN have common and/or distinct neural
underpinnings and (b) how these underpinnings vary with reading instruction. In this study, RAN and PA skills were examined in 28 children before
(Year 1) and after (Year 2) one year of kindergarten. Using voxel-based morphometry we characterized the relationship between gray matter volume
indices (GMVI) and RAN/PA skills in each year and longitudinally. Our
results revealed that a higher performance on a RAN task is associated with
increased GMVI in bilateral superior temporal as well as precentral regions
in both years. In contrast, a higher performance on a PA task was related
to increased GMVIs in posterior left hemispheric regions in Year 2 and to a
lesser degree in Year 1. Our findings suggest that RAN and PA are associated with distinct neuroanatomical regions of the reading network and that
associations with PA but not RAN seem to vary with reading experience.
This is in line with previous studies that suggest an independent development of PA and RAN skills with varying developmental trajectories during
the time-course of learning to read.

A69
INVESTIGATING THE INFLUENCES OF EARLY LANGUAGE DELAY
AND FAMILIAL RISK FOR DYSLEXIA ON BRAIN STRUCTURE IN
PRE-SCHOOLERS/KINDERGARTENERS Nora Raschle1,2,3, Bryce

Becker1, Sara Smith1, Nadine Gaab1,2; 1Boston Children’s Hospital, Laboratories of Cognitive Neuroscience, Developmental Medicine Center, 2Harvard
Medical School, 3Universitäre Psychiatrische Kliniken Basel (Switzerland) —
Previous research shows that early language abilities in infancy/toddlerhood predict later language/literacy skills and changes in brain structure/
function in school-age children with early language delay (ELD) have
been reported Here we present behavioral data from 114 pre-schoolers/
kindergarteners with (ELD+; N=34) and without (ELD-; N=80) early language delay in infancy/toddlerhood as determined by retrospective parent
reports. We further divided these children based on their familial risk of
dyslexia (FHD-/FHD+). Behaviorally, ELD+ children scored significantly
lower than ELD- children on language and reading-related measures,
including expressive and receptive language, phonological processing
and rapid automatized naming. The lowest performance was observed in
ELD+ children with FHD+. Furthermore, we performed voxel-based morphometry (VBM8) in a subset of 46 children. To investigate the effects of
both behavioral (ELD+/ELD-) and genetic (FHD+/FHD-) pre-markers of
language-based learning disabilities, a full-factorial design was employed.
We demonstrate reduced gray matter volume indices for ELD+>ELDmainly in left-hemispheric middle temporal areas, but also occipital and
frontal regions (p>0.005). Alterations in middle temporal brain regions
were observed in ELD+ children regardless of FHD status. FHD+ compared to FHD- children displayed gray matter reductions in temporopa-

Poster Session A
rietal and occipitotemporal regions; however the effects were strongest in
FHD+ELD+. An interaction effect of ELD and FHD was observed in bilateral temporoparietal and occipitotemporal areas. Our findings support the
idea of a cumulative effect of early behavioral and genetic risk factors on
later brain structure. These findings may facilitate knowledge of the neuronal basis and etiology of language-based learning disabilities, ultimately
informing diagnosis and treatment.

A70
LINGUISTIC DEFICITS DIFFERENTIATE MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT FROM HEALTHY AGING AND PREDICT DEFAULT NETWORK
INTEGRITY Barbara Lust1, Janet Cohen Sherman2, Suzanne Flynn3, James

Gair1, Charles Henderson1, Claire Cordella4, Jordan Whitlock3, Marc Harrison1;
1
Cornell University, 2Massachusetts General Hospital, 3MIT, 4Harvard — This
research attempts to identify linguistic deficits that characterize prodromal
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD), relate these to neuroscientific foundations of
linguistic knowledge in prodromal AD, and make predictions for future
correlational studies linking behavioral and imaging results in this area.
Through inter-institutional collaboration, three pilot populations were
compared - Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) (mean age 75, N=32), agematched Healthy Subjects , N=21), and Young Adults (mean age 23, N=10)
- on several experiments eliciting language production of complex sentence types varying in specified syntactic and semantic factors. Analyses of
results through logistic-linear mixed models indicated that MCI language
did not differ from other groups on syntactic factors but was significantly
depressed when integration of syntax with ambiguous semantic reference
was required, e.g, certain pronoun use or ambiguous reference like “what
you have”. Working memory tests indicated deficits are not explained by
memory restrictions. Review of neuroscientific literature suggests these
results cohere both with an autonomous serial auditory language processing model involving late stage syntax-semantics integration and with a
recent hypothesis that the neural Default Network (reflecting interaction
between spontaneous cognition and sensory controlled external reference)
is disrupted in prodromal AD. These processing and structural models converge to implicate early neurodegeneration in integration hubs including
the Posterior Cingulate Cortex involving Inferior Parietal Lobe, but sparing
anterior Superior Temporal Gyrus (STG) and Inferior Frontal Gyrus (e.g,
BA44,45); thus providing predictions for a program of future brain imaging analyses in correlation with linguistically informed behavioral analyses
and a potential neurocognitive model for disease progression.

A71
TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF VISUAL WORD PROCESSING EFFECTS OF FOREIGN LANGUAGE LEARNING IN CHILDREN
AND ADULTS Aleksandra K. Eberhard-Moscicka1,2, Lea B. Jost1,2, Lynn V.

Fehlbaum1, Simone E. Pfenninger3, Urs Maurer1,2; 1Department of Psychology,
Division of Cognitive Neuroscience, University of Zurich, Switzerland, 2Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Switzerland, 3English
Department, University of Zurich, Switzerland — Learning a foreign language
implies acquiring expertise for new visual word forms. The N1 component of the event-related potential (ERP) has been shown to reflect visual
expertise for print. Moreover, some studies indicated its sensitivity to the
familiarity of word forms. Here, we investigated how temporal dynamics
of visual word processing change with increasing language proficiency, by
testing children longitudinally before (1st grade, mean age: 7.6 years) and
after one year of classroom English instruction (3rd grade) and comparing them to more proficient adult foreign language speakers of English. A
128-channel EEG was recorded, while 22 native (Swiss-)German adults and
27 monolingual (Swiss-)German children performed an immediate repetition detection task with German word, English word and pseudoword
conditions. We subdivided the N1 segment into thirds and compared the
three conditions at left and right occipito-temporal electrodes. Adult participants showed a left-lateralized N1 in all three sub-segments. Differences
between conditions occurred only in the third sub-segment where a condition-by-hemisphere interaction modulated the two main effects. No significant effects in any of the three sub-segments were present in children,
neither in 1st grade nor in 3rd grade. However, the condition-by-hemisphere interaction in the third sub-segment approached the trend level in
3rd grade and resembled the adult-like N1 pattern. Hence, we propose that
learning a new language is reflected in neural changes that occur early in
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

47

Poster Session A	
the course of visual word processing. However, one year of foreign language instruction does not appear to be sufficient to automatize processing
of new visual word forms.

LANGUAGE: Other
A72
EFFECTS OF SUBCORTICAL LESIONS ON THE PRODUCTION OF
AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE David Corina1, Svenna Pedersen2, Cindy

Farnady2, Ursula Bellugi2, Greg Hickok3; 1Center for Mind and Brain, University of California, Davis CA, 2The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 3University of California, Irvine — Goal: Little is known about the contributions of
subcortical systems in mediation of American Sign Language (ASL). Here
we present two case studies of deaf signers with left-hemisphere subcortical lesions that provide contrasting impairments in language production.
Methods: Two profoundly deaf life-long signers were identified in our
aphasia research program. Both subjects were tested with the Salk Institute
adaptation of the Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination and in-house
language and cognitive measures designed to assess ASL comprehension,
production and non-linguistic limb movement. Patient LHD 173 is an 86
year old male with a lesion involving corona radiata and centrum semivale.
Neuropsychological testing of patient LHD 173 reveals severely impaired
language output with difficulty in initiating movements. Performance on
sign elicitation tasks resulted in a preponderance of stereotyped highly
reduced repetition of sign forms that faded to a soft sign “mumbling” similar to palilalia observed in speech. In contrast, LHD 175 is a 63 year old
female with a lesion involving left basal ganglia and corona radiata. LHD
173 shows an exuberance of sign movements often with variable ballistic
motion production and an under-damping of movements, prolonged intervals in sequential movements (especially fingerspelling), and difficulty
in two-handed coordination. Conclusions: Taken together these two case
studies provide evidence for sign language homologues to hypokinetic and
hyperkinetic language disturbances occasionally seen in hearing individuals with subcortical white-matter and basal ganglia lesions. These are the
first case studies to illustrate these impairments in deaf ASL signers.

A73
REORGANIZATION OF BRAIN ACTIVITY FOLLOWING TREATMENT AND POST-TREATMENT OVERTESTING IN A PERSON WITH
ANOMIA Rhonda B. Friedman1, William Hayward1, Sarah F. Snider1, Kelli L.

Sullivan1, Peter E. Turkeltaub1; 1Georgetown University — This study examined the effects of continued studying vs. continued testing on changes in
brain activity following treatment for anomia. YPR presented at three years
post-stroke with moderate to severe anomia. 120 pictures that he named
consistently incorrectly on three baseline sessions were chosen; 96 as treatment items, and 24 as untrained control items. He participated in treatment
sessions semi-weekly for 12.5 weeks. At the end of that time he had successfully “learned” 76 of the 96 items; that is, he named the picture correctly
on two successive sessions. Over the course of the 12.5 weeks, as the 76
items were learned they were placed into one of the four additional (over)
training conditions (test only, study only, test and study, no overtraining)
and continued to be tested and/or studied accordingly to reinforce retention. After a one-month washout period without exposure to the treatment
items, items that had been overtested were retained better than those not
overtested, but overstudying had no such effect. fMRI scans using a covert
naming task were performed before treatment and at retention testing one
month after treatment. At the latter time point, greater activity in several
brain areas was observed for the overtested items compared to non-overtested items. The reverse comparison revealed no activation. In contrast,
comparing activation for items that were overstudied vs. not-overstudied
resulted in no difference in activity in either direction. These results suggest
that continued testing affects brain re-organization following stroke in a
way that leads to better retention.

A74
NEURAL CORRELATES OF COHERENCE MONITORING DURING
NARRATIVE COMPREHENSION IN CHILDREN AND YOUNG
ADULTS. Linda Van Leijenhorst12, Anne Helder12, Josefine Karlsson12, Paul
van den Broek12; 1Leiden University, the Netherlands, 2Leiden Institute for Brain

48

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
and Cognition, the Netherlands — The ability to comprehend texts is crucial to success in everyday life, and the development of reading comprehension skills is an important goal during middle childhood. Despite the
efforts of education around 10% of children fail to reach sufficient levels
of text comprehension at the end of elementary school. Recently functional
MRI studies have begun to identify a network of brain regions that contributes to discourse comprehension (see Ferstl et al., 2008). However, the
neural correlates of text comprehension processes in childhood are largely
unknown. In this study we investigated the neural correlates of comprehension monitoring during reading in children (N = 6, ages 9-12) and young
adults (N = 21, ages 19-27). We collected fMRI data while participants
read 32 six-sentence narratives that were presented sentence-by-sentence
in a slow self-paced event-related design. Half of the narratives contained
a break in coherence. Behaviorally adults demonstrated better text comprehension compared to children, even though both age groups showed
increased reading times for incoherent compared to coherent narratives.
Preliminary fMRI results show that reading of incoherent narratives was
associated with a network of regions in the bilateral Angular Gyri and Temporal Poles, Dorsomedial Prefrontal Cortex, Anterior Cingulate Cortex, and
Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex (DLPFC) in young adults. Children show a
similar pattern of brain activation, but do not seem to recruit DLPFC. These
preliminary results suggest that, although similar regions are involved in
the comprehension of narratives in middle childhood, the contribution of
cognitive control related regions may differ from that in adults.

A75
APHASIA AND AMUSIA FOLLOWING UNILATERAL DAMAGE TO
THE LEFT HEMISPHERE Timothy Justus1, Barbara Tillmann2, Aniruddh

Patel3, Nina Dronkers4,5, Juliana Baldo4; 1Pitzer College, Claremont, CA, 2Lyon
Neuroscience Research Center, Université Lyon 1, 3Tufts University, Medford, MA, 4VA Northern California Health Care System, Martinez, 5University
of California, Davis — To what extent are acquired language deficits (i.e.,
aphasia) associated with acquired music deficits (i.e., amusia)? We tested
22 people with aphasia following unilateral left-hemisphere stroke on the
Montréal Battery for the Evaluation of Amusia (MBEA). Here, we focus on
the results of the first four subtests. In each test, participants heard 30 pairs
of melodies and decided whether they were the same or different. In the
first three tests (scale, contour, interval), differences were created by altering the pitch of one tone, whereas in the fourth test (rhythm), differences
were created by altering the relative durations of two consecutive tones.
Based on the MBEA norms, all aphasic participants in this study could be
classified as amusic; however, the degree of amusic impairment did not
vary systematically with aphasia subtype. To explore the underlying lesion
variability, d-prime scores representing each MBEA subtest were analyzed
using voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping (VLSM). Preliminary analyses
revealed a network along the left superior temporal cortex, including Heschl’s gyrus, that was associated with processing scale and interval, whereas
the left inferior frontal cortex was associated with processing contour and
rhythm. Although bilateral fronto-temporal regions are frequently implicated in music perception, it is typically the right-hemisphere network that
is regarded as more essential for music. Here, we have demonstrated that
unilateral left-hemisphere damage alone can result in impaired performance on a standard test of music perception. Supported by the GRAMMY
Foundation.

A76
STRUCTURAL MRI REVEALS CORRELATIONS BETWEEN INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN LANGUAGE-RELATED COGNITIVE
ABILITIES AND THICKNESS OF LANGUAGE-RELEVANT CORTICAL AREAS Clinton L. Johns1, David Braze1, Peter J. Molfese1, Julie A.

Van Dyke1, James S. Magnuson1,2, Whitney Tabor1,2, W. Einar Mencl1, Donald
P. Shankweiler1,2; 1Haskins Laboratories, 2University of Connecticut — This
study examined the neuroanatomical correlates of individual differences
in cognitive abilities related to language processing and comprehension
in typically developing adults. There is increasing evidence for relations
between brain structure and variation in linguistic ability; however, most
available evidence derives from contrasts between clinical (e.g., dyslexic)
and non-clinical groups. In addition, studies investigating individual differences in non-clinical populations have utilized small and homogeneous
samples (e.g., college students) and/or have included a narrow range of

2014 Annual Meeting	
indices of language-relevant skills. In contrast, this study incorporates a
comprehensive skill battery and a large, community-based sample with a
wide range of linguistic ability. A Principal Components Analysis revealed
four components that accounted for 76% of the variance in the battery measures. These components correspond to constructs previously correlated
with language ability: phonological ability, comprehension ability, processing speed, and working memory capacity. These components were entered
into regression analyses of grey matter thickness across the whole brain.
Results indicate that individual differences in language-related abilities are
associated with differences in cortical architecture across multiple levels
of language processing. In the left hemisphere, phonological and comprehension ability were significantly correlated with the thickness of pars
opercularis in the inferior frontal gyrus, which has been associated with
higher-level language functions; and Heschl’s gyrus in the temporal lobe,
where auditory processing begins. In addition, the phonological, comprehension, and processing speed components were jointly correlated with the
thickness of lingual gyrus in visual cortex, which has been associated with
both naming and recognition of words and letters.

A77
THE INFLUENCE OF REFERENTIAL CONTEXT ON THE PROCESSING OF AMBIGUOUS SYNTACTIC STRUCTURES IN SCHIZOPHRENIA: EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Megan A.

Boudewyn1, Shruti Dave1, Matthew Traxler1, Debra Long1, George R. Mangun1,
Cameron Carter1, Tamara Swaab1; 1University of California, Davis — Cognitive
control deficits in schizophrenia impair spoken language comprehension
when the meaning of the discourse context is not supported by the meaning of words in the local sentence context (Swaab et al, 2013). However, it
is not known whether referential context in discourse can be used to disambiguate processing of syntactically difficult structures. In the present
study, schizophrenia patients and healthy control participants listened to
short stories that ended with a sentence containing a preferred syntactic
structure (VP-attached phrase: e.g., “cut down the oak with the chainsaw”)
or with a dis-preferred structure (NP-attached phrase: e.g., “cut down the
oak with the mushroom”). Previous event-related potential studies from
our lab have shown that attachment preference can be modulated by referential context in healthy adults, such that processing of NP-attachment
is facilitated when prior context contains more than one plausible referent (e.g. two oaks; Dave et al, 2013). For healthy control participants, our
results showed significant modulation of processing for both NP- and
VP-attached sentence types as a function of referential context. In contrast,
schizophrenia patients only showed significant effects of referential context
on the preferred VP-attached structure (p<.05). This suggests that cognitive
control deficits in schizophrenia result in impaired suppression of contextually-inappropriate syntactic structures when the to-be-rejected structure
is preferred, but not when it is dis-preferred.

A78
LOCATION-SPECIFIC EFFECTS OF CEREBELLAR TDCS ON ARTICULATION AND VERBAL FLUENCY Catherine Stoodley1, Mary Swears1,

Alexa Desko2, Peter Turkeltaub2,3; 1American University, Washington, DC,
2
Georgetown University, Washington, DC, 3MedStar National Rehabilitation
Hospital, Washington, DC — The cerebellum is thought to be involved in
both motor and cognitive aspects of language. Depending on the location of damage, cerebellar lesions can lead to dysarthria or to difficulties
on naming and fluency measures. In neuroimaging studies, articulation
engages the representation of the articulatory muscles in the anterior lobe
of the cerebellum (lobule V-medial lobule VI), and verb generation and
fluency tasks engage lateral parts of right lobule VII, which connects with
left frontal and parietal networks. We examined this topography for language function using anodal transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)
applied to two different locations: the “motor” position (3 cm lateral to the
inion) over the right anterior lobe, and the “cognitive” position (4 cm lateral
to the inion and 1 cm down) over the right posterolateral cerebellum. The
reference electrode was on the deltoid. Participants (17 females, 14 males;
mean age 23.4 ± 6.3 years) completed articulation and fluency measures
pre- and post- 20min of 2mA motor (n=11), cognitive (n=10), or sham tDCS
(n=10). After motor tDCS, participants produced fewer syllables of “ba”
in a 30s period than the cognitive and sham groups. Cerebellar tDCS did
not significantly affect phonemic fluency. During semantic fluency, the

Poster Session A
sham and motor tDCS groups showed practice effects, but the cognitive
group showed no improvement. These preliminary findings indicate that,
depending on electrode position, cerebellar tDCS can affect articulation or
semantic fluency. These findings are consistent with the concept that the
cerebellum modulates both motoric and cognitive aspects of language.

A79
AN ERP STUDY OF SENTENTIAL CODESWITCHING IN SPANISH-ENGLISH BILINGUALS: COMPARING HABITUAL AND
NON-HABITUAL CODESWITCHERS Kaitlyn Litcofsky1, Janet van Hell1,2;
1

Pennsylvania State University, 2Radboud University Nijmegen — A characteristic of bilingual speech is the occurrence of sentences that contain words of
both languages. Psycholinguistic and neurocognitive research has shown
that switching between isolated items incurs an asymmetrical processing
cost where it is harder to switch into the dominant language than into the
weaker language. This cost is thought to be related to the inhibition of the
dominant language. In contrast, relatively little is known about the processing of codeswitches in a meaningful sentence context. In two experiments,
sentential codeswitching was examined using event-related potentials
(ERPs) in two groups of Spanish-English bilinguals: those immersed in L2
English who codeswitch frequently in their daily life, and those immersed
in L1 Spanish who do not codeswitch. Stimuli were 160 sentences that began
in Spanish or English and either contained a codeswitch into the other language or not. Both groups of bilinguals showed late positivity effects in
response to codeswitched words as compared to non-codeswitched words,
but only when switching from the dominant to the weaker language. No
effect of codeswitching occurred when switching into the dominant language. These results are in contrast to the language switching studies, and
indicate that codeswitching in a sentential context requires different processing mechanisms. Given the appearance of the late positivity, it appears
that sentential codeswitching may rely on sentence-level integration mechanisms related to activation of the weaker language.

LANGUAGE: Semantic
A80
EFFECTS OF DISTANCE BETWEEN MEANINGS ON THE NEURAL
CORRELATES OF SEMANTIC AMBIGUITY Christopher M. Grindrod1,

Emily O. Garnett2, Svetlana Malyutina2, Dirk B. den Ouden2; 1University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign, 2University of South Carolina — Many words are globally ambiguous, in that the same written or spoken form can have multiple
senses, and often completely different meanings. Recent studies have shown
that recognition of ambiguous words is influenced by the distance between
meanings. For example, words with meanings from the same grammatical
class (e.g., organ) are recognized more slowly than words with meanings
from different grammatical classes (e.g., bark). These findings argue that
meanings that are closer in semantic space exhibit greater competition,
slowing word recognition. While there is a behavioral cost in processing
meanings that are close in semantic space, how this is reflected in the neural
systems underlying ambiguity processing remains unanswered. The goal
of the present study was to investigate whether the neural correlates of
ambiguity are modulated by semantic distance. In an event-related fMRI
study, thirteen young adults performed a lexical decision experiment
that included balanced and unbalanced noun-noun and noun-verb homonyms, unambiguous words, and nonwords. We hypothesized that neural
activation would be graded based on the distance between meanings in
anterior and posterior brain regions involved in the storage, retrieval and
computation of word meaning. Consistent with this prediction, balanced
homonyms produced increased activation in bilateral middle and superior
temporal gyri, left prefrontal cortex and right anterior cingulate. In addition, noun-verb homonyms exhibited greater activation in bilateral inferior
frontal gyrus, right anterior cingulate, and right middle and superior temporal gyri. These findings provide evidence that the brain regions underlying semantic ambiguity are modulated by the distance between meanings.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

49

Poster Session A	

A81
KNOWLEDGE ABOUT FOOD IN PATIENTS WITH PRIMARY DEMENTIA. Raffaella Rumiati1, Giulio Pergola1, Maria Caterina Silveri2, Paola Rossi2,

Emanuela Liaci1, Francesco Foroni1; 1SISSA, 2Università Cattolica — Previous
studies demonstrated that patients with neurodegenerative diseases may
show altered eating habits which, in turn, have been associated with deficits in olfactory processing. However, patients’ visual recognition of food
items has never been tested in detail. Thirteen patients (age: 71.7 ± 6.1 yrs.;
education: 10.3 ± 5.4 yrs.) and 18 healthy controls (age: 68.6 ±5.5 yrs.; education: 8.7 ±2.4yrs.) took part in the study. Seven patients received a presumptive diagnosis of fronto-temporal dementia (FTD) or Semantic Dementia
(SD), and 6 of dementia of Alzheimer type (DAT). All participants were
administered with 3 tests tapping lexical-semantic knowledge about food
and non-food items: confrontation naming (Task 1), categorization (Task 2),
and word-to-picture matching (Task 3). Overall, patients performed poorer
than controls on Tasks 1 and 3, with FTD-SD patients being more impaired
than DAT patients. When we compared performance on food versus nonfood items, we observed that patients performed better on naming food
than nonfood items (Task 1). Specifically, FTD-SD patients displayed a significant difference between food and nonfood items, while DAT patients
showed no difference. On Task 3 the same pattern was observed. These
preliminarily findings suggest that FTD-SD impacts lexical-semantic processes more severely than DAT, particularly with respect to nonfood items.
Visual identification may yield a different time course of impairment in
these patients.

A82
PREFERENTIAL INVOLVEMENT OF THE RIGHT HEMISPHERE IN
METAPHOR COMPREHENSION: EVIDENCE FROM TMS Natalie A.

Kacinik1, Rita W. El-Haddad1, Tony Ro2; 1Brooklyn College and Graduate Center,
City University of New York, 2City College and Graduate Center, City University
of New York — Early research on the neural basis of metaphor processing, particularly studies of brain-injured patients, suggested that the right
hemisphere (RH) was preferentially involved in understanding metaphors.
However, most recent divided visual field, fMRI, and ERP studies of normal
individuals have generally not supported the RH metaphor hypothesis.
We used rTMS to investigate whether disrupting RH vs. LH processes in
normal individuals would show preferential involvement of the RH in metaphor comprehension. Participants were presented with literal and metaphoric sentences, of moderate familiarity on average, followed by a related
or unrelated word. Participants made a relatedness judgment while undergoing counterbalanced blocks of TMS to their left or right posterior superior temporal cortex or vertex (control). Three TMS pulses were applied
100ms apart coinciding with offset of the sentence, during, and soon after
onset of the target word to maximally disrupt the activation and integration of the sentence and word meaning. Reaction time data revealed a TMS
by stimulus type interaction with TMS to the RH resulting in significantly
longer RTs for metaphoric compared to literal items. Responses to literal
stimuli were slower after TMS to the LH rather than the RH, although the
difference was not significant. These findings concur with Pobric et al.’s
(2008) study of word pair stimuli that appears to be the only metaphor TMS
study done to date, and extends the importance of right posterior temporal cortex for metaphor comprehension to moderately familiar metaphoric
sentences whose processing was significantly hindered by disrupting the
functioning of that region.

A83
SEMANTIC ACCESS AND ERROR MONITORING DURING SENTENCE COMPREHENSION: EFFECTS OF PRESENTATION SPEED
ON THE N400 Darren Tanner1, Sarah Grey2, Janet G. Van Hell2; 1University

of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Pennsylvania State University — In research
on language comprehension using event-related potentials (ERPs), studies
consistently report that the amplitude of the N400 component is reliably
larger for words that are anomalous versus those that are congruent with a
preceding semantic context, and some studies additionally report a posterior late positive complex (LPC). Recent theoretical accounts of this biphasic response suggest that N400 amplitude modulations reflect facilitation of
a supportive context in accessing semantic features from memory, whereas
the LPC reflects attempts to reprocess or repair the preceding context (Kolk

50

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
& Chwilla, 2007; Van Petten & Luka, 2012). Here we investigated the effects
of language presentation speed on the N400 and LPC during semantic
processing. Participants read semantically congruent and incongruent sentences (e.g., “John wanted to bake/*read a book in his spare time”; ERPs
time-locked to “book”) while performing a binary acceptability judgment
task in one of three stimulus-onset asynchrony (SOA) conditions: 225ms,
450ms, and 650ms. The semantic congruence effect on N400 amplitude
was modulated by SOA: N400 effects were largest in the 650ms condition,
smaller in the 450ms condition, and non-existent in the 225ms condition,
In contrast, the LPC was present in all three conditions. This dissociation
in the effects of SOA on the N400 and LPC suggests that the use of semantic context for lexical integration may break down in highly speeded processing scenarios, though the ability to detect and categorize anomalous
sentences remains intact. We discuss our findings as they relate to theories
of semantic access and error monitoring during language comprehension.

A84
QUANTIFICATION, ATTENTION AND THE P300 EFFECT

Veena
Dwivedi1, Raechelle Gibson2, Kaitlin Curtiss1; 1Brock University, 2Western University — We used event-related brain potentials (ERPs) in a dual task study
to investigate how comprehenders interpret number in different semantic contexts. Borrowing from recent behavioural work (Patson & Warren,
2010), 10 participants made judgments on the number of words appearing
on a computer screen. Equal numbers of one- vs. two-word chunks were
presented throughout the experiment. Participants indicated their decision on whether one or two words appeared by pressing “1” or “2”. We
hypothesized that the appearance of a single noun marked as morphologically plural, e.g., trees, would result in interference with the (correct) “1”
response on the number judgment task. We employed a 3 X 2 design. The
subject noun was either universally quantified or referential, e.g., (i) Every
kid climbed a tree vs. (ii) The kid climbed a tree. The direct object was either
indefinite singular, see (i), (ii) above, or definite singular/plural, as in (iii)/
(iv) Every/The kid climbed the tree and (v)/(vi) Every/The kid climbed
the trees. Number judgments were required at tree(s), which was always
presented alone (and never final). ERPs at tree(s) showed different neurophysiological responses to plural trees when it was contained in conditions
starting with Every vs. The; a P300 effect was found, where this effect was
attenuated in referential contexts. Thus, sentences beginning with “the”
are given more attention than those beginning with “every;” the latter are
underspecified. Therefore, more resources are available for the secondary task of counting words on the screen (Donchin, 1981), resulting in the
observed P300 amplitude difference.

A85
NEURAL CONNECTIVITY DURING SEMANTIC PROCESSING OF
PICTURES AND SPOKEN WORDS IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS Emily Coderre1, Barry Gordon1,2, Kerry Ledoux1; 1Department of

Neurology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 2Department of
Cognitive Science, The Johns Hopkins University — One of the core deficits
of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) is language processing, with abnormalities documented in semantic integration and higher-level linguistic
cognition. For example, in ERP research, the N400 effect for language (a
late negativity indexing semantic integration) is often reduced or even
absent in ASD individuals compared to normal controls. These language
deficits may be related to findings of abnormal brain connectivity in ASD,
specifically hyperconnectivity in local networks and hypoconnectivity in
long-range networks, both at rest and during language processing. The current study uses electroencephalographic (EEG) coherence analysis, which
provides a measure of neural connectivity on a millisecond time scale, to
investigate differences in connectivity during the N400 window that might
explain the linguistic deficits observed in ASD. Preliminary data are presented from seven high-functioning individuals with ASD (HFAs) and agematched normal controls (NCs) performing an N400 congruency paradigm
in which a picture and auditory word either matched (congruent condition)
or mismatched (incongruent condition). The ERP data showed a larger and
earlier N400 effect (i.e., larger N400 for incongruent than congruent trials)
for HFAs than NCs, contrary to previous research. EEG coherence analysis
of the incongruent > congruent difference waves within the N400 window
showed increased short-range cross-hemisphere coherence for HFAs compared to NCs. In contrast, NCs showed greater within-hemisphere coherence than HFAs, especially for fronto-parietal connections in the left hemi-

2014 Annual Meeting	
sphere. These results replicate previous findings of abnormal connectivity
in ASD and suggest that HFAs may employ a different functional strategy
of semantic integration processing than NCs.

A86
SHARED NEURAL SYSTEMS FOR LANGUAGE AND GESTURE
COMPREHENSION Elizabeth Redcay1, Kayla Velnoskey1, Meredith Rowe1;

1
University of Maryland — Behavioral evidence and theory suggest that
comprehension and production of gestures and words may be part of a
shared cognitive system. The goal of the current study is to identify the
extent to which the neural bases for language and gesture comprehension
are shared and/or distinct in adults. To address this question, functional
MRI data were collected from 15 college students while they watched
video clips of an experimenter producing communicative, participant-directed gesture strings (e.g., gesturing “Hello, come here”) and “grooming
gestures”, which were hand and body actions that did not convey communicative intent (e.g. scratching her face and smoothing her hair). To identify
amodal brain regions supporting communicative and semantic processes,
we presented participants with 3 language conditions. These included 1)
communicative, participant-directed sentences, matched in content to the
communicative gestures, 2) 3rd-person sentences that describe a character’s
actions, but not mental states, and 3) jabberwocky sentences. Comparison of
communicative to grooming gestures (CG vs GG) elicited activation bilaterally along the full anterior-posterior extent of the superior temporal sulcus
(STS). Conjunction analyses between CG vs GG and participant-directed vs
3rd-person sentences revealed shared engagement of left posterior STS for
processing communicative intent whereas conjunction between CG vs GG
and 3rd-person vs jabberwocky sentences revealed shared engagement of
left anterior STS for semantic representations. These data suggest the STS
provides a common neural substrate for both language and gesture processing but components of this shared system are represented differentially
along the posterior to anterior extent of the STS.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
A87
MANIPULATING PERCEPTUAL FLUENCY ALTERS THE MERE
EXPOSURE EFFECT AND REVERSES OLD/NEW ERP EFFECTS

P. Andrew Leynes1, Richard J. Addante2; 1The College of New Jersey, 2The
University of Texas at Dallas — Prior studies have shown that recognition
memory judgments of words can be differentially supported by perceptual fluency or familiarity, which are associated with distinct event-related
potentials (ERPs) (Leynes & Zish, 2012: Neuropsychologia, 50, 3240-3249).
However, it remains unclear how pervasive these effects are. The current
study extended these finding by manipulating the perceptual fluency at test
(i.e., visual clarity) of novel commercial product images (e.g., toy, cereal
box, etc.) to determine how memory of novel objects and product-liking
ratings would be influenced by fluency. All products were encoded under
full perceptual clarity, whereas perceptual fluency (clear or blurry) of
test items varied across blocks or randomly across individual trials. ERPs
were recorded during the recognition test (old/new judgments) that also
required subjects to provide a liking judgment for each probe. Behaviorally,
old products were liked more than new products (i.e., the mere exposure
effect) when visual clarity remained constant from trial to trial (blocked
condition). However, this pattern was altered when visual clarity varied
randomly, such that perceptually clear products were liked more than
blurred products (old and new product liking ratings did not differ). These
results support the claim that perceptual fluency drives the mere exposure effect. The ERP analyses did not uncover any evidence of traditional
old/new ERP effects in either condition (i.e., FN400 or LPC). Instead, we
observed a reversed effect (new > old) during the 900-1100ms time window
in right parietal regions. We consider several possible cognitive mechanisms that may underlie this unusual memory-related ERP difference.

A88
DOPAMINERGIC MODULATION OF HIPPOCAMPAL AND STRIATAL ASPECTS OF SPATIAL LEARNING AND MEMORY IN PARKINSONISM Franka Thurm1, Nicolas W. Schuck2, Mareike Fauser3, Ulrike

Lueken4, Alexander Storch3, Shu-Chen Li1; 1Chair of Lifespan Developmental

Poster Session A
Neuroscience, Department of Psychology, TU Dresden, Germany, 2Princeton
Neuroscience Institute, Green Hall, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA,
3
Deparment of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav Carus, TU Dresden,
Germany, 4Institute of Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Department of
Psychology, TU Dresden, Germany — In light of the involvement of the frontal-striatal pathway in reward processing and adaptive behavioral control,
research on non-motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease (PD) and effects
of PD medication has mostly focused on cognitive impairments that can be
attributed to dopamine deficiency of the frontal-striatal loop. A rarely investigated, if not entirely overlooked, aspect in current research on cognitive
dysfunctions of PD is the potential interactions between striatal dopamine
degeneration and hippocampal-dependent functions. Of specific interest,
the hippocampus and striatum play different roles in spatial learning and
memory (e.g., Doeller & Burgess, 2008, PNAS; Parkard, Hirsh, & White,
1989, J Neurosci). Midbrain dopamine degeneration may thus affect the
relative contributions of the hippocampus and striatum on spatial learning
in PD patients. Using a virtual reality (VR) spatial navigation task, a recent
study showed impaired performance of older compared to younger adults,
particularly in hippocampus-dependent boundary processing (Schuck et
al., 2013, Hippocampus). Normal aging is accompanied by a global but less
severe dopaminergic loss compared to PD, these results hint towards navigation deficits in PD patients as well. Here we used a VR-spatial navigation
task to investigate PD patients’ spatial navigation performance and effects
of dopamine treatment by assessing PD patients’ navigation performance
ON and OFF medication. Preliminary analysis revealed an apparent effect
of medication, with patients performing better under medication. Further
analyses will be conducted to explore whether medication may enhance
the striatal- and hippocampal-dependent aspects of spatial learning differentially.

A89
USE OF EXPLICIT MEMORY CUES IN PATIENTS WITH AMNESTIC
MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT (AMCI) Kara T. Kleber1,2, Rebecca G.

Deason3, Maureen K. O’Connor1,2,4, Xiaoyan Sun1,2, Sean Flannery1,2, Michael J.
Tat1,2, Andrew E. Budson1,2; 1VA Boston Healthcare System, 2Boston University
School of Medicine, 3Texas State University, 4Bedford VA Hospital, Bedford MA
— Patients diagnosed with amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment (aMCI)
and Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) are known to have significant impairments
in episodic memory, but also exhibit increases in false memory. Increases
in false memory errors in aMCI and AD patients may be associated with a
more liberal response criterion in tests of recognition memory. Examining
how AD and aMCI patients set recognition criteria could be important in
understanding their high rate of false recognitions. Investigators have suggested that the parietal lobe may play a role in setting memorial response
criteria. It has been demonstrated that, relative to healthy controls, patients
with parietal lobe lesions fail to use explicit memory cues that were
designed to shift their response criterion in recognition memory tests (Dobbins et al., 2012). Because AD-related pathophysiologic processes involve
the parietal lobes, our objective was to examine how aMCI patients would
use external memory cues. Patients and healthy controls were administered
a recognition memory test with both valid and invalid cues that appeared
before most test words. Participants were informed of cue accuracy and
asked to incorporate cues to maximize performance. Subject performance
with no cue (baseline) was compared to cued performance to determine
whether the two groups incorporated the cues differently. Group differences were observed in a shallow encoding condition, but not in a deep
encoding condition. The results suggest that aMCI patients can actively use
external cues to help them make memory decisions under some memory
encoding conditions, but not in others.

A90
DECODING THE AGE AND REHEARSAL HISTORY OF REAL-WORLD
MEMORIES Melina Uncapher1, J Tyler Boyd-Meredith1, Jesse Rissman3,

Anthony Wagner1,2; 1Dept of Psychology, Stanford University, 2Neurosciences
Program, Stanford University, 3Dept of Psychology, University of California
Los Angeles — Using fMRI and multivoxel pattern analyses (MVPA), we
recently demonstrated that individual lab-based memories can be detected
from distributed patterns of brain activity. However, it is currently unclear
whether these methods would be similarly effective in decoding more ecologically valid factors such as memory for real-world events, memories
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

51

Poster Session A	
that have been rehearsed, and the remoteness (age) of memories. Here
we scanned participants as they retrieved memories of autobiographical
events. Participants wore cameras for two-week sessions to capture images
of life events, 8mo, 5mo, and 2mo prior to scanning. They returned to the
lab at the end of each session to rehearse 40 of 80 event photo sequences
selected from the prior session. Subsequently, using MVPA, we reliably
decoded participants’ identification of events from their own camera relative to those from others’ cameras. We were also able to decode the remoteness of memories, as well as whether memories had been practiced during
the prior rehearsal stages. Interestingly, dorsal parietal activity informed
classification of practiced relative to unpracticed events, and recent relative
to remote memories, whereas ventral parietal activity contributed to classification of unpracticed events and more remote memories. This dissociation in parietal cortex, along with behavioral data, suggests that qualitative
changes may occur in neural signatures of retrieval of real-world memories
that have been rehearsed or are more remote in time. These findings have
implications when outcomes hinge on real-world memories that have been
repeatedly rehearsed or are temporally remote, as may be the case in eyewitness identification or testimony.

A91
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN OLDER ADULTS’ FORCED-CHOICE
RECOGNITION MEMORY: PARTITIONING CONTRIBUTIONS OF
RECOLLECTION AND FAMILIARITY. Joel Quamme1, Ellen Migo2, Selina

Homes3,4, Andrew Bendell3, Kenneth Norman5, Andrew Mayes3, Daniela Montaldi3; 1Grand Valley State University, 2King’s College London, 3University of
Manchester, 4Shropshire Enablement Team, 5Princeton University — The Complementary Learning Systems (CLS) model (Norman & O’Reilly, 2003) predicts the manner in which forced-choice recognition memory decisions are
made should be sensitive to differences in test format under conditions of
high target-foil similarity. When previously encountered target items are
tested alongside corresponding similar foils (forced-choice corresponding;
FCC), judgments can be supported by a familiarity comparison. However,
when target items appear alongside foils that correspond to different targets (Forced-choice non-corresponding; FCNC), familiarity comparisons
should be unhelpful and decisions should depend instead on recollection of
specific details about original studied items. In the current study, we used
an individual differences approach to test this prediction. We examined
relationships among older adults’ performance on measures of FCC and
FCNC for object pictures and standardized measures of recall and recognition commonly used in neuropsychological practice. Drawing on prior
individual differences work, we tested for separate variance partitions in
FCC and FCNC attributable to recollection (shared with recall) and familiarity (shared with recognition after the common influence of recall was
removed). Consistent with CLS predictions, a significant familiarity-related
variance partition was found in FCC, but not FCNC, and a recollection-related variance partition was found in FCNC but not FCC. Latent variable
simulations confirm that the probability of this result occurring under the
particular dual-process assumptions of CLS is at least ten times that of each
of several alternative models. The results have implications for both recognition memory theory and test design in neuropsychological practice.

A92
IMPAIRED PERCEPTION OF MNEMONIC OLDNESS, BUT NOT
MNEMONIC NEWNESS, AFTER PARIETAL LOBE DAMAGE Marian

Berryhill1, Kylie Hower2, John Wixted3, Ingrid Olson2; 1University of Nevada,
Temple University, 3University of California, San Diego — In studies of episodic memory retrieval, recognition paradigms are known to elicit robust
activations in the inferior parietal lobe. However, damage to this region
does not produce severe deficits in episodic memory performance as
indexed by typical accuracy measures. Rather, because problems with
memory confidence are frequently reported, the observed deficits may
be best described as subjective memory deficits. Here, we further investigated the inferior parietal lobe’s role in recognition memory as well as
in subjective memory. We tested the hypothesis that the inferior parietal
lobe gauges the perceived oldness of items, given several neuroimaging
findings suggesting that a portion of the left inferior parietal lobe is sensitive to perceived oldness. We tested two patients with bilateral parietal
lobe lesions and matched controls on an old/new recognition task. From
these data, we constructed receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves
2

52

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
by fitting the data with the unequal-variance signal-detection model.
No impairment was observed in terms of patients’ recognition accuracy.
However, patients exhibited lower hit rates and false alarms rates at high
confidence levels. Further, patients and controls differed in how they set
decision criteria for making recognition responses. Patients’ decision criteria for “old” responses were shifted in a conservative fashion such that
they were unwilling to endorse recognized target items with high levels
of confidence. Thus, damage to the inferior parietal lobe seems to produce
a unique problem in metamemory that cannot be indexed via traditional
performance measures and that is selective to the “perception of oldness”.

A93
THE ROLE OF HIPPOCAMPUS AND ENTORHINAL CORTEX IN
MEMORY INTEGRATION AND INFERENCE Dagmar (Dasa) Zeithamova1,

Amelia M. Wattenberger1, Alison R. Preston1; 1University of Texas at Austin —
Everyday judgments often draw on multiple prior experiences. They may
require retrieval and logical inference from multiple separated memories.
Alternatively, they rely on integrated memories resulting from reactivation of prior related memories and their integration with current events
during encoding. We hypothesized that reliance on one or the other process
depends on the degree of prior knowledge reactivation during encoding of
related events. To test this hypothesis, participants were overtrained on a
set of AB associations (house-object or face-object). During functional MRI
the next day, subjects learned in a single exposure overlapping BC associations between familiar (B) and novel (C) objects. Multivoxel pattern analysis
within ventral temporal cortex indexed trial-by-trial reactivation of related
A content (face/house) during BC learning. To test whether such reactivation promotes memory integration, a surprise AC inference test assessing
memory for indirect associations was also scanned. During BC encoding,
hippocampal and entorhinal activation tracked trial-by-trial reactivation
of prior memories. During AC inference, these regions were more active
during successful than unsuccessful inference. We conclude that reactivation of prior memories enables hippocampal-mediated memory integration
to anticipate novel judgments. Activation in lateral prefrontal regions was
also greater during successful than unsuccessful AC inference, especially
when corresponding BC trials showed minimal evidence for A reactivation.
We speculate that when prior memories are not reactivated during encoding, separate memory traces are formed and recombined during inference
through lateral prefrontal processing. These findings demonstrate how
reactivation modulates the respective engagement of two complementary
encoding-retrieval mechanisms that support novel judgments.

A94
AEROBIC CAPACITY AND RECOGNITION MEMORY ARE POSITIVELY ASSOCIATED WITH GRAY MATTER VOLUME IN THE
MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE IN HEALTHY YOUNG ADULTS Andrew

Whiteman1, Chantal Stern1, Karin Schon1,2; 1Boston University College of Arts
and Sciences, 2Boston University School of Medicine — Convergent evidence
from human and non-human animal studies suggests aerobic exercise
may improve brain health and cognition. Rodent studies have consistently
demonstrated an augmentative effect of running on hippocampal memory
and structural plasticity mechanisms in the hippocampus. Similarly, recent
human studies indicate exercise may lessen age-related decline in hippocampal volume. Here, we explored whether additional structures in the
human medial temporal lobes are impacted by aerobic fitness. We used
modulated voxel-based morphometry to assess regional differences in gray
matter volume associated with aerobic capacity and recognition memory.
Thirty-four healthy young adults (mean age = 20.8 ±2.4 years) underwent
cardio-respiratory fitness testing (VO2 peak), and MR imaging to acquire
high-resolution structural T1-weighted MP-RAGE images (1.0 mm3 isotropic voxels; 3T Philips Achieva). Participants also viewed a series of 144 trial
unique complex outdoor scenes in the context of a working memory paradigm. Approximately 15 minutes later, participants performed a surprise
subsequent recognition memory test (SMT) for these scenes. Results from a
hierarchical regression analysis showed that VO2 peak positively predicted
gray matter volume in the entorhinal cortex, the “gateway” to the hippocampus. Moreover, volume in both the hippocampus and the entorhinal
cortex positively correlated with performance on the SMT, a task we have
previously shown recruits these same anatomical structures functionally

2014 Annual Meeting	
(Schon et al., 2004). Our results extend previous work by suggesting aerobic
capacity may be associated with both structure and function of the medial
temporal lobe memory system.

A95
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF ENCODING PROCESSES ASSOCIATED WITH THE CONFIDENCE AND ACCURACY OF SOURCE
RETRIEVAL Preston P Thakral1, Michael D Rugg1; 1University of Texas at

Dallas — Previous studies have demonstrated that the neural correlates
of successful source encoding (subsequent source memory effects) overlap regions selectively engaged during the online processing of the source
features. The aim of the present experiment was to determine whether
feature-selective subsequent memory effects predict the accuracy and confidence of subsequent source memory judgments. At study, participants
viewed a series of pictures of colored objects. Each object was accompanied
by a visually- or an auditorily-presented word. The study task was to judge
whether the word was congruent or incongruent with the picture. At test,
participants viewed studied and unstudied pictures and were required to
respond “old” if confident they had seen the picture before and otherwise
to respond “new”. After each “old” response, participants went on to judge
whether the picture had been paired with a visual or an auditory word,
using a 6-point confidence scale. As expected, source accuracy increased
with confidence. Modality-independent subsequent source memory effects
were identified in inferior frontal cortex and fusiform gyrus. Modality-selective effects overlapped regions preferentially involved in the online
processing of visual and auditory information. Both classes of subsequent
memory effects were associated primarily with highly confident source
judgments, and did not track source confidence in a graded manner.
Together with previous findings that subsequent memory effects do track
subsequent source confidence in a continuous fashion, the present findings
suggest that the relationship between subsequent source memory effects
and subsequent source confidence and accuracy is variable, likely depending on the details of the experimental procedure.

A96
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INSIGHTS INTO INVOLUNTARY
MEMORY RETRIEVAL Lisa H. Evans1, Jane E. Herron1, Edward L. Wilding1;

1
Cardiff University Brain Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), School of Psychology, Cardiff
University, UK — There are many instances where we would prefer memories did not come to mind, perhaps because they are distressing or embarrassing. Research indicates that people can sometimes exert control over
memory and prevent involuntary retrieval. In this study we used event-related potentials (ERPs) to examine some circumstances under which individuals can do this. In particular, whether people continue to retrieve information from memory when it is no longer required, and if so, how long this
persists. In an initial study phase words were shown individually on the
left or right side of fixation. In a test phase these words were shown again,
interspersed with unstudied words, in one of three locations: above, at, or
below fixation. Participants were cued trial-by-trial to complete one of two
tasks: indicate the current screen location of the word (perceptual task), or
indicate if the word was new or where it was displayed in the study phase
(memory task). Two trials of each task were completed before a switch
to the alternate task was required. An ERP index of successful memory
retrieval was reliable on the first trial of the perceptual task, after switching from the memory task, but not on the subsequent trial. These findings
indicate that there was involuntary retrieval of irrelevant memory information immediately after switching from the memory task but this was not
sustained. This could be due to memory control mechanisms taking time to
engage or the dissipation of a task set that assists memory retrieval.

A97
DRAWING ON THE PAST TO SIMULATE THE FUTURE: MEDIAL
PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND THE FACILITATION OF PRIOR KNOWLEDGE Roland G Benoit1, Szpunar Karl K1, Schacter Daniel L1; 1Harvard Univer-

sity — The human ability to simulate possible future episodes seems to be
supported by the same core network that also supports recollections of the
past. This study scrutinized the functions mediated by a specific node of
this network, the anterior medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). We hypothesized that this region supports simulations by accessing prior knowledge
structures related to the elements of a simulation. Prior to the scanning ses-

Poster Session A
sion, participants generated 200 people and locations that they personally
know, and indicated the familiarity and pleasantness of each person and
location. In the fMRI scanner, they then simulated interacting with a given
person at a specific location. Consistent with our hypothesis, mPFC activation was tightly coupled with the degree to which the constituting elements
of the episode were familiar. Thus, this region was more strongly engaged
when the simulations could be based on richer prior knowledge. Moreover,
preliminary analyses indicate that activation in a part of this region also
reflects the combined pleasantness of the episode’s elements, suggesting
that mPFC processes the anticipated affective quality of the event. Taken
together, mPFC may effectively facilitate prior affective knowledge to simulate what it might be like to experience a potential future episode.

A98
HIPPOCAMPAL DAMAGE IMPAIRS THE ON-LINE REPRESENTATION OF VISUAL INFORMATION David Warren1, Melissa Duff1, Daniel

Tranel1; 1University of Iowa — The hippocampus plays a necessary role in
the formation of new declarative memories, but is not generally thought
to participate in on-line representation of information during short delays
(i.e., on the scale of short-term or working memory). However, recent findings suggest that the hippocampus contributes to memory representations
even during very short delays. We used neuropsychological methodology
to evaluate hippocampal contributions to on-line representation of visual
information by adapting a paradigm previously used to study visual working memory capacity (Zhang & Luck, 2008) and applying it to patients
with hippocampal damage. Participants studied 1, 3, or 6 briefly-presented
(100 msec) colored squares, and after a short blank interval (1 s) indicated
the color of a randomly selected square using a graded color wheel. Maximum likelihood estimation was used to determine whether responses were
memory-guided or guesses, yielding estimates of representation accuracy
and guessing rate. Using this approach, we studied the performance of
patients with bilateral hippocampal damage (N=5), neurological comparison patients without hippocampal damage (N=14), and healthy normal
comparison participants (N=16). We found that patients with hippocampal damage were impaired when performing this task despite the very
short study-test interval (1 s). Specifically, hippocampal patients showed
increased guessing rates [F(2,35)=4.043, p<0.05] suggesting more frequent
loss of the studied stimulus representations. Meanwhile, estimates of representational accuracy were similar for all groups [F(2,35)=0.246, p>0.75].
This intriguing finding suggests that the hippocampus normally supports
maintenance of recently-experienced visual information across very short
intervals, but does not contribute to the accuracy of those representations.

A99
HIPPOCAMPAL ACTIVITY AND MEMORY PERFORMANCE PREDICT CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY FOR STIMULI RECALLED
FROM LONG-TERM MEMORY Marie St-Laurent1, Hervé Abdi2, Bradley R.

Buchsbaum1,3; 1Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest, 2University of Texas
at Dallas, 3University of Toronto — According to the Principle of Reactivation, faithful recollection evokes patterns of neural activity that resemble
those instantiated when an event was first perceived. In the current study,
we investigated the link between specific neural reactivation, memory
performance, and hippocampal activity. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to quantify brain activity as participants viewed
and mentally replayed a set of 11 short videos, each of which was viewed
and recalled multiple times. We then trained a classifier to identify specific
videos based on brain activity at perception, and tested how accurately
the classifier could distinguish videos during mental replay. Classification
accuracy correlated significantly with subjective in-scan ratings of memory
vividness, and with performance on a post-scan memory test of the videos’
content. The magnitude of hippocampal activation during mental replay
also correlated significantly with trial-to-trial variation in classifier performance. Our results indicate a link between neural specificity and both subjective and objective measures of memory performance, and demonstrate
how classifiers can be used to quantify the quality of recollection objectively. In addition, we observe that activity in the hippocampus, a structure
known to play a central role in the retrieval of vivid and detailed memories
for past events, is linked to the reactivation of stimulus-specific patterns of
brain activity, which is consistent with its hypothetical role as an index of
long-term memory content.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

53

Poster Session A	

A100
RESTING STATE CONNECTIVITY IS RELATED TO INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN SUBJECTIVELY-RATED MEMORY ABILITY. Signy Shel-

don1,2, Norman Farb2, Brian Levine1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest
Centre for Geriatric Care, 2Department of Psychology, University of Toronto
— Individual differences in memory are well accepted, yet the neural basis
of these differences is largely unknown. Resting state connectivity analysis
is a useful method to determine if such individual differences are reflected
in how the brain is intrinsically functionally organized. In this study, we
sought to determine if Default Model Network (DMN) connectivity, a network that has strong links to memory function, is influenced by individual
differences in two types of memory retrieval: episodic (the recall of past
personal events) and semantic (the recall of general facts and information)
memory. Participants’ self-reported ability to recall episodic and semantic memories was measured with a validated questionnaire, the Survey of
Autobiographical Memory (SAM; Palombo et al., 2013). These scores were
used as covariates to analyze participants’ resting state scan. Seed connectivity analyses using an anatomically defined parahippocampal gyrus
seed revealed that self-reported episodic memory ability was anchored in
a medial temporal lobe network that predominately included posterior
aspects of the brain, notably regions in the visual cortex. Self-reported
semantic memory ability, however, was anchored in a medial temporal lobe
network that was predominately connected to anterior brain regions, notably the prefrontal cortex. Similar differences were found using other seed
regions of the DMN. These differences suggest mnemonic traits are selectively related to specific neurocognitive processes. High episodic memory
ability is related to enhanced medial temporal/posterior connectivity that
may support imagery-based processes, which underlie rich recollection.
Those with subjectively-rated high semantic ability have enhanced medial
temporal/anterior connectivity supporting organized retrieval of information.

A101
TASK-RELATED CHANGES IN CONNECTIVITY WITH ANGULAR
GYRUS PREDICT RECOLLECTION PERFORMANCE ACROSS
THREE EPISODIC MEMORY TASKS Danielle King1, Marianne de Chaste-

laine1, Rachael Elward1, Tracy Wang1, Michael Rugg1; 1University of Texas at
Dallas — Prior research has demonstrated that neural activity in the angular gyrus (AnG) is enhanced during successful recollection. This region
appears to be functionally heterogeneous, contributing to a wide range
of experimental tasks that rely on various cognitive processes. The AnG
has also been shown to be highly flexible, changing allegiance with different brain networks frequently over time. In the present study, we examined whether there are brain regions that exhibit task-related changes in
functional connectivity with the AnG during successful recollection and
whether the magnitude of these changes can predict recollection performance. Data from three fMRI experiments, each of which assessed the
neural correlates of successful recollection using a different test procedure
(remember/know, associative memory, and source memory) were analyzed using psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analysis. The results
demonstrated that across all three experiments, a consistent set of regions
demonstrated recollection-related increases in connectivity with the left
AnG. These included extrastriate cortex, ventral temporal cortex, bilateral
posterior parietal cortex, posterior cingulate/retrosplenial cortex, and striatum. In addition, the average increase in connectivity across these different
regions correlated positively across subjects with recollection performance
in all three experiments. Thus, the extent to which the AnG increases connectivity with a distributed set of brain regions during successful retrieval
reliably predicts recollection performance. Possible mechanisms underlying this relationship will be discussed.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Semantic
A102
RETRIEVAL OF ESTABLISHED SEMANTIC NARRATIVES: CONTRIBUTIONS OF MTL AND TEMPORAL NEOCORTEX Mieke Verfaellie1,

Kathryn Bousquet1, Aubrey Wank1, Margaret Keane2,1; 1VA Boston Healthcare System and Boston University School of Medicine, 2Wellesley College

54

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
— Many reports suggest that lesions of the medial temporal lobes (MTL)
spare memory for semantic facts or concepts, or at most affect retrieval of
recently acquired knowledge only. Such findings have led to the notion
that once consolidated, semantic memories are represented neocortically
and are no longer MTL-dependent. Here, we examined whether well-established semantic memories with a narrative structure are also independent
of the MTL. Seven amnesic patients, five with lesions restricted to the MTL
and two with lesions extending into lateral temporal cortex (MTL+), were
asked to recount fairy tales and bible stories that they rated as familiar.
Narratives were scored for number and type of details, number of main
steps, and order in which the main steps were recounted. In comparison to
controls, patients with MTL lesions produced fewer details, but the number
and order of main steps generated was intact. By contrast, patients with
MTL+ lesions showed a pervasive impairment, affecting not only the generation of details, but also the generation and ordering of main steps. These
findings suggest (1) that retrieval of detailed semantic memories acquired
pre-morbidly remains MTL dependent; and (2) that neocortically mediated
semantic memories are schematic in nature, preserving only the essential
elements and their sequence. These findings are inconsistent with standard
consolidation theory, but can be accommodated by a memory transformation view (Winocur et al., 2011), if it is assumed that consolidation involves
a loss of detail not only for episodic, but also for semantic memories.

A103
DEFINING NOVEL CONCEPTS: IMPAIRED CREATIVITY IN AMNESIA Margaret Keane1,2, Kathryn Bousquet1, Mieke Verfaellie1; 1VA Boston

Healthcare System and Boston University School of Medicine, 2Wellesley College — Recent work from our laboratory has demonstrated that individuals with amnesia following medial temporal lobe (MTL) damage show
impaired performance in a semantic imagination task in which they are
asked to generate and elaborate upon issues that might arise in the future
(e.g., “What will be the most important national defense issues debated
in the 2032 election?”). Interpretation of this deficit is complicated by the
fact that control participants may draw upon autobiographical memory to
answer such questions (e.g., recalling comments from a recent presidential
debate about the role of the military in foreign conflicts). To evaluate semantic imagination in a task that is unlikely to tap autobiographical memory,
we tested 9 amnesic participants in a paradigm that required them to generate definitions for novel noun-noun combinations (e.g., “cactus carpet”),
and to list features for each concept. A control condition required participants to define familiar noun-noun compounds (e.g., “ceiling fan”). Compared to a matched control group, amnesic participants showed impaired
generation of acceptable definitions and impaired generation of features for
novel compounds. By contrast, the amnesic group showed intact generation of acceptable definitions for familiar compounds. These results suggest
a role for the MTL in semantic creativity under conditions that are unlikely
to tap autobiographical memory in control participants. Our findings add
to a growing body of literature implicating the MTL in the creative use of
existing knowledge in the service of problem solving and discourse.

A104
IMPLICIT TRANSITIVE INFERENCE USING AUDITORY STIMULI

Anthony Greene1, Rea Aazcueta1, Jared Blommel1, Brendan Semph1, Chloe
Ries1, Joseph Nimm1, Patrick Heffernan1; 1University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
— Transitive inference (TI), a form of inferential reasoning, refers to the
ability to make correct judgments about relationships indirectly, by their
relations to common items. While transitive inference has been extensively
examined in humans, to date, only visual stimulus items have been used.
One major question is whether successful TI for visual items is an aspect of
spatial cognition. In order to examine the generalizability of TI in humans,
we introduce auditory stimuli, presented in pairs, (A>B, B>C, C>D, D>E)
which an organized into a single hierarchy (A>B>C>D>E) to support correct inference (B>D) among novel pairings. Participants were randomly
divided into a named condition (names were given to the tones e.g., flute
or horn) or unnamed condition and were either informed or uninformed
about the existence of the hierarchy prior to the stimulus presentation.
Some uninformed participants become aware, while some informed participants do not discover the hierarchy. Awareness was assessed through
a post experimental questionnaire. Results show no significant differences
between any of these groups at study or test, suggesting little or no effect
of verbal strategies or conscious awareness. Test performance was strongly

2014 Annual Meeting	
predicted by performance on the inner pairs during training (r = 0.444 p
< 0.001) and awareness was modestly correlated with BD performance
(r = 0.225 p < 0.015) yet not required, as there were performers with low
awareness. Overall our results demonstrate that visual and auditory TI performance profiles are nearly identical suggesting similar processes despite
distinct perceptual modalities.

A105
AMBIGUITY TYPE AND GRAMMATICAL CLASS AFFECT SEMANTIC SELECTION Fan-pei Yang1, Daniel C. Krawczyk2,3, Navid Khodaparast2,

Kailyn Bradley2, Min-chieh Fang1, K. C. Chiu1; 1National Tsing Hua University.
Taiwan, 2Center for Brain Health, University of Texas at Dallas, Dallas, TX, USA,
3
Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
at Dallas, TX, USA — Research to-date has not successfully demonstrated
consistent neural distinctions for different types of ambiguity or explored
the effect of grammatical class on semantic selection. We conducted a relatedness judgment task using event-related functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) to further explore these topics. Participants judged relatedness within word pairs. Consistent and inconsistent conditions were
included along with �ller items. Imaging results revealed a main effect
of ambiguity in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and parietal
cortices. A main effect of grammatical class was observed in the parahippocampal and lingual gyri, and a main effect of consistency was found in
the DLPFC, ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) and occipital cortices.
Interactions among these factors were observed in the cingulate gyrus
and motor cortices in addition to the DLPFC. These results suggest that
both ambiguity type and grammatical class modulate semantic selection
through different neural regions.

A106
SENSATION SEEKING IS MORE INFLUENTIAL FOR AUTOMATIC
THAN CONSCIOUS CONTROLLED MEMORY SYSTEMS Adam

Lawson1, Amanda Renfro1; 1Eastern Kentucky University — Substantial evidence shows that high and low sensation seekers differ in brain activation
related to the memory of emotionally salient events. In this poster, three
experiments using an old-new recognition memory task are presented. All
three experiments consistently show sensation seeking differences in brain
mechanisms reflective of automatic memory mechanisms as opposed to
more conscious-controlled recollection memory mechanisms. One study
(Lawson, Liu, Joseph, Vagnini, Kelly, & Jiang, 2012) utilizing event-related
potentials (ERPs) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) found
sensation seeking differences in early N2-orbitofrontal and FN400-caudate
nucleus activation reflecting automatic processes. Two subsequent studies using skin conductance response and heart rate (beats per minute)
data have further substantiated automatic memory mechanisms as the
primary mechanism for sensation seeking differences. Two experiments,
one utilizing negative valance images (N = 80) and the second utilizing
positive valance images (N = 40), were conducted using an old-new task
that required both automatic familiarity judgments and more conscious
controlled recollection judgments. In both experiments, sensation seeking
differences for both behavioral and psychophysiological data were found
in relation to the familiarity of images rather than recollection of memories.
Collectively, the results suggest that individual differences in sensation
seeking reflect cortical processes involved in non-conscious familiarity as
opposed to conscious-controlled recollection memory systems.

A107
CATEGORY-SPECIFIC ACTIVATION PATTERNS ARISE FROM BASE
CONNECTIVITY: CONVERGING EVIDENCE FROM FUNCTIONAL
NEUROIMAGING, PROBABILISTIC TRACTOGRAPHY, AND A
NEURAL NETWORK MODEL Lang Chen1, Matthew A. Lambon Ralph2,

Lauren Cloutman2, Ryo Ishibashi3, Timothy T. Roghers1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2University of Manchester, 3Kyoto University — Functional neuroimaging studies have reported differential activation for different conceptual categories including animals, actions, tools etc. Accounts diverge
on whether this phenomenon reflects (a) the existence of functional/anatomical modules for conceptual categories or (b) systematic differences in
perceptual experience that covary with knowledge domains. We consider
a third hypothesis: that category-specificity arises from the underlying

Poster Session A
connectivity of the cortical semantic network. In an Activation Likelihood
Estimate (ALE) meta-analysis of 48 studies, we found that animal concepts
elicited greater activation in lateral posterior fusiform gyrus (pFG), superior temporal gyrus/sulcus (STG/STS) and lateral occipital cortex (LOC)
bilaterally whereas artifact concepts elicited greater activation in bilateral
medial pFG, left posterior middle temporal gyrus (pMTG) and left inferior
parietal lobe (IPL). We then conducted a probabilistic tractography analysis of diffusion-weighted images from 24 subjects to investigate white-matter pathways connecting these brain regions. All temporal lobe regions
streamed to the ventral anterior temporal lobe (vATL), hypothesized as a
multimodal hub for concept processing. Artifact-specific regions were also
connected in a specialized white-matter sub-network: pMTG streamed to
both the IPL and pFG artifact regions, while the medial pFG stream merged
with the inferior occipeto-frontal fasciculus (IFOF) projecting caudally
into the dorsal parietal cortex. In a neurocomputational model adopting
this connectivity, we demonstrated that animal-specific and artifact-specific brain activation patterns, both in the sighted and congenitally blind,
emerge spontaneously after environmental structures that exist across multiple modalities are acquired. Thus we propose that category-specificity in
brain imaging studies arises from the base connectivity of the underlying
network.

A108
FAST MAPPING RAPIDLY INTEGRATES INFORMATION INTO
EXISTING MEMORY NETWORKS Marc N Coutanche1, Sharon L Thomp-

son-Schill1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Successful learning involves consolidating and integrating new material into existing memory networks.
There is some evidence that a learning procedure, known as fast mapping
(FM), simulates the early word-learning environment of children. Recent
results have suggested that learning by FM can proceed independently of
hippocampally-mediated learning systems in adults, leading to claims that
FM procedures promote rapid and direct incorporation into memory networks. Yet, integration of newly learned information has not been tested
following a FM procedure. We report an investigation of whether FM integrates new words and meanings more rapidly than explicit encoding (EE).
We introduced fifty participants to sixteen unfamiliar animals and names
through either FM or EE. Participants exposed to the words through an
EE paradigm showed strong declarative memory performance, but little
lexical competition or semantic priming of related known words. In contrast, although FM produced weaker declarative memories, the FM group
demonstrated evidence of lexical integration immediately after training
(creating a double dissociation). This integration was still present the next
day. The learned animals became semantically integrated by the day after
FM, but not after EE. This is evidence that FM can prompt rapid lexical and
semantic integration with existing knowledge.

A109
CONVERGING EVIDENCE FOR THE NEUROANATOMIC BASIS OF
COMBINATORIAL SEMANTICS Amy Price1, Michael Bonner1, Jonathan

Peelle2, Murray Grossman1; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2Washington University in St. Louis — Human thought and language rely on the brain’s ability
to flexibly combine concepts. This fundamental process supports the construction of complex concepts from basic constituents. For example, both
“jacket” and “plaid” can be represented as individual concepts, but can also
be combined to form the more complex concept, “plaid jacket”. Although
this process is central to the expression and comprehension of meaning,
little is known about its neural basis. Here we present evidence for a neuroanatomic model of conceptual combination from three experiments. We
predicted that the highly integrative region of heteromodal association
cortex in the angular gyrus would be critical for conceptual combination,
given its anatomic connectivity and its strong association with semantic
memory in functional neuroimaging studies. Consistent with this hypothesis, we found that the process of combining concepts to form meaningful
representations specifically modulated neural activity in the angular gyrus
of healthy adults in an fMRI study (N=22; p<0.05, whole-brain corrected),
independent of the modality of the conceptual information. We also found
in healthy adults that individual differences in the structure of the angular
gyrus were related to individual differences in behavioral performance on
the conceptual combination task. Finally, in a population of patients with
neurodegenerative disease (N=22), we found that the degree of atrophy
in the angular gyrus was specifically related to impaired performance on
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

55

Poster Session A	
combinatorial processing (p<0.05, whole-brain corrected). These converging anatomic findings implicate the angular gyrus in a high-level integrative function in semantic memory that underlies conceptual combination.

A110
PARCELLATION OF LEFT PARIETAL TOOL REPRESENTATIONS
BY FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY Frank Garcea1,2, Bradford Mahon1,2,3;

2014 Annual Meeting

METHODS: Electrophysiology
A112
UNCERTAINTY AND FEEDBACK-RELATED STATES IN A
SEMI-STRUCTURED, PARTICIPANT-DRIVEN TASK Laura Mari-

Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, USA,
2
Center for Visual Science, University of Rochester, USA, 3Department of Neurosurgery, University of Rochester, USA — Manipulating a tool according to its
function requires the integration of visual, conceptual, and motor information, a process subserved in part by the left parietal cortex (LPC). How these
different types of information are integrated and how their integration is
reflected in neural responses in the LPC remains an open question. Here,
participants viewed images of tools and animals during a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiment. Functional connectivity and
k-means clustering were used to parcellate the LPC into subregions based
on functional connectivity to a whole brain network of regions involved in
tool use. One cluster, in lateral inferior parietal cortex, expressed privileged
functional connectivity to the motor system (left ventral premotor cortex). A
second cluster, in the anterior IPS, expressed privileged functional connectivity with the ventral-medial temporal lobe (left medial fusiform gyrus). A
third cluster, in the superior parietal lobe, expressed privileged functional
connectivity with the dorsal stream (dorsal occipital cortex). Hierarchical
clustering was used to formally relate the resulting parcellation scheme
of left parietal tool representations to previous work that has parcellated
the left parietal lobule on purely anatomical grounds, and control analyses
using Monte Carlo style simulations demonstrated that the clustering solutions were outside the range of what would be observed based on chance
“lumpiness” in random data or mere anatomical proximity. These findings
demonstrate significant heterogeneity in the functional organization of
manipulable object representations in the LPC, and outline a framework
that generates novel predictions about the causes of some forms of upper
limb apraxia.

ano1, Joshua Poore1, Andrea Webb1, Amy Kruse2, Brendan Seagraves2, Jana
Schwartz1; 1The Charles Stark Draper Laboratory, 2Intific, Inc. — Although
electroencephalography (EEG) has become portable and amenable to investigating cognitive processes in realistic environments, inferences of underlying cognitive processes from EEG have largely been predicated on rigid,
laboratory-controlled event-related designs. As such, it is unclear whether
data from semi-structured, participant-driven tasks will be robust and interpretable. We investigated uncertainty and feedback-related states using a
24-channel, portable EEG (B-Alert X24, ABM) in an interactive, semi-structured probabilistic learning task developed using the RealWorld® (Intific,
Inc.) simulation authoring tool. 29 participants freely progressed through a
virtual environment and learned which one of six character models, varying by features, was a “threa”, by making “shoo” decisions upon encountering them together. In 30% of encounters, all models were “non-threats”;
shooting the wrong model (or making no decision) resulted in environment
reset. Pre/post-task reaction-time tests indicated participants’ opinions of
which models were “threats”. Repeated measures analyses revealed that
participants were largely unsuccessful in “threat” identification (17% correct); however, reaction-times or confidence regarding “threats” changed
across the task (F(1,52)=25.93, p<.001). Modeling “wrong-kill” and “correct-kill” decisions as events, event-related potential (ERP) analyses yielded
evidence of characteristic uncertainty (N100) and feedback-related negativity (FRN) deflections, coupled with significant increases in fronto-central
alpha and beta band activity in the period immediately following decision
feedback. Our findings illustrate how interpretable inferences can be (cautiously) extracted from rich, complex user-driven tasks with limited repetition, suggesting that it is possible to investigate cognitive process with EEG
within tasks that more closely approximate realistic environments.

A111
IMPOVERISHED REMOTE SEMANTIC MEMORY IN HIPPOCAMPAL AMNESIA Nathaniel B. Klooster1, Melissa C. Duff1; 1University of Iowa —

A113
EVALUATION OF A BRIEF NEUROMETRIC BATTERY FOR THE
DETECTION OF COGNITIVE DECLINE IN OLDER ADULTS. Emily

1

Remote semantic memory, previously acquired knowledge of vocabulary,
concepts, and general information about the world, is widely considered
intact in hippocampal amnesia. According to the standard view, the hippocampus plays a critical role in the acquisition of new semantic information, but that over time, these representations become independent of the
hippocampus through neocortical consolidation. Recent work, however,
suggests that the hippocampus contributes to on-line information processing and to reconsolidation of old or updated information. Given these findings suggesting a more extended time course of hippocampal involvement,
we re-examine the integrity of remote semantic memory in patients with
bilateral hippocampal damage and severe declarative memory impairment
using psycholinguistic measures of semantic richness. Participants were
presented with a series of words that varied on a continuum of high and
low frequency and asked to state as many features (e.g., harpsichord: has
keys, has legs, played in Baroque music) and as many senses (e.g., bug: an
insect, to annoy, a wiretap) for each word as possible. Relative to a group of
demographically matched comparison participants, the patients with hippocampal amnesia produced significantly fewer features and senses of the
words. Future work will determine whether this deficit is an impairment in
the access and use of the representations, a subtle disruption in the remote
semantic representations themselves, or some combination. Regardless of
the outcome, these findings suggest that the hippocampus continues to
support the maintenance, updating, access, and use of semantic representations after their initial acquisition.

C. Cunningham1, Jamie N. Hershaw2, Paul D. Kieffaber1; 1College of William
and Mary, 2Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences — With the
prevalence of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) projected to increase by 40% over
the next decade, the urgency surrounding development of reliable methods of early detection is intensifying. Electroencephalography (EEG) holds
promise in this area, and the primary aim of this research is to develop and
evaluate a brief battery of EEG-based neurometrics for use in the detection
of subtle changes in sensory/perceptual function. Kappenman and Luck
(2011) demonstrated the feasibility of assessing multiple visual event-related potential (ERP) components in parallel within a single task. Our first
aim, therefore, was to extend these findings to the auditory domain, using
nested stimuli within a single procedure to elicit multiple auditory ERP
components (MMN, P50, N2, P300). Waveforms and scalp topographies of
these components were found to be similar to those of components elicited
via conventional methods, and exhibited high test-retest reliability (r values
ranged from 0.6-0.95, excepting an r of 0.13 for P50). In the second portion of this project, we tested a novel EEG-based battery of combined auditory and visual stimuli designed to elicit a broad range of ERPs (MMNf,
MMNd, P50, C1, Visual MMN, P300, N2pc, ERN). Data were recorded from
younger (ages 18-24) and older (ages 60+) adults while they completed the
20-minute neurometric task. Results indicate that this battery may be used
to elicit up to eight distinct ERPs in a short period of time, and preliminary
analyses support the potential utility of these ERP profiles for the identification/classification of age-related changes in brain function.

A114
ASSESSING LATERAL INTERACTIONS WITHIN THE EARLY VISUAL
AREAS OF ADULTS WITH AUTISM. Sabrina Censi1,2, Mathieu Simard3,

Laurent Mottron4,5, Dave Saint-Amour3,6, Armando Bertone1,2,5; 1Perceptual
Neuroscience Laboratory for Autism and Development (PNLab), 2McGill University, 3Centre de recherche, CHU Sainte-Justine, 4Université de Montréal, 5University of Montreal Center of Excellence for Pervasive Developmental Disorders

56

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting	
(CETEDUM), 6Université du Québec à Montréal — Atypical performance on
visuo-spatial tasks targeting early, non-social perception is a defining characteristic of autism, yet few biologically plausible hypotheses are available
to explain them. Some authors have theorized that individuals with autism
may have atypical local connectivity resulting in altered response properties of early visual feature detectors. The goal of this study was to assess
lateral interactions between neurons within early visual areas in autism by
measuring steady-state visual evoked potentials (ssVEPs) elicited by windmill-dartboard and lateral masking paradigms. Nine adults with autism
and 9 typically developing adults were asked to passively view visual
stimuli during windmill-dartboard and lateral masking paradigms while
ssVEPs from four electrodes over the occipital cortex (Oz, POz, O1 and
O2) were collected. For the windmill-dartboard paradigm, first- and second-harmonic components of the responses were used to calculate indices
reflecting facilitatory (FI) and inhibitory (SI) cortical interactions for all participants. For the lateral masking paradigm, Gabor patches were presented
ether in isolation (target), or flanked by collinear Gabors at different contrasts (8, 16, 30%) at target-flanker distances (1.5Î», 3 Î», 6 Î»). There were no
group differences for either FI or SI cortical interaction indices, although an
expected difference between collinear and orthogonal Gabors (presented
at a contrast of 16%) at target-flanker distances of 1.5 Î» was found in the
control group, p = 0.018. Importantly, this difference was not evidenced
for the autism group, which is consistent with the hypothesis that lateral
connectivity within early visual areas is atypical in autism.

A115
PRE-PROCESSING INTER-RATER RELIABILITY IN FACE-NAME
MEMORY TASK-RELATED HIGH-DENSITY EEG: ICCS AND
IMPACT ON ERP RESULTS Steven Shirk1,2, Donald McLaren1,2,3, Jessica

Dodd1, Alex Powers1, Alec Duffy2, Meghan Mitchell1,2,3, Alireza Atri1,2,3; 1Edith
Nourse Rogers Memorial Veterans Hospital, 2Massachusetts General Hospital
Department of Neurology, 3Harvard Medical School — EEG data is a temporally-sensitive measure of brain activity commonly used in cognitive
neuroscience studies. Analysis of ERP data is performed, however, on
post-processed as opposed to raw data. The pre-processing steps that yield
post-processed data from raw data often involve imposing filters, removing sections of data considered artifacts, and mitigating eye blinks. Some
pre-processing steps involve subjective processer (i.e. rater) judgments. The
aim of this study was to compare results from data pre-processed by three
different raters in order to calculate inter-rater reliability and to investigate
the possible impact inter-rater discordance may have on the final ERP analysis results. Using data collected from young, cognitively healthy subjects
(N=16, age range 18-39) during a face-name paired-associate recognition
task, we observed high inter-rater reliability across raters, with interclass
correlation coefficients (ICCs) ranging from 0.60 to 0.99 for the 8 regions of
interest (ROI) by epoch by memory contrast measurements. Only 7 of 88
ICC measurements were below .80, mostly occurring in the frontal pole.
Furthermore, the effects of interest were similar for the results produced
by all three raters for the classic old/new ERP effects related to recognition
memory performance. These findings support that the inter-rater reliability
of ERP pre-processing in this paired-associate memory task is high, that
rater-related pre-processing effects do not significantly impact ERP effects
of interest, and validate the robustness of this ERP paradigm.

METHODS: Other
A116
LATERALITY AND HEMISPHERIC INTERACTION TO FIXATED
DISPLAYS: ENHANCING THE ECOLOGICAL VALIDITY OF
BEHAVIOURAL TESTS Jennifer Kluftinger1, Andrew J. Hughes2, Barbara J.

Rutherford3; 1Simon Fraser University, 2University of North Dakota, 3UBC Okanagan — Two experiments use patterns of laterality and hemispheric interaction established from lateralized displays to test a procedure that more
closely mimics natural viewing. Displays for a matching task were presented at fixation, either with or without a lateralized distractor to capture
the attention of the contralateral hemisphere. Task difficulty varied across
display sizes of three or five stimuli, and by the type of match. Experiment
1 presented a target letter that did or did not match the case of the probes.
Experiment 2 presented a non-lexical target that did or did not match the

Poster Session A
orientation of the probes. Both experiments were predicted to provoke a
cost from hemispheric interaction when the task was simple and a benefit
when the task was difficult. Laterality was predicted to shift from favouring
the left hemisphere in Experiment 1 (lexical task) to the right hemisphere
in Experiment 2 (mental rotation). Support was found in the accuracy data.
Experiment 1 found laterality in favour of the left hemisphere and better
performance by the left hemisphere alone than both together to three-item
displays; and, a benefit to performance from hemispheric interaction compared to the left hemisphere alone to five-item displays for physical match.
Experiment 2 found laterality in favour of the right hemisphere to five-item
displays for physical match and better performance by both hemispheres
than either one alone to five-item displays for categorical match. The findings reveal that the procedure is effective. It follows that adoption would
enhance the ecological validity of behavioural tests.

A117
ENGAGEMENT: PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL APPROACHES TO
UNDERSTANDING PSYCHOLOGICAL IMMERSION IN MULTIMEDIA Joshua Poore1, Andrea Webb1, Cunha Meredith1, Schwartz Jana1; 1The

Charles Stark Draper Laboratory — Engagement (i.e., presence, immersion)
is important in the development of educational media; engaged users are
putatively more likely to grasp pedagogical content than disengaged users.
Previous psychophysiological approaches to measuring engagement, however, have been largely counterproductive in that they rely on comparisons
of physiologic signals outside of the multimedia context (e.g., simple baselines), or experimentally constrain the context in which one hopes users
to be engaged. We investigated whether context-dependent approaches to
modeling physiological data taken from users during unconstrained media
exposure was informative beyond context-independent physiological
data in accounting for post-hoc self-reports of engagement. In our experiment, 39 participants were exposed to various genres of interactive (video-games) and passive media (videos), for comparison, while monitored
with eye-tracking, electromyography, and autonomic nervous system sensors (i.e., electrocardiogram, photoplethysmograph, electrodermal activity), followed by a self-report battery of published measures of engagement
(Brockmeyer, et al., 2009; Procci & Bowers, 2011). For context modeling,
events within each media exposure were coded for content and timestamped from screen-captures. Results indicate that context-dependent (r =
.56, p < .01) and -independent physiological (r = .31, p < .05) responses were
significantly correlated with engagement measures, but context-dependent
responses independently accounted for substantially more variance in
self-report measures (∆R2 = 23%, p < .001) as compared to context-independent responses, which were not independently significant predictors. Our
findings address shortcomings in current methods for measuring engagement across different media types and genres, and show promise in providing granularity for metrics that may inform the design of engaging media.

A118
COMPARING NATURAL LANGUAGE AND ADAPTIVE QUERYING
APPROACHES FOR ESTIMATING SIMILARITY STRUCTURE April

Murphy1, Christopher Cox1, Kevin Jamieson1, Robert Nowak1, Timothy Rogers1;
University of Wisconsin-Madison — In brain-imaging studies which use
advanced statistical approaches for predicting neural representations associated with word meaning, a common tool includes using corpus-based
methods from natural language processing (NLP) to estimate the semantic similarity structure among words. However, reviewing several NLP
methods reveals that cognitively plausible (i.e., human-like) performance
across these models is extremely difficult to compare because the models
are trained on different corpora and often evaluated on different semantic tasks. Moreover, reliable performance on representations of abstract
(e.g., emotion) words is far poorer than for concrete words. An alternative
approach could be to obtain thousands of high-quality individual human
judgments, but this process is extremely labor-intensive, and the number
of measurements needed increases prodigiously with the number of words
used. In the present work, we introduce a new method for more efficiently
estimating similarity structure among words. Under the assumption that
these relations reside in a relatively low-dimensional space, the model
learns d-dimensional embeddings from human subjects by selecting optimal queries in the form of forced-choice triads-allowing human-like representations to be learned from a minimum n of actual observations. We
1

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

57

Poster Session A	
then compared this method to (a) estimates of similarity from random
samples of individual human judgments, and (b) estimates from several
leading NLP models. Critically, our method performs just as well as (a) yet
with many fewer measurements, and considerably outperforms (b). Given
the present results, we suggest that these estimates can be appropriated
to better guide multi-voxel pattern analyses of neural semantics in future
applications.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition
A119
GRAY MATTER CORRELATES OF PITCH PERCEPTION AND PRODUCTION Gottfried Schlaug1, Berit Lindau1, Ethan Pani1, Psyche Loui1,2;
1

Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, 2Wesleyan
University — Tone-deafness (congenital amusia) is a neurodevelopmental
disorder of musical ability. Local gray matter volumes were regressed with
performances in psychometric tests of tone-deafness (Montreal Battery
for Evaluation of Amusia) and psychophysical tests of pitch discrimination (psychophysical staircase threshold-finding procedure) to compare
these two derived phenotypical markers of tone-deafness. The voxel-based
morphometry study was conducted in 60 subjects with varying levels of
pitch discrimination and MBEA performances, controlling for age, gender,
nonverbal IQ, and amount of musical training. We initially ran a negative regression of gray matter on pitch discrimination threshold. Results
showed a significant cluster (504 voxels, qFDR = 0.015, pFWE = 0.026 at
cluster level) overlaying the pars triangularis of the left inferior frontal
gyrus (IFG) and the left insula. We then conducted a positive regression of
grey matter on performance on the MBEA. This regression showed smaller
gray matter clusters in the pars triangularis of the left IFG as well, but did
not reach significance. Results of the regressions of gray matter on pitch
discrimination threshold and the contour sub-score of the MBEA overlapped in the pars triangularis of the left IFG. Although the two measures
yield slightly different results, they also seem to share common features.
Taken together, these data suggest that pitch discrimination threshold may
serve as a stable phenotype of tone-deafness, with the peak grey matter
correlate in the left IFG and anterior insular region.

A120
WHITE MATTER CORRELATES OF PITCH PERCEPTION AND PRODUCTION Psyche Loui1, Ethan Pani2, Berit Lindau2, Gottfried Schlaug2; 1Wes-

leyan University, 2Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical
School — Although musical ability is ubiquitous and celebrated across all
human cultures, a subset of the population is tone-deaf (also known as
congenitally amusic): they show impairments in pitch perception and production. We conducted a diffusion tensor imaging study comparing white
matter integrity of a large group of adults (N = 60) along a continuum of
pitch discrimination thresholds of performance. We used the whole-brain
TBSS approach to define skeleton white matter voxels in each subject, and
then regressed the pitch discrimination threshold on FA values for each
voxel across all subjects. Results showed a single robustly significant (447
voxels; p < .05 TFCE-corrected for whole-brain comparisons) cluster in the
right superior longitudinal fasciculus. This negative correlation between FA
and pitch discrimination threshold remained significant after controlling
for musical training and nonverbal IQ differences, confirming that better
pitch perceivers (i.e. people with lower thresholds for pitch discrimination)
had higher Fractional Anisotropy (the degree of preferential diffusion of
white matter) in the right hemisphere superior longitudinal fasciculus. As
the superior longitudinal fasciculus is a collection of white matter fibers
that include the arcuate fasciculus - a dominant pathway for language and
music - results replicate and extend previous work showing reduced arcuate fasciculus (fronto-temporal) connectivity among tone-deaf individuals,
and provide converging evidence for the role of auditory-motor connectivity in fine-grained pitch perception.

A121
PERCEPTION OF AMERICAN ENGLISH VOWELS BY SPANISH-ENGLISH BILINGUAL LISTENERS Paula Garcia1, Karen Froud1; 1Columbia

University, Teachers College — Adult cross-language studies demonstrate
that second language (L2) learning is influenced by native language (L1)

58

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
phonological systems, with L2 learners assimilating non-native sounds to
native phonemes (Best, 1995). Sequential bilingual Spanish-English speakers face perceptual challenges in acquiring American English (AE) vowel
contrasts, which are often signaled by multiple acoustic cues not present in
L1. Research on English vowel perception in L1-Spanish adults has focused
on the English vowel contrast /i/, /j/ (as in sheep, ship) because discrimination errors between these two vowels are common (e.g., Flege, Bohn & Jang,
1997). However, other vowel contrasts such as /Œ/-/Q/ are also known to
present perceptual challenges for Spanish listeners (Escudero & Chládková,
2010). nThis study examined neurophysiological responses (ERPs) of adult
sequential Spanish-English bilinguals, compared to English-speaking controls, in a task requiring perceptual discrimination of AE vowel contrasts
/Œ/-/Q/ and /æ/-/[/ under two listening conditions: (1) natural vowel
duration and (2) neutralized vowel duration. MMN / P300 responses were
observed for all participants. Behavioral (accuracy-reaction time) and neurophysiological (MMN/P300) differences between groups indicate that
Spanish listeners identified vowel pair /æ/-/[/ like English speakers in
both conditions, but were less accurate and slower to identify vowel pair
/Œ/-/Q/. These results suggest that perceptual differences in vowel pairs
are related to Spanish listeners difficulties with relevant spectral/duration
features in specific AE vowels (e.g., formant transitions in /Œ/-/Q/), but
not in others (e.g., /æ/-/[/). These findings could support development of
teaching methods that improve perception of relevant vowel cues during
L2 English acquisition.

A122
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN CHANGE DEAFNESS: VERBAL
COGNITIVE STYLE AIDS DETECTION Carryl Baldwin1, Dan Roberts1,

George Buzzell1, Bum-Sik Sin1, Matthew Jesso1, Brian Simpson2, Nandini Iyer2;
1
George Mason University. Fairfax, VA, 2Air Force Research Laboratory, Dayton,
OH — In complex auditory scenes containing more than four objects,
humans frequently fail to detect the disappearance of one of the objects
unless attention is specifically directed towards that object (Eramudugolla,
Irvine, McAnally, Martin, & Mattingley, 2005). This change deafness, or
the failure to detect suprathreshold changes to an auditory scene, has been
attributed to either a failure of attention (Eramudugolla et al., 2005) or the
rate at which listeners can apply verbal labels to the objects, as opposed to
a failure of auditory encoding (Gregg & Samuel, 2008). In two experiments
that differed only in the specific natural object sounds presented, listeners
attempted to detect the disappearance of an object from a complex continuous stream of 2, 4, 6, or 8 natural sounds. In different blocks, the objects
were dissociated by their identity, location in space, or both. We reasoned
that individuals with a strong visuospatial strategy would perform better
when objects dissociated by location, and conversely a verbal cognitive style
would benefit from dissociation by identity. As expected, individuals with
a strong verbal strategy detected significantly more object changes within
the identity task than individuals with a strong visuospatial strategy. However, in the task in which objects were dissociated by location, there were
no differences in performance as a function of cognitive strategy. Adding
location information by presenting multiple objects from different locations
aided performance generally, but verbal strategists maintained their performance advantage. These results provide strong support for the role of
verbal strategies in aiding auditory change detection.

A123
REPRESENTATION OF SPECTRO-TEMPORAL FEATURES OF FRICATIVE AND STOP-CONSONANT WORD ONSETS WITHIN THE SENSORY AUDITORY-EVOKED POTENTIALS (AEPS), THE P1-N1-P2
AND T-COMPLEX USING SINGLE TRIAL ANALYSIS Monica Wagner1,
Arindam RoyChoudhury2, Valerie L Shafer3, Brett Martin3, JungMoon Hyun3,
Mitchell Steinschneider4; 1St. John’s University, 2Columbia University, 3The
Graduate Center of the City University of New York, 4Albert Einstein College of
Medicine — The phoneme sequence that constitutes a spoken word consists
of a unique set of acoustic features that change over time. The P1-N1-P2 and
T-complex of auditory evoked potentials (AEPs) reflect these time-varying
features (Wagner et al., 2013) and can be used to index cortical level processing of the spoken word. It is unclear, however, whether spectro-temporal features of words can be consistently identified within the P1-N1-P2
and T-complex signature waveforms in individual subjects having normal
language abilities. AEPs were recorded (65 channel net, Electric Geodesic

2014 Annual Meeting	
Inc.) from 48 native-Polish and native-English adults in response to spoken
words that began with the syllables “set” and “pet”. Each word type consists of 70 natural productions, which approximates the acoustic variation
of a single speaker. The onset phonemes /s/ and /p/ are highly contrastive
in both spectral and temporal features (Bordon et al., 2003; Rosen, 2013),
which facilitates identification of feature processing within the sensory
AEPs. Single trial responses were analyzed to assess (1) whether spectral
contrasts were reflected within the signature waveforms to natural speech
stimuli (2) variation in the signature waveform patterns across healthy
adults (3) consistency of single trial brain responses within individual
healthy subjects and (4) changes in stability of the brain responses over time
between 50 and 600 ms. Results are discussed in terms clinical potential of
the P1-N1-P2 and T-complex signature waveforms and the value of single
trial analysis.

A124
AUDITORY MEMORY DISTORTIONS CORRESPOND WITH
INCREASED ACTIVITY IN SUPERIOR TEMPORAL CORTEX Ryan

Brigante1, Joanna Hutchison1,2, Kristen Deupree1, Bart Rypma1,2; 1University
of Texas at Dallas, 2University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center — Auditory working memory, the ability to consciously remember sounds for
short time periods, has a limited capacity and is prone to errors. Previous
work from our laboratory has shown that people tend to restrict auditory
musical information mentally so that they remember music with less content than they initially perceived. The present experiment sought to replicate these memory distortions while measuring corresponding changes
in blood oxygenation with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
of the brain. Eleven healthy young adults listened to excerpts of professional music during fMRI scanning and then made judgments about the
relative content of stimuli in a delayed response task. Consistent with previous research, participants tended to remember stimuli with less content
than they initially perceived. These distorted memories corresponded with
increased signal relative to accurate trials in superior temporal gyrus (STG)
but not inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). This finding suggests that STG is crucially involved in representation of sounds in working memory. At a broad
theoretical level, this finding suggests that short-term memory representations are grounded in modality-specific sensory cortices prior to frontal and
association cortices.

A125
HEMODYNAMIC SIGNATURES OF (MIS-)PERCEIVING TEMPORAL
CHANGE Bjoern Herrmann1, Molly J. Henry1, Mathias Scharinger1, Jonas

Obleser1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences —
Perception of time and temporal change are critical for human cognition.
Yet, perception of temporal change is susceptible to contextual influences
such as changes in acoustic pitch. Recent magnetoencephalographic brain
recordings showed how neural oscillations in auditory cortex code for
pitch-induced illusions of temporal rate change. The current fMRI study
investigated the neural mechanisms underlying perception of temporal
rate change and illusions thereof on a systems level that involves brain
regions outside sensory cortices proper. In a 6 × design, human participants
(N=19) listened to frequency-modulated sounds (~4 Hz) that varied over
time in both modulation rate and pitch. Participants judged the direction of
rate change (‘speeding up’ vs. ‘slowing down’), while ignoring changes in
pitch. Behaviorally, rate judgments were strongly biased by pitch changes:
Participants perceived the rate to slow down when pitch decreased and
to speed up when pitch increased (‘rate-change illusion’). The current
fMRI data show that, for regions classically associated with timing functions (pre-SMA, right IFG/insula, left putamen), activation increased with
increasing task difficulty. Importantly, while the right IFG/insula only
scaled with task difficulty, activation in pre-SMA additionally correlated
with the ability to discriminate rate changes and (negatively) with the magnitude of the rate-change illusion. A further distinction was observed in
the left putamen, which was negatively correlated with the degree of illusion, but uncorrelated with rate change discrimination. Thus, the current
findings dissociate between regions that only scale with task difficulty and
those that are additionally linked to perception of temporal rate change.

Poster Session A

A126
SYNCHRONIZATION TO AUDITORY AND VISUAL RHYTHMS IN
HEARING AND DEAF INDIVIDUALS Aniruddh Patel1, John Iversen2,

Brenda Nicodemus3, Karen Emmorey4; 1Tufts University, 2UC San Diego, 3Gallaudet University, 4San Diego State University — A striking asymmetry in
human sensorimotor processing is that humans synchronize movements
to rhythmic sound with far greater precision than to temporally equivalent visual stimuli (e.g., to an auditory vs. a flashing visual metronome).
Traditionally, this finding is thought to reflect a fundamental difference
in auditory vs. visual processing, i.e., superior temporal processing by the
auditory system and/or privileged coupling between auditory and motor
systems. However, it is unclear whether this asymmetry is an inevitable
consequence of brain organization or whether it can be modified (or even
eliminated) by experience or by stimulus characteristics. To study the role
of experience, we compared synchronization to flashing metronomes in
hearing and profoundly deaf individuals. Deaf individuals performed
better than hearing individuals when synchronizing with visual flashes,
suggesting that cross-modal plasticity enhances the ability to synchronize
with temporally discrete visual stimuli. However, synchronization was still
not as accurate as when hearing individuals tapped to an auditory metronome, suggesting that there are certain fundamental neural asymmetries
in auditory-motor vs. visuo-motor synchronization to discrete metronomic
stimuli. To study the role of stimulus characteristics in synchronization,
participants tapped to a silent image of a bouncing ball. When this stimulus
was used, hearing participants synchronized as well as they did with an
auditory metronome, and deaf individuals showed signs of metrical grouping, suggesting that visual timing may access higher-order beat perception
mechanisms for deaf individuals. Overall, these results suggest that the
auditory advantage in rhythmic synchronization is more experience- and
stimulus-dependent than has been previously reported.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Development
& aging
A127
NEURAL ADAPTATION IN INFANTS’ PERCEPTION OF AUDIOVISUAL TEMPORAL SYNCHRONY RELATIONS Franziska Kopp1, Alexan-

dra Jesse2; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Development Berlin, 2University of
Massachusetts Amherst — In this experiment, we tracked the neural dynamics associated with the repeated presentation of an audiovisual asynchrony
in 6-month-old infants. One group of infants (n = 22) was repeatedly shown
audiovisual stimuli in which the auditory event preceded the visual event
by 320 ms (AV320), for another group (n = 20) this asynchrony was only
280 ms (AV280), and a third group (n = 20) received the same stimuli in
synchrony (AVsync). Asynchronies of 320 ms are outside of the temporal window of audiovisual integration in infants; asynchronies of 280 ms
should be near the boundary of this window. EEG was assessed and evaluated by comparing ERP patterns across blocks and across groups. There
was a general tendency of diminished negative (auditory N1, visual Nc)
and increased positive (visual Pb) amplitudes between block 1 and block
2 in all groups, indicating general adjustment processes with repeated
presentation. As an indicator for the processing of synchrony versus asynchrony, Pb latencies were significantly longer in response to asynchronous
than synchronous stimuli, with longer latencies for larger asynchronies.
The auditory N1 and P2 were differentially modulated across blocks and
groups. N1 amplitude became less negative and P2 amplitude became
more positive in the AVsync group across blocks, whereas this pattern was
only marginal significant for the AV280 group, and was completely absent
in the AV320 group. Results suggest an influence of the audiovisual asynchrony on the perception of temporal synchrony relations, and a change of
neural dynamics with repeated asynchrony presentations.

A128
EMERGENCE OF INDIVIDUALITY IN COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT

Ulman Lindenberger1, Julia Freund2, Andreas M. Brandmaier1, Lars Lewejohann3, Imke Kirste4, Mareike Kritzler3, Antonio Krüger3,5, Norbert Sachser3,
Gerd Kempermann2,6; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 2Technische Universität Dresden, 3Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, 4Duke
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

59

Poster Session A	
University Medical Center, 5German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence,
6
German Center for Neurodegenerative Disease (DZNE) — What is the link
between individual experience and brain structure? Why do identical twins
not resemble each other perfectly even when growing up together? To shed
light on these issues, Freund et al. (2013) introduced an animal model for
the study of individualization mechanisms. They observed forty genetically identical mice that were kept in an enclosure offering a large variety
of activity options. Each animal was equipped with a microchip, allowing
for reconstruction of the animals’ exploratory behavior. Despite a common
environment and identical genes, the mice increasingly diverged in their
exploratory behavior. These differences were associated with differences in
the generation of new neurons in the hippocampus: Animals that explored
the environment to a greater degree also grew more new neurons in the
dentate gyrus of the hippocampus than animals that were more passive.
We conclude that individual experiences and ensuing behavior contribute
to the “individualization of the brain.” This process of individualization
cannot be reduced to differences in environment or genetic makeup. We
will discuss potential mechanisms underlying individualization, the general potential of the paradigm introduced by Freund et al. (2013), including
future questions and plans. Freund, Brandmaier, Lewejohann, Kirste, Kritzler, Krüger, Sachser, Lindenberger, & Kempermann (2013). Emergence of
individuality in genetically identical mice. Science, 340(6133), 756-759.

A129
RESTING INTERHEMISPHERIC INHIBITION IN ELDERLY: FUNCTIONAL AND STRUCTURAL MRI CORRELATES Allyson Rosen1,2,

Jeffrey Stephens1,2, Gary Glover2, Maxwell Boakye3, Paige Fraser1,2, Keith
Main1,2, Jean Charles Lamy4; 1Palo Alto Veterans Affairs Health Care System,
Palo Alto, CA, 2Stanford University, 3University of Louisville, KY, 4CESEM, CNRS
UMR8194, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité — Change in transcallosal inhibition has been invoked as a mechanism by which older adults
show less lateralized frontal fMRI activation. The aim of the study is to
compare three measures of interhemispheric connectivity in motor cortex
in older adults: resting state functional connectivity, interhemispheric inhibition (IHI as measured by transcranial magnetic stimulation), and DTI
tractography. Previous work showed that the changes were selective for
long IHI (40 ms interpulse interval) and related to active, fMRI in motor
cortex. We hypothesized that we would also find a relationship in older
adults between long IHI and resting state connectivity fMRI in the motor
cortices. Fifteen young (ages 21-35) and sixteen elderly (ages 61-86) underwent paired pulse TMS (interpulse intervals 10 ms and 40 ms) and resting state fMRI. Functional connectivity of the primary motor cortex was
derived based on regions of interest (ROI) in right and left M1. The ROI’s
were based on separate structural and active fMRI data. We found a significant correlation in elderly (R2=-0.27, p=0.035) and not young (R2=0.11,
p=0.24) between motor cortex fMRI and resting long IHI. Previous studies
have also demonstrated that stronger IHI was related to more corpus callosum integrity since it is believed to mediate IHI. We performed diffusion
tensor imaging and used tractography to measure the integrity (fractional
anisotropy) of the hand area in the corpus callosum and again found the
same long interval resting IHI data in elderly to be correlated with FA of the
hand area in the corpus callosum (R2=-0.20, p=0.048).

A130
BRAIN STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION IN CHILDREN WITH NONVERBAL LEARNING DISABILITIES Ian DeVolder1, Thomasin McCoy1,

Vincent Magnotta1, Peg Nopoulos1; 1University of Iowa — Nonverbal learning disability (NLD) refers to a constellation of neuropsychological deficits specific to nonverbal cognitive processes, including tactile and visual
perception, complex psychomotor activity, processing of novel stimuli,
sustained attention, executive function, academic areas such as mathematical reasoning, and problems with socioemotional cognition. It has been
hypothesized that NLD constitutes a right-hemisphere neurodevelopmental disorder, with particular problems in white matter development and
right hemisphere connectivity. The purpose of the current study was to
examine brain structure, white matter integrity, and functional connectivity
in children with NLD using structural MRI, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI),
and resting-state functional connectivity MRI (rs-fMRI). 11 children with
NLD (9 males, 2 females; age range = 7-12) were compared to 33 age and
sex-matched healthy control children. Intracranial volume was found to be

60

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
decreased in children with NLD. When looking regionally, only the hippocampus appeared abnormal in NLD, with a reduction in right hippocampal volumes. DTI revealed a decrease in fractional anisotropy (FA) within
several white matter tracts that connect different lobes in both the right and
left hemispheres for children with NLD. Resting-state fMRI data indicated
a decrease in functional connectivity within right hemisphere regions,
accompanied by an increase in connectivity to left hemisphere regions in
children with NLD. The results provide support for a right-hemisphere
neurodevelopmental component to NLD. Resting state data indicated a
decrease in right hemisphere functional connectivity, with a potentially
compensatory increase in connectivity to left hemisphere brain regions,
possibly explaining the intact verbal abilities in these children.

A131
AGE-RELATED COMPENSATION DURING MOTOR IMAGERY: A
MULTIMODAL STUDY Hana Burianova1, Lars Marstaller2, Anina Rich2, Mark

Williams2, Greg Savage2; 1University of Queensland, Australia, 2Macquarie University, Australia — Motor imagery (MI) is an active process during which
the representation of simple or complex motor movements is internally
reproduced without any overt physical action. The neural correlates of
MI overlap greatly with those of motor execution, and thus MI has been
utilized in rehabilitative settings to optimize motor function after stroke
or injury. As older adults are more prone to impairments in motor function, understanding age-related effects on MI is important. In a multimodal
study, young and older adults took part in the Finger Configuration Task
(FCT), either executing or imagining sequences of finger movements,
whilst their brain activity was measured by magnetoencephalography
(MEG) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). The results
show that MI ability does not diminish with age; however, the quality of
the underlying neural signal changes. In contrast to young adults, during
MI older adults show increased activity in somatosensory areas and in
additional areas outside of the motor network. This activity correlates positively with both vividness and FCT accuracy scores, and is also associated
with stronger beta desynchronization. In contrast to older adults, young
adults show increased activity in areas implicated in executive control of
attention. Activity in these areas does not correlate with either vividness
or accuracy scores. The converging fMRI, MEG, and behavioural results
yield evidence of age-related compensation in areas involved in bottom-up
processing of somatosensory information, and weaker top-down control of
attention. Our findings have important implications for the utilization of
MI as a rehabilitative strategy in older adults.

A132
DISCRIMINATION OF NUMEROSITIES IN CHILDREN STUDIED BY
MEANS OF FAST PERIODIC VISUAL STIMULATION Sandrine Mejias1,

Bruno Rossion2, Christine Schiltz1; 1University of Luxembourg, 2University of
Louvain — We are constantly dealing with quantities in our environment.
This ability to process numerical magnitude is present in infants (Izard et
al., 2009), a variety of animal species (Flombaum et al., 2005) and in tribes
with small number words lexicon (Pica et al., 2004). It implies that our brain
is able to extract the total number of items in a scene, regardless of perceptual interference (non-numerical properties of the stimuli). However, this
ability seems to be refined through development (Halberda et al., 2012),
due to visual-perception maturation and/or educational environment,
e.g. when learning arithmetic. Here, we measured rapidly and objectively
6-to-12-y.o. children’s sensitivity to (non-)symbolic numerical stimuli
(dots or Arabic numbers), using fast periodic visual stimulation (FVPS) as
implemented in a repetition-suppression paradigm (Rossion & Boremanse,
2011). Children were presented with stimuli appearing at 3.5 items/second
(fundamental frequency=3.5 Hz), for 60 seconds. Half of the sequences
consisted of different stimuli at every cycle of stimulation (e.g., “10”, “18”,
“12”,...), the other half of sequences were composed of same stimuli (“10”)
repeated throughout the whole sequence. We observed a large increase
of the EEG response at the fundamental frequency (a steady-state visual
evoked potential; Regan, 1966) over the lateral parieto-occipital electrodes
sites. This response was reduced when the same stimulus was repeated,
especially for symbolic stimuli. These results are correlated to children’s
age, their visual-perception, arithmetic and non-symbolic numerical abilities (L-POST, KRT, Panamath). They indicate that FPVS of (non-)symbolic
numerosities is a promising tool to study children’s sensitivity to numerical
magnitude.

2014 Annual Meeting	

A133
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS OF RESPONSE SELECTION AND
INHIBITION MODULATED BY COMPLEXITY OF OBJECT CATEGORIZATION IN NORMAL AGING Erin Venza1, Athula Pudhiyidath1, Hsueh-

Sheng Chiang1, Raksha A. Mudar1,2, Audette Rackley1, Jeffrey Spence1, John
Hart, Jr.1; 1University of Texas at Dallas, 2University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign — The study aims to investigate how event-related potential (ERP)
markers of response selection and inhibition in normal aging population
are modulated when categorization increases in perceptual and semantic
complexity. Ten normal aging adults were included and assessed by neuropsychological tests (9F, age = 63 ±4.9, education = 17.8 ±1.8, MMSE = 28.6
±1.2). In the Single Car (SC) task, subjects pressed a button upon seeing a
car (Go) but not a dog (NoGo). In the Object Animal (OA) task, they pressed
for non-animal items (Go) but not for animals (NoGo). We found that reaction time (RT) for Go was longer in OA than in SC (p < .001). Accuracy
showed no significant difference between conditions or tasks. ERPs were
analyzed using a multi-variate statistical technique (STAT-PCA, threshold
at FDR=.05). An interaction effect was found in frontal areas, where Go
elicited more negative N2 than NoGo in SC but no difference in OA. Two
components associated with the main effect of condition were found corresponding to a centro-parietal P3 and to an occipital N1. The main effect
of task was found with OA having more negative potentials than SC centro-parietally around 300 ms post-stimulus. The findings suggest response
inhibition recruits increased level of attention and motor monitoring compared to response selection. Top down control may be less sufficient during
inhibition than during selection when categorization involves less semantic information. It suggests normal aging adults may benefit from deeper
semantic processing in inhibiting responses during categorization.

A134
BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL CHARACTERIZATION OF DISTRACTION ACROSS THE ADULT LIFESPAN Joaquin A. Anguera1, Camarin E.

Rolle1, Adam Gazzaley1; 1University of California San Francisco — Our recent
work demonstrated that performance during one type of interference,
interruption (or multitasking) declines with advancing age (Anguera et
al., 2013). Using the same paradigm (NeuroRacer), we evaluated another
type of interference, distractibility, during a perceptual discrimination task
under the settings of distraction (completion of a task against a visually
noisy background) & no distraction. 174 individuals between the ages 20-79
(~30 individuals per decade of life) participated in a 1st experiment: here
we observed a correlation between age and an index of distractibility (r=.38,
p<.001) indicating that with increasing age, adults become more distractible. In a 2nd experiment, we collected EEG data on 20 young (24.1 ± 2.9),
19 middle-aged (39 ± 4.2), and 20 older adults (70.5 ± 5.9) while playing each
NeuroRacer condition. Attentional processing was assessed using posterior
alpha desynchronization time-locked to sign onset for targets and non-targets. An age group (YA; OA; MA) X condition (Distracted; Not-Distracted)
X stimulus (Target; Non-Target) interaction was present, with main effects
of stimulus and condition as well. Follow-up tests revealed that only young
adults showed a differential patterns of alpha desynchronization for targets
and non-targets during the distraction condition, unlike the other condition
or groups. These findings suggest that while middle-aged and older adults
still show similar extents of alpha desynchronization as younger adults,
they do not effectively modulate this activity for different target types in a
distracting environment. This lack of neural differentiation between target
types informs the increase in distractibility with age across the lifespan.

A135
AN ERP-STUDY ON THE PROCESSING OF SOCIAL INFORMATION
- MAKING A CASE FOR POINTING GESTURES Manuela Stets1, Bennett

Bertenthal1; 1Indiana University, Dept. of Psychological and Brain Sciences —
The importance of communicating information using social cues has been
studied extensively. For instance, Senju et al. (2006) showed differential
ERPs to gaze cues that were congruent or incongruent with the appearance of a lateralized target. Using fMRI-methodology, Materna et al. (2008)
reported that adults showed similar responses to gaze-shifts and pointing gestures. However, neuro-cognitive results remain inconclusive as to
whether pointing is also represented similarly to changes in eye-gaze direction in infants as seen in adults. This study investigates cortical responses

Poster Session A
to pointing in 10-month-old infants and adults. Participants saw a fixation
cross followed by 4 conditions: pointing gestures that were congruent or
incongruent with a target’s location (a checkerboard appearing left or right
for 500ms), only a pointing hand, or only the target. Based on behavioral
findings (Bertenthal et al., under review), we used a stimulus-target onset
asynchrony (SOA) of 100 or 600ms. Preliminary adult results suggest that
a pointing hand elicits neural activation similar to a face including a gazeshift as indicated by a pronounced N170 (slightly delayed) for all pointing-conditions. This component was not modulated by the SOA. In infants,
all conditions including the pointing gesture elicited a component complex
resembling the N290-P400-complex known to reflect face-processing in this
age-group. The condition with only the target did not. As such, this study
presents evidence that patterns of neural activity in response to a pointing
hand are similar to those observed in response to gaze-shift.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
A136
PERCEIVED SIMILARITY DEPENDS ON CONTEXT

Alexander N.
Sokolov1, Joachim F. Eicher1,2, Marina A. Pavlova1; 1University of Tübingen,
2
University of Freiburg — In daily life, we used to rely upon apparent similarity when missing specific knowledge about things or recalling people
and places. However, if similarity is context-dependent is largely unknown.
Statistical context (i.e., overall base rates and initial encounters of distinct
stimuli) can modulate perceived magnitudes of single stimuli: For instance,
the same speed appears slower with fast rather than slow speeds possessing higher overall base rates or dominating the series outset (the frequency
and primacy effects; Sokolov et al., 2000). When judging similarity of stimulus pairs, physically small differences between stimuli are typically more
common than large differences. Here, we examined whether the overall
frequency (i.e., base rate) and initial encounters of distinct stimulus pairs
affect perceived similarity. Six Gabor patches (spatial frequency, 1-10 cycle
deg-1 in 0.2 log-steps) were presented in pairs to four separate groups of
participants who had to judge their similarity using a 3-point scale (hardly,
moderately, and very similar). In the groups, patch pairs with either large
or small differences possessed higher overall base rates and/or dominated
the initial trials. The results showed that regardless of which (small or
large) differences mainly occurred on the initial trials, judgments of similarity were considerably higher in groups with on overall frequent pairs
of large rather than small differences (the frequency effect). We conclude
that apparent similarity largely depends on the statistical context of stimuli.
The outcome suggests important implications for computational models of
sensory representations that should take proper account of variable base
rates of stimulus pairs.

A137
ABSTRACTION OF NUMBER CONCEPTS FROM VISUAL PERCEPTS IN THE HUMAN BRAIN Joonkoo Park1, Nicholas DeWind1, Marty

Woldorff1, Elizabeth Brannon1; 1Duke University, USA — Humans are endowed
with an intuitive sense of number that allows us to perceive and estimate
numerosity without relying on language. It is controversial, however, as to
whether the brain is capable of representing number itself or is only capable
of encoding number based on other perceptual cues that are necessarily
confounded with number, such as the total surface area or density of a dot
array. In this study, we developed a novel analytic method which allows an
assessment of the unique contributions of number and other visual properties. In essence, when dot-array stimuli are systematically constructed to
cover a range of perceptual properties, all of these properties can be represented as a linear combination of three orthogonal dimensions. Thus, a
linear model can be used to quantitatively assess the unique contribution
of each dimension, including number, in explaining neural responses to
the dot arrays. We then used this approach to a passive-viewing event-related-potential experiment to investigate the temporal dynamics of neural
sensitivity to number and to other visual properties. The results demonstrate that the human brain is uniquely sensitive to number from very early
in the visual stream - 75 ms at the medial occipital site and 180 ms at the
bilateral occipito-parietal sites. These findings provide strong evidence for
the existence of a neural mechanism for rapidly and directly extracting
numerosity information in the human visual pathway.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

61

Poster Session A	

A138
STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY FINGERPRINTS
FOR FACE PERCEPTION Zeynep Saygin1, Nancy Kanwisher1; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology — A fundamental hypothesis in neuroscience
is that connectivity mirrors function at a fine spatial grain across the cortex.
Previous research supports this hypothesis for the human brain, by demonstrating that the degree of voxelwise face-selectivity in the fusiform gyrus
of individual subjects can be predicted from that voxel’s connections to the
rest of the brain (its unique connectivity fingerprint), measured through
diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI; Saygin et al. 2012). Here we asked
whether resting-state functional connectivity (fcMRI) can also predict
face-selectivity in the fusiform gyrus, and whether structural or functional
connectivity fingerprints also predict face selectivity in the superior temporal sulcus (STS). We found that both fcMRI and DWI connectivity predicted
face selectivity in the fusiform and STS more accurately than did a group
analysis of face selectivity from other subjects. Prediction accuracies from
DWI connectivity were slightly but significantly better than predictions
from fcMRI connectivity for the fusiform gyrus, but the two predictors performed similarly for the STS. A direct comparison of the subset of connections that best predicted face-selectivity revealed that DWI and fcMRI connectivity fingerprints for function were generally quite similar, especially
for the top predictors, although differences existed among weaker predictors. Overall, these data provide converging evidence from both DWI and
fcMRI that i) connectivity and function are tightly linked at a voxelwise
scale in face-selective cortex in humans, and ii) face-selective voxels can be
predicted from either diffusion or resting functional data alone.

A139
FAST CONNECTIVITY DYNAMICS OF CONSCIOUS AND UNCONSCIOUS VISUAL EXPERIENCE Nicolas Bedo1, Lawrence M. Ward1,2;
1

University of British Columbia, 2UBC Brain Research Centre — In spite of
many insights into the neural correlates of consciousness, we still don’t
know much about the moment-to-moment changes in brain connectivity
associated with conscious experience. Oscillatory dynamics likely play an
important role in conscious processing by facilitating rapid engagement
and disengagement of widely distributed neural assemblies. We exploited
a visual illusion, in which a small contrast decrement of a fuzzy annulus
often, but not always, resulted in the experience of the annulus vanishing,
to study differing (conscious versus unconscious) visual experiences in
response to the same physical stimulus. Using high-density EEG, independent component analysis, and dipole fitting, we identified common neural
sources at frontal (anterior cingulate) and parietal (precuneus/posterior
cingulate) sites. Consistent with previous studies, pre-stimulus alpha-band
(8-13 Hz) functional connectivity (phase synchronization) between independent components localized to these sites was larger on trials on which
the annulus appeared to vanish (unconscious) than when it remained consciously visible. When the annulus remained consciously visible, however,
early (<100ms) gamma- (38-42 Hz) and theta-band (3-7 Hz) phase synchronization was larger than when it vanished. Further, pre-stimulus effective
connectivity (directed information flow from transfer entropy) was greater
from parietal to frontal sources in theta- and alpha-bands, and greater
following stimulus onset in alpha- and gamma-bands, when the annulus
remained consciously visible. These results highlight the importance of
anterior-posterior interactions in consciousness by elucidating the timing
and directionality of information flow, and also confirm that rapid changes
in synchronized oscillatory activity are associated with drastic alterations
in one’s moment-to-moment conscious perception.

A140
DECODING ACTION CONCEPTS AT DIFFERENT LEVELS OF
ABSTRACTION - AN MVPA STUDY Moritz F. Wurm1, Angelika Lingnau1;

1
University of Trento, Italy — Action concepts are abstractions of concrete
action. It is assumed that abstraction occurs on several distinct levels. For
example, “opening a bottle” is an abstraction of concrete instantiations of
that action (e.g., “opening a particular wine bottle”). On a higher level of
abstraction, “opening” describes the action concept independent of the
object class. The neural substrates of abstraction from concrete actions to
abstract action concepts are debated: Motor versions of embodied theories
claim that action concepts are grounded in the motor system. By contrast,
classical cognitive theories propose that action concepts consist of amodal

62

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
representations in networks distinct from the motor system. Here we
used cross-conditional multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA) of fMRI data
to decode observed actions on three levels of abstraction: a concrete level
(opening vs. closing a specific bottle), an intermediate level (opening vs.
closing across different bottle exemplars), and an abstract level (opening
vs. closing across object classes, i.e., bottles and boxes). A ROI analysis
revealed significant decoding accuracies for the concrete level in left ventral
premotor, and bilateral inferior parietal and occipitotemporal cortex (OTC).
Intermediate and abstract concept levels, however, could be decoded bilaterally in the anterior intraparietal sulcus (aIPS) and in the posterior middle
temporal gyrus (pMTG) only, an area that has also been implicated to play
a role in conceptual processing of action verbs. These results were corroborated by a surface-based searchlight analysis. In contrast to embodied
theories, our findings suggest that action concepts are represented outside
premotor and motor regions.

A141
TIME-SCALE OF PERCEPTUAL GROUPING FORMATION

Daniel D.
Kurylo1; 1Brooklyn College, CUNY — Neural processes that mediate perceptual grouping serve to bind individual components of a stimulus. Binding
develops over time in the form of intrinsic lateral connections, feed-forward convergence, and dynamic modifications from feedback signals. In
order to determine the time-scale over which binding forms among stimulus components, perceived grouping was measured for briefly presented
dot patterns that were followed by a stimulus mask. Grids of dots, organized in terms of common luminance, appeared for 12 ms on a computer
monitor. Grids were followed by a mask that overlaid either grid elements,
or the spaces among elements in which binding would occur. A gap of
varying duration occurred between grid offset and mask onset in which no
stimulus was present. Observers reported the perceived pattern of grouping of the grids. Results indicated that grouping can proceed uninterrupted
with as little as 12 ms access to primary stimulus signals, whereas masking
spatial locations among elements disrupts processing for the first 35 ms of
grouping formation. In addition, feedback of partially constructed grouping patterns appears to occur during a 12 ms window that exists 47 ms after
stimulus presentation. These results may be accounted for by reciprocal
interactions at early stages of processing in which grouping patterns are
identified, after which constructed patterns are passed to subsequent levels
of processing. These results support a model of progressive element binding that cascades over time through multiple levels of processing.

THINKING: Decision making
A142
NEURAL DYNAMICS OF DECISION-MAKING IN A FINANCIAL
TRADING TASK Alison Harris1, Cary Frydman2, Tom Chang2; 1Claremont

McKenna College, 2University of Southern California — Although economic
models of decision-making often assume that choice behavior is rational,
deviations from optimality have been repeatedly documented in financial
trading. One robust finding is the disposition effect : the tendency of investors to hold on to losing stocks while selling winners prematurely. Recent
neuroimaging data suggests that this behavior is associated with differential activity in neural reward circuits for realization of capital gains (price
cost), compared to paper gains. However, less is known about how individuals overcome these biases to implement appropriate trading actions:
selling losers (realized losses) and holding winners (paper gains). Here we
hypothesize that optimal trading behavior is associated with increased cognitive regulation, similar to that observed in dietary self-control. We examined this question using event-related potentials (ERP) to measure subjects
brain activity while trading in an experimental stock market to obtain real
monetary outcomes. For each stock, optimality of choice on a given trial
was defined mathematically based on the stock s expected return and the
participant s decision to hold or sell. Consistent with previous ERP data,
where successful self-control is associated with early attentional gating of
perceptual activity, the earliest neural correlates of optimal choice occurred
from approximately 100-150 ms after stimulus onset. This early peak was
enhanced for both realized losses and paper gains, despite behavioral differences in the action being implemented, and highly significant differences

2014 Annual Meeting	
in RT. In line with a growing literature on attentional fluctuation, these data
suggest that early differences in attentional modulation can be associated
with far-reaching behavioral effects.

A143
ECONOMIC DECISION-MAKING IN THE ULTIMATUM BARGAINING GAME: BEHAVIORAL AND ERP EVIDENCE FOR EFFORTFUL
OPERANT CONDITIONING STRATEGIES Courtney Stevens1, Neal

Rusk1, Ami Snur1; 1Willamette University, Salem Oregon — The present study
examined the neural correlates of economic decision-making. Participants
(n=15) played a multiple-shot version of the Ultimatum Bargaining Game
(UBG) while event-related brain potentials were recorded. Participant
played the UBG in two conditions. In the Perceived Fixed (PF) condition,
participants believed the proposer did not see their decision and only
entered computer-generated offers. In the Perceived Alterable (PA) condition, participants believed the proposer could see their decision before
selecting a next offer, such that decisions could potentially influence future
offers. In reality, all offers were randomly generated. We predicted that
the effects of offer type (fair/mid-value/unfair) would be affected by the
manipulation of perceived offer alterability (PF/PA). Data were analyzed
using a 2x3 ANOVA with factors of Condition (PF/PA) and Offer Type
(fair/mid-value/unfair). Consistent with previous literature, participants
accepted unfair offers less frequently. However, this effect was stronger in
the PA condition, which also showed lower overall acceptance rates. The
N350 showed increased amplitude to mid-value offers in the PA versus PF
condition, suggesting greater mental effort for mid-value decisions in the
PA condition. In addition, the P300 showed a main effect of offer type (largest for fair offers) and condition (larger in the PF condition), suggesting
greater reward satisfaction for fair offers and larger overall monetary gains
in the PF condition. Taken together, these data suggest that participants
may use effortful operant conditioning strategies in the UBG when they
believe they can influence a proposer’s future offers, providing a potential
explanation for participants’ behavior in the UBG.

A144
THE INFORMATION-THEORETIC SURPRISE OF ECONOMIC DECISIONS DIFFERENTIALLY MODULATES BOLD SIGNAL IN ANTERIOR AND POSTERIOR BRAIN REGIONS Michael J. Tobia1, Tobias

Sommer2; 1PSU Center for NMR Research, Hershey Medical Center, 2University
Medical Center, Hamburg-Eppendorf — The Bayesian brain learns the statistical distribution of sensory events for perceptual inference and decision-making based on sensory consequences. It is not known if the brain
also stores information about the distribution of its own response history
when learning complicated contingencies with multifarious consequences.
This experiment investigated whether behavioral surprise, an information-theoretic measure of response predictability that implies memory
for a distribution of response history, modulates neural activity. Thirty
participants (ages 18-30) completed 240 trials of an inter-temporal choice
task in which they selected an amount to wager from four possible values
on each trial, followed by two independent consequences: a probabilistic
gain/loss, and a response-contingent state transition. Behavioral surprise
for each trial was calculated as the [-log2 p(x)], where p(x) is the probability of the categorical value (1-4) of the selected wager at the current state.
FMRI data were analyzed for activation at the onset of stimulus events, and
trial-by-trial parametric modulation by behavioral surprise, nominal wager
value, and reward/loss value. Two sets of clusters (p < .005; cluster > 156
voxels) were differentially modulated by behavioral surprise. An anterior
system comprised of the inferior frontal gyrus and anterior cingulate (each
bilaterally), and left caudate, was positively modulated. A posterior system
comprised of the posterior cingulate, parahippocampal gyrus and posterior hippocampus (each bilaterally), and left angular gyrus, was negatively
modulated. These results provide evidence that the brain stores information about its own response history, not just sensory information. This
information could be important when learning complicated multifarious
response-consequence relations.

Poster Session A

A145
WHEN REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IS NOT ENOUGH: EXAMINING THE ROLE OF MIDBRAIN REWARD PROCESSING IN
NON-STATIONARY ENVIRONMENTS Cameron Hassall1, Olave Krigol-

son1; 1Dalhousie University — Real-world decision making is challenging
due, in part, to changes in the underlying reward structure: the best option
last week may be less rewarding today. Determining the best response is
even more challenging when feedback validity is low. Presented here are
the results of two experiments designed to determine the degree to which
midbrain reward processing is responsible for detecting reward contingency changes when feedback validity is low. In particular, we recorded
electroencephalographic data while participants learned optimal stimulus-response rules that were either changing or static. We observed an
enhancement of the feedback error-related negativity (fERN) - a component of the event-related potential (ERP) related to reward processing - in
non-stationary environments compared to stationary environments, but
only when participants were cued as to which environment they were in.
Our results suggest that while midbrain reward systems may be involved
in detecting unexpected uncertainty in non-stationary environments, other
systems are likely involved when feedback validity is low - namely, the
locus-coeruleus-norepinephrine system. Finally, a computational model
that combines these systems is described and tested. Taken together, these
results downplay the role of the midbrain reward system when feedback
validity is low, and highlight the importance of the locus-coeruleus-norepinephrine system in detecting reward contingency changes.

A146
WIN, LOSE OR BUST: ERP CHANGES ASSOCIATED WITH FEEDBACK IN A GAMBLING TASK Nikki Honzel1, Jary Larsen1, Felix Baciga-

lupo2, Diane Swick1,2; 1Veterans Affairs Northern California Health Care System,
University of California, Davis — The current study examined the neural
activity associated with evaluating feedback in a realistic gambling task.
Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded while participants played
a modified Blackjack game against a dealer. We wished to see whether the
feedback-related negativity (FRN) and P300 components were sensitive to
the type of loss. Participants drew up to five cards to sum as close to 21
without going over. Participants started with $10.00 and were awarded
$0.25 if they scored higher than the dealer. If the participant lost (scored
lower than dealer) or busted (score > 21), $0.25 was deducted. ERPs were
time-locked to the feedback screen to examine neural responses on “Win”,
“Lose” or “Bust” trials. The FRN to “Lose” was significantly more negative than either “Win” or “Bust”. Interestingly, the ERP response to “Bust”
was driven by an extreme positive wave, with “Bust” feedback producing
a significantly larger P300 compared to either “Win” or “Lose” feedback.
These findings replicate previous results that demonstrate the FRN is more
negative to losses compared to wins. However, in the current task, FRN
was not selective to just good versus bad outcomes. Both “Lose” and “Bust”
feedback resulted in a loss of $0.25, yet the neurophysiological responses
were significantly different. The prominent P300 suggests that “Bust” feedback resulted in a greater violation of reward expectations. The results also
suggest a difference between evaluation of negative feedback contingent on
the participant’s choice to risk taking an additional card, compared to a loss
when competing against an opponent.
2

A147
RISK-SEEKING ATTITUDE MANIFESTED VIA OVERVALUATION OF
REWARDS RATHER THAN BIASED WEIGHTING OF PROBABILITY
IN SENSORIMOTOR TASKS Erik Chang1, Jyh-Jong Hsieh1,2, Shih-Wei Wu3;
1

National Central University, 2National Chiao-Tung University, 3National YangMing University — Our daily decisions are seldom made in vacuum but
heavily rely on explicit and implicit uncertainties. Previous decision-making studies have demonstrated that explicit uncertainty leads to risk-averse
tendency, while implicit sensorimotor uncertainty results in risk-seeking
tendency. A hypothetical account for this discrepancy is that the overconfidence on one’s own motor performance inflates the subjective estimate
of success. Here we compared participants’ decisions for a traditional lottery versus two novel sensorimotor lotteries of which reward probability
was calibrated from individual’s performance on the corresponding sensorimotor task: The keyboard task required the participant to intercept a
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

63

Poster Session A	
moving object by pressing a keyboard button when it passed a central circular region on a computer display, whereas the touch-screen task required
direct reach-to-touch interception at the same region. Participants had to
choose between a risky bet and a sure bet. The risk attitude was assessed
under the framework of cumulative prospective theory (CPT) which separately estimates parameters for probability weighting and outcome valuation. Intriguingly, and somewhat counter-intuitively, participants showed
a significant tendency to overvalue the reward of the touch-screen lottery
but undervalue it in the traditional lottery, whereas the bias of valuation
for the keyboard lottery was in-between but also significantly different
from the other conditions. By contrast, there was no significant difference
in the probability parameter was found among conditions. We suggest that
personal efforts may alter the subjective valuation of outcome rather than
weighting of probability, with a few caveats awaiting future investigations.

A148
RECONCILING NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF VALUE AND
SALIENCE IN THE HUMAN PARIETAL AND ORBITOFRONTAL
CORTEX Thorsten Kahnt1, Soyoung Park1, John-Dylan Haynes2, Philippe

Tobler1; 1University of Zurich, 2Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Berlin — A large body of evidence has implicated the posterior parietal
and orbitofrontal cortex in the processing of motivational value. However,
value perfectly correlates with motivational salience when appetitive and
aversive stimuli are investigated in isolation. Accordingly, uncertainty
has remained about the precise nature of the previously identified signals. In particular, recent evidence suggests that neurons in the posterior
parietal cortex signal salience instead of value. Here we used multivariate (pattern-based) analyses and human fMRI data to reconcile the neural
representations of motivational value and salience. Thirty subjects were
scanned during a Pavlovian task which involved visual cues predicting
appetitive and aversive outcomes, and provided orthogonal levels of value
and salience. We used a searchlight decoding approach in conjunction with
support vector regression models to identify neural signatures of value
and salience. We find that multivoxel ensemble activity in the superior
posterior parietal cortex encodes both value and salience of the predictive
cues. In contrast, activity patterns in the inferior posterior parietal cortex
encode salience only. Thus, by using an unbiased whole-brain approach,
we demonstrate that both value and salience signals are present in the
posterior parietal cortex. Moreover, we identify multivoxel patterns in the
orbitofrontal cortex that correlate with motivational value. Critically, the
positive value of appetitive cues is represented by the same multivoxel pattern as the negative value of aversive cues. Thus, these orbitofrontal activity
patterns constitute a common neural scale for appetite and aversive values.

A149
CORTICOSTRIATAL CIRCUIT DYSFUNCTION DRIVES REINFORCEMENT LEARNING DEFICITS IN INCARCERATED ANTISOCIAL
OFFENDERS Edward Patzelt1, Alexander Millner1, Erik Kastman1, Hayley Dorf-

man1, Arielle Baskin-Sommers2,3, Kent Kiehl4,5, Joseph Newman3, Joshua Buckholtz1,6,7; 1Harvard University, 2Mclean Hospital, 3University of Wisconsin-Madison, 4University of New Mexico, 5Mind Research Network, 6Center for Brain
Science, 7Massachusetts General Hospital — Epidemiological studies suggest
that the majority of crime is committed by a relatively small number of antisocial individuals. The economic burden imposed by antisocial behavior is
profound, with billions spent each year on incarceration. However, antisocial behavior is notoriously difficult to treat, owing largely to our poor
understand of the cognitive and neural mechanisms that enable humans
to learn and follow social norms. Given that successful norm compliance
likely requires adaptive reinforcement learning, some have suggested that
antisocial individuals may show domain-general deficits in reward feedback learning. We tested this hypothesis using an instrumental monetary
reinforcement-learning task in a sample of 49 incarcerated offenders who
were scanned with a mobile 1.5T MR device. In order to more precisely
isolate deficits related to “antisociality” from related constructs, we controlled for individual variability in trait aggression. We found temporally
specific associations between antisocial behavior and corticostriatal circuit
activity during gain learning. In particular, antisocial behavior was linked
to decreased striatal activation at choice and diminished ventromedial prefrontal cortex activity in response to reward feedback. Together, these findings provide evidence for corticostriatal hyporeactivity during value-based

64

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
decision-making in antisocial individuals. Corticostriatal circuit dysfunction may impair the adaptive reward feedback learning required to guide
behavior according to social norms.

THINKING: Reasoning
A150
THE EFFECT OF SEMANTIC AND RELATIONAL SIMILARITY ON
THE N400 IN VERBAL ANALOGICAL REASONING Ryan J. Brisson1,

Matthew J. Kmiecik1, Amanda S. Sweis1, Robert G. Morrison1; 1Loyola University
Chicago — We have previously shown that the N400 event-related potential becomes more negative as the semantic distance increases between the
source and target of verbal analogies. This result, along with the finding
that far analogies increasingly depend on frontopolar cortex (Green et al.,
2010, 2012) suggests that near and far verbal analogies may differentially
depend on semantic and relational neurocognitive processing. In order to
further investigate the role of semantic and relational similarity in verbal
analogies we presented the A, B, C and D terms of verbal analogies sequentially. As in our previous study, we varied the semantic distance between
the AB and CD terms as measured using Latent Semantic Analysis, matching both valid and invalid near and far analogies for distance. In this study
we also counterbalanced stimuli so every word appeared equally in each
analogy slot across participants. Participants did not differ in accuracy or
RT for near and far analogies. Upon presentation of the C-term, the N400
was less negative for the near valid condition compared to all other conditions. In contrast, upon presentation of the final D-term, the N400 was
differentially modulated with respect to both validity and distance with
valid analogies showing less negative N400’s than invalid, but semantic
distance still showing a small but reliable impact on both near and far analogies. Together these results show the combined influence of semantic and
relational similarity on the N400 and suggest the increasing importance of
the processing of explicit relations late during verbal analogical processing.

A151
COMPONENTS OF BELIEF UPDATING AND THEIR NEURAL CORRELATES Nicole Marinsek1, Benjamin Turner1, Michael Miller1; 1University of

California, Santa Barbara — In this study, we aimed to 1) model the component processes of hypothesis evaluation during the receipt of new evidence
and 2) identify brain regions that support these processes. We recorded
subjects’ brain activity with fMRI as they attempted to generate appropriate
category labels for a series of novel word sets that were designed to either
elicit repeated cycles of hypothesis formation and evaluation (“ad hoc”
word sets) or minimize these processes (“automatic” word sets). We used a
Bayesian framework to model the strength of subjects’ category hypotheses
as the words in each set were presented. In order to estimate the parameters of the model, we collected behavioral data on a different set of subjects
and used the data to generate normed estimates of the posterior probability
for the first word in each set, likelihood ratios for subsequent words, and
the degree to which each word violated expectations. We created several
versions of the Bayesian-based model in order to test different potential
psychological strategies. We then ran model-based fMRI analyses of the
original data in order to identify the brain regions associated with belief
updating, hypothesis strength, and hypothesis acceptance, thus simultaneously validating competing models of psychological strategies and localizing their associated networks. The results of this study provide insight into
the psychological and neural processes of hypothesis evaluation and the
validity of Bayes’ theorem as a model of belief updating in humans. This
research was supported by the Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies
under grant W911NF-09-D-0001.

A152
DTI TRACKS CREDULITY TO EXPLICITLY-LABELED FALSE INFORMATION IN PATIENTS WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA Erik Asp1, Kelsey

Warner1, Daniel Tranel1, Nancy Andreasen1; 1University of Iowa — We have
developed the False Tagging Theory (FTT), which proposes that the link
between the association areas of the prefrontal cortex and the temporal-parietal junction (TPJ) are necessary for somatic “false tags” in the psychological concept of doubt. We have shown that damage (via stroke or tumor
resection) to these structures or the primary link between them (i.e., supe-

2014 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session A

rior longitudinal fasciculus) leads to a disrupted false tagging mechanism
and a “doubt deficit” which manifests as increased credulity. The FTT may
address longstanding questions in patients with schizophrenia (SZ), such
as how fixed false beliefs can form. Here, we put the FTT to a crucial test
by giving SZ patients novel beliefs in the laboratory and directly measuring
their ability to falsify (or doubt) those beliefs. Subjects were given stories to
which a series of explicitly-labeled false statements were embedded. The
false statements were designed to sway the dispositional opinion of the
protagonist of the story, if mistakenly believed. The results show that SZ
patients 1) tend to misremember more explicitly-labeled false information
as true than comparisons, and 2) use the misremember false information in
subsequent social judgments of the protagonist. Moreover, structural integrity of white matter measured by DTI in the frontal and parietal lobes negatively correlates with “false as true” errors in SZ patients. These findings
indicate that a core component of executive dysfunction in schizophrenia
may be explained by failures to doubt automatically believed information,
a deficit that is associated with a specific disruption of the frontal-parietal
circuitry.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

65

Poster Session B
ATTENTION: Multisensory
B1
HAND LOCATION AFFECTS VISUAL PROCESSING UNDER DISTRIBUTED BUT NOT FOCUSED ATTENTION Catherine Reed1, William

Bush2, Natasha Parikh3, Niti Nagar1, John Garza4, Sean Vecera2; 1Claremont
McKenna College, 2University of Iowa, 3Harvey Mudd College, 4University of
Nebraska, Lincoln — Hand position can bias attention to locations near the
hands and affect the amplitude of both early (e.g., N1) and later ERP components (e.g., P3). The current study used dense-array electroencephalography/event-related potentials (dEEG/ERP) to measure the impact of hand
position on visual processing during both focused and distributed spatial
attention. To manipulate the distribution of attention we used a modified
version of the paradigm developed by Mangun and Hillyard (1993). Stimuli were presented briefly and rapidly on either side of a fixation; participants distinguished infrequent targets (15%) from standards while EEG
data were collected. We compared conditions in which a hand or a wood
hand-shaped object was placed near a stimulus location. In Experiment 1,
attention was broadly distributed across both stimulus locations to determine whether increased amplitudes of P1 or N1 components could be
attributed to the position of the hand per se or to any visual anchor. In
Experiment 2, a cue directed attention to one location to determine whether
attentional focus overrode the hand’s contributions. When attention was
distributed across two potential stimulus locations, greater N1 amplitudes
were observed in response to stimuli at near-hand compared to near-block
locations, indicating that the hand had a greater impact on processing than
a simple visual anchor. However, when attention was focused on a single
location, focal attention and stimulus location overrode hand or anchor
effects. These results demonstrate that hand position influences early visual
processing, but only when attention is broadly distributed.

B2
DRD4 LONG ALLELE CARRIERS SHOW ENHANCED SELECTIVE
ATTENTION TO HIGH-PRIORITY ITEMS IN THE ENVIRONMENT

Marissa Gorlick1, Darrell Worthy2, Valerie Knopik3, John McGeary4, Christopher
Beevers1, W. Todd Maddox1; 1University of Texas at Austin, 2Texas A&M University, 3Brown University — Individuals with 7 or more repeats (long allele)
in exon III of the DRD4 gene sometimes demonstrate impaired attention,
as seen in ADHD, and at other times demonstrate enhanced attention, as
seen in addictive behavior. Though the clinical effects of DRD4 are the
focus of much work, this gene may not necessarily serve as a “risk” gene
for attentional deficits, but as a plasticity gene where selective attention is
heightened for priority items in the environment. In the current work we
examine the role of DRD4 in two tasks that benefit from selective attention
to high-priority information. In Experiment 1, participants perform a category-learning task where performance is supported by selecting features to
update verbal rules. Here selective attention to the most salient features is
associated with good performance. In Experiment 2, participants perform a
working memory task that relies on selective attention to update and maintain items in memory while also performing a secondary task, the Operation Span Task (OSPAN). Long allele carriers show superior performance
relative to short in the category learning and OSPAN tasks. These results
suggest that DRD4 may serve as a “plasticity” gene where long allele carriers show heightened selective attention to high-priority items in the environment, which can be either beneficial or counterproductive, depending
on the context.

B3
DYNAMIC RECRUITMENT OF SENSORY-BIASED ATTENTION NETWORKS IN TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL SHORT-TERM MEMORY
TASKS Samantha W Michalka1, Lingqiang Kong1, Maya L Rosen1, Kathryn J

Devaney1, Barbara G Shinn-Cunningham1, David C Somers1; 1Boston University — While the sensory modalities of audition and vision both can both
provide amodal spatial and temporal domain information, the quality and

66

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

resolution of this amodal information is not equal across the senses. The
visual system exhibits high spatial but low temporal resolution; conversely,
the auditory system exhibits low spatial but high temporal resolution. We
propose that tasks in one sensory modality may dynamically recruit the
other modality’s attention network when the other modality offers higher
resolution in the relevant domain (e.g., visual-temporal or auditory-spatial tasks). We call this the Domain Recruitment Hypothesis. To test this
hypothesis, we performed 3 sets of fMRI experiments. First, we employed
a sustained attention task with competing auditory and visual stimuli to
define sensory-biased cortical regions in both frontal and posterior areas.
We then used resting-state functional connectivity to confirm regions with
the same sensory-bias belong to visual or auditory attention networks. In
the final experiment, we employed 4 short-term memory change detection tasks: visual-temporal, visual-spatial, auditory-temporal, and auditory-spatial. The auditory-spatial task (vs. the auditory-temporal task) significantly recruited the visual network. Similarly, the visual-temporal task
(vs. the visual-spatial task) significantly recruited the auditory network.
These observations support the Domain Recruitment Hypothesis. Our findings have important implications for understanding the functional organization of human cortex and the neural substrates of cognitive control. This
work was supported by CELEST, a National Science Foundation Science of
Learning Center, (NSF SMA-0835976) and the National Institutes of Health
(NIH R01EY022229, 1F31MH101963-01).

B4
WHAT IS THE SHAPE OF BUBANO? THE SOUND-SHAPE CORRESPONDENCE EFFECT IN 4-MONTH-OLD INFANTS Jovana Pejovic1,

Monika Molnar1, Clara Martin1; 1Basque Center on Cognition, Brain, and Language, Donostia, Spain — Sound-shape correspondence represents a bias in
association between acoustic and visual information, specifically between
the name (auditory) and shape (visual) of an object. A well-known example of this bias is to associate the pseudo-word kiki with angular objects,
and the pseudo-word bouba with rounded objects. This “bouba-kiki effect”
has been observed in adults, toddlers, and recently even in 4-month-old
infants. However, it is unclear whether the effect in infants is specific to the
combination of the phonemes found in “kiki” and “bouba”, or the effect
can be extended to other pseudo-words, specific to the participants’ native
language background. To test this, we asked Spanish-Basque bilinguals to
generate new pseudo-words that they associate with rounded or angular
object. Another group of participants rated the pseudo-words to verify
their association to the objects. From this corpus, we selected two new
Spanish-like pseudo-words for the infant experiment: “raceto” for angular objects, and “ubano” for rounded objects. This pair has been presented
to 4-month-old Spanish monolingual infants using an audio-visual preference looking paradigm, in which infants were exposed to either congruent
trials (raceto paired with angular objects and bubano paired with rounded
objects) and incongruent trials (raceto paired with rounded objects, and
bubano paired with angular objects). Infants’ looking behaviour did not
confirm that infants link pseudo-words to objects, although infants showed
a significant preference of listening to “raceto” over “bubano”. Our results
in relation to previous findings on sound-shape correspondence in infancy
will be discussed.

B5
THE MECHANISM OF WATCH STEAL: THE EFFECT OF POWER GRIP
ON ATTENTION TO TACTILE STIMULUS Masataka Urushihara1, Goh Mat-

suda1,2, Yoshiyuki Tamamiya1,2, Kazuo Hiraki1,2; 1The University of Tokyo, 2JST,
CREST — This study examined the effect of power grip on attention to tactile stimulus. We focused on magician’s techniques to deceive a sense of
touch. For example, in watch steal, a magician tells spectators to close their
hand tightly and make them look away from their wrist when trying to
steal their watch before they realizes it. We conducted two experiments
composed of the following three conditions. In a relax condition, participants relaxed their hand. In a power-grip and soft-grip condition, they held
a hand-gripper tightly and held a tied hand-gripper softly with their right
hand, respectively. In the first experiment, we employed a vibration detec-

2014 Annual Meeting	
tion task (VDT) in which participants pressed a key when they felt a vibration presented on their right wrist. In order to investigate an interaction of
visual misdirection and power grip, we employed a dual task paradigm in
the second experiment; one is a visual mental counting task and the other
is VDT. The correct response ratios of VDT showed no significant effects
of power grip in the first experiment. On the contrary, power grip significantly reduced the correct response ratios of VDT in the second experiment.
These results suggest that power grip decreased participant’s attention to
tactile stimuli only when their attentional focuses were divided into two
different modalities such as senses of touch and vision. This interpretation
is concordant with the magician’s watch steal. Our findings indicate the
importance to consider muscle condition when investigating mechanism
of tactile sense.

B6
WHILE YOU WERE ALMOST SLEEPING: NEURAL CORRELATES
OF EYE CLOSURE DURING SLEEP DEPRIVATION Ju Lynn Ong1,

Danyang Kong1, Tiffany T.Y. Chia1, Christopher L. Asplund2, Michael W.L.
Chee1; 1Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore, 2Yale-NUS College,
Singapore — When deprived of sleep, partial and complete eye closures
increase, reflecting wake-sleep transitions. Interestingly, when fully awake
and in darkness, voluntary eyes-open and eyes-closed conditions elicit
differential brain activation, even in non-visual areas (Marx et al., 2003).
Here, we determined whether involuntary eye closure arising from being
sleep deprived modulates BOLD signal in a similar fashion. 19 healthy
participants who were kept awake for ~24h underwent resting-state scans.
Although instructed to keep their eyes open, multiple epochs with partial
or complete eye closure were observed on account of increased sleepiness.
Continuous eye-tracking video was classified into 4-sec “Eyes Closed” (EC)
or “Eyes Open” (EO) epochs. In accordance with prior work, the contrast
between EC>EO epochs showed increased activations in the somatosensory, visual extrastriate and auditory regions. This pattern of activation has
been attributed to an interoceptive state characterized by imagination and
heightened multisensory activity. A novel finding is that the sleep deprived
state was associated with addditional changes: increased activation of the
more “limbic” nodes of the default-mode network (parahippocampal
gyrus, hippocampus, medial prefrontal and posterior cingulate cortex)
which could denote a transition from wakefulness to sleep during which an
individual becomes free from exteroceptive vigilance. Eye closure was also
associated with pronounced deactivation of the thalamus and brainstem,
that could reflect transition between wakefulness to sleep and/or dramatic
sensory gating. Thus, eye closures, particularly following sleep deprivation
are associated with significant shifts in activation and deactivation of multiple brain regions.

B7
WITHIN- AND CROSS-MODAL ATTENTION MODULATE UNATTENDED VISUAL INFORMATION AS REVEALED BY THE STRENGTH
OF VISUAL MOTION AFTEREFFECTS ACROSS VISUAL CONTRAST

Vivian Ciaramitaro1, Doris Chow1, Geoffrey M Boynton2; 1University of Massachusetts Boston, 2University of Washington — You miss something (e.g.
seeing a “gorilla” at a party) when you attend to information of the same
modality elsewhere (e.g. staring at a beautiful guest) or a different modality
(e.g. listening to a conversation). Here we examined if within- and crossmodal attention affected the processing of unattended visual information.
Participants viewed one drifting gratings in each hemifield and heard a
binaural auditory tone. On any given trial only one stimulus was attended:
the visual stimulus (speed discrimination task) or the auditory stimulus
(frequency discrimination task). At the end of each trial, the strength of a
visual motion aftereffect (MAE) was quantified, using a nulling paradigm,
for the same visual stimulus when it was (a) attended, (b) unattended with
attention directed to the contralateral visual stimulus (within-modal attention), or (c) unattended with attention directed to the auditory stimulus
(cross-modal attention). Relative to attended visual information: MAE
strength was reduced (1) in the within-modal condition, when attention
was directed to the contralateral visual stimulus, confirming spatial attention effects on MAE and (2) in the cross-modal condition when attention
was directed to the auditory stimulus. Furthermore, MAE strength suggests a larger suppression of unattended information for within-modal
versus cross-modal attention. Two additional experiments show MAE

Poster Session B
strength increases gradually with contrast, with saturation effects in accord
with neuronal contrast response functions in earlier visual areas. These
results reveal behavioral consequences correlating to differences in the
BOLD response to unattended visual information in similar attention tasks
(Ciaramitaro, Buracas & Boynton, 2007).

B8
TESTING FOR A SUPRA-MODAL ATTENTIONAL NETWORK MECHANISM Alfredo Spagna1, Jin Fan2; 1Department of Psychology, Sapienza,

Rome, Italy, 2Department of Psychology, Queens College CUNY, United States
— There has been growing knowledge regarding the visual attentional networks which are a set of anatomically distinct and hierarchically organized
components whose interaction supports the alerting, orienting and executive control functions of attention. However, the existence of a supra-modal
mechanism recruiting resources from the same functional networks, independent of stimulus modality, has not been tested. In this study, we examined the correlation between participants’ performance on a visual and an
auditory version of the attention network test. For the auditory version, to
parallel left and right visual field cues, we used sound cues presented to
left and right ears to engage orienting and alerting functions. Further, to
involve executive control, a pair of tones (low/low, high/high, low/high,
or high/low frequency) was presented sequentially with the first one as
the target and the second one as the flanker. Results showed significant
positive correlations between visual and auditory conflict scores for both
reaction time and efficiency, while inter- modality attentional scores for the
alerting and orienting networks were not significantly correlated. Taken
together, these results may suggest that there is a common neural mechanism supporting executive control across both modalities, but a relatively
greater contribution of modality specific processes to the alerting and orienting functions.

B9
NEURAL BASIS OF CROSSMODAL INFLUENCES ON VISUAL
TIME-ORDER PERCEPTION Lavanya Krishnan1, Antigona Martinez1,2, Wen-

feng Feng1, John McDonald3, Steven Hillyard1; 1University of California, San
Diego, 2Nathan Kline Institute, 3Simon Fraser University — It has recently been
reported (McDonald et al. 2013) that task-irrelevant auditory cues reflexively activate visual cortex, eliciting event related brain potentials (ERP)
that are larger contralateral to the cue. This neural modulation may underlie the enhanced processing of visual stimuli that occur in close spatial
proximity to sudden acoustic changes in the environment. We designed
a study to investigate the functional significance of this visual cortex activation in enhancing visual perception, by correlating its amplitude with
perceptual judgments, on a trial-by-trial basis. The task involved a spatially
non-predictive auditory cue followed by red and green squares on either
side of fixation. The squares were either simultaneous, separated by 33 ms,
or 66 ms. Participants were required to report the color of the square that
they perceived as appearing first. When the red and green squares were
presented simultaneously, on 72 % of the trials, participants perceived the
square at the cued location as appearing earlier. We found that the cued
square would need to lag the uncued square by 56 ms in order to be perceived as appearing simultaneously in accordance with the findings of
McDonald et al. (2005). ERP recordings revealed that in response to the
auditory cue there was an enhanced contralateral positivity over visual
cortex. This contralateral positivity was significantly larger when participants perceived the stimulus at the cued location as appearing earlier compared to when they did not.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Development &
aging
B10
COGNITIVE REGULATION OF NEGATIVE AFFECT ACROSS CHILDHOOD, ADOLESCENCE AND YOUNG ADULTHOOD Jennifer Silvers1,2,

Catherine Insel3, Alisa Powers4, Peter Franz1, Chelsea Helion2, Theresa Teslovich
Woo2, Gloria Pedersen2, Danielle Dellarco2, Jochen Weber1, B.J. Casey2, Walter
Mischel1; 1Columbia University, 2Weill Cornell Medical College, 3Harvard University, 4Long Island University — Learning to regulate one’s emotions is a
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

67

Poster Session B	
critical life skill. One particularly effective means for regulating emotion is
cognitive reappraisal, wherein one thinks about a stimulus differently so
as to alter its emotional import. While it is commonly accepted that emotional behavior changes dramatically across development, less is known
about how the ability to use cognitive strategies like reappraisal differs as
a function of age or what neural mechanisms support such changes. The
present study sought to address these questions by testing 84 healthy individuals (49 female; aged 6.83-22.3 years) on a fMRI paradigm examining
neural responses to aversive and neutral stimuli. On a trial-by-trial basis,
participants were instructed to mentally distance themselves from pictured
events (reappraise), immerse themselves in them, or respond naturally to
the stimulus presented. Overall, participants reported less negative affect
when reappraising aversive stimuli than when responding naturally or
immersing (p<.001). Reappraisal-related reductions in negative affect were
paralleled by recruitment of bilateral dorsolateral PFC and posterior parietal cortex (p<.05, FWE corrected). An interaction was observed between
valence, strategy and age at both the behavioral (p=.09) and neural levels
(p<.005, k>15 voxels), such that age predicted less negative affect and less
amygdala activity on reappraisal trials but not other trials. Taken together,
these data suggest that age predicts enhanced reappraisal success as
indexed by both decreases in negative affect and the amygdala response.

B11
VALENCE DIFFERENCES IN NEURAL MARKERS OF IMPLICIT EMOTION REGULATION IN OLDER ADULTS Jill D. Waring1,2, Ruth O’Hara1,2,

Amit Etkin1,2; 1Stanford University School of Medicine, 2VA Palo Alto Healthcare
System — There is a well-established positivity bias in older adults, evidenced in greater attention and better memory for positive than negative
information. It is thought that older adults engage these emotion regulation
strategies automatically, by “default”. To better understand the automatic
nature of this positivity bias, we investigated behavioral and neural markers of implicit emotion regulation in community-dwelling older adults.
Participants completed a face-word emotion conflict task (fear, happy)
during functional magnetic resonance imaging. Facilitated regulation of
emotion conflict was observed on face-word incongruent trials following
another incongruent trial (i.e., emotional conflict adaptation), as reflected in
faster reaction times. There were no differences in reaction times for emotion conflict adaptation for fearful versus happy faces, however, there were
significant differences in the neural markers of emotion conflict adaptation
between face types. There was a set of regions across the prefrontal cortex
extending into the temporal lobes and insula that were recruited for fearful greater than happy face-word emotional conflict adaptation, which was
not seen for happy greater than fearful adaptation. Anterior cingulate connectivity provides further evidence of the differing mechanisms of implicit
emotion regulation between happy and fearful faces. These results suggest
that there are neural markers of facilitated emotion regulation for positive
information compared to negative in older adults, even on an implicit level.
This provides evidence for origins of older adults’ “default” emotion regulation strategies that lead to the positivity bias.

B12
DYNAMICS OF SUSTAINED REWARD ACTIVITY ACROSS DEVELOPMENT Aaron Heller1, Leah Somerville2, Todd Hare3, BJ Casey1; 1Sackler

Institute for Developmental Psychobiology; Weill-Cornell Medical College,
Department of Psychology, Harvard University, 3Department of Economics,
University of Zurich — Emerging research suggests that the repeatedly
engaging reward activity in a sustained manner is relevant for reduced
positive affect in depression. However little is known about how the temporal dynamics of reward related activity emerge during adolescent development. Understanding the emergence of such dynamics may be clinically
important as mood disorders commonly begin during this period. To that
end, sixty-four individuals ranging from the ages of twelve to twenty-four
were scanned in an emotional go-no go paradigm in which participants
made speeded button responses to emotional faces. To investigate the temporal dynamics of reward activity we examined rates of habituation across
the scan to happy faces. Results suggest nonlinear habituation rates across
development - young adults demonstrate significantly more sustained
activity in reward related circuits including the striatum and prefrontal
cortex than children or teens. This effect is best accounted for by a logarithmic function, as opposed to a linear or quadratic function. To test whether
this effect could be due to differences in brain morphology we controlled

2

68

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
for the Jacobian Determinant used in normalization. This did accounted for
differences in parietal but not subcortical regions. These results provide initial evidence that the ability to sustain reward circuitry function in response
to appetitive stimuli changes nonlinearly across development. They also
demonstrate that controlling for individual differences in brain structure
may be important for examining functional brain differences across development.

B13
DIFFERENT NEURAL MECHANISMS IN COORDINATING WITH
OTHER’S BEHAVIORAL RHYTHMS BETWEEN NORMAL AND ASD
SUBJECTS Masahiro Kawasaki1,2, Keiichi Kitajo2, Kenjiro Fukao3, Toshiya

Murai3, Yoko Yamaguchi2, Yasuko Funabiki3; 1University of Tsukuba, 2RIKEN,
Kyoto University — Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is known to be typically characterized by communication difficulties and stereotyped behaviors. However, there remains open question about what kind of communication is difficult and its neural mechanism. Here we compared the
behavioral and electroencephalograph (EEG) rhythms between normal
and ASD subjects for alternating tapping task which required subjects to
synchronize the tapping intervals with another subject, or a virtual person
(PC program) who tapped at a constant or variable interval. Twenty-four
normal subjects and twenty-four ASD subjects participate in the tasks. In
the task, when one and another subjects tapped key, one sound (“do” or
“mi”) was presented, respectively. If a difference between time intervals of
previous other’s tapping and current subject’s tapping was small, one-octave high sound was presented. Subjects were asked to tap with equal time
interval of previous other’s tapping. Each subject completed human condition, constant PC condition (intervals: 600msec) and variable PC condition
(intervals: from 400msec to 800msec). Behavioral results of synchronization (i.e. number of presentation of one-octave high sound) showed significant differences between normal and ASD subjects under the human and
variable PC conditions but not under the constant PC condition. In EEG
results, only the ASD subjects showed the enhancements of frontal theta
amplitudes (6-8Hz) just prior to other’s tapping. The frontal theta activity
is proposed to correlate with cognitive loads. Therefore the ASD subjects
might unnecessarily expect the others’ behaviors in communication and
then might have difficulty in coordinating the sudden changes and fluctuations of other’s rhythms.
3

B14
INFLUENCE OF DAYTIME SLEEP ON EMOTION REACTIVITY IN
PRESCHOOL CHILDREN Dylan Hillsburg1, Amanda Cremone1, Ada Frati-

celli Torres2, Rebecca Spencer1, Jennifer McDermott1; 1University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 2Universidad de Puerto Rico — Attention biases for affective
stimuli are thought to reflect varying degrees of emotion reactivity and can
ultimately confer risk for affective disorders (Fox, Ridgewell & Ashwin,
2009). Although sleep is known to have an important role in emotional reactivity and regulation, there is limited work on the influence of sleep during
the preschool years and far less work on the specific role of children’s daytime sleep. The current study explored the association between preschooler
daytime sleep and emotion reactivity using an affective dot probe paradigm
that assessed attention toward neutral versus affective faces (i.e. angry
or happy). Twenty children between 3-5 years of age (M=3.5-6yrs) completed the dot probe task two times (approximately 1 week apart) under
two conditions: 1) after nap promotion and 2) after nap deprivation. Attention bias scores were calculated separately for each emotion by subtracting
congruent trial reaction times from incongruent trials. Results revealed a
significant bias toward positive emotion (t(20)=2.09,p=.05) and a pattern of
negative emotion avoidance after nap deprivation. This emotional attention difference was present only after nap deprivation (t(20)=1.80,p=.086).
No differences in emotion processing emerged for nap promotion. These
results reveal that when young children experience sleep deprivation, positive emotion cues may be more easily processed compared to negative ones.
As such, nap deprivation may impact emotion regulation in young children
via altered attention mechanisms tied to emotion reactivity. These findings
extend the attention bias literature to young preschoolers and highlight the
major role of sleep in developmental patterns of emotion processing.

2014 Annual Meeting	

B15
INCREASED DIURNAL CORTISOL IS RELATED TO DECREASED
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN THE AMYGDALA AND
THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX AMONG HEALTHY OLDER ADULTS

Georgina Moreno1, Joel Bruss1, Kameko Halfmann1, Matthew Sutterer1, Michelle
Voss1, Natalie Denburg1; 1University of Iowa — Previous research indicates
that stress may have deleterious effects on the brain. It is well established
that the medial temporal lobe, specifically the hippocampus and amygdala,
are especially vulnerable to stress. We are now learning that regions in the
frontal lobe, an area susceptible to the negative effects of normal aging, may
also be vulnerable to stress. To gauge the functional integrity of these brain
regions, we investigated whether there is a relationship between diurnal
cortisol levels in older adults and differences in resting-state functional connectivity. Resting-state fMRI data and diurnal salivary cortisol levels were
collected in healthy older adults (ages 65-90). Following Veer et al. (2012),
we used seed-based connectivity analyses to examine coupling between the
amygdala and regions in the prefrontal cortex (PFC). Additionally, because
a high proportion of regions in the default mode network (DMN) are PFC
regions, we investigated connectivity between the amygdala and DMN
and its subsystems (Andrews-Hanna et al., 2010). We hypothesized that
older adults with higher diurnal cortisol would evidence weaker connectivity between brain regions affected by chronic stress. Consistent with our
hypothesis, we found that increased diurnal cortisol was related to weaker
coupling between the amygdala and various regions of the PFC. Additionally, diurnal cortisol was a predictor of functional connectivity between the
amygdala and DMN (adjusted R-squared=-0.54, p=.02). Our results suggest that elevated diurnal cortisol, which is indicative of increased chronic
stress, is a possible mediator of age-related declines in functional connectivity in networks with a large proportion of PFC regions.

B16
AGING AND SUCCESSFUL EMOTION REGULATION: THE ROLE OF
VALENCE AND STRATEGY Eric Allard1, Elizabeth Kensinger1; 1Department

of Psychology, Boston College — Several studies have furthered our understanding of the neural correlates of emotion regulation processes in adulthood. However, a preponderance of studies in this area have been limited
in terms of the strategies assessed, stimuli employed, and age range of participant samples. In the current study, 34 younger adults and 30 older adults
viewed a series of positive and negative video clips during an event-related
fMRI scan session. Videos were viewed during three scan runs (passive
viewing, selective attention, and reappraisal). When results focused on
neural activation during the onset of the emotional peak for the film clip
(e.g., the most emotionally salient portion of the film), a significant Age
x Valence x Regulation Condition interaction emerged within regions of
the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), left insula, and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). Assessments of age differences revealed that older
adults had greater ACC, insula, and DLPFC activity in response to negative
videos in the passive viewing condition in comparison to younger adults.
Older adults also had higher activity within these regions when viewing
positive videos in the reappraisal condition as compared to younger adults.
Finally, younger adults showed higher activity within these three regions
when viewing negative videos in the selective attention condition as compared to younger adults. These results suggest that both age groups engage
emotional processing and regulatory regions when processing dynamic,
evocative stimuli. However, some age differences in neural activation in
response to regulatory strategies do emerge depending on strategy type
and stimulus valence.

B17
LONGITUDINAL ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN NEGATIVE PARENTING DURING EARLY CHILDHOOD AND HIPPOCAMPAL RESTING-STATE STATE NETWORKS THREE YEARS LATER Sarah Blan-

kenship1, Sandra J.E. Langeslag1, Victoria C. Smith1, Tracy Riggins1, Lea
Dougherty1; 1University of Maryland, College Park — It is well-established that
severe negative experiences during childhood (e.g., deprivation, abuse)
have detrimental effects on cognitive, emotional, and neural development.
In particular, chronic stressors, such as psychopathology or abuse, have
been shown to adversely impact hippocampal development through glucocorticoid pathways (i.e., cortisol, a stress hormone). Although the effects

Poster Session B
of stress on hippocampal development are documented in the maltreatment and clinical literature, to date, little research has investigated the
relation between typical variations in early life stressors (such as exposure
to negative hostile parenting) and hippocampal development during childhood. Understanding how exposure to normative levels of parenting stress
affects neurofunctional development provides insight into the complex
interactions between stress, brain development, and psychopathology. In
the present study we investigated how negative parenting behaviors (i.e.,
high hostility and intrusiveness, low support) assessed during an observational parent-child interaction task when the children were 3-5 years relates
to hippocampal resting-state functional connectivity at 5-8 years. Preliminary results (N=20, 9 female) reveal greater observed negative parenting
behaviors during early childhood predict alterations of hippocampal brain
networks three years later. Specifically, increases in negative parenting
were related to increased connectivity between bilateral hippocampi and
left superior frontal gyrus (p=.01, uncorrected), a region implicated in emotional memory, attention, and executive function. This provides some of
the first evidence that typical variations in parenting are associated with
individual differences in hippocampal functional connectivity, with specific changes in emotional and attentional networks. These results suggest
a potential mechanism through which normative negative experiences may
affect subsequent behavioral outcomes.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
B18
EFFECTS OF SLEEP ON MEMORY FOR EMOTIONAL AND DISTINCTIVE COMPONENTS OF SCENES Carolina Campanella1, Stephan

Hamann1; 1Emory University — Emotion has selective effects on episodic
memory. For example, episodic memory for salient aspects of emotional
scenes is often enhanced whereas memory for background, neutral information is impaired, a phenomenon referred to as the emotional memory
trade-off effect. This selectivity in memory typically increases after a delay
including sleep; suggesting sleep may selectively enhance emotional
memory via consolidation. Previously, we demonstrated that distinctive,
non-emotional stimuli can elicit similar memory trade-offs, suggesting that
similar cognitive processes may underlie trade-offs for salient emotional
and neutral information. However, it is unknown whether sleep also selectively enhances memory for distinctive, non-emotional information. We
investigated the effect of sleep on memory trade-offs for distinctive and
emotional information using a daytime napping paradigm with polysomnography. At encoding, subjects viewed scenes consisting of a central item
(either negative, positive, neutral, or visually distinctive but emotionally
neutral) against neutral scene backgrounds. After a 2.5 hr delay, during
which a sleep group napped and a wake group remained awake, recognition memory was tested for the objects and for the neutral backgrounds.
Sleep increased the memory trade-off effect for both emotional and distinctive objects and their associated backgrounds. These findings suggest
sleep preferentially consolidates distinctive and emotional information and
illustrates the importance of assessing the contribution of distinctiveness
when examining cognitive and neural mechanisms underlying memory
trade-offs.

B19
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS FOR IMPLICIT, EXPLICIT, AND
EMPATHIC PROCESSING OF EMOTIONAL FACIAL EXPRESSIONS

Jason S. Nomi1, Stephanie Bastidas1, Tien T. Tong1, Taylor J. Groth1, Lucy
J. Troup; 1Colorado State University — The current study examined how
implicit, explicit, and empathic responses to emotional facial expressions
influence event-related potentials (ERPs). Non-depressed and non-anxious human participants viewed happy, sad, and neutral emotional facial
expressions while attempting to either identify the gender (implicit), identify the emotional expression (explicit), or empathize with the emotional
expression (empathic). EEG data were recorded from 19 electrodes set
according to the international 10-20 system with analysis focusing on mean
amplitudes for midline and bilateral frontal, central, and parietal electrodes. Midline analysis showed that the vertex positive potential (VPP;
140-200ms) amplitude was largest for sad faces across all electrodes regardCognitive Neuroscience Society

69

Poster Session B	
less of condition. Global analysis showed that P3 (200-400ms) amplitudes in
the expression recognition condition differed by hemisphere and electrode
for sad and happy faces but not for neutral faces. Finally, the global analysis also showed that P3 amplitudes for all three emotional expressions in
the empathize condition differed by hemisphere and electrode. The results
suggest that the early perception of emotional expression across all manipulations is represented by increased midline amplitude of the VPP while
processes such as expression recognition and empathizing with expressions are represented by differences in P3 amplitudes across hemispheres
and electrodes.

B20
EMPATHY TO EMOTIONAL PAIN IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Silvia Corbera12,

Kevin Cook2, Sophy Brocke1, Sabra Dunn1, Michal Assaf1, Bruce Wexler2; 1Olin
Neuropsychiatry Research Center, Institute of Living, Hartford, CT, United
States, 2Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States — Social dysfunction
is one among the most debilitating aspects of schizophrenia (SZ). Empathy is a multidimensional construct crucial for successful social interactions
and is described as having two components: affective (early-automatic) and
cognitive (late-controlled). In a previous study, our group examined these
components using Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) in an empathy for physical pain paradigm. We found that patients with SZ showed a decreased
early-affective response and a deficit modulating the late-cognitive one. In
this present study we expand our work and examine these empathic components in a novel context: observing somebody in emotional pain. In this
conference I will expand preliminary ERP and behavioral data gathered
from 9 SZ and 12 and healthy controls (HC). Participants viewed pictures
depicting individuals either in an emotionally painful or neutral situation during two conditions: Pain Judgment Condition (PC): participants
decided whether the person was in emotional pain; and Gender Judgment
Condition (GC): participants chose the gender of person. SZ had difficulties
identifying painful stimuli (stimuli x group= F(1, 18)=5.22; p=0.035), especially in the PC (stimuli x condition x group: F(1, 18)=6.25; p=0.022). Groups
did not differ in reaction time although both responded slower with painful stimuli in the GC (stimuli x condition: F(1, 18)=16.50; p=0.001). Groups
also differed in a variety of social cognition measures (e.g., quality of life,
emotion recognition and regulation and social competence; p values range
0.042 to <0.001). Overall, SZ exhibited deficits processing painful stimuli. A
comparison of the paradigms will be presented as well as implications for
treatment.

B21
PLACEBO TREATMENT REDUCES SOCIAL REJECTION-RELATED
PAIN VIA ACTIVATION OF THE DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL
CORTEX AND THE PERIAQUEDUCTAL GRAY Leonie Koban1, Ethan

Kross2, Choong-Wan Woo1, Luka Ruzic1, Tor Wager1; 1University of Colorado
Boulder, 2University of Michigan — Placebo analgesia (PA) refers to a reduced
experience of pain caused by belief in a medical treatment. PA has been
mainly studied in somatic pain, but placebo effects may extend to social
“pain” and other forms of distress as well. Placebo effects on somatic pain
are thought to involve prefrontal cortex and subcortical regions that contribute to the opioidergic descending pain modulatory system, particularly
the periaqueductal gray (PAG). The corresponding mechanisms of placebo
effects on social pain are unknown, but several recent studies suggest opioidergic circuits in the PAG and forebrain may be involved. Here, we used
fMRI to investigate whether placebo treatment can reduce the social “pain”
caused by re-experiencing a recent romantic rejection. N=40 participants
were presented with pictures of their ex-partners and of friends (control
condition), during a baseline period, as well as after a randomly assigned
placebo or control intervention. Behavioral ratings showed a significant
reduction in negative affect following the placebo but not the control intervention, indicating that treatment expectations can regulate psychological
pain. Further, a multilevel mediation analysis revealed that placebo effects
on social pain ratings were mediated by increased BOLD activity in the
right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and PAG. These findings imply that
prefrontal-PAG interactions may also be crucial for the relief of affective
and social distress, and suggest a possible mechanistic basis for non-specific treatment effects in a wide range of affective disorders.

70

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

B22
DISTINCT NEURAL REGULATORS OF EMPATHY FOR PHYSICAL
PAIN AND EMOTIONAL SUFFERING Emile Bruneau1, Rebecca Saxe1;
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology — Brain regions in the “shared pain
network”, including anterior middle cingulate cortex (AMCC) and bilateral
insulae, can be activated by experiencing physical pain, observing another
person in physical pain, or even just by reading stories about a character
in physical pain. In previous research, we found that reading stories about
a character experiencing emotional distress, by contrast, recruits a different group of brain regions mostly associated with thinking about others’
minds, including bilateral temporo-parietal junction (TPJ), precuneus (PC)
and medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC). An open question remains whether
either, or both, of these brain networks is associated with empathic concern
- that is, a feeling for another person’s suffering, which motivates helping
and other pro-social behavior. One way to manipulate empathic concern
is through instructions to actively up-regulate empathic feelings, versus to
“remain objective”. In the current study, participants (n=40) read stories
about physically painful and emotionally distressing events, while actively
empathizing or trying to remain objective. Using group analyses and individually defined functional and anatomical localizers, we found that activity in the AMCC was associated with up-regulation of empathy for physical
pain (but not emotional suffering), while activity in bilateral amygdala was
associated with up-regulation of empathy for emotional suffering (but not
physical pain). These data provide further evidence for two distinct neural
mechanisms, responding to others’ physical and emotional pain, respectively, and link these neural mechanisms to empathic concern.

B23
STRESS-MEDIATED ALTERATIONS OF CORTICAL NETWORK
COHERENCE ASSOCIATED WITH SEROTONIN TRANSPORTER
POLYMORPHISMS John P. Hegarty, II1, Bradley J. Ferguson1, Jeffrey D.

Johnson1, Shawn E. Christ1, David Q. Beversdorf1; 1University of Missouri,
Columbia — The brain mediates the physiological response following psychological stress. Cognitive processing is susceptible to stress effects, and
genetic contributions affect individual stress susceptibility, such as the serotonin transporter gene (SERT). Impaired cognitive processing is associated
with disrupted coherence within neuronal networks and differences across
SERT polymorphisms may explain some variability in stress response.
Connectivity analyses of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI)
data has been implicated as a potential measure of network coherence. We
hypothesized that individuals more susceptible to stress, primarily those
possessing the short allele of the SERT gene, would exhibit greater changes
in functional connectivity following exposure to a stressor. This was tested
utilizing fMRI during resting state, TR=2000ms TE=30ms 4 mm3. Subjects
attended counterbalanced sessions and were exposed to the presence/
absence of a psychological stressor; the Montreal Imaging Stress Task
(MIST) is a modified MRI-compatible Trier Social Stress Test. Presentation
of a crosshair, passive fixation, followed presentation of arithmetic problems with/without time constraints and with/without performance feedback. Conservative motion correction techniques were utilized, as motion
is a major limitation in this research. Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI)
based regions of interest for fMRI signals were assessed to estimate global
connectivity patterns. Preliminary results based on repeated measure stress
comparisons between genetic groups indicate altered cortical/subcortical
connectivity depending on SERT polymorphisms; specifically those genetically more susceptible to stress exhibited the greatest changes in connectivity compared to those less susceptible. These findings reveal that stress
may alter cognitive processing based on changes in signal to noise across
neuronal networks.

B24
THE BRAIN ACTIVITY IN PROCESSING FACIAL EMOTION AND
IDENTITY: AN ANALYSIS OF MEG DATA Shih-tseng T. Huang1,2, Daisy
L. Hung3,4, Ovid J.-L. Tzeng4,5, Denise H. Wu3,6, Pei-Shu Tsai7, Ming-Chun Lee1;
Department of Psychology, National Chung-Cheng University, 2Center for Cognitive Sciences, National Chung-Cheng University, 3Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central University, 4Institute of Neuroscience, National YangMing University, 5The Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, 6Laboratories
for Cognitive Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, 7Graduate Institute

1

2014 Annual Meeting	
of Translation and Interpretation, National Changhua University of Education —
Haxby, Hoffman & Gobbini (2000) proposed that the core system contains
two pathways for the visual analysis of faces, one processes the changeable
facial properties(e.g., expression), the other processes the invariant facial
properties (e.g., identity). Each pathway involves separate neurological
components. Bayle et al. (2007) suggested that the brain activation of emotion task was higher than that of identity task on happy faces. The present
study attempted to analyze MEG data in measuring the brain activations in
performing tasks of identity of person and emotional expression. Twenty
adults (10 males and 10 females, age ranged from 19 to 29) with normal
or corrected normal vision and reported no abnormal neurological history
participated. In the study, faces of seven basic emotions were tested in separate blocks and presented in pairs. The participants were asked to judge if
the two faces in each trial were identical as in the same emotion or as from
the same person. The results found the brain activation of person identity
task was significant higher than those of the emotion task, and the activations of the second faces were higher than those of the first faces. The
difference between the tasks showed a higher activation of the subcortical
nuclei especially at the right insula for identity task before 250ms. The findings suggested a non-conscious perception of emotion information which
is implemented at early stage of processing.

B25
EMOTION MODULATES BEHAVIOUR MEDIATED BY THE VENTRAL BUT NOT DORSAL VISUAL STREAM. James Kryklywy1, Derek

Mitchell1; 1University of Western Ontario — How a person processes, prioritizes and represents sensory information can be greatly impacted by the
emotional nature of a stimulus. This is particularly notable in the ventral
visual stream, where emotional content is known to augment stimulus
representation and influence the performance of ventral stream-mediated behaviours. However, the impact of emotion within the dorsal visual
stream remains unclear. This is a particularly compelling question given
evidence that dorsal stream-mediated behaviours are relatively insensitive
to attentional manipulations and optical illusions. The present study aimed
to investigate whether behaviours mediated predominantly by the ventral
versus dorsal stream are differentially susceptible to emotional context.
During the presentation of a task-irrelevant sound (negative, positive or
neutral), participants localized a visual target stimulus embedded within a
background array utilizing either indirect or direct response outputs. These
actions are thought to rely differentially on the ventral and dorsal visual
streams respectively. In line with predictions, we found that during indirect localization, response accuracy was significantly enhanced in the context of negative compared to either neutral or positive sounds. In contrast,
no significant effects of emotion were identified during direct localization.
These results suggest that the ventral visual stream integrates both visual
and emotional information, whereas the dorsal visual stream is uninfluenced by emotional cues. Furthermore, this study highlights the complexity of emotion-cognition interactions, indicating how emotion can have a
differential impact on almost identical overt behaviours that happen to be
governed by distinct neurocognitive systems.

B26
VISUO-OLFACTORY THREAT INTEGRATION AND ANXIETY INFLUENCE AFFECTIVE APPRAISAL OF NOVEL OBJECTS Lucas Novak1, Wen

Li1; 1University of Wisconsin - Madison — Previous work in our lab has shown
that subtle threat cues from different senses can be integrated to facilitate
threat perception. Here, we investigated how this crossmodal integrative
processing of threat could influence the perception of subsequent sensory
input, and how it varies with individual differences in anxiety. Pairing face
and odor stimuli containing minute threat or neutral emotion, we assessed
shifts in affective appraisal of a novel (Greeble) object consequent to olfactory-visual integration of these threat cues. Indeed, pleasantness ratings
were more negative for Greebles following bimodal than unimodal threat
cues (T(27) s>2.6, p s<.05). Notably, ratings following unimodal threat correlated inversely with anxiety (p=.02), suggesting that anxious participants
were more sensitive to the influence of minute threat cues than non-anxious
participants, although both high and low-anxious subjects showed equivalent priming effects of bimodal threat cues. In support of neural integration
of threat, fMRI results showed response augmentation to bimodal versus
unimodal threat presentation in a set of multisensory convergence regions
(amygdala, superior temporal sulcus, orbitofrontal cortex), which was not

Poster Session B
modulated by anxiety. Anxiety was positively associated with stronger
activity to bimodal (vs. unimodal) threat cues in hippocampus and fusiform
cortex. The influence of visuo-olfactory integration on the ensuing Greeble
processing was reflected in strengthened hippocampal response to Greebles following bimodal (vs. unimodal) threat. Finally, anxiety amplified the
effect of threat integration on fusiform response to Greebles. The findings
highlight the influence of multimodal threat on affective appraisal of novel
objects, while also demonstrating the effect of anxiety on this process.

B27
UNDERSTANDING OTHERS’ FEELINGS: THE ROLE OF THE RIGHT
PRIMARY SOMATOSENSORY CORTEX IN ENCODING THE AFFECTIVE VALENCE OF OTHERS’ TOUCH Angela Rossetti1,2, Giuseppe

Vallar1,2, Silvia Convento1, Nadia Bolognini1,2; 1University of Milano Bicocca,
20126 Milano, Italy, 2Neuropsychological Laboratory, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy — Brain imaging studies in humans have shown
the existence of a shared somatosensory representation in the primary
somatosensory cortex (S1), putatively involved in understanding others’
sensations (Keysers et al., 2010); however, the role of S1 in such a high-level
process is still unknown. To ascertain the causal involvement of S1, and
its possible hemispheric lateralization, in encoding the affective valence of
emotional scenes, depicting, or not, a tactile event, we gave to healthy participants a picture-based affective go/no-go task and low-frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS). The dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (DLPFC) was chosen as control site. rTMS over the right, but not
the left, S1 selectively increased the participants’ latencies in the affective
go/no-go task, but only when the affective state was conveyed by touch;
intriguingly, this interfering effect was associated with the empathic ability
to adopt the subjective perspective of others. The left, not the right, DLPFC
is also involved in affective go/no-go performance, but regardless of the
sight of touch, and independently of empathic abilities. This novel evidence
demonstrates the crossmodal role of right S1 in encoding the pleasant and
aversive consequences of others’ sensations evoked by touch.

B28
THE EARLY VISUAL CORTEX SUPPORTS SPECIALIZED THREAT
ENCODING-A MEG STUDY Yuqi You1, Bhuvanesh Awasthi1, Wen Li1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison — Increasing evidence from animal and human
research suggests that the sensory cortex can sustain rapid and refined
threat analysis independently of the amygdala threat processing via subcortical pathways (Weinberger, 2007; Li et al., 2008; Tsuchiya et al., 2009).
To further dissect cortical-versus-subcortical processing of visual threat, we
filtered images to contain only high (> 7 cycles/degree) or low (< 3 cycles/
degree) spatial frequencies (H/LSFs), which preferentially activate the
ventral cortical/parvocellular or subcortical/magnocellular visual pathways, respectively. Participants viewed threat-related images (fearful and
disgusting) in both SFs while magnetoencephalography (MEG; with high
spatial and temporal resolution) data were acquired. An early event-related magnetic field (ERF) component peaking at 116 ms after image onset
(M100) distinguished the two threat subtypes (fear and disgust) in HSF
only, showing enhanced response to fear relative to disgust (t(13) = 2.05, p <
.05). Point-by-point t-tests further indicated that this fear-disgust discrimination persisted well beyond M100 time window to last till 280 ms (p < .05).
Moreover, the divergent M100 response to HSF fear and disgust images
was localized to left striate cortex (-14, -96, -10; z = 3.11, p < .001), supporting specialized encoding of individual threat subtypes in the visual cortex.
By contrast, LSF images failed to generate such within-threat discrimination at this early stage. Taken together, these results highlight the role of the
sensory cortex (and the parvocellular pathway) in rapid and refined threat
encoding and representation.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Person perception
B29
SEX DIFFERENCES IN THE NEUROMAGNETIC RESPONSE TO
BIOLOGICAL MOTION Marina Pavlova1, Alexander Sokolov2, Christel Bidet-

Ildei3; 1Department of Pediatric Neurology and Developmental Medicine,Children’s Hospital, Medical School, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,
2
Center for Pediatric Clinical Studies (CPCS), Children’s Hospital, Medical
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

71

Poster Session B	
School, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 3University of Poitiers,
CMRS, Poitiers, France — Visual sensitivity to human body motion may
be considered as a hallmark of daily-life social cognition and a basis for
nonverbal communication and social competence. Sex differences are often
evident in the comprehension of social signals, but the underlying neurobiological basis for these differences is unclear. Here we assess sex impact
on the magnetoencephalographic cortical response to point-light human
locomotion. At early latencies, females exhibit a greater peak of root-meansquire (RMS) activation than males over the right parietal, left temporal,
and right temporal cortex, a core of the social brain. At later latencies, the
boosts of activation are greater in males over the right frontal and occipital cortices. The findings deliver the first evidence for gender dependent
modes in time-course and topography of the neural circuitry underpinning
visual processing of biological motion. Gender-related dimorphism in the
cortical response may prevent behavioral differences if they are maladaptive. The outcome represents a framework for studying sex differences in
the social brain in neuropsychiatric and neurodevelopmental disorders.

B30
CEREBRO-CEREBELLAR PLASTICITY AND BIOLOGICAL MOTON
PROCESSING Arseny Sokolov1,2, Michael Erb3, Wolfgang Grodd4, Marcos

Tatagiba2, Richard Frackowiak1, Marina Pavlova5; 1Département des Neurosciences Cliniques, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV), Lausanne,
Switzerland, 2Department of Neurosurgery, University of Tübingen Medical
School, Tübingen, Germany, 3Department of Biomedical Magnetic Resonance,
University of Tübingen Medical School, Tübingen, Germany, 4Department of
Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, University Hospital Aachen,
Aachen, Germany, 5Department of Pediatric Neurology and Child Development,
Children’s Hospital, University of Tübingen Medical School, Tübingen, Germany
— A widespread cortical network subserves perception of others’ actions
that is indispensable for social cognition in everyday life. Recent data indicate that lesions to the left lateral cerebellum substantially impair visual
processing of body motion (Sokolov et al. Cereb Cortex 2010), apparently
due to perturbation of reciprocal cerebellar communication with the right
superior temporal sulcus, STS (Sokolov et al. Neuroimage 2012; Cereb
Cortex in press), a cornerstone of the action observation network. However,
evolution of body motion processing after cerebellar lesion and possible
network plasticity remain unclear. Psychophysical assessment in a patient
SL with left cerebellar dysplastic gangliocytoma (WHO grade I) before, and
8 and 24 months after neurosurgery, and in six healthy matched controls
revealed substantial postoperative improvement in visual sensitivity to
point-light biological motion. By 24 months after neurosurgery, sensitivity
to body motion in SL reached the level of controls. Functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) showed activation of left cerebellar lobules III
and IX in SL, implying a medial shift of cerebellar activity as compared
to healthy controls. Psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analysis demonstrated effective connectivity between the left cerebellum and a region in
the right STS, shifted to the anterior part as compared to controls. The study
suggests a remarkable potential for recovery of biological motion processing after cerebellar damage, paralleled by topographical reorganization of
the underlying cerebro-cerebellar circuitry. The findings open a window
for further research on cerebellar plasticity and cognitive processing.

B31
DIFFERENT TIME COURSE OF VISUOCORTICAL SIGNAL CHANGES
TO FEAR-CONDITIONED FACES WITH DIRECT OR AVERTED GAZE:
A SSVEP STUDY WITH SINGLE-TRIAL ANALYSIS Matthias J Wieser1,

Vladimir Miskovic2,3, Sophie Rausch1,2, Andreas Keil2; 1University of Würzburg,
Germany, 2University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 3State University of New York
at Binghamton, Binghamton, NY — Social organisms fundamentally rely on
experience to successfully navigate in a social world by associating social
stimuli with aversive versus safe qualities. Cognitive neuroscience research
has shown that visual cues reliably paired with danger are processed more
efficiently than neutral cues, and that such facilitated sensory processing
extends to low levels of the visual system. The present study aimed at
determining the extent to which visual cortical engagement elicited by a
face stimulus with learned affective value is modulated by relatively subtle
facial features such as gaze direction and emotional expression. To this end,
electro-cortical processing of direct-gaze compared to averted-gaze faces
serving as CS+ cues was investigated in a differential fear conditioning par-

72

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
adigm. Furthermore it was investigated whether gaze shift interacted with
angry facial expressions to confer greater immunity to extinction of learned
associations. Behavioral ratings and visually evoked steady-state potentials
(ssVEP) were recorded in healthy human participants. As expected, directgaze CS+ compared to averted-gaze CS- cues elicited larger ssVEP amplitudes during conditioning, whereas this differentiation was not observed
when averted-gaze faces were paired with the aversive US. Importantly, a
more fine-grained analysis examining trial-by-trial changes in visual cortical activation across the learning phases revealed that this effect was not
necessarily due to a lack of learning per se, but mainly due to a delayed
build-up of cortical amplification for the averted-gaze CS+ cues. This suggests that the temporal dynamics of cortical engagement with aversively
conditioned faces vary as a function of the cue.

B32
PHASE LOCKING DURING PERSPECTIVE TAKING PREDICTS
ENHANCED ENCODING OF COUNTER-STEREOTYPICAL INFORMATION AND PREDICTION ACCURACY FOR OUT-GROUP MEMBERS Kelly A. Jordan1, Adam Magerman1, Chad E. Forbes1; 1University of

Delaware — Whether we’re calculating where to eat or what we should
say during social interactions, we rely on past experiences, knowledge and
situational cues to predict what responses will engender successful navigation through social environments. Despite the fundamental importance of
prediction accuracy, people are inept when predicting other’s behaviors;
particularly, predicting out-group behaviors, which can be biased by inaccurate, stereotypic information. To the extent that accurate knowledge for
out-group members can increase prediction accuracy, facilitating encoding
of counter-stereotypic information may be a means of increasing prediction
accuracy. Past research suggests that perspective taking can be effective in
promoting encoding of counter-stereotypic information. Present research
examined this, investigating whether perspective taking enhanced encoding of counter-stereotypical information for out-group members and subsequent ability to accurately predict out-group behaviors. White participants
self-identified as Democrats or Republicans, viewed photos of political
and ethnic in-group or out-group members. Photos were accompanied by
information containing stereotypic or counter-stereotypic political viewpoints, which participants viewed objectively or from the perspective of the
out-group member. Participants completed memory and prediction tasks,
continuous EEG activity was recorded throughout. Time frequency analysis revealed interactions during the perspective taking condition unique
to viewing Latino Republicans. Theta burst at Posterior Cingulate Cortex
(PCC) predicted PCC-Medial Prefrontal Cortex (MPFC) phase-locking (PL)
and PCC-Temporal-Parietal Junction (TPJ) PL. PCC, MPFC and TPJ power
and PL were associated with greater accuracy for counter-stereotypical predictions only. These results are suggestive of communications occurring
between the PCC, MPFC and TPJ early in the processing stream which is
affecting prediction accuracy.

B33
STIMULATING INFERIOR FRONTAL CORTEX IMPROVES THE
CONTROL OF IMITATION Jeremy Hogeveen1, Sukhvinder Obhi1, Michael

Banissy2, Idalmis Santiesteban3, Clare Press3, Caroline Catmur4, Geoffrey
Bird5,6; 1Wilfrid Laurier University, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, 2Goldsmiths, University of London, United Kingdom, 3Birkbeck College, University of London,
United Kingdom, 4University of Surrey, Guildford, UK., 5Social, Genetic and
Developmental Psychiatry Centre (MRC), Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College
London, UK., 6Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London,
UK. — There is a ubiquitous tendency for humans to unintentionally imitate one another, but we are also quite adept at exerting control over this
“automatic” behavioural tendency. For example, during social interactions
mimicry improves rapport between interaction partners and, correspondingly, people tend to increase imitation in this context. Conversely, in the
imitation inhibition (II) paradigm, participants perform a choice response
task whilst observing an action that is either similar or dissimilar to their
response, and are required to inhibit imitation to perform the task correctly.
These behavioural effects might be implemented, in part, by excitatory and
inhibitory activity in the human mirror system - observed actions activate
a matching motor representation, which either hits threshold and causes us
to imitate (social mimicry), or is actively inhibited before it hits threshold to
prevent imitation (II). To demonstrate involvement of the mirror system in

2014 Annual Meeting	
controlling imitation, we enhanced cortical excitability at the frontal node of
the mirror system - inferior frontal cortex (IFC) - using anodal transcranial
direct current stimulation (atDCS) prior to engaging participants in three
tasks: i) a social interaction, ii) an II task, and iii) a well matched inhibitory
control task. Relative to sham tDCS, atDCS to IFC increased social mimicry
during the interaction, reduced interference during the II task, but did not
affect the inhibitory control task. These results suggest a dynamic involvement of the mirror system in the control of imitation, with IFC involved in
both imitation, and imitation-inhibition, depending on task demands.

B34
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS TO THE CATEGORIZATION OF
GENDER AT THE BASIC AND SUBORDINATE LEVEL William L. D.

Krenzer1, Callan Lujan1, Kristina Pfeifer1, Avi Ben-Zeev1, Mark W. Geisler1;
1
San Francisco State University — Tanaka et al. (1999) showed that when
categorizing an object, such as a beagle (subordinate level), there was an
increase in the N1 amplitude, compared to when the same object was categorized as an animal (basic level). Ito and Urland (2005) showed a difference in the P300 amplitude when individuals viewed faces of different
races. By adapting Tanaka’s, Ito, and Urland’s studies to look at gender, we
were interested to see if amplitude and latency differences occurred in the
N170 and the P300, when participants studied celebrity faces categorized
by gender (basic level), or by name (subordinate level). Participants took
part in a gender (male or female) by categorization level (basic or subordinate) image oddball paradigm task. Within each block, one gender was the
target stimuli (presented 20% of the time) and the other was the distractor
(presented 80% of the time). While participants responded to the stimuli,
Event-Related Potentials (ERP’s) were recorded from electrodes placed
along the midline of the scalp at sites Fz, Cz, and Pz, and at the temporal
lobe sites T5 and T6. Eye artifacts were recorded from electrodes placed
below, and to the side of the left eye. Based on preliminary data, with a
sample size of 19 (11 female), we observed an increase in the P300 amplitude and a delayed P300 latency to female celebrity faces at the subordinate
level versus the basic level. This could indicate that processing women’s
names versus processing their gender requires more effort (see Kok, 1997).

B35
WHY CLARITY OF THE LOOKING-GLASS SELF DEPENDS ON POPULARITY: NEURAL MECHANISMS LINKING SOCIAL NETWORK
POSITION TO ACCURACY OF REFLECTED SELF-APPRAISALS

Noam Zerubavel1, Jochen Weber1, Niall Bolger1, Peter Bearman1, Kevin Ochsner1; 1Columbia University — It is entirely human to contemplate how others
perceive us, but what factors explain individual differences in the accuracy
of these reflected self-appraisals? We hypothesized that popular members
of real-world social networks would more accurately understand how their
peers perceived them, and that this relationship would be mediated by the
efficiency of neural mechanisms underlying reflected self-appraisals. To
test these predictions, we recruited two student organizations, each comprised of 13 well-acquainted group members (N=26). Utilizing a roundrobin design, we obtained participants’ predictions about how each of
their group members would rate them on a series of traits and those group
members’ actual ratings. By correlating predicted and actual trait ratings,
we computed each group member’s reflected self-appraisal accuracy. We
also utilized social network analysis to measure individuals’ popularity.
Confirming our first hypothesis, popularity was positively correlated with
accuracy of reflected self-appraisals. We then used functional magnetic resonance imaging to scan these same participants (N=21) while they made
reflected (other-about-you) and direct (you-about-you) self-appraisals.
The other-about-you > you-about-you contrast identified brain regions
uniquely recruited for reflected self-appraisals: middle temporal gyrus,
precuneus, and temporo-parietal junction. Mediation analyses revealed
that decreased middle temporal gyrus activation during reflected self-appraisals fully mediated the link between popularity and reflected self-appraisal accuracy, suggesting that popular individuals’ enhanced accuracy
results from greater efficiency of neural mechanisms underlying reflected
self-appraisals. More broadly, we provide a theoretical framework and
experimental methodology for integrating functional neuroimaging with
social network analysis to understand individual differences in neurocognitive processes and their interpersonal consequences.

Poster Session B

B36
THE ROLE OF THE VENTRAL ANTERIOR TEMPORAL LOBES IN
PERSON PERCEPTION Jessica Collins1, Ingrid Olson1; 1Temple University

— Studies of nonhuman primates have reported the existence of face sensitive patches in the ventral anterior temporal lobes (vATLs). Using optimized
imaging parameters recent fMRI studies in humans have identified a functionally homologous brain region, however the functional significance of
this region in the greater face processing system remains unknown. Lesion
evidence suggests that this region should be sensitive to certain perceptual
features as well as conceptual knowledge related to person identity. The
goal of this study was to investigate the following questions: (1) Are face
sensitive neurons in the vATL sensitive to conceptual knowledge? And (2)
Does the sensitivity profile of the vATL face patches differ from the occipital face area (OFA) and fusiform face area (FFA)? Participants learned to
associate social conceptual information (names and occupations) with a set
of previously unfamiliar faces over a two-day training regimen. These faces
were then presented to participants during an fMRI session using a continuous carry over design. An independent functional localizer was used
to identify each subject’s OFA, FFA, and vATL face patches. Multivoxel
pattern analyses (MVPA) revealed sensitivity in the vATL face patches to
facial identity, and conceptual knowledge (occupation labels) that differed
from the more posterior face-processing network, suggesting that this brain
area may serve a key role in bridging face-memory and face-perception.

B37
LOOK ME IN THE EYE: AN IN-DEPTH INVESTIGATION OF FIXATION
PATTERNS TO EMOTIONAL FACES IN PATIENTS WITH PREFRONTAL DAMAGE Avinash Vaidya1, Lesley Fellows1; 1Montreal Neurological Insti-

tute, Dept. of Neurology & Neurosurgery, McGill University — Routine social
interaction demands that we recognize the subtle emotional changes in
people around us. Several neuropsychiatric disorders, characterized by
deficits in emotion recognition and social cognition, are associated with
unusual gaze patterns toward faces, suggesting that these patients fail to
direct gaze to emotionally informative facial features. In particular, fixation
of the eyes appears to be critical for the detection of fear, and instruction
to fixate this region can improve performance. Anecdotal reports since the
time of Phineas Gage have suggested that the frontal lobes play a role in
mediating normal social interaction. Damage to orbitofrontal cortex (OFC)
in particular impairs recognition of a wide range of emotions, particularly when expressions are subtle. This work suggests that OFC may play
a role in guiding attention to emotionally diagnostic features. To test this
hypothesis, we asked patients with OFC damage, patients with prefrontal
damage sparing OFC, and healthy age-matched control subjects to judge
emotional expressions while their eye movements were tracked. Subjects
judged expressions when freely examining faces, when asked to look only
at the eyes or mouth, and when viewing faces through a gaze-contingent
spotlight. Preliminary analysis shows that patients with OFC damage, but
not other frontal-damaged patients, are impaired in maintaining fixation to
the eyes. OFC may play a role in maintaining eye contact, in turn facilitating social interaction.

B38
EFFECT OF A SINGLE MINIMAL DOSE OF AN ATYPICAL ANTIPSYCHOTIC (RISPERIDONE) ON THE LATE POSITIVE COMPONENT
EVOKED BY NAMES OF SOCIAL ROLES IN HIGH SCHIZOTYPY
SUBJECTS. Fernanda Pérez Gay Juárez1, Ola Mohamed Ali2, Aisha Walker3,

Ana Luci­a Fernandez Cruz1, Bruno Debruille1,2,4; 1McGill University, Neuroscience Department, 2McGill University, Psychiatry Department, 3McGill University, Psychology Department, 4McGill University, Neurology and Neurosurgery
Department. — Schizotypy is a cluster of personality traits that includes
abnormal social functioning. Healthy individuals with high schizotypal
traits share some predispositions and neurocognitive deficits with schizophrenia patients. This has led researchers to suggest the existence of a continuum between normality and schizophrenia, via schizotypy. The most
widely used medications for schizophrenia are antipsychotics. The aim of
the present study is to investigate their effect on social cognition, given the
social withdrawal seen along the schizotypy continuum. To achieve this
goal, we analyzed the effects of 1 mg of risperidone on Event Related Potentials (ERPs). We did this on healthy subjects rather than on schizophrenia
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

73

Poster Session B	
patients to ensure that effects seen are directly due to the medication, rather
than secondary to symptom alleviation. We recorded the scalp electrical
activity elicited by names of social roles in a group of 50 participants that
scored high in the Raine’s Schizotypal Personality Questionnaire (SPQ).
These recordings were made before and after the neural effects of a pill
containing either 1 mg of risperidone (25 subjects) or placebo (26 subjects).
Participants were asked to decide whether or not they could consider themselves playing each presented social role at any moment in their lives. We
found a before and after pill intake difference in the amplitudes of theLate
Positive Component (LPC). These amplitudes were much larger in the
medication group than in the placebo group. These differences were maximal at pre-frontal electrode sites and could thus provide an insight into the
mechanism of action of antipsychotics.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development
& aging
B39
A PHYSICALLY ACTIVE LIFESTYLE ENHANCES EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING IN ELDERS Kristy A. Nielson1,2, Christina M. Figueroa1, Kathleen
E. Hazlett1; 1Marquette University, 2Medical College of Wisconsin — Physical
activity (PA) is associated with maintenance of brain volume and cognitive
functioning across the lifespan. Executive functioning has been suggested
to particularly benefit from PA. The purpose of this study was to examine
various metrics of executive functioning in healthy elders as a function of
their self-reported PA. Forty-four cognitively intact older adults (age 54 to
92, mean = 68.2) were given the Stanford Brief Activity Scale to assess PA,
the Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE), the Synonym Knowledge Test (SKT),
and three indices of executive functioning: the Trail-making Tests (TMT),
the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST), the Parametric Go/No-go/Stop
test (PGNGS; inhibitory control). Participants were separated into low (8
male, 14 female) and moderate-to-high PA groups (5 male, 17 female). Age,
education, MMSE and SKT did not differ by PA. MANOVA neared significance for the TMT (p = .08), with Trails-A trending and Trails-B significantly faster in High PA participants. MANOVA was significant by PA
for the WCST (p = .047), with Trials to First Category and Failure to Maintain Set significantly better in High PA; Categories Completed, Errors and
Non-perseverative Errors trended toward significance. MANOVA was also
significantly different by PA for the PGNGS (p = .009); all inhibitory indices
were better in High PA, with Stop-signal inhibition reaching significance.
Age, sex, education and Alzheimer’s disease family history covariates did
not change the results. Thus, even in a small sample, greater levels of regular physical activity result in better executive functioning across the older
adult age spectrum.

B40
DISRUPTED FUNCTIONAL ACTIVATION DURING COGNITIVE
DUAL-TASK PERFORMANCE IS ASSOCIATED WITH IMPAIRED
MOBILITY: AN FMRI STUDY Lindsay Nagamatsu1, Chun Liang Hsu1,

Michelle Voss2, Alison Chan1, Todd Handy1, Peter Graf1, B. Lynn Beattie1, Teresa
Liu-Ambrose1; 1University of British Columbia, 2University of Iowa — Older
adults with a history of falls have previously been shown to have impaired
behavioural performance on dual-task paradigms, attributed to reduced
cognitive functions and fewer available resources. However, it is currently
unknown which brain regions may subserve the relationship between
impaired dual-task performance and falls risk in older adults. Therefore,
the primary aim of our study was to examine differences in functional brain
activation between fallers and non-fallers during dual-task performance,
and to ascertain whether such differences correspond to behavioural performance. We conducted a cross-sectional study of men and women aged
70-80 years with a history of multiple falls compared with those without
such a history (n = 28 per group). Participants completed an event-related
cognitive dual-task paradigm during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Comparing functional activation during dual-task performance
relative to single task performance (i.e., only responding to one set of stimuli), we found that visuomotor and attentional networks in the brain exhibited reduced hemodynamic response in fallers compared with non-fallers.
In conjunction, fallers also had poorer dual-task behavioural performance
during the task, with slower reaction times, whereas no significant differ-

74

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
ence between groups was observed during single-task performance. Lastly,
task accuracy during dual-task performance was significantly associated
with activation in sensori-motor brain regions. Our results suggest that falls
risk is associated with altered neurocognitive responses during dual-tasking, which in turn, may contribute to reduced behavioural performance.
Furthermore, our research has the potential to elucidate the role that the
brain may play in the relationship between cognition and mobility.

B41
COGNITIVE CONTROL OVER PREVIOUSLY REWARDED STIMULI
IN ADOLESCENCE IS ASSOCIATED WITH THICKNESS IN THE
MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX Margaret Sheridan1, Alexandra Clarck2,

Katie McLaughlin3; 1Boston Children’s Hospital/Harvard Medical School, 2University of California San Diego, 3University of Washington — Adolescence is
a period of the lifespan when challenges to behavioral regulation can have
critical short and long-term repercussions. During adolescence, burgeoning
independence and exposure to situations with tangible risk present a particular psychological challenge (Gruber, Sagar, Dahlgren, Racine, & Lukas,
2011; Nigg et al., 2004), whereby momentary motivation toward rewards
comes into conflict with long-term goals that require inhibitory control
processes. Thirty-one adolescents age 13-19 years (14 male) participated in
a modified Go/NoGo task and structural MRI scanning. Adolescents first
participated in a monetary incentive delay task where they came to associate one stimulus with a reward and another equally common stimulus with
a neutral outcome. Following this task, adolescents participated in a go/
no go task where they pressed to some stimuli but withheld a button press
to the previously rewarded and the previously neutral stimuli. Adolescents made more false alarms to previously rewarded stimuli. Previously
rewarded NoGo compared to the neutral NoGo (t(30) = 2.43, p=.02). Next
we examined the association between thickness in the right inferior frontal gyrus (rIFG) and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) with the previously
rewarded NoGo performance. Thickness was assessed using FreeSurfer
(FS), an automatic cortical segmentation program. Thickness of the mPFC,
but not rIFG was marginally associated with the effect of reward on NoGo
false alarms (Î²=.25, p=.06). These data suggest that age related changes in
mPFC structure support the development of a novel form of inhibitory control, control over previously rewarding stimuli. This ability may be particularly relevant for adolescent development.

B42
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCE IN THE QUALITY OF LEARNING
ACHIEVED WITH PARIETAL BRAIN STIMULATION Marinella Cappelletti1, Helen Pickat1, Emily Upstill1, Maarten Speekenbrink2, Vincent Walsh1;
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, UK, 2Department pf Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London,
UK — Cognitive interventions aiming at improving cognitive skills have
often proven successful in young and recently also in ageing participants.
However, what exactly underlies the observed improvements is currently
unknown: learning may reflect an enhancement of the conceptual understanding related to a cognitive task or instead of strategies that allow performing the task successfully. Here we combined cognitive training and
brain stimulation (transcranial Random Noise Stimulation, tRNS) in 60
participants in order to measure: (i) whether improvements in a cognitive
task concerned concept-based or strategy-based skills; (ii) whether learning was modulated by the type of cognitive training received (i.e. training only or training+tRNS to critical or control brain regions -parietal or
motor); (ii) any age-related difference in amount or type of learning. We
trained younger and older participants on a well-known (Halberda et al,
2008) and previously used paradigm (Cappelletti et al, 2013) measuring the
ability to judge the more numerous of two sets, an established measure of
a parietal lobe-based number skill, which allows distinguishing between
concept-based and strategy based trials; additional tasks controlled for
spurious effects of training. All participants benefited from training, irrespective of age and of stimulation group, although participants receiving
training+parietal stimulation showed a significantly larger improvement
not differing between younger and ageing participants. There was, however, a significant difference regarding the quality of learning: ageing participants improved more in strategy-based performance, and younger in

1

2014 Annual Meeting	
concept-based performance. These results suggest the importance of identifying the exact cognitive processes underlying learning to plan more effective training programs.

B43
MULTIPLE BRAIN MARKERS CONTRIBUTE TO AGE-RELATED
VARIATION IN COGNITION AMONG COGNITIVELY NORMAL
OLDER ADULTS Trey Hedden1,2, Aaron Schultz1, Anna Rieckmann1, Elizabeth

C. Mormino1, Keith A. Johnson1,2,3, Reisa A. Sperling1,2,3, Randy L. Buckner1,2,4;
1
Massachusetts General Hospital, 2Havard Medical School, 3Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 4Harvard University — Evident changes in brain morphometry,
function, and disease-related biomarkers accompany advanced aging, but
the impact of these neural markers on cognition remains difficult to characterize. Most studies compare small numbers of brain markers or exhibit
relatively small effect sizes (Hedden et al., 2013; Salthouse, 2011). We examined shared and selective contributions of multiple brain markers to age-related variation in cognition. 144 cognitively normal older adults aged 65-90
from the Harvard Aging Brain Study were characterized on MRI markers
of gray matter thickness and volume, white matter lesions (WML), fractional anisotropy (FA), resting-state functional connectivity, task-related
activity, and PET markers of glucose metabolism and amyloid burden. Episodic memory, executive function, and processing speed were separately
assessed. Brain markers were primarily global in nature and were selected
a priori. Hierarchical regression analyses examined the age-related variance in cognition shared with each brain marker individually and unique
to each marker when controlling for all other markers. The largest individual and unique relationships to all cognitive factors involved FA and
WML, with an additional contribution of hippocampal volume to episodic
memory. Approximately 60% of the age-related variance in cognition could
be accounted for by combining all brain markers (but only ~20% of total
variance); most of this age-related variance was shared among two or more
brain markers. These results suggest that the majority of age-related variation in cognition is shared among multiple brain markers, but potential
specificity of associations between brain markers and cognitive domains
motivates additional study of age-related markers of neural health.

B44
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN MULTIPLE CORTICAL NETWORKS
IS ASSOCIATED WITH COGNITION DURING AGING Emily E. Shaw1,

Aaron Schultz1, Reisa A. Sperling1,2,3, Randy L. Buckner1,2,4, Trey Hedden1,2;
1
Massachusetts General Hospital, 2Harvard Medical School, 3Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, 4Harvard University — Resting state functional connectivity MRI has become a widely-used tool for measuring the integrity of largescale cortical networks. We examined multiple cortical networks using
Template-Based Rotation (TBR), a method that applies a priori network
and nuisance component templates defined from an independent dataset
to test datasets of interest. We applied a priori templates to a test dataset of
66 younger (ages 18-34) and 237 older adults (ages 65-90) from the Harvard
Aging Brain Study to examine the relationship between multiple largescale cortical networks and cognition. Cognition was assessed with factor
scores derived from a neuropsychological battery, representing processing speed, executive function, and episodic memory. Resting-state BOLD
data were acquired in two six-minute acquisitions on a 3-Telsa scanner,
screened for data quality metrics including motion, and processed using
the TBR procedure to extract individual-level metrics of network integrity
in multiple cortical networks. Age differences between younger and older
adults were observed in the integrity of multiple cortical networks and in
cognition. Within the older adults, integrity in multiple large-scale cortical networks was positively related to all cognitive domains. Controlling
for the correlations between networks, only a positive relation between the
fronto-parietal control network and executive function was significant, suggesting specificity in this relationship. These results extend prior work (e.g.,
Andrews-Hanna et al., 2007), demonstrating that functional connectivity
metrics in multiple cortical networks are associated with individual variation in cognition, and further suggesting that TBR may be a useful tool for
measuring relationships between reduced network integrity and cognition
during aging.

Poster Session B

B45
AGE DIFFERENCES IN PREFRONTAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO SELECTIVE ENCODING OF VALUABLE TO-BE-REMEMBERED WORDS

Michael S. Cohen1, Jesse Rissman1, Nanthia A. Suthana1, Saskia Giebl1, Alan D.
Castel1, Barbara J. Knowlton1; 1UCLA — Young and older adults both need to
be selective in what they remember, but this ability is particularly important for older adults, given the memory declines typical in healthy aging.
Castel et al. (2002) showed that older adults are able to perform as well as
or better than young adults on measures of selective encoding in a value-directed remembering task. We adapted this paradigm for fMRI, presenting
participants with a series of lists containing words assigned either high or
low point values, and examined how value affects BOLD signal at encoding. Free recall tests after each list, with feedback on point total, encouraged strategic encoding. Previously, we found that encoding of valuable
items in young adults is associated with increased activity in brain regions
associated with semantic processing, including left ventrolateral prefrontal
cortex (PFC). This difference in encoding-related activity as a function of
value also correlated with individual differences in selectivity, suggesting
that selectivity is mediated by increased engagement of semantic strategies
during encoding of high-value words. Presently, we report a similar association between effects of value on left prefrontal BOLD signal and selectivity
in older adults. However, in older adults, activations are shifted towards
dorsal and anterior regions of PFC, consistent with Rajah and D Esposito
(2005). We do not find evidence associating increased bilaterality with successful selective encoding (cf., Cabeza, 2002). Older adults thus appear to
engage somewhat different patterns of activity within left PFC to differentially encode valuable items.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring &
inhibitory control
B46
THE EFFECT OF INDUCING TIME PRESSURE ON RESPONSE INHIBITION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD: AN ERP STUDY Aishah Abdul Rahman1,

Sandra A. Wiebe1, Daniel J. Carroll2, Kimberly Andrews Espy3; 1University of
Alberta, 2University of Sheffield, 3University of Oregon — Response inhibition
predicts important behavioral outcomes in childhood and develops rapidly in early childhood. In this study, we examined the neural correlates of
response inhibition when time pressure was induced in a go/no-go (GNG)
task; previous work has shown that decreasing the response time window
increases response prepotency and thereby inhibitory demands. To investigate how this manipulation affects young children, 5-year-old children (n
= 34) completed a GNG task while we recorded scalp EEG; children were
divided into two groups that differed in the response time window (Fast
group = 750 msec; Slow group = 1500 msec). Dependent measures included
accuracy, response times (RT), and event related potentials (ERP) measures
(N2 and P3 amplitude and latency). Children in the Fast group responded
more quickly, suggesting that the time pressure manipulation was effective. Research in older children and adults typically finds that N2 amplitude and latency differ between go and no-go trials. In contrast, present
findings in early childhood revealed P3 amplitude and latency to be the
distinguishing markers between go/no-go trials, where on no-go trials P3
amplitude was higher in both groups and latency was earlier in the Fast
group. Our results are in line with suggestions that neural markers of inhibition have not yet fully migrated to frontal regions in early childhood,
and suggest that when children must respond quickly under time pressure,
they must engage inhibitory mechanisms more quickly in order to successfully suppress prepotent responses.

B47
AWARENESS OF OBSERVATION AFFECTS RESTING STATE BRAIN
ACTIVITY Jeanne Li1, Benjamin Turner1, Evan Risko2, Alan Kingstone3, Michael

Miller1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara, 2Arizona State University, 3University of British Columbia — It is well established that awareness of observation (AO) can have behavioral (e.g., Zajonc, 1965) and physiological (e.g.,
Risko & Kingstone, 2011) effects on participants. In the present study, we
sought to investigate this effect in fMRI, where the only observation is of
resting state brain activity. Using a series of simple instructional manipuCognitive Neuroscience Society

75

Poster Session B	
lations - first, describing true functional scans as functional or anatomical
with minimal extra detail, and then with more detail and a cover story purporting the use of “mind-reading technology” - we were able to demonstrate widespread changes in both brain activity and connectivity due to
AO. In addition to illustrating how fundamental the observation effect
is, this research has implications for the broader cognitive neuroscience
field. For researchers interested in studying resting state, it highlights the
importance of being precise in instructions: our results show that even mild
instructional variation can alter brain activity. However, our results have a
more far-reaching message: because most participants in fMRI experiments
understand that their brains are being observed, this AO activity may be
tacitly present in most or all fMRI studies. Moreover, capacity for AO is
a previously-unrecognized axis along which experimental conditions or
tasks and participants or populations can vary. Researchers should therefore exercise caution in attributing differences between conditions or participants to other explanatory variables without first accounting for this
potential confound. This research was supported by the Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies under grant W911NF-09-D-0001.

B48
INTEGRATING RECOMMENDATIONS DURING PERCEPTUAL
JUDGMENTS: THE ROLE OF CUE UTILITY. Jihyun Cha1, Sanghoon

Han2, Ian G. Dobbins1; 1Washington University in St. Louis, 2Yonsei University
— External recommendations can alter or reinforce initial judgments. We
examined integration of recommendations as a function of utility. Observers rendered initial perceptual judgments followed by recommendations.
For the informative group, the recommendations generally disagreed with
initial errors (“disagree” prompt) and for the uninformative group, recommendations generally supported initial errors (“agree” prompt). All initially correct responses garnered agreement for both groups. Subjects were
then allowed to revise or confirm initial judgments followed by feedback.
Recommendation utility was reversed for the groups in the final, sixth session. Behaviorally, the informative group corrected initial errors more often
than the uninformative group, with this pattern reversing in the final session. fMRI revealed a group by recommendation (agree versus disagree)
interaction implicating prefrontal and lateral parietal areas including posterior cingulate, angular/middle temporal gyrus, and superior/lateral premotor prefrontal regions. In the majority of regions, this resulted because
the informative group showed similar activation for agreement and disagreement trials whereas the uninformative group showed a differential
response (disagreement > agreement). This pattern fully reversed in the
final session during which the utility of the recommendations unexpectedly
reversed. We suggest these responses carry information about the relative
utility of confirmations and disconfirmations from external agents during
decision making.

B49
AN EVALUATION OF COGNITIVE WORKLOAD DURING VISUAL
STORAGE TASKS USING AN AUDITORY ODDBALL PARADIGM

Kathleen Van Benthem1, Sarah Cebulski1, Jocelyn Keillor2, Chris Herdman1;
1
Carleton University, 2National Research Council — Spectral and event-related
components can serve as workload indices during visual storage tasks. The
current study identified components related to workload and classified
them according to our unique workload conditions. The current study used
128-channel dense array electroencephalography and independent component analysis to systematically identify the components, or neurological
signatures, associated with low and high workload situations. Participants
were 20 English speaking, right-handed students with normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity who received course credit for participating.
We manipulated cognitive workload during a delayed match-to-sample
task while simultaneously presenting an auditory oddball paradigm. As
expected, behavioral data demonstrated significant effects of workload,
with reduced accuracy and increased reaction time for visual storage tasks
in the high workload condition (p< .05). The auditory oddball paradigm
produced mismatch negativity effects with preliminary analyses revealing
an increased negativity for deviant tones across the entire time window
in frontal and occipital regions (p<0.01). Preliminary wavelet analyses
revealed both alpha and theta band response to tone and workload in frontal and parietal regions. Specifically, in frontal regions theta power reductions were less pronounced during deviant tone processing as compared to
standard tone processing in the low workload condition. Our findings have

76

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
applications for brain-computer interfaces and can extend to occupations
where high cognitive workload is known to impact worker safety. Ongoing
work will explore machine learning as a methodology for accurately classifying workload condition in real-time.

B50
HIGHLY FLUENT BALANCED BILINGUALISM DOES NOT ENHANCE
EXECUTIVE PROCESSING Oliver Sawi1,2, Jack Darrow1, Hunter Johnson1,

Kenneth Paap1; 1San Francisco State University, 2University of Connecticut —
Paap and Greenberg (2013) concluded that there is no coherent evidence
for bilingual advantages in executive processing compared to monolinguals. More optimistic researchers believe that the advantages may be constrained to certain types of bilinguals. Following the tradition of Green’s
influential inhibitory control model, bilingual researchers have frequently
focused on the need to manage the competition between the two languages.
One perspective on the role of balance between L1 and L2 is that the level
of competition is greatest when one language is dominant and must be suppressed during the comprehension and production of the less dominant L2.
From an opposing perspective the greatest competition occurs for highly
fluent and balanced bilinguals because the non-target language is always
automatically activated and generates strong competition. The present
study used a composite database of 168 bilinguals and 216 monolinguals
who participated in two or more of the following tasks: Simon, flanker, color-shape switching, and antisaccade. Regression analyses do not support
either possibility. A second strategy for testing the competition hypothesis
is to see if executive processing is enhanced by having three competing
languages (trilinguals) compared to only one (monolinguals) or two (bilinguals). There was no consistent evidence supporting the hypotheses that
either bilingualism or trilingualism enhances inhibitory control, monitoring, or switching compared to a monolingual control group.

B51
METHADONE MAINTENANCE TREATMENT OF HEROIN ADDICTS
RESPONSE INHIBITION FUNCTION IMPAIRMENT: EVIDENCE
FROM ERPS Ling Yang1, Qiongying Xu1, Shifeng Li2, Xin Zhao1, Li Ma1, Youfen

Zheng1, Juanjuan Zhang1, Yi Li1, Yueyue Cai1; 1School of Psychology, Northwest
Normal University, Lanzhou, China., 2State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China. — Abstract:
Response inhibition has been a core issue in addictive behavior. There are
many previous studies that have found that the ability of response inhibition of drug dependences have been damaged, however, the ability of
response inhibition of methadone maintenance treatment of heroin addicts
whether abnormal is not clear. In order to investigate the response inhibition function of heroin addicts in methadone maintenance treatment, this
study record the EEG of GO/NO GO task of 14 heroin addicts with methadone maintenance treatment and 18 normal people. The behavior results
have revealed that the reactions of the GO stimuli of the methadone maintenance treatment of heroin addicts were greater than normal people. At
the same time, the EEG results have found that compared with the normal
people, the methadone maintenance treatment of heroin addicts elicited
smaller N2 amplitude than the normal people. In addition, the methadone
maintenance treatment of heroin addicts was associated with the longer P3
latency. Our result demonstrated that there is damage of the response inhibition of the methadone maintenance treatment of heroin addicts.

B52
PARAMETRIC MANIPULATIONS IN SIMON AND GO/NOGO
TASKS: AN FMRI STUDY OF RESPONSE INHIBITION Sobanawartiny

Wijeakumar1, Eliot Hazeltine1, Aaron Buss1, Vincent Magnotta1, John Spencer1;
University of Iowa — Few studies have explored the shared and unique
neural mechanisms underlying types of response inhibition. Here, we used
functional magnetic resonance imaging to investigate these mechanisms
in a Simon and Go/NoGo (GnG) task. There were two manipulations: a
working memory load manipulation implemented by varying the number
of stimuli (2, 4, or 6; half the stimuli were Go/Compatible trials) and a proportion manipulation implemented by varying the proportion of Go/Compatible trials with either 25% or 75%. There was an increase in reaction time
(RT) as the load increased and a reduction in RTs as the proportion of Go/
Compatible trials increased. Both tasks showed enhanced activation in the
cerebellum, putamen, and thalamus on Go/Compatible trials, as well as
1

2014 Annual Meeting	
robust motor-preparatory activations in regions like the pre and postcentral
gyri. Medial frontal activation was observed when Go trials were more frequent. Across No-Go trials, we found activation of the middle frontal gyrus
for the proportion (25% - 75% No-Go trials) and load (loads 6 - 2) contrasts,
demonstrating greater need for active inhibitory control on No-Go and
incompatible trials. The Simon task yielded less robust neural activation
overall relative to the GnG task. However, we did find unique activation
of the superior parietal lobule and precuneus when comparing load 6 to 2
on incompatible trials when there would be a greater need to ignore spatial information. This is consistent with previous work that has implicated
these areas in spatial selective attention and inhibitory control.

B53
DIFFUSION TENSOR IMAGING REVEALS STRUCTURAL DIFFERENCES RELATED TO ANTISACCADE PERFORMANCE IN PEOPLE
WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA David J Schaeffer1, Amanda L Rodrigue1, Jordan

E Pierce1, Brett A Clementz1, Jennifer E McDowell1; 1University of Georgia
— Schizophrenia is characterized by problems with cognitive control, as
demonstrated with antisaccade tasks. When paired with neuroimaging,
antisaccade tasks are useful for studying inhibitory failures mediated by
prefrontal cortex (PFC) circuitry. Antisaccades require suppression of
a reflexive glance toward a suddenly appearing cue and generation of a
saccade to the mirror image location of that cue. An initial glance toward
the cue constitutes an error. People with schizophrenia typically make
more errors than healthy people, although antisaccade error rates are also
variable across healthy groups, with some participants showing similar
performance to people with schizophrenia. Whether the neural circuitry
differs between people with schizophrenia and otherwise healthy individuals with low levels of cognitive control remains to be elucidated. Recent
evidence suggests that deficits of cognitive control may be apparent at the
level of white matter connections. Diffusion tensor imaging was used to
evaluate white matter integrity (as indexed by fractional anisotropy (FA))
in 13 participants with schizophrenia and 13 healthy participants selected
for low levels of cognitive control (determined by span task performance).
Tract-based spatial statistics showed that the groups were generally similar across whole brain FA with the exception of greater FA in the healthy
group in an extensive prefrontal cluster. Across both groups, prefrontal FA
correlated with the percentage of correct antisaccades such that increased
FA was associated with better performance. These results suggest that
PFC white matter mediated deficits in cognitive control are more robust in
people with schizophrenia when compared to their low cognitive control
counterparts.

B54
ERROR-RELATED ACTIVITY DURING ANTISACCADES IS LINKED
TO INCREASED COUPLING OF MIDDLE TEMPORAL GYRUS AND
POSTERIOR CINGULATE Amanda Rodrigue1, David Schaeffer1, Jordan

Pierce1, Brett Clementz1, Jennifer McDowell1; 1University of Georgia — Cognitive control supports goal related behavior in the presence of distracting stimuli, although lapses do occur resulting in errors. The goal of this
study was to identify regions that differentiate between correct and error
responses and quantify their level of activity to further explore a potential
mechanism behind error commission. A well-documented model of cognitive control that includes frequent errors (even in healthy people) is the
antisaccade task. This task requires inhibition of a prepotent response to
look towards a peripheral cue and a volitional saccade to the mirror location. Errors are defined as an initial glance toward the peripheral cue and
are indicative of a failure to inhibit distracting stimuli to make task related
responses. Participants completed an fMRI imaging session in which they
performed the antisaccade task; subjects who made a sufficient number
of correct and error responses were selected for further analysis. Consequently, voxel-wise analysis differentiated activity during correct and error
antisaccades and relationships among distinguishing areas were evaluated
by correlating BOLD signal activity within and across trial types. There was
a significant change in relationship (increase in correlation) in the BOLD
signal between two clusters (middle temporal gyrus and posterior cingulate) during error trials compared to correct trials. Closer coupling between
these two regions may not only be indicative of error commission, but also
a possible mechanism by which errors can occur.

Poster Session B

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory
B55
AN INVESTIGATION OF EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY IN TRAUMATIC
BRAIN INJURY DURING A NOVEL WORKING MEMORY TASK.

Glenn Wylie1,2,3, Ekaterina Dobryakova1,2, Adam Staffaroni1, John DeLuca1,2,
Nancy Chiaravalloti1,2; 1Kessler Foundation, 2Rutgers University, 3Department
of Veteran’s Affairs — Working memory (WM), one’s ability to maintain
and manipulate information on-line for a short period of time, has been
studied with various paradigms. However, all of them engage several WM
subprocesses such as capacity and manipulation. While a distributed network of brain regions are involved during these subprocesses, no single
paradigm has been able to isolate the network responsible specifically for
capacity and manipulation. A WM task that allows separation of these
subprocesses is required. Previously, we identified areas involved solely
in capacity and manipulation of information in healthy individuals with
a novel WM task - CapMan. The objective of the current investigation was
to identify differences in information flow during high capacity demands
and high manipulation demands between healthy participants (n=15) and
individuals with traumatic brain injury (n=15) who have cognitive deficits
as a result of diffuse axonal damage. We examined effective connectivity
using Independent Multiple-sample Greedy Equivalence Search method
(Ramsey et al., 2010). Effective connectivity allows inference of causal relationships between brain regions engaged in a specific cognitive process.
Raw time series were extracted from the regions previously identified
to be engaged during high capacity and high manipulation demands of
the CapMan task. While sharing some connections, the TBI participants’
exhibited a greater number of connections between the regions engaged in
capacity and manipulation processes. More connections in the TBIs might
suggest that the information flow during high capacity and high manipulation demands is not as efficient as in healthy individuals.

B56
WORKING MEMORY CONTRIBUTIONS TO REINFORCEMENT
LEARNING IMPAIRMENTS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA. Anne Collins1, James

Gold2, James Waltz2, Michael Frank1; 1Brown University, Providence, 2University
of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore — Previous research has shown
that patients with schizophrenia show impairment on reward- and punishment-driven learning tasks. However, the observed learning behavior
originates from the interaction of multiple neural processes, such as incremental basal-ganglia and dopamine-dependent reinforcement learning
(RL) systems, but also prefrontal-cortical-dependent working memory
(WM). Thus, the degrees to which specific systems contribute to learning impairments in schizophrenia are unclear. We recently developed a
task and computational model allowing us to separately assess the roles
of (slow, cumulative learning) RL mechanisms vs. (fast, but capacity limited) WM mechanisms, in healthy adults. Here, we used this task with 48
patients and 37 healthy controls, in order to assess the specific sources of
learning impairments. In 15 separate blocks, subjects learned to pick 1 of
3 actions for stimuli. The number of stimuli to learn in each block varied
from 2 to 6, allowing us to separate influences of capacity limited WM from
RL system. As expected, both patients and controls were able to learn in all
blocks, but showed effects of set size and delay between identical stimulus
repetition, confirming the presence of working memory effects. Patients
performed significantly worse than controls. Fit of our working-memory
reinforcement-learning model accounted better for the data than all other
models. Model fits showed a significant difference between patients and
controls for working-memory parameters (capacity and reliability), but
not for reinforcement learning parameters (learning rate, softmax temperature). These results indicate that dysfunctional prefrontal working memory
mechanisms make an inordinate contribution to learning impairment in
schizophrenia.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

77

Poster Session B	

B57
HOW ARE ATTENDED AND UNATTENDED ITEMS IN SHORT-TERM
MEMORY REPRESENTED? AN FMRI/EEG/TMS STUDY Nathan

S Rose1, Joshua J LaRocque1, Adam C Riggall1, Olivia Gosseries1, Bradley R
Postle1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison — Multivariate pattern analysis
(MVPA) has failed to find evidence for an active neural trace of stimuli that
are in short-term memory (STM) but outside focal attention. We examined
the physiological bases of representing information in different attentional
states with a two-step experimental procedure. In an initial fMRI session,
we scanned participants performing single-item delayed-recognition for
words, faces, or the direction of moving dots, and applied MVPA to identify
category-selective regions for subsequent targeting with transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). In the subsequent TMS-EEG session, participants
performed a two-item delayed recognition task in which they were cued
to maintain one of the items in focal attention while still holding the other
item in STM. By targeting a category-selective region with a single-pulse of
TMS during the delay, we could probe the physiological state of the neural
representation of information when it was in one of three states: in focal
attention; in STM but not in focal attention; or not in STM. Preliminary data
showed that the TMS-evoked response in channels over category-selective
regions was larger when the item from the corresponding category was
in focal attention than when it was unattended but in STM. Additionally,
TMS differentially perturbed cross-channel coherence in the gamma band
between the critical channel and its contralateral homolog as a function of
an item’s attended state. These results suggest a difference in local cortical
excitability and connectivity for items in versus out of the focus of attention
during their short-term retention.

B58
EFFECT OF THETA BURST STIMULATION ON VISUAL REPRESENTATION DURING A SHORT-TERM MEMORY TASK Olivia Gosseries1,

Joshua, J. LaRocque1, Adam, C. Riggall1, Michael, J. Starrett1, Bradley, R.
Postle1; 1University of Wisconsin — With fMRI of short-term memory (STM)
for the direction of motion, elevated delay period activity is observed in
frontal and parietal cortex, including the intraparietal sulcus (IPS). Multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA), however, fails to find evidence for stimulus representation in these regions. Stimulus identity is decodable from
posterior visual regions, from V1 to MT+, despite the fact that they do not
exhibit elevated delay-period activity. When memory load is increased,
signal intensity in frontal and parietal regions increases monotonically, and
MVPA decoding performance from posterior cortex declines monotonically, as do behavioral estimates of mnemonic precision. To further explore
the functions of IPS and extrastriate cortex (EC), we transiently induced
hypometabolism in these regions with transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) using a theta burst stimulation (TBS) protocol. Immediately thereafter, we scanned subjects while they performed the STM-for-motion task.
Preliminary data confirmed that STM precision declined from load-1 to
load-3, and revealed that TBS exacerbated this effect: TBS of IPS produced
a modest decline in precision, and TBS of EC produced a markedly larger
decline. General linear model analysis showed that, after TBS of IPS or EC,
decreased delay-period activity was observed in that region compared to
when it was not targeted by TBS. Thus, these data suggest a causal role for
EC in the precision stimulus representation during visual STM.

B59
IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY BUT OUTSIDE OF THE FOCUS OF
ATTENTION: A ROLE FOR LONG-TERM MEMORY? Michael J. Star-

rett1, Joshua J. LaRocque1, Nathan S. Rose1, Bradley R. Postle1; 1University
of Wisconsin-Madison — Many behavioral and neuroimaging studies have
provided evidence for distinct states of short-term memory (STM) for information in vs. out of the focus of attention (FOA), as controlled, e.g., with
retrocues instructing subjects which of two memory items is relevant for
an upcoming probe. Intriguingly, multivariate pattern analyses (MVPA) of
fMRI and EEG data from such studies have found no evidence for an active
neural representation of the uncued memory item (Lewis-Peacock et al.,
2012; LaRocque et al., 2013a; b). These results suggest that items retained
in STM, but outside the FOA, might be encoded by a passive storage
mechanism, such as that used by long-term memory (LTM). To evaluate
whether LTM, specifically, may be recruited during tests of STM, subjects

78

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
first performed a two-step, delayed-recognition task with retrocues (similar to LaRocque et al. (2013)), using pictures of common objects as stimuli.
To control for any potential rehearsal benefit of the memory probes, we
also included catch trials that ended after the first delay-period without any
memory probe. To assess if uncued items were encoded via LTM mechanisms, a 2-alternative forced choice LTM recognition task was administered
1 week later. As expected, preliminary behavioral data (N=10) showed significantly greater LTM accuracy for items cued and probed twice over items
never cued or probed (p<.05). However, LTM did not differ for cued and
uncued items on catch trials (p=.48). The absence of any memory enhancement for uncued items suggests that STM items retained outside the FOA
are not stored in LTM.

B60
THE PRECISION OF SHORT-TERM MEMORY ITEMS RETAINED
INSIDE AND OUTSIDE THE FOCUS OF ATTENTION Adam Eichen-

baum1, Joshua J. LaRocque1, Stephen M. Emrich2, Bradley R. Postle1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2Brock University — Several models of shortterm memory (STM) posit distinct states corresponding to items retained
in and out of the focus of attention; this distinction has been supported by
behavioral and neural evidence (Oberauer, 2002; Lewis-Peacock et al., 2012;
LaRocque et al., 2013). However, it is unclear how the retention of memory
items outside the focus of attention might affect the fidelity of the memory.
We sought to test the hypothesis that retaining memory items outside the
focus of attention causes a loss of precision for those items. Participants
performed a free recall memory task in which they were cued to direct their
attention towards one of two motion directions held in STM. Of particular interest were trials in which participants held one item in the focus of
attention for the entire trial before recalling it (an “attended memory item”,
or AMI) and trials in which an item that was initially uncued was subsequently cued and recalled (an “unattended memory item,” or UMI). We fit
participants’ responses to a model that assumes a mixture of response types:
target responses, non-target responses, and guesses (Bays et al., 2009). This
model provided estimates of the precision of AMIs and UMIs. Recall of
UMIs was significantly less precise than AMIs. These results support STM
models that distinguish between attended and unattended memory items,
and suggest that retaining information outside the focus of attention incurs
a cost in precision upon retrieval.

B61
FRONTOPARIETAL TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION MODULATES WORKING MEMORY TRAINING BENEFITS
AND EVENT-RELATED SCALP TOPOGRAPHY Dwight Peterson1, Kevin

Jones1, Gabriella Dimotsantos1, Marian Berryhill1; 1University of Nevada, Reno
— Working memory (WM) training aims to improve WM function. Recent
findings show that pairing WM training with noninvasive transcranial
direct current stimulation (tDCS) to frontoparietal sites provides significantly larger and longer lasting improvements than WM training alone.
However, the mechanism of these improvements remains unclear. One
possibility is that local activity is strengthened by anodal (+) tDCS. Alternatively, network-level activity may underlie improvements. We tested these
possibilities by combining high-density EEG (HD-EEG) with tDCS and
WM training in healthy young adults. Training took place over a 1-week
period. HD-EEG recordings were recorded during the first and last sessions
while participants performed a WM task. On days 1-4 participants received
right frontoparietal tDCS (alternating F4/P4, or sham; 15 minutes 1.5 mA)
paired with WM training. As expected, over the course of the weeklong
experiment all participants showed improvement in the WM task, but the
tDCS-linked WM training paradigm produced significantly greater behavioral improvements. Importantly, we observed dynamic neural changes
evidenced in both event-related brain components and dense-array EEG
topography. Specifically, the amplitudes of early event-related components (e.g., N1/P1) at the stimulated sites (P4, F4) were enhanced following
training selectively for the participants who received anodal tDCS; those
receiving sham tDCS showed no local ERP changes. Additionally, distributed changes in dense-array EEG scalp topography from pre-training to
post-training were evident across the right hemisphere. These findings
suggest that local and global cortical changes underlie tDCS-linked WM
benefits.

2014 Annual Meeting	

B62
THE TIME-COURSE OF STRESS AND ITS EFFECTS ON RULEBASED CATEGORY LEARNING Steve Hutchinson1, Lauren Hawthorne1,

Lauren Szymula1, Shannon K. McCoy1, Shawn W. Ell1,2; 1University of Maine,
2
Maine Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences & Engineering — Stressful
situations trigger a cascade of physiological processes. Recent research suggests that the time varying nature of these processes has important implications for cognitive function, particularly processes dependent upon prefrontal cortical function. In the present study, we investigate this question
in the context of rule-based categorization - a task that his highly dependent
upon cognitive control processes mediated by prefrontal cortex. After completion of a social-evaluative stressor (i.e., a modified version of the Trier
Social Stress Test), participants completed a rule-based categorization task
at varying time delays relative to cessation of the stressor (no delay, short
delay, long delay). Preliminary data indicate that participants were stressed
in all three conditions (cardiovascularly) and that participants in the no
delay and short delay conditions had worse performance on the rule-based
task than participants in the long delay condition. These data are consistent
with the animal literature in suggesting that cognitive control tasks performed relatively soon after commencement of a stressful event, are susceptible to stress-related impairment. The implications for understanding
the stress-cognition relationship will be discussed.

B63
SHORT-TERM MEMORY REQUIRES STABLE MODULATION OF
EEG ALPHA OSCILLATIONS Abigail Noyce1, Lisa Payne1, Robert Sekuler1;

1
Brandeis University — Alpha-band (8-14 Hz) oscillations during short-term
memory retention are hypothesized to act as a sensory gating mechanism,
protecting the contents of memory. The magnitude of these oscillations is
observed to increase with memory set size. To understand the roles that
subjects’ effort and cognitive control play in this response to increasing
task difficulty, we offered a bonus monetary payment on one block of a
short-term recognition memory experiment while recording electroencephalogram (EEG). On each trial, subjects viewed six briefly-presented consonants, and, after a three-second retention interval, reported whether a
probe letter was old or new. We measured the magnitude and instability
of alpha-band oscillatory activity over parietal electrodes during a time
window from one second post-stimulus to one second pre-probe. Magnitude and instability were operationalized as the mean power and variance
of alpha-band activity in that window on each trial. Unstable retention-period alpha activity was negatively correlated with old/new discrimination
scores in both the baseline and the bonus conditions. When offered a bonus,
65% of subjects improved their memory performance from a baseline block
to the bonus experimental block. A composite score derived from both
magnitude and variance of alpha power predicted the degree of bonus-induced improvement or impairment. Subject effort, as well as memory set
size, can modulate alpha power during retention, and the stability of alphaband activity is an important predictor of short-term memory performance.

B64
WORKING MEMORY ON VISUOMOTOR ADAPTATION AMONG
ADULTS WITH MOTOR DIFFICULTIES Chi-Mei Lee1, Jin Bo1; 1Eastern

Michigan University, Michigan, United States — Cognitive functions, such as
spatial working memory (SWM), play important roles in visuomotor adaptation. Previous studies reveal that motor deficits in Developmental Coordination Disorder (DCD) are related to poor spatial working memory (SWM).
The current study aimed to study the relationships between cognitive
functioning and visuomotor adaptability in individuals with and without
motor difficulties. Twenty-seven adults (aged from 18 to 34) were recruited
with self-reported as having motor coordination problems. The Wechsler
Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS-IV) working memory index, the Wechsler
Memory Scale (WMS-III) letter-number sequencing, and WMS-III spatial
span were administrated to assess general working memory (WM), verbal
WM, and spatial WM, respectively. All participants completed a center-out
rotation task with the visual feedback of the hand movement rotated 30°
counter-clockwise. The adaptability was measured by the after-effect on
directional error (DE), which is the maximum directional deviation of the
actual movement direction from the ideal movement direction. Results
revealed that participants with lower motor ability showed less adaptability than those with normal motor ability. Individuals with better SWM dis-

Poster Session B
played bigger after-effect on DE, suggesting better visuomotor adaptability. Interestingly, the verbal WM, general WM, and IQ were not correlated
with the adaptability measure. It seems like SWM can serve as a protective factor to enhance motor learning in the visuomotor adaptation, even
though poor motor ability compromised individuals’ adaptability. Further
exploration of the contributions of other cognitive processes on visuomotor adaptation and the influence of SWM on motor learning processes are
needed to increase understanding of the complex relationships.

LANGUAGE: Other
B65
A CLINICAL MODEL OF LANGUAGE FOR PRESURGICAL LANGUAGE LOCALIZATION USING FMRI Christopher Benjamin1,2, Kayleigh

Hale1,3, Patricia Walshaw1, Monika Polczynska1, Susan Bookheimer1; 1Semel
Institute, UCLA, 2Computational Radiology Laboratory, Harvard Medical School,
3
Graduate School of Education and Psychology, Pepperdine University — Functional MRI (fMRI) has been successfully used to answer a range of research
questions about the relationships between brain, cognition and behavior.
Its clinical applications, however, remain largely limited to the presurgical
mapping of language, particularly in planning epilepsy surgery. Here fMRI
can remove two boundaries that contraindicate potentially curative surgery
through determining hemispheric dominance for language or memory (lateralization), and localizing the actual extent of eloquent language cortex
(localization). While our ability to lateralize language has advanced to the
stage that it is arguably unethical to proceed to surgery without completing
language fMRI, fMRI language maps should not yet be routinely used for
planning resection boundaries (i.e., localization; Binder, 2011). We believe
that central to this limitation is the widespread use of an outdated model of
the language system focusing almost exclusively on Broca’s and Wernicke’s
areas. We hypothesized that there is sufficient evidence to support involvement of a set of regions beyond these areas, namely the Basal Temporal
Language Area; Exner’s area; the Supramarginal and Angular gyri; and the
“Supplementary Speech Area”, in language function. We systematically
queried the pubmed online database to review lesion, direct cortical stimulation and fMRI research on the involvement of these areas in language.
Results indicate damage to these regions can impair language function and
that these regions can be imaged using fMRI. These findings suggest a comprehensive clinical model of language and we detail how this can be used
to achieve fMRI-based localization of language cortex in the clinic.

B66
AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION OF NATIVE AND
SECOND-LANGUAGE SPEAKERS’ PROCESSING OF SPELLING-SOUND REGULARITY AND CONSISTENCY IN ENGLISH Mona

Roxana Botezatu1,2, Carol A. Miller3, Maya Misra4; 1Department of Psychology,
Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, 2Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute,
Elkins Park, PA, 3Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 4Previously at the Department of
Communication Sciences and Disorders, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA — We examined the time course of processing spelling-sound
regularity and consistency in English (a deep orthography) in non-native
English speakers with differing first language (L1) orthographic depths
(shallow: Spanish; deep: Chinese) and native controls. English monolinguals (N=21) and highly proficient, but L1-dominant, Spanish-English
(N=22) and Chinese-English (N=18) bilinguals decided whether visually
presented letter strings were English words, while behavioral and EEG
measures were recorded. The spelling-sound regularity and consistency of
stimuli were co-varied such that words had either regular/consistent (e.g.,
GATE) or irregular/inconsistent mappings (e.g., PINT). Irregular/inconsistent words generated smaller N400s than regular/consistent words in both
monolinguals and bilinguals, but the effect began earlier and ended later
(spanning from the P200 to the LPC) and was more robust in bilinguals. The
size of the electrophysiological regularity/consistency effect was positively
correlated with Woodcock Word Attack scores, a behavioral measure of
English pseudoword reading, in Spanish-English bilinguals, but negatively
correlated with Woodcock Word Identification and Word Attack scores,
behavioral measures of English word and pseudoword reading, respectively, in Chinese-English bilinguals. Results indicate that bilinguals may
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

79

Poster Session B	
have used the transparency of their L1 orthography as a reference point for
judging the transparency of their second language (L2-English) orthography. Bilinguals with low English proficiency used distinct reading strategies in the L2 than the L1, whereas bilinguals with high English proficiency
transferred reading strategies from the L1 to the L2 as appropriate. Results
are interpreted in light of the contrastive analysis hypothesis (Lado, 1957;
Stockwell, Bowen, & Martin, 1965).

B67
HEMISPHERE DIFFERENCES: INFERENCES AND EMOTIONAL
LANGUAGE Connie Shears1, Adriana Ariza1, Jay Kim1, Erika Sam1, Melissa

Bond1, Maisy Lam1, Shaun Flax2; 1Chapman University, 2American University
— The research on the lateralization of processing emotions or processing emotional language has been confounded by whether participants are
experiencing the emotion or whether they are reading about a character’s
emotional state (Beeman et al, 2000 vs Engles, et al, 2007). The right-hemisphere has been linked to processing one’s own emotions (Borod, 1992),
while the left-hemisphere is dominant for most language processes except
the formation of inferences (Beeman and Chiarello, 1998). We investigated
hemisphere differences for emotional language that conveyed a character’s
emotional state and either supported a causal inference or did not (control).
We hypothesized that if the right hemisphere is better adapted to processing inferences drawn from emotional language (regardless of the reader’s
own emotional state), then we expected to see a right-hemisphere advantage for forming inferences from positive or negative sentences, relative to
neutral. We developed two-sentence stimulus pairs that related a fictional
character’s positive, neutral, or negative emotion. Using a divided visual
field paradigm, we were able to measure inference processing in each
hemisphere separately by the response times and accuracy of target word
recognitions. The results show that readers made more causal inferences
following positive and negative sentences when targets were presented to
the right-hemisphere and no differences between hemispheres following
neutral sentences. These results indicate that the right hemisphere is forming the causal inferences necessary to comprehend a fictional character’s
emotional state. Thus, the right-hemisphere has an advantage over the left
hemisphere when processing emotional language.

B68
NEUROCHEMICAL BASIS OF READING ABILITY IN EMERGENT
READERS Stephanie Del Tufo1,2, Stephen J. Frost1, Peter Molfese1, Robert K.

Fulbright1,3, Doug L. Rothman1,3, Graeme F. Mason1,3, Jonathan L. Preston1,6,
Nicole Landi1,2,4, W. Einar Mencl1, Fumiko Hoeft1,5, Elena L. Grigorenko1,4, Kenneth R. Pugh1,2; 1Haskins Laboratories, 2University of Connecticut, 3Yale University School of Medicine, 4Yale University Child Studies Center, 5University
of California, San Francisco, 6Southern Connecticut State University — The
neural basis of reading suggests a network of areas that work in coordination to allow adults to read fluently (Pugh et al., 2013). Evidence from
Bruno et al. (2013) and Pugh et al. (under review) found an inverse relationship between Choline (Cho) & Glutamate (Glu) and reading ability.
Taking advantage of a novel neuroimaging technique, magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (MRS), we examined the neurochemical basis of reading letters, words and pseudowords in emergent readers across a spectrum of
ability, across three visits. At the letter, word and pseudoword levels, we
find the predicted effects of stimuli difficulty, prime, and visit. A mixed
effects model was used to determine individual neurotransmitter contributions to increased reaction time as well as percent accuracy. At the
word and pseudoword levels we find that Choline is the best predictor of
accuracy, and replicate previous work showing that high choline suggests
lower accuracy in reading ability. Increased N-Acetylaspartylglutamic acid
(NAA) was found to show a relationship with increased reaction time,
while increased gamma-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) and Glu were found
to show a relationship with decreased reaction time. Previous studies have
suggested that NAA is an indicator of intact neuronal processes or axonal
integrity (Moffett et al., 2007). While, decreases in GABA have been showed
to reduce inhibition allowing for faster reaction times (Stagg, 2013). Taken
together this suggests that the neurochemical basis of reading ability relies
on a network of neurotransmitters, which work in coordination to facilitate
reading ability at the single word and psuedoword level.

80

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

B69
EFFECTS OF AGE OF ACQUISITION ON NEURAL RECRUITMENT
FOR NON-NATIVE CATEGORICAL PERCEPTION Victoria Wagner1, Pilar

M. Archila-Suerte1, Jason Zevin2, Arturo E. Hernandez1; 1University of Houston,
Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Medical College of
Cornell University — It is well established that there are differences between
early and late bilinguals in perceived L2 speech. The current study further
investigated the effects of age of acquisition on the neural recruitment
associated with categorical perception in a second language. Early and late
Spanish-English bilingual adults participated in a categorical perceptual
judgment task while undergoing fMRI. Stimuli varied along two continuums with the vowels being modified along seven even points, either spectrally from “pin” to “pen” or in duration from “pen” to “pan”. Stimuli were
grouped in 6 categories based on monolinguals’ responses with those that
fell clearly within a category and those that were in between categories.
Participants viewed two images that corresponded to the categories and
then listened to a stimulus that was randomly selected from the 7 stimuli
within the continuum. Participants had to select the picture that matched
the auditory stimulus. The results showed that for the ambiguous stimuli only in the pin-pen continuum, late bilinguals had greater activation
in the inferior frontal gyrus; corresponding to Brodmann areas 44/45 and
a second region of activation in IFG pars orbitalis corresponding to BA 47.
The pin-pen continuum is not common to Spanish dialects spoken. Therefore, the late bilinguals may need to recruit knowledge from speech motor
commands to make judgments about ambiguous stimuli compared to early
bilinguals. These results suggest that late bilinguals rely to a greater extent
on the motor systems expanding on current theories of speech processing
(Galantucci, 2006).
2

B70
ARE BILINGUALS BETTER THAN MONOLINGUALS AT FOREIGN
LANGUAGE LEARNING? AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY

Sarah Grey1,2, Cristina Sanz2, Kara Morgan-Short3, Michael T. Ullman2; 1The
Pennsylvania State University, 2Georgetown University, 3University of Illinois-Chicago — This study investigated the neurocognitive underpinnings of
hypothesized bilingual advantages at adult additional language learning.
Our study addressed limitations and provided a more detailed perspective on potential advantages by measuring behavioral and neural outcomes
(using event-related potentials, or ERPs), at different points in the learning trajectory, and for different linguistic targets (word order and gender
agreement). Highly proficient Mandarin-English early bilingual adults and
matched English monolinguals were trained and tested on learning an
artificial language (Brocanto2). Participants were trained under an Uninstructed condition, which did not provide explicit grammar information,
but consisted of numerous meaningful examples, and was designed to
mimic naturalistic, immersion-like foreign language exposure. Both language groups (bilinguals and monolinguals) engaged in the same comprehension and production practice, and ERP data were gathered after low
and high levels of experience with the language. Results showed somewhat different patterns for behavioral and neural measures. Behaviorally,
the two language groups did not differ at low experience, whereas at high
experience the monolinguals outperformed the bilinguals, both at practice and at grammaticality judgment for both word order and agreement.
The ERP data suggested that the monolinguals showed more native-like
ERP components than bilinguals for word order processing, whereas the
bilinguals showed more native-like effects for agreement. The data suggest that bilinguals may not always show previously-claimed behavioral
advantages, and that their neural patterns are meaningfully different from
monolinguals’. The results will be discussed as they relate to bilingualism
and the neurocognition of late-learned language.

B71
CROSSED SUBCORTICAL APHASIA: A CASE STUDY Venugopal Bala-

subramanian1, Maha Aldera1, Maureen Costello1; 1Seton Hall University — Studies in subcortical aphasias have pointed out the lack of fine grained analysis
of impairments of language and emphasized the need for a theoretical/
model oriented description of subcortical aphasias (Cappa & Wallesch,
1994; Crosson, 1985). Hence, a longitudinal case study was undertaken to
describe the patterns of language impairment in SE, a 69 year-old female
who had a sudden onset of aphasia and left hemiplegia. In acute phase: A

2014 Annual Meeting	
C.T scan done at three days post onset reveled hemorrhage in the putamen.
S.E was globally aphasic. At six weeks post onset S.E’s language and speech
were characterized to be severe auditory comprehension deficits for following simple commands, profound apraxia of speech, neologistic speech,
nonfunctional verbal expression and limb apraxia. At three months post
onset the patient’s symptom complex included severely impaired auditory comprehension of conversational speech, Broca’s aphasia, apraxia of
speech and semantic phonemic paraphasias. At two years post onset the
following test instruments were used: Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination, Apraxia Battery for Adults, Boston Naming Test and Token Test.
Test results confirmed the observations made at three months post onset.
At six years post onset, S.E’s linguistic performance was analyzed using the
following tasks: phonological analysis of spontaneous speech and naming
responses, grammaticality judgment, writing to dictation and discourse
production. As predicted by Crosson’s model (1985), at six years post-onset, S.E’s linguistic performance was characterized by reduced ability to
make grammaticality decisions, sentence comprehension deficits,decreased
use of story schemas, agrammatic speech and writing.

B72
HIERARCHICAL ORGANIZATION OF THE HUMAN AUDITORY
CORTEX: EVIDENCE OF A GRADIENT FOR PHONOLOGICAL GRAIN
SIZE SENSITIVITY Christine Brennan1, James Booth1; 1Northwestern Univer-

sity — There is evidence showing that processing of temporal and spectral
features in the auditory cortex is hierarchical (Zatorre & Berlin, 2001), but
there is no direct evidence that the processing of phonemes in speech is
hierarchical. There is some indirect evidence suggesting that a gradient of
selectively based on phonological grain size sensitivity may exist within
the belt and/or parabelt regions (DeWitt and Rauschecker, 2012); however,
selectivity of the superior temporal cortex to systematically varying grain
sizes has not been directly tested. Using functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) in adults, the current study examines the auditory cortex
under different phonological grain size conditions to determine if there is
a gradient from smaller (i.e., single phones) to larger (i.e. quadraphones)
units within the superior temporal cortex. We found extensive activation
throughout the left superior temporal gyrus for small phonological grain
size compared to large phonological grain size. However, we found significant differences for large greater than small grain size only in anterior
superior temporal gyrus. These findings are consistent with the prediction
that there is a gradient of sensitivity to phonological grain size within the
auditory cortex. Our results delineate the hierarchical organization of the
superior temporal cortex and have implications for understanding developmental disorders such as language impairment and reading disability in
which, it has been argued, deficits in speech processing are central.

LANGUAGE: Semantic
B73
FUNCTIONAL LINKS OF NEURAL CORRELATES OF WORD MEANING: BEHAVIORAL AND NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE Sung-

bong Kim1, Peter Gordon1, Lucy Owen1, Hillary Levinson1, Michael Small1, Mary
Llenell Banzuela Paz1; 1Teachers College, Columbia University — Harnad
(1990) claimed that some words are grounded in neural networks by means
of direct sensorimotor interaction with the environment while other words
are grounded through symbol grounding transfer, a process by which new
concepts borrow sensorimotor groundings from previously grounded
symbols. The current study examined whether sensorimotor groundings of
words transfer to new words that were acquired by means of the symbolic
manipulation “A=B”. Adult English speakers were trained to learn 30 new
L2 words. The L2 words were matched to three categories of L1 (English)
verbs (i.e., 10 foot-related, 10 hand-related, and 10 non-action verbs). Subjects were asked to press either a hand button with a finger or a foot pedal
(at different blocks) as soon as they read either L2 words or L1 words on
the monitor. In the L2 condition, subjects had shorter response times (RTs)
for button pressing in response to the hand-related words and, shorter RTs
for foot pedal pressing in response to the foot-related new words. The preliminary analysis on ERP waveforms (recorded by EGI 128channel EEG
systems) showed that the late positivity (P3) for L2 words at Cz and neighboring electrodes was larger than non-words, but started and reached their
peaks about 100ms later than L1 words, which corresponds to the slower

Poster Session B
RTs to L2 words than L1. Together these results suggest the words learned
without direct sensorimotor experiences still interact with body movement
though we need further analysis with EEG source localization to see neural
correlates of different categories of verbs.

B74
RESTRICTING SPONTANEOUS GESTURE USE WHEN TALKING
ABOUT SPATIAL EVENTS Tilbe Goksun1, Lorna Quandt1, Samuel Cason2,

Anjan Chatterjee1; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2University of Delaware —
People often use spontaneous gestures when communicating spatial information such as describing spatial motion in events. A spatial event like
“climbing up a tree,” involves the manner (verb; climbing) and the path
(preposition; up) of the motion. Previous findings suggest that manner and
path production can be impaired separately. Patients having left superior
temporal gyrus (STG) damage might use gestures to compensate for difficulties with spatial language. In a case series, we tested the role of gesture
as a compensatory mechanism. Elderly controls (n=20) and patients with
left hemisphere damage (n=7) were shown motion events (e.g., the woman
hops across the street), depicted in brief video clips. Participants described
the actions in two conditions: 1) no mention of gesture by the experimenter
(spontaneous gestures); and 2) by sitting on their hands (gesture prohibition). We coded the use of path/manner information in Condition 1 (speech
or gesture) and Condition 2 (speech only). Results indicated that controls
produced more prepositions in Condition 2 compared to Condition 1
(p<.05). Although patients with damage to the left inferior frontal gyrus
(IFG) and left STG produced significantly fewer prepositions in Condition
1 compared to controls, prohibiting gesture in Condition 2 led to a significant decrease in preposition use (case statistics, Crawford & Gartwaite,
2007). The patients also used significantly more gestures referring to path
in Condition 1, compared to controls. For both groups, inhibiting gesture
use did not affect information about manner. We conclude that patients’
spontaneous gestures helps compensate for problems with preposition production.

B75
N400 PROCESSES INHIBIT DISCONFIRMED HIGH CLOZE PROBABILITY SENTENCE ENDINGS: FINDING A BEHAVIORAL EFFECT
OF THE INHIBITION J. Bruno Debruille1, Jun Jun Wu1, Ola Mohamed Ali1;

1
McGill University — The N400 event-related brain potential (ERP) could
the inhibition of representations that have been inappropriately activated.
Accordingly, the large N400s evoked by low cloze probability sentence
endings would be generated in part by processes that inhibit the high cloze
probability endings disconfirmed by the low-cloze words. The high cloze
endings would then be harder to activate by the sentence frame. Accordingly, they would be less likely to be produced by subjects who are presented with that sentence frame for a second time. To test this prediction,
140 sentences with low cloze probability endings were presented to 27
participants in a first block of trials. In a second block, participants were
shown the sentence frames again but without any endings. There, their
task was to verbalize aloud the first word that came to mind, which was
noted by the experimenter. In accordance with the inhibition idea, the high
cloze probability endings were produced on average only 34% of the times
whereas, according to their high cloze probability alone, they should have
been produced 62% of the times. Also consistent with the N400 inhibition
idea, N400s elicited by low cloze probability endings in the 1st block were
smaller when the high cloze probability endings were produced by subjects. They were larger when they were not produced but when it was a new
ending that was verbalized, which happened in 43% of the trials. Finally,
N400s were small when the presented ending was verbalized, which could
be due to a Dm effect.

B76
USING FUNCTIONAL TRANSCRANIAL DOPPLER SONOGRAPHY (FTCD) TO INVESTIGATE HEMISPHERIC LATERALISATION
OF BRITISH SIGN LANGUAGE (BSL) PRODUCTION Eva Gutierrez1,

Heather Payne1, Mairead MacSweeney1; 1University College London — fTCD
is a simple and non-invasive technique which can be used to measure
changes in blood flow velocity to the left and right cerebral hemispheres
and can therefore be used to infer lateralisation of function. Due to concerns
about artefacts induced by jaw movements during overt speech production,
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

81

Poster Session B	
most previous studies of language have required covert production, where
words are subvocally produced. In Experiment 1 we directly contrasted
covert and overt speech production in hearing right-handed adults during
a phonological fluency task. We also tested semantic fluency to assess consistency of hemispheric dominance across different language tasks. The
laterality index (LI) was left lateralized in all conditions and there was no
difference in strength of LI between overt and covert speech. This supports
the validity of using overt language production in fTCD studies, another
benefit of which is a reliable measure of number of items generated. In
Experiment 2 we adapted the paradigm to test phonological and semantic fluency during both overt and covert BSL production in right-handed
deaf native signers. Phonological fluency was tested using a handshape
cue. All LIs were left lateralized and there was no difference in strength
of LI between overt and covert sign production. A contrast of Experiments
1 and 2 showed that LIs were higher during sign than speech production.
The relationship between semantic and phonological fluency also differed
between languages. These results may reflect stronger links between form
and meaning during signed than spoken language lexical access.

B77
INHIBITION PLAYS A ROLE WHEN READERS PREDICT IN A FIRST
OR SECOND LANGUAGE Megan Zirnstein1, Janet G. van Hell1,2, Judith F.

Kroll1; 1Pennsylvania State University, 2Radboud University — Readers use contextual information to generate expectations about the meaning of upcoming words. Individuals benefit when upcoming words are better supported
by context and therefore more easily anticipated (Federmeier, 2007; Van
Berkum, 2008), suggesting that the ability to predict upcoming words may
reduce processing load and free up cognitive resources for more demanding tasks. Reducing cognitive load may be especially helpful for individuals who are reading in a second language (L2). Past neurocognitive research
demonstrates that reading in the L2 imposes greater cognitive demands
than reading in the L1 (e.g., Hasegawa et al., 2002), suggesting there may be
particular benefits when prediction is successful in L2 reading. Recent studies also suggest that the experience bilinguals have in negotiating cross-language competition creates benefits in inhibitory control (Bialystok et al.,
2004; Gold et al., 2013). We investigated the extent to which the bilingual
experience and inhibitory control may influence prediction during reading.
Bilingual and monolingual participants read sentences while their EEG was
recorded. ERPs were time-locked to target words that varied in their predictability (expected vs. unexpected), which were presented in sentences
that varied in terms of semantic constraint (high vs. low). Both bilinguals
and monolinguals showed significant N400 modulation for target words
presented in highly constraining sentence contexts, as well as frontal positive responses to unexpected targets in highly constraining sentences.
Importantly, this latter effect interacted with inhibitory control ability, suggesting that the ability to inhibit previously formed predictions is necessary
when reading in a first or second language.

B78
HAND PREFERENCE, HAND PERFORMANCE, AND CREATIVITY

Adam Felton1, Christine Chiarello1; 1University of California, Riverside — There
is a growing literature documenting a vast array of cognitive differences
between consistent and mixed (not left and right) handers (Prichard, Propper, & Christman, 2013). The purpose of this study was to investigate the
extent to which hand preference and hand performance related to convergent creativity. Hand preference was assessed with a modified Edinburgh
Handedness Inventory (EHI). Hand preference scores were calculated for
the EHI tasks in addition to scores for the Bryden subtasks of the EHI, providing two handedness scores for each participant. Hand preference was
transformed into a dichotomous variable (consistent/mixed) by converting scores into absolute values and then using a pre-determined cut-off
to determine group membership. Hand performance was assessed using
a pegboard task (Annett, 2002). A timed, vocal-response version of the
remote associates test (RAT) was used to measure convergent creativity. It
was predicted that hand preference, not performance, would be related to
creativity and that mixed handed participants would perform better than
consistent handed participants. Contrary to the prediction, it was observed
that handedness groups did not differ on creativity and, unexpectedly,
hand performance was significantly related to creativity. These findings
conflict with data previously reported (Felton, Holtgraves, Vazquez, 2013)

2014 Annual Meeting
demonstrating an advantage for mixed handers over consistent handers
on creativity. In light of these results and previous studies, the relationship
between hand preference, hand performance, and creativity is unclear.

B79
WHAT’S RIGHT ABOUT THE RIGHT HEMISPHERE HYPOTHESIS
FOR METAPHOR? Marguerite McQuire1, Eileen Cardillo, Geena Ianni, Anjan

Chatterjee; 1University of Pennsylvania — Despite the traditional association
of right hemisphere injury with metaphor comprehension deficits, neuroimaging studies indicate inconsistent or weak right hemisphere involvement. We designed a novel comprehension task to test the necessity of right
and left hemisphere contributions to metaphor comprehension. Stimuli
consisted of low familiarity metaphors of three different types: predicate
metaphors based on action verbs (The debate spun into a brawl), nominal
metaphors based on event nouns (The divorce was a hard fall), and nominal metaphors based on entity nouns (The coffee was a caffeine bullet). For
each metaphor (n = 60), a closely matched literal sentence with the same
base term was also generated. Sentences were presented visually, followed
by four adjective-noun answer choices (target + three foil types). Participants were instructed to select the phrase that best matched the meaning
of the sentence. Healthy older adults (N=12) indicated comparable accuracy across conditions. Contrary to the right hemisphere hypothesis for
metaphor comprehension, our preliminary data indicate that both patients
with left hemisphere damage (N=16) and right hemisphere damage (N=15)
found metaphors more difficult than literal sentences, a difference that was
larger for the left not right hemisphere patients, particularly in the nominal
conditions. Error analysis indicated the nature of comprehension failure
differed between groups only for literal not metaphoric sentences; both
groups showed a literal bias when reading metaphors. These data do not
support a privileged role of the right hemisphere in metaphor processing.
We conclude metaphor comprehension is a bilaterally mediated process.

LANGUAGE: Syntax
B80
EXPLORING THE CROSS-LINGUISTIC NATURE OF SIMPLE AND
COMPLEX WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS IN HUMAN LANGUAGE
THROUGH EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Miwako Hisagi1,3, Michael

Yoshitaka Erlewine1, Sachiko Kato2, Hadas Kotek1, Ayaka Sugawara1, Daichi
Yasunaga2,4, Dimitrios Pantazis1, Masatoshi Koizumi2, Shigeru Miyagawa1;
1
MIT, 2Tohoku University, 3Iona College, 4Kanazawa University — This study
uses Event-Related Potentials (ERP) to explore the relationship between
simple and complex words and expressions in human language, with data
drawn from both American English (AE) and Japanese (JP). We seek to
distinguish between two leading approaches to morphological blocking
effects in current linguistic literature theory - one based on the construction
of complex morphology in syntax and one assuming competition of forms
stored in the lexicon. We created four types of causative sentences. Two
are judged by native speakers as grammatical: (a) inanimate subject + V
and (b) animate subject + make V; and two are judged as deviant: (c) inanimate subject + make V and (d) animate subject + V. Electroencephalogram
(EEG) was recorded for AE and JP, and magnetoencephalography (MEG)
was also recorded for AE. The two approaches to blocking make different
predictions about the ERP reactions expected from subjects exposed to conditions (c) and (d). We observed an N400 from all conditions, as expected.
We also observed a small P600, 600ms-800ms after the presentation of the
verbs for condition type (c), although less clearly in AE. Additionally, condition (d) unexpectedly did not elicit a larger N400 than the other three
conditions in AE. Our results show that the nature of the anomalies in types
(c) and (d) is different: type (c) involves a violation of a derivational rule,
while type (d) is semantically incongruent. These findings support the view
that derivational morphology is computed in syntax, and is unpredicted by
lexical approaches to blocking effects.

B81
SENTENCE PROCESSING DIGGING DEEP: THETA-BAND AND
ALPHA-BAND OSCILLATIONS DURING STRUCTURED-MEMORY
RETRIEVAL Lars Meyer1, Maren Grigutsch1, Noura Schmuck2, Phoebe

Gaston3, Angela D. Friederici1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and

82

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting	
Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 3New
York University — Storage and retrieval are working-memory processes ubiquitous in sentence processing. While storage of argument noun phrases has
been found to increase left parietal oscillatory synchronization in the alpha
band, the oscillatory brain dynamics of retrieval during sentence processing are still poorly understood. The current work studied retrieval during
sentence processing by employing pronoun-noun dependencies: Pronouns
trigger retrieval of their antecedent nouns, that is, the lexical-semantic item
the pronoun is referring to. Retrieval performance depends on the antecedent’s nestedness inside the sentence structure, predicting harder retrieval
from subordinate as compared to main clauses. To understand better the
neural underpinnings of this increased retrieval demand, we assessed the
oscillatory brain dynamics in the electroencephalogram during non-nested-antecedent and nested-antecedent retrieval at sentence-final pronouns. Comprehension performance was lower for nested-antecedent as
compared to non-nested-antecedent sentences. Time-frequency analyses
during antecedent-noun retrieval at sentence-final pronouns revealed that
nested-antecedent pronouns, relative to non-nested-antecedent pronouns,
elicit left fronto-central theta-band synchronization, followed by bilateral
anterior alpha-band desynchronization. While the theta power increase
was negatively correlated with the performance decrease, the alpha power
decrease was positively correlated with the performance decrease. Our
findings may reflect staged mechanisms during pronoun processing: Initial theta synchronization may reflect sentence-structure-sensitive retrieval
from working-memory, consistent with the proposed role of left-hemispheric theta synchronization outside of the sentence-processing domain.
The observed bilateral frontal alpha desynchronization may reflect subsequent lexical-semantic access to the antecedent noun’s long-term-memory
representation, consistent with previous proposals on a role of distributed
alpha desynchronization in long-term-memory access.

B82
A “SYNTACTIC PERTURBATION” PARADIGM DURING SENTENCE
PRODUCTION REVEALS SENTENCE PROCESSING NETWORKS IN
THE BRAIN William Matchin1, Gregory Hickok1; 1University of California, Irvine

— An elusive goal of neurolinguistics is the search for neural networks
underlying syntax and sentence processing. The present study investigated
networks underlying sentence production using a target perturbation technique. Perturbation techniques have been used previously to investigate
speech production, involving auditory feedback perturbation and measuring the neural response to perturbation and compensation. Here, we
adopted a similar approach at the sentence level involving perturbation
of the planned syntactic structure. Subjects were cued pictorially to produce simple sentences (active or passive), including a proportion of trials
in which the subject’s target syntactic structure shifted mid-utterance (e.g.,
active to passive). Our control condition consisted of identical cues where
the subject’s task was to produce lists of words. The design produced three
key contrasts: (i) active vs. passive (complexity), (ii) switch vs. non-switch
(perturbation), and (iii) sentences vs. word lists (structure). The complexity
effect revealed activity in the right precentral gyrus. The sentence perturbation effect activated the right IFG, right anterior insula, right orbitofrontal
cortex, the left inferior frontal gyrus, the left inferior parietal lobe, and the
right caudate nucleus. A similar network of regions and the right-hemisphere preference were observed in a previous study of pitch perturbation
and compensation (Tourville et al., 2008). The effect of structure revealed
activity in the left postcentral gyrus and bilateral caudate nucleus. We posit
that sentence production can be integrated into models of hierarchical control and brain networks underlying sentence processing can be revealed
using a perturbation paradigm.

B83
CAN UNIVERSITY SECOND LANGUAGE LEARNERS ATTAIN
NATIVE-LIKE BRAIN PROCESSING OF MORPHO-SYNTAX? Harriet

Wood Bowden1, Cristina Sanz2, Karsten Steinhauer3, Michael T. Ullman2; 1University of Tennessee-Knoxville, 2Georgetown University, 3McGill University —
Can adult second language (L2) learners attain native-like brain processing
of grammar with sufficient exposure/proficiency, and does this vary with
different aspects of grammar? We examined the neurocognitive processing
of L2 Spanish morpho-syntax, specifically gender and number agreement.
We tested native (L1) speakers (n=15) and two groups of university-level

Poster Session B
L2 learners: low experience/proficiency learners (n=16), who were enrolled
in 2nd-4th semester college Spanish, and high experience/proficiency
learners (n=14), who had about 7 semesters of college Spanish plus 1-2
semesters of immersion. Proficiency was measured with the Simulated Oral
Proficiency Interview, the Elicited Imitation task, and self-ratings. Neurocognitive processing of (visually-presented) Spanish sentences was tested
with event-related potentials (ERPs) in a balanced violation paradigm. Preliminary results indicate that (1) L1 speakers displayed a LAN+P600 for
both gender and number, (2) L2 Low speakers displayed a P600 to number
violations only, and (3) L2 Advanced speakers displayed a P600 (but no
LAN) to both gender and number violations. These results contrast with
those of a recently-published study (Bowden, Steinhauer, Sanz & Ullman,
2013), in which the same high experience/proficiency learners showed
native-like (LAN+P600) neurocognitive processing of syntactic word-order. Taken together, the results suggest that adult L2 learners are more
likely to attain fully native-like brain processing for syntactic word-order
than morpho-syntactic agreement, and that within morpho-syntax, nativelike processing can be achieved earlier for number than gender. The results
suggest that native-like processing of grammar can be achieved, even in
university learners, but that it varies according to different aspects of grammar.

B84
ERP RESPONSES TO SUBJECT AGREEMENT VIOLATIONS IN
AFRICAN AMERICAN ENGLISH: EVIDENCE FOR DIGLOSSIC REPRESENTATION Felicidad Garcia1, Trey Avery1, Khamis-Dakwar Reem2, Froud

Karen1; 1Teachers College, Columbia University, 2Adelphi University — Diglossia refers to a specific sociolinguistic situation where two language varieties co-exist in complementary functional distribution (such as the spoken
and Standard varieties of Arabic that are used in different communicative
settings). Although this phenomenon is under-studied, the application of
neuroscientific methods shows great promise for elucidating the nature of
underlying linguistic representations in diglossia (e.g., Khamis-Dakwar
& Froud, 2007). We suggest that the status of African American English
(AAE) is consistent with the defining characteristics of diglossia (Ferguson, 1959), and therefore grammatical violations of Standard American
English (SAE) that are acceptable to AAE speakers will not be automatically
detected by bidialectal speakers. To evaluate this hypothesis, we compared
event-related potential (ERP) responses to syntactic differences in SAE and
AAE. Adult monodialectal SAE speakers (n = 7) and bidialectal SAE/AAE
(n = 6) listened to 30 sentences in two conditions presenting the inclusion
or omission of a third-person singular agreement on a present tense verb
(e.g., The black cat *lap/laps the milk). Participants also performed grammaticality judgments for each sentence (omitted s-markers in this context
are an acceptable variation in AAE). Monodialectal SAE speakers showed
expected LAN and P600 responses to agreement marker omission, but
these responses were absent in SAE/AAE bidialectal speakers. However,
grammaticality judgment responses and reaction times were consistent
across participant groups. These findings indicate that AAE might be neurologically represented like a diglossic language variety, and underscore
the need for new approaches to understanding of language processing in
bidialectal populations.

B85
NEURAL CORRELATES OF MERGING NUMBER WORDS IN CHINESE AND FRENCH SPEAKERS Yi-hui Hung1,2, Denise H. Wu2,3, Marco

Lai2,3, Ovid J.-L. Tzeng1,2,4, Daisy L. Hung1,2,3, Stanislas Dehaene5,6,7,8, Christophe Pallier5,6,7,8; 1Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University,
Taiwan,, 2Laboratories for Cognitive Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan,, 3Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central University,
Taiwan, 4The Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, Taiwan, 5INSERM, U992,
Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, F-91191 Gif/Yvette, France, 6CEA, DSV/I2BM,
NeuroSpin Center, F-91191 Gif/Yvette, France, 7Univ Paris-Sud, Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, F-91191 Gif/Yvette, France, 8Collège de France, F-75005 Paris,
France — Large numerical quantities are typically expressed by chaining
multiple number words. Even when they rely on base ten, the principles
for building up large number words vary across languages (e.g., Chinese
is more transparent than French). Here, we focused on the merging operation for combining successive number words (e.g., “twenty two” vs. “two
twenty”, the latter does not combine). We wondered to what extent this
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

83

Poster Session B	
merging operation engages the brain networks involved in number processing (e.g. parietal regions) and in lexical composition and phrase structure building (i.e. superior temporal sulcus and inferior frontal regions).
Because we also wondered whether cross-linguistic differences could
exist in this respect, we tested both Chinese and French speakers in their
own languages. Their task was to name number words presented in rapid
serial visual presentation. Measures of naming times showed that number
words were produced more quickly when they could merge with the preceding ones. Functional magnetic resonance data showed, in both groups,
that mergeability provoked increased activations in the left inferior frontal gyrus (pars opercularis / pars triangularis and pars orbitalis) and in
the left inferior parietal sulcus. The comparison between the two groups
revealed increased activation in the right prefrontal regions for Chinese but
not for French. Future research will need to address whether this is specific
to number word processing or a general syntactic processing difference
between Chinese and French speakers. Finally, these results reveal that, in
contrast to lexical composition, merging number words does not involve
superior temporal sulcus.

B86
EFFECTS OF AGE OF ACQUISITION (AOA) AND PROFICIENCY ON
PROCESSING OF SYNTAX IN 6- TO 8-YEAR OLD MONOLINGUAL
AND BILINGUAL CHILDREN: AN ERP STUDY Annika Andersson1, Lisa

D Sanders2, Christina Karns3, Helen J Neville3; 1Lund University, 2University of
Massachusetts, 3University of Oregon — Even though language proficiency
in children is strongly related to success in almost all domains, neurocognitive studies of L2 processing are typically limited to adults with several
years of exposure, who may use general cognitive mechanisms to compensate for any difficulties in L2 processing. For example, whereas previous
studies of adult bilinguals have reported differences in the anterior negativity elicited by syntactic violations with delays in exposure to English of less
than 3 years (Weber-Fox & Neville, 1996) a precursor to the anterior negativity has been reported in monolingual children as young as 2.5 years of
age (Oberecker, et al., 2005). In the current ERP study, processing of English
phrase structure was explored in 6- to 8-year old monolingual and bilingual
children who acquired English as a second language around 4 years of age.
Monolingual children of higher proficiency displayed relatively mature
processing of phrase structure violations as indicated by a left anterior negativity over lateral sites and a posterior positivity. High-proficiency bilingual children tended to display a medial anterior negativity and a posterior
positivity. The difference in distribution of the anterior effect across groups
could only be explained by AoA. However, lower proficiency affected the
posterior ERP effect and amplitude of the anterior effects in response to
syntactic violations. These results suggest that the more automatic syntactic
processing in children is affected by AoA while more controlled, metalinguistic processing may be related to language proficiency.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Development &
aging
B87
TEACHING OLD BRAINS NEW FACTS: INCIDENTAL LEARNING OF
NOVEL CONCEPTS IN OLDER ADULTS AND ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Eve Attali1, Asaf Gilboa1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest, 2Uni-

versity of Toronto — Fast Mapping (FM) is a process supporting incidental
vocabulary acquisition in children as they infer the meaning of novel words
based on contextual cues. Preliminary findings that amnesics with Medial-Temporal Lobe lesions are able to acquire novel associations through
FM, suggest FM supports direct neocortical declarative learning. Pathological and normal age-related decline in declarative memory is correlated
with hippocampal dysfunction but also with neocortical atrophy. We tested
older adults’ ability to learn through FM and the impact of dementia on
such learning. Eighteen patients with mild Alzheimer’s Disease and 26
controls performed a FM task and a standard explicit encoding task (EE).
During FM, subjects saw a sentence containing the target label along with 2
pictures. They had to infer the association between novel labels and novel
items. Associative recognition was tested at 10 minutes and 1 week. Aging
was associated with poor FM performance. However, AD performed as

84

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
well as NC on FM despite significant EE impairment. There was variable
1-week retention of associations learned through FM, but complete loss following EE. EE scores were correlated with Hippocampal volumes and with
clinical episodic memory tests. By contrast, FM scores were correlated with
posterior lateral neocortical regions and with semantic tasks. In conclusion, AD patients were able to learn new associations through FM despite
impaired episodic memory. FM is less sensitive to hippocampal atrophy
and more sensitive to neocortical degeneration. Learning through FM
depends on the lateral neocortex probably due to its role in representing
semantic associative networks.

B88
AMYLOID DEPOSITION IS LINKED TO ABERRANT ENTORHINAL
ACTIVITY AMONG COGNITIVELY NORMAL OLDER ADULTS Willem

Huijbers1,2,3, Elizabeth Mormino2,3, Sarah Wigman1,2,3, Andrew Ward1,2,3,
Patrizia Vannini1,2,3, Donald McLaren2,3, Alex Becker2,4, Aaron Schultz2,3, Trey
Hedden2,4, Keith Johnson2,4, Reisa Sperling1,2,3; 1Center for Alzheimer Research
and Treatment, Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 2Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical
Imaging, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, 3Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA., 4Department of Radiology, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA. — Normal aging is
often difficult to distinguish from the earliest stages of Alzheimer’s disease
(AD). Years before clinical memory deficits manifest, amyloid-Î² deposits in
the cortex in many older individuals. Neuroimaging studies indicate that
neocortical regions of default-network are especially vulnerable to amyloid-Î² deposition. Yet, the impact of amyloid-Î² on age-related changes
within the medial temporal lobe (MTL) memory system is less clear. Here
we demonstrate that cognitively normal older adults, compared to young
adults, demonstrate reduced ability to modulate hippocampal activations
and entorhinal deactivations during an episodic memory task. Among the
older adults, amyloid-Î² deposition was associated with failure to modulate activity in entorhinal cortex, but not hippocampus. Furthermore, we
show that entorhinal regions demonstrating amyloid-Î² related dysfunction
are directly connected to the neocortical regions of the default-network.
Together these findings link neocortical amyloid-Î² deposition to neuronal
dysfunction specifically in entorhinal cortex, while aging is associated with
more widespread effects across the MTL.

B89
AGE DIFFERENCES IN THE ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, SOCIOCOGNITIVE ENGAGEMENT, AND TV VIEWING ON FACE
MEMORY. Jennifer J. Heisz1, Susan Vandermorris2, Johnny Wu3, Anthony R.

McIntosh3, Jennifer D. Ryan3; 1Department of Kinesiology, McMaster University,
Baycrest Health Sciences, 3Rotman Research Institute — Physical and sociocognitive lifestyle activities promote aspects of cognitive function in older
adults. Very little is known about the relation between these lifestyle activities and cognitive function in young adults. One aspect of cognitive function that is critical for everyday function is episodic memory. The present
study examined the relationship between lifestyle activities and episodic
memory in younger and older adults. Participants were sixty-two younger
and older adults. The augmented Victoria Longitudinal Study Activities
Questionnaire was used to quantify level of engagement in physical activity, sociocognitive activity, and TV viewing. Episodic memory was assessed
using the old-new face recognition paradigm in which memory for younger
and older faces was tested. Compared to younger adults, older adults
reported being less physically and sociocognitively active while engaging
in more passive behaviours such as TV viewing. A positive association
was observed between physical activity and episodic memory for young
adults but not for older adults. Interestingly, TV viewing was negatively
associated with episodic memory in older adults but not younger adults.
No relationship was found between sociocognitive activity and episodic
memory for either younger or older adults. Although the own-age effect
was observed for older adults, face age did not interact with lifestyle activities. The positive cognitive benefits of physical activity extend to younger
adults; however, the interplay between physical activity and cognition may
differ across the lifespan. Furthermore, TV viewing may be particularly
detrimental to cognitive performance later in life.

2

2014 Annual Meeting	

B90
MINIMIZING VISUAL INTERFERENCE IMPROVES RECOGNITION
MEMORY PERFORMANCE IN AMNESIA Rachel N. Newsome1, Alex-

andra N. Trelle1,2, Gillian Rowe1,3, Rosemary Cowell4, Morgan D. Barense1,3;
1
University of Toronto, 2University of Cambridge, 3Baycrest, Rotman Research
Institute, 4University of Massachusetts, Amherst — A new framework for
understanding medial temporal lobe (MTL) function has recently been
developed. Under this representational-hierarchical model, simple features of objects are thought to be represented in posterior regions of the
ventral visual stream (VVS), and complex conjunctions of features - putatively comprising an entire object - are thought to be represented in anterior
regions of the VVS. When these complex object-level representations are
damaged, due to MTL damage, one must rely on simple feature representations in intact posterior VVS regions. This leads to increased vulnerability to interference, simply because everyday objects tend to share features
(e.g., similar colors, shapes). In support of this idea, recent work has shown
that MTL-lesioned rats were impaired in an object recognition task under
conditions of normal visual interference, but that performance could be
rescued by reducing visual interference. In the present study, we administered an object recognition task to a group of amnesics. We manipulated
interference during the delay period in three conditions: cognitive interference (neuropsychological testing), visual interference (viewing scrambled
versions of foil objects, designed to create feature-level interference), and
minimal interference (dark room). As a group, amnesics performed better
on the minimal interference condition, relative to the cognitive and perceptual interference conditions. Investigation of single-case data revealed
that a subset of amnesics performed normally on the cognitive and minimal
interference conditions, but were dramatically impaired on the visual interference condition. These results support the representational-hierarchical
model and suggest the mechanism by which reducing visual interference
improves memory in amnesia.

B91
NORMAL AGING DELAYED EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL (ERP)
WORD REPETITION EFFECTS Jin-Chen Yang1,2, Lawrence Chen1,3,

Yu-Qiong Niu1,2, Randi Hagerman4, Marta Kutas5, John Olichney1,2; 1Center for
Mind and Brain, University of California Davis, Davis, CA, USA, 2Department of
Neurology, University of California Davis, School of Medicine, Sacramento, CA,
USA, 3Department of Psychology, University of California Davis, Davis, CA, USA,
4
MIND Institute, University of California Davis, School of Medicine, Sacramento,
CA, USA, 5Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego,
CA, USA — The N400 and P600 event-related potential (ERP) word repetition effects have demonstrated sensitivity to verbal memory impairments
in neurodegenerative disorders including amnesia, Alzheimer’s disease
and the fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS). However,
the impact of normal aging on the two ERP word repetition effects has not
been quantified systematically. In the present study, data from 74 cognitively normal participants (mean age = 63.2 ± 9.2, age range = 42-86, females
= 35) were analyzed. EEG/ERP recordings were obtained during a category judgment task in which semantically congruous (50%) and incongruous category-exemplar pairs were repeated ~10-140 seconds later. Results
showed that the older group (N = 24, mean age = 73.8) had prolonged latencies of both the N400 and P600 repetition effects, when compared to the
middle-aged (N = 24, mean age = 53.2) and young elderly (N = 26, mean
age = 62.7) subjects. Linear regression analyses across all the participants
revealed a 1.81 ms/year prolongation of the N400 repetition effect latency
with aging. The P600 repetition effect latency displayed an insignificant
increase of 0.42 ms/year. No significant impact of age was observed for the
amplitude of either the N400 or the P600 repetition effect. The results suggest that a progressively slowing might characterize the effects of advanced
aging on verbal memory, especially on implicit memory as measured by
the ERP repetition priming.

B92
DEVELOPMENT OF SUBJECTIVE RECOLLECTION: EVIDENCE
FROM EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Leslie Rollins1, Tracy Riggins1;

1
University of Maryland, College Park — Dual-process models of recognition
memory propose that memory is subserved by familiarity and recollection.
The most common method used to assess recollection in adults is Tulving’s

Poster Session B
remember/know paradigm (1985), a subjective measure of recollection.
Most developmental studies have assessed recollection based on objective
memory for specific details (e.g., item color) due to concerns about children’s ability to perform subjective tasks. However, recent evidence shows
that children can reliably make subjective memory judgments. The current
studies examine age-related differences in ERP correlates of subjective
recollection at encoding (Study 1) and retrieval (Study 2) in two separate
samples of 6- to 8-year-old children and adults. Behavioral data revealed
that both child and adult participants used subjective judgments accurately
(i.e., memory for two objectively assessed contextual details was higher for
items given “remember” versus “familiar” judgments). We assessed ERP
data from both studies for the presence of recollection effects (i.e., differences in response amplitude between items given a “remember” judgment
and those given a “familiar” judgments and missed/novel items. At encoding, subsequent recollection effects were present in children (n = 17) and
adults (n = 25) in the 700-900ms time window. There was no difference
between age groups. In contrast, at retrieval adults (n = 22) but not children (n = 17) demonstrated a recollection effect. Consistent with previous
studies in adults, this effect was maximal across left centro-parietal leads
500-700ms poststimuus onset. These findings suggest that age-related differences in recollection may be predominantly due to the development of
retrieval processes.

B93
DISTINCT RESTING-STATE FUNCTIONAL NETWORKS RELATED
TO MOTIVATED LEARNING BEHAVIOR IN ADULTS COMPARED TO
ADOLESCENTS Maheen Shermohammed1, Aaron Mattfeld1, John Gabrieli1;

1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology — Motivation and learning are fundamental cognitive processes, but how the brain supports them and how
they change across development is unknown. Task-based studies have
shown that adolescents have stronger reward-related activity when compared to both children and adults. We were interested whether similar differences were apparent in the brain at rest and whether these resting-state
differences were related to motivated learning and memory behavior. We
collected resting-state scans from 24 adolescents and 22 adults and conducted a seed-based functional connectivity analysis. The regions we used
as seeds were obtained from an independent motivated learning task
that showed differences in adults compared to adolescents when viewing
reward-related cues. Specifically, we used the left anterior putamen (seed
1) as well as the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, left superior parietal
lobule, and bilateral hippocampal cortex collectively (seed 2) to examine
how resting state correlations were related to motivated learning and
memory performance. In our resting state analyses we observed that in
adults memory performance was positively correlated with functional connectivity between regions typically related to goals and attention (seed 2)
and the bilateral insula. In contrast, in adolescents behavioral performance
was positively correlated with functional coupling between the left anterior
putamen (seed 1) and the medial prefrontal and left temporopolar cortices.
These results suggest that distinct functional networks at rest are related to
behavioral performance in adults and adolescents and may reflect developmental differences in the neurobiology of motivated learning and memory.

B94
AGE-RELATED COMPENSATORY OVER-RECRUITMENT DURING
RECOGNITION MEMORY: EVIDENCE FROM SUPPORT VECTOR
MACHINE PATTERN CLASSIFICATION Tyler Santander1, Brian A.
Lopez2, Misty Schubert2, Craig Bennett2, Michael B. Miller2; 1University of Virginia, 2University of California, Santa Barbara — As individuals develop and
age, the brain undergoes considerable structural and functional changes,
which mediate the development and decline of higher-order cognition. It is
currently unknown, however, how the deterioration of brain systems with
old age may be ameliorated to maintain healthy behavior. One hypothesis involves the compensatory recruitment of additional brain regions not
normally activated in a given task. To test this, recognition memory behavior and associated brain activity were examined in young (ages 25-35) and
older (ages 60-75) adults during fMRI scanning. The informational value in
brain areas that older adults activated beyond the typical young adult was
probed using support vector machine (SVM) pattern classification. Classifiers were trained to distinguish between successful memory responses (hits
and correct rejections) over several feature sets and tested using an iteraCognitive Neuroscience Society

85

Poster Session B	
tive leave-one-subject-per-class-out procedure. Among voxels both groups
commonly activated, the classifier significantly distinguished between
successful memory responses (balanced accuracy, BAcc = 72%). Likewise,
among voxels that older adults activated beyond the average young adult,
the classifier again significantly distinguished between successful memory
responses (BAcc = 70%). This suggests that activations in these voxels carry
discriminative value among older adults, which may be evidence of age-related compensatory over-recruitment. Importantly, when applied to voxels
activated in young adults that diverged from the group average, classifier
performance was nonsignificant. Contrary to the second model, this suggests that any residual activations in young adults largely appear to be just
noise. Given roughly equivalent task performance, age-related over-recruitment may facilitate healthy cognitive aging among older adults.

B95
REJECTING EMOTIONAL GIST: AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES
IN RIGHT DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND FALSE
RECOLLECTION OF AROUSING PICTURES Stephen J. Gray1, Ian M.

McDonough2, Sasha N. Cervantes3, David A. Gallo1; 1University of Chicago,
2
University of Texas - Dallas, 3California University at Pennsylvania — Research
suggests that age-related increases in false recollection are partly due to
dysfunctional use of right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) during
retrieval monitoring (e.g., McDonough et al, 2013). In the current study,
we extended this finding to false recollection of emotional pictures. Participants studied emotionally arousing and neutral pictures, and on a
subsequent cued recollection test they were provided with descriptions
of studied pictures (targets) or descriptions of nonstudied pictures (lures)
during fMRI. Consistent with prior behavioral work, we found increased
false alarms to emotionally arousing lures compared with neutral lures in
older adults, suggesting an effect of emotional gist on false recollection. The
absence of this behavioral effect in younger adults (YAs) suggested that
YAs were better able than OA at suppressing the effects of emotional gist
on false alarms. Whole-brain fMRI analyses at test revealed that the rejection of emotionally arousing lures (relative to neutral lures) was related
to increased activity in right frontal regions including dlPFC, as well as
activity in other regions linked to episodic retrieval, including precuneus,
parahippocampal gyrus, and posterior cingulate. Critically, the right dlPFC
activity was significantly greater in YAs than in OAs, consistent with the
idea that OAs are less likely than YAs to use dlPFC to reject emotional
gist during retrieval monitoring. These findings complement behavioral
and neuroimaging research suggesting that gist-processing is less likely to
be opposed by retrieval monitoring processes in older adults, leading to
poorer memory accuracy.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
B96
DIFFERENCES IN CRITERION PLACEMENT AND THE VENTRAL
PARIETAL CORTEX Amy Frithsen1, Michael Miller1; 1University of California,

Santa Barbara — Within the lateral parietal cortex, a dissociation has been
found between activations in the dorsal and ventral areas. While dorsal
activations have been linked to cognitive processes such as post-retrieval
monitoring of memory evidence, it is less clear what functional role the
ventral regions are playing during retrieval. Dorsal areas have been found
to be correlated with a subject’s criterion placement, a measure of how
much memory evidence is required to respond “old” to an item during a
recognition test. Previous studies have also shown this region to be modulated by the ratio of old items present during a memory test. When the ratio
of old items is high (lax criterion), this region is much less active than when
the ratio of old items is low (conservative criterion). While this relationship
between criterion placement and activity within the dorsal parietal cortex
has been relatively established, not much is known about its relationship
with the ventral regions of this area. The current fMRI study tested this relationship using a probability manipulation during a remember-know test.
During “likely” blocks, 70% of test items were old, while only 30% of test
items were old during “unlikely” blocks. Differences in activation between
blocks were then compared. Implications of these results are discussed in
terms of how they may guide theories of ventral parietal activations during

86

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
memory retrieval. This research was supported by the Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies through contract W911NF-09-D-0001 from the U.S.
Army Research Office.

B97
SEPARATING DECISIONAL AND MNEMONIC PROCESS IN RECOGNITION MEMORY Benjamin Turner1, Alec Nisbet1,2, Michael Miller1; 1UC

Santa Barbara, 2Cardiff University — Most researchers in the field of recognition memory would agree that two interacting but distinct cognitive
processes underlie recognition memory performance: first, memory-related processes that reflect the amount of mnemonic evidence associated
with different items; and second, decision-related processes that use this
evidence to guide responding. However, separating these processes can
be surprisingly difficult, as evidenced by the ongoing debate over what,
exactly, successful retrieval activity reflects, particularly in areas like posterior parietal cortex (e.g., Herron, Henson, & Rugg, 2004; Wagner et al., 2005;
O’Connor, Han, & Dobbins, 2010; Guerin & Miller, 2011). In the present
study, we analyzed data from 95 participants in a criterion-shifting recognition memory paradigm, making use of the prediction from signal detection
theory (SDT) that mean mnemonic evidence per trial type (e.g., hit, false
alarm, etc.) depends in a nonlinear way on sensitivity and bias. More specifically, as the criterion becomes more conservative, the mean amount of
mnemonic evidence increases for all four trial types according to SDT. By
accounting for this phenomenon, it is possible to attribute changes in activity that accompany changes in criterion to either the criterion placement per
se, or else to these changes in memory evidence. Our results demonstrate
that we were able to separate out mnemonic and decisional contributions
to successful retrieval activity, revealing distinct brain networks associated
with each. This research was supported by the Institute for Collaborative
Biotechnologies under grant W911NF-09-D-0001.

B98
SUBSEQUENT MEMORY IN SCHIZOPHRENIA

Azurii Collier1, Dan
Wolf1, Jeffrey Valdez1, Raquel Gur1, Ruben Gur1; 1University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine — Differential neural activation at encoding can predict which stimuli will be subsequently remembered or forgotten. We used
event related fMRI to investigate subsequent memory effects for visual
fractals in patients with schizophrenia (n=26) and healthy controls (n=28).
Participants incidentally encoded the fractals during an oddball task and
10 minutes later they made old/new recognition memory judgments on
30 targets and 30 foils. Responses and reaction times were recorded. Both
groups found the task challenging and performed at chance. Patients’
memory accuracy was similar to controls; however, patients were slower
to identify targets. We found evidence for subsequent memory (SM, subsequently remembered > subsequently forgotten) in both groups but with
distinct patterns. Region of interest analyses in controls demonstrated activation in both the middle temporal lobe (MTL) and the fusiform cortex (FF);
whereas, patients activated only the fusiform. There were no significant
between group differences in MTL activation; however, patients demonstrated greater FF activation than controls. Notably, greater FF activation
during successful encoding was associated with more severe negative
symptoms. Whole brain analyses in patients demonstrated SM activation
in the occipital pole, temporal occipital fusiform cortex, lateral occipital
cortex, and left inferior temporal gyrus; whereas, there was no significant
activation in controls. Taken together, our findings suggest that patients
may activate FF as a compensatory strategy to promote successful encoding, with less reliance on the MTL recruitment found in controls. Such
compensatory activation is needed especially for patients with more severe
negative symptoms.

B99
THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBES ARE CRITICAL FOR REWARDBASED DECISION-MAKING UNDER CONDITIONS THAT PROMOTE EPISODIC FUTURE-THINKING Daniela J. Palombo1,2, Margaret

M. Keane3,1,2, Mieke Verfaellie1,2; 1VA Boston Healthcare System, 2Boston University School of Medicine, 3Wellesley College — Recent evidence suggests
a tight link between re-experiencing the past and imagining future events
(episodic future-thinking) in humans. Patients with amnesia due to medial
temporal lobe (MTL) damage show deficits in episodic future-thinking
that are correlated with their episodic memory loss, suggesting a common

2014 Annual Meeting	
MTL-based substrate. Yet, the broader functional significance of this association has not been firmly established. In the present study, we investigated the consequences of MTL damage on human decision-making in the
context of reward-based inter-temporal choice. In a temporal discounting
task, humans typically devalue a future reward to account for its delayed
arrival (e.g., preferring $30 now over $40 in 6 weeks). We hypothesized
that this type of inter-temporal choice would be selectively impaired in
amnesic patients in a condition where episodic future-thinking promotes
selection of the larger future reward in control participants. Accordingly, in
a standard-temporal discounting task, amnesic patients showed temporal
discounting indices similar to healthy controls, replicating previous work.
In contrast, while healthy controls demonstrated attenuated temporal discounting (i.e., an increased likelihood to select the larger future reward) in a
condition that first required participants to engage in episodic future-thinking (e.g., imagine spending $40 at a theatre in 6 weeks), amnesic patients
failed to demonstrate this effect. These data suggest an adaptive role for
MTL-based processes: One’s ability to simulate future events, via flexible
recombining of details from episodic memory, aids humans in predicting
the outcome of actions and thus aids in decision-making.

B100
THE IMPACT OF PERCEPTUAL EVENT BOUNDARIES ON MEMORY-RELATED NEURAL OSCILLATIONS Andrew Heusser1, Youssef

Ezzyat1, Lila Davachi1; 1New York University — The human brain imposes
structure on the world, segmenting experience into discrete, but temporally contiguous events. Prior work has shown that associative memory
(e.g. memory for temporal order) is reduced for information presented
with an intervening event boundary compared to representations experienced within the same event (Dubrow et al., 2013; Ezzyat et al., 2011). This
is thought to be related to augmented attentional allocation to boundary
items (Boltz, 1992; Swallow et al., 2007), perhaps at the cost of ongoing
across-trial associative processing. Here, we examined two distinct forms of
associative memory: across-trial temporal order memory and within-trial
item-feature binding. We hypothesized that event boundaries might facilitate encoding for information studied at boundaries, and simultaneously
disrupt temporal order memory for items that span a boundary. Participants encoded a series of trial-unique grayscale objects presented on colored backgrounds that changed periodically. Shifts in background color
were operationalized to act as perceptual event boundaries. Object-color
memory and temporal order memory was tested after each encoding block.
Interestingly, object-color memory was significantly better for boundary (compared to non-boundary) items, but order memory that spanned
a boundary was significantly reduced compared to non-boundary order
memory. MEG analyses reveal that oscillatory power in the theta (4-8 Hz),
alpha (9-12 Hz), and beta (13-30 Hz) bands in posterior sensors increased
as a function of within-event position and this increase was related to the
benefit for within-event order memory. Further analyses will characterize
memory-related oscillatory activity at event boundaries.

B101
AWARENESS OF MEMORY FOLLOWING THETA-BURST TMS TO
DISTINCT PREFRONTAL CORTICAL LOCATIONS Anthony Ryals1,

Evan Gross1, Kelly Brandstatt1, Mehmet Dokucu1, Lynne Rogers2, Joel Voss1;
1
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 2Rehabilitation Institute
of Chicago (RIC) — Evidence from neuroimaging and lesion studies suggests that memory and subjective memory awareness may involve different prefrontal cortex regions. A rostrocaudal hierarchy has been proposed
whereby increasingly anterior prefrontal regions are more heavily involved
in memory awareness. We used theta-burst transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to create “virtual lesions” of posterior versus anterior prefrontal regions in order to test for differences in memory awareness in healthy
individuals. For each subject, theta-burst TMS was delivered to bilateral
frontopolar cortex (FPC), bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC),
and to a sham (vertex) location, prior to performance of an item-location
recognition memory task (with one region targeted in each of three distinct
sessions, in counterbalanced order). The memory task involved global prospective and retrospective estimates of performance and also prospective
and retrospective item-by-item judgments of performance. Overall recognition performance did not differ based on stimulation location, nor did
item-by-item prospective or retrospective confidence for recognition hits.
After DLPFC stimulation there was a trend for higher prospective confi-

Poster Session B
dence for subsequent recognition misses compared to both FPC and sham
(p=0.09). FPC stimulation caused lower prospective confidence for recognition misses (i.e., higher monitoring accuracy) compared to both DLPFC
(p< 0.01) and sham (p<0.05). FPC and DLPFC stimulation were associated
with a shift towards underconfidence for global retrospective estimates
compared to sham. Findings suggest that DLPFC and FPC have distinct
roles in memory awareness, and are consistent with a hypothesized role for
FPC in supporting awareness of performance, perhaps via integration of
information about accuracy over time.

B102
INTERSECTION OF CHOICE, PREFERENCE, AND MEMORY: THE
SIMPLE ACT OF CHOOSING ENHANCES DECLARATIVE MEMORY.

Vishnu Murty1, Sarah DuBrow1, Lila Davachi1; 1New York University — Individuals value the freedom to make choices in their environment. The opportunity to choose is associated with positive affect and engagement of the
mesolimbic dopamine system. Positive affect and mesolimbic dopamine
activation have both been demonstrated to enhance long-term memory.
Together these findings suggest that giving an individual the ability to
make choices about their learning experience should enhance their later
memory, even when choices do not influence the content of memoranda.
To investigate these processes, we had participants perform an intentional encoding task in which they studied object images. On each trial,
participants were shown a display with two cover screens that concealed
to-be-encoded objects. Participants made a button press to remove one
screen, which revealed the underlying object. We manipulated participant’s
opportunity to choose which screen was revealed across conditions. In the
choice condition, participants chose one of the two screens to remove. In the
fixed condition, participants were instructed to select a particular screen.
Critically, the object on each trial was pre-determined; thus, choices had no
influence on the content of the memoranda. Results indicated that memory
was greater for objects in the choice versus fixed condition. Behaviorally,
choice-induced preference for cover screens tracked memory enhancements for the revealed objects. Neurally, anticipatory engagement of the
striatum predicted memory in the choice but not fixed condition. These
findings suggest that choice recruits valuation systems to promote longterm memory encoding. This demonstrates a novel mechanism to motivate
memory encoding in the absence of extrinsic rewards: manipulating agency
during learning.

B103
RELATEDNESS-BASED UNITIZATION MODULATES ASSOCIATIVE
RETRIEVAL PROCESSES Daniel Levy1, Roni Tibon1, Anna-Lena Scheu-

plein2, Axel Mecklinger2, Nurit Gronau3; 1Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya, 2Saarland University, 3Open University of Israel — Although memory of episodic
associations is generally considered to be recollective in nature, it has been
suggested that when stimuli are experienced as a unit, familiarity processes might contribute to their subsequent associative recognition. Factors
of semantic and spatial relatedness may modulate such unitization. To
investigate the effect of relatedness-based unitization at encoding on the
processes of retrieval of associative information, we had participants interactively encode pairs of object pictures, arranged in a near-vertical format
so as to suggest a functional or configural relationship between them. Half
of pairs were independently judged to be of related objects (e.g., a coffee
pot over a mug) and half of unrelated objects (e. g., a shovel over a table).
At test, participants discriminated intact, recombined, and new pairs while
EEG event related potentials (ERPs) were recorded. In an early ERP marker
of retrieval success generally associated with familiarity processes, peaking
~400 ms after test pair presentation, correctly identified new unrelated pairs
elicited the most negative deflection, correctly identified intact related pairs
elicited the least negative deflection, and waveforms elicited by correctly
identified related new and unrelated old pairs fell between those deflections, and were indistinguishable. In contrast, in a later parietal-maximal
ERP marker associated with recollection, extending ~500-1000 ms after test
pair presentation, correctly identified intact related pairs elicited a more
positive deflection than other intact and new conditions. These findings
may indicate that unitization resulting from semantic relatedness at encoding may modulate both familiarity and recollective processes at retrieval.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

87

Poster Session B	

B104
NEURAL CORRELATES OF RETRIEVAL ORIENTATION MODULATED BY THE ORDER OF TEST CONDITIONS Timm Rosburg1, Mikael

Johansson2, Axel Mecklinger1; 1Saarland University, Germany, 2Lund University,
Sweden — Retrieval orientation refers to a pre-retrieval process and conceptualizes the specific form of processing that is applied to a retrieval cue.
In our event-related potential (ERP) study, we sought to find evidence for
an involvement of the auditory cortex when subjects attempt to retrieve
vocalized information, and hypothesized that adopting retrieval orientation would be beneficial for retrieval accuracy. Participants saw object
words that they subsequently vocalized or visually imagined. In the subsequent memory exclusion task, participants responded more slowly and
less accurately to targets of the vocalize condition than to targets of the
imagine condition. ERPs to new items varied at the left-temporal electrode T7 between 500 and 800 ms, indicating a retrieval orientation effect
in the subject group as a whole. However, whereas the effect was strongly
pronounced in participants with high retrieval accuracy, it was absent in
participants with low retrieval accuracy. Current source density (CSD)
mapping of the retrieval orientation effect indicated a source over left temporal regions. Independently from retrieval accuracy, the ERP retrieval
orientation effect was surprisingly also modulated by test order, showing
more positive ERPs to new items when participants first targeted vocalized information. Findings are suggestive of an involvement of the auditory cortex in retrieval attempts of vocalized information and confirm that
adopting retrieval orientation may improve retrieval accuracy. The effects
of test order on retrieval-related processes might reflect a stronger focus on
the newness of items in the more difficult test condition when participants
started with this condition.

B105
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED (VS. THE ROAD MORE TRAVELED):
HIPPOCAMPAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO REMOTE SPATIAL MEMORY
DURING VIRTUAL NAVIGATION Jason Ozubko1, Jessica Robin1,2, R.

Shayna Rosenbaum1,3, Cheryl Grady1,2, Gordon Winocur1,2, Morris Moscovitch1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute, 2University of Toronto, 3York University
— Understanding of human spatial memory has expanded greatly in the
past few decades with the rise of virtual reality (VR) paradigms. Studies of
active navigation in realistic environments have consistently demonstrated
that the hippocampus (HPC) is necessary for navigation in newly-learned
environments. By contrast, it is not known whether the HPC is implicated
when navigating in familiar environments, though behavioural studies of
remote spatial memory in patients with HPC lesions, and fMRI studies with
healthy individuals using mental navigation, suggest it is not. To address
this question, we developed a versatile VR paradigm that uses real-world
panoramic, ground-level views of streetscapes. Applying our technology to
a large scale city (Toronto, ON), we found that the HPC plays an important
role in navigating in less familiar areas of a city, but not when navigating in
highly familiar environments. Importantly, when the position of landmarks
was mirror-reversed, the extra-hippocampal representations that support
navigation in highly familiar environments were insufficient, and the HPC
was recruited once again. Additionally, individuals who self-reported that
they did not use mapping strategies while navigating were found to rely
significantly less on their HPC during navigation, except under the most
demanding (i.e., mirrored) conditions. Our results suggest that the HPC
may represent detailed spatial maps but, over time simpler versions of
these representations are supported by the neocortex. Neocortical spatial
maps may frequently be sufficient to navigate along well-known routes,
but if navigation becomes difficult or a detailed spatial map is needed for
reference, the HPC is recruited.

B106
DOES AROUSAL INDEPENDENTLY BOOST MEMORY FOR EMOTIONAL SCENES? INVESTIGATING THE EFFECTS OF EMOTION
WITH THE LEFT-PARIETAL ERP OLD/NEW EFFECT. Graham MacKenzie1, Emma Neilson1, David I Donaldson1; 1University of Stirling — Emotion
can enhance or impair episodic memory, with increases in “emotional
arousal” significantly enhancing recollection of prior events. The emotion
dimensions of arousal and valence are rarely manipulated independently:
consequently, the discrete effect of arousal remains unclear. Here we

88

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
ask whether selectively manipulating the arousal of negatively valenced
scenes affects recollection - does increased arousal provide an additional
boost to memory? Images of scenes were studied with either a square or
circle pattern overlaid, providing source information to remember. All
scenes had negative valence, with either high or low arousal. Event-Related
Potentials (ERPs) were recorded at test, time-locked to stimulus onset.
Old and new scenes were presented alone and participants made initial
old/new decisions before making source judgments for all recognized
scenes. Behaviourally there was no effect of arousal on source memory, but
response bias was more conservative for low-arousal scenes. In accordance
with source memory performance, ERPs revealed no difference in magnitude of the left-parietal old/new effects (500-700msec) for high and low
arousal scenes. However, the old/new effects associated with familiarity
(300-500msec) were topographically dissociable, with a classic mid-frontal
old/new effect for high arousal scenes and a right-frontal effect for low
arousal scenes - suggesting that arousal may influence recognition memory
by changes in response bias influencing how familiarity is processed. Critically, and contrary to expectations, behavioural and neural findings provide convergent evidence that increasing the arousal of negative scenes
does not enhance recollection. Although increases in emotional arousal
may enhance memory, increasing arousal alone does not boost recollection.

B107
OSCILLATING AUDITORY STIMULATION DURING SLEEP PROMOTES SLEEP SPINDLES. James Antony1, Jinkyung Bae1, Ken Paller1;

1
Northwestern University — Two types of neural oscillation are important
for memory processing during sleep: slow oscillations (<1 Hz) during
slow-wave sleep (SWS) and spindles (11-16Hz, 0.5-2s) during stage-2 and
SWS. Several methods have been used to show that facilitating slow waves
can enhance memory, perhaps due to indirect effects on spindle activity.
Here we attempted to manipulate spindles directly by presenting oscillating white-noise bursts at spindle frequencies. In separate groups we used
one of three frequencies, 12Hz, 15Hz, and 50Hz, corresponding roughly
to slow spindle, fast spindle, and a non-spindle control frequency, respectively. Each 2s burst was followed by 8s of white noise at the background
amplitude. Subjects napped for 90 minutes. Spindles were detected using
an established automated algorithm. For 15Hz, there was an increase in
fast spindles during stimulation relative to non-stimulation periods. Slow
spindles did not differ between stimulation and non-stimulation periods.
For 12Hz, there was a trend for an increase in slow spindles. For 50Hz,
no effects were found. Between-group comparisons confirmed that spindle frequency varied reliably as a function of stimulation frequency. Further analyses compared spindles during stimulation to spindles following
stimulation, and no differences were found in spindle power, duration, or
topography, suggesting that induced spindles were physiologically similar
to spontaneous spindles. Prior findings have linked spindles with memory
consolidation, general intelligence, and sleep stability. This successful
demonstration of a method to selectively and non-invasively facilitate spindles opens the door to research into the physiological functions of spindles
and to practical applications of spindle induction methods.

B108
AN ERP STUDY OF THE DISSOCIATION BETWEEN RECOLLECTION- AND FAMILIARITY-RELATED PRESTIMULUS ENCODING
ACTIVITIES Tzu-Ling Liu1, Yi-Jhong Han1, Shih-kuen Cheng1; 1Institute of Cog-

nitive Neuroscience, National Central University, Taiwan — Recent findings in
long-term memory suggest that successful encoding is modulated by the
neural activities prior to encountering the to-be-encoded items. The current
study examined whether this “prestimulus subsequent memory effect” dissociates between recollection-related and familiarity-related encoding. Participants first engaged in a study phase, during which they made one of two
types of judgments to concrete nouns. The judgment to be made for each
word was signaled by a cue presented prior to the nouns. In the following
test phase, participants differentiated studied words from unstudied ones
and identified the judgment type for the studied words. ERPs elicited by
the task cues during the study phase were sorted according to whether the
study items were correctly recognized with its source judgment. Results
showed that when comparing cue-eliciting waveforms between hit items
and missed items, waveforms of correctly recognized items showed a left
frontal negativity which was also found in previous studies. By contrasting
cue-elicited activity of source correct hits to those of source incorrect hits,

2014 Annual Meeting	
we extracted activities which is defined as recollection-related prestimulus effect. Also, we contrasted activity of source incorrect hits to those of
misses to extract familiarity-related prestimulus effect. It was found that
hit trials with correct source memory showed a negativity over the frontal
areas compared to source incorrect hits; while source incorrect hits showed
a wide-spread positivity compare to miss items. These findings suggest that
the prestimulus subsequent memory effect may consist of multiple processes, including processes which support recollection-related and familiarity-related memory encodings.

B109
ERP EVIDENCE FOR FEATURE-SPECIFIC EXPLICIT MEMORY
RETRIEVAL IN THE ABSENCE OF RETRIEVAL MODE Kristina Küper1,2,

Hubert D. Zimmer2; 1Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and
Human Factors, Dortmund, Germany, 2Brain and Cognition Unit, Department
of Psychology, Saarland University, Saarbruecken, Germany — Explicit but
not implicit memory retrieval is feature-specific in that old/new effects are
reduced when arbitrary stimulus features, such as color, are modified from
study to test. In contrast to implicit retrieval, explicit retrieval is characterized by retrieval mode, a tonic state in which stimuli are deliberately
processed as memory retrieval cues. In the present ERP (event-related
potential) study, we examined whether retrieval mode is a prerequisite for
feature-specific explicit retrieval by having participants perform a direct
memory test either in a blocked fashion or under task-switch conditions
which prevent the establishment of retrieval mode. Participants were asked
to memorize line drawings of familiar objects and the color they were presented in. At test, we presented new items and study items which were
either repeated identically or in a different color than at study. Participants
performed a memory inclusion task in which both types of study items
had to be categorized as “old”. In the task-switch group, a cue indicated
on a trial-by-trial basis whether participants had to perform the inclusion
task or a semantic retrieval task (natural/artificial decision). ERPs were
generally more positive-going on switch-trials in the task-switch group
than with blocked retrieval likely reflecting increased processing demands.
Both behavioral and LPC (late positive component) old/new effects indexing recollection processes were feature-specific in the task-switch group
and thus not contingent on the presence of retrieval mode. The absence
of retrieval mode did, however, disrupt familiarity processes as unspecific
FN400 old/new effects emerged only with blocked retrieval.

B110
POST-RETRIEVAL SELECTION MODULATES PROCESSING OF
RETRIEVED ASSOCIATES TO OVERCOME INTERFERENCE IN
MEMORY Michael Dulas1, Audrey Duarte1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology

— fMRI evidence suggests that overcoming interference in memory may
require post-retrieval selection, a process thought to be mediated by the
left mid-ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC). Further, research has
shown selective attention can modulate activity in perceptual processing
regions, enhancing activity for attended-to stimuli and suppressing activity
for ignored stimuli. Thus, one possible way in which post-retrieval selection resolves interference in memory is by enhancing/inhibiting representations of retrieved associates. The present study investigated whether
VLPFC-mediated post-retrieval selection modulates perceptual processing
of retrieved associates in the face of competing alternatives. During encoding, participants were shown objects paired with either a face or a scene.
Each object was shown multiple times, and its paired associate changed
partway through encoding. Interference was manipulated by how often
the object was paired with the lure (least recent) associate versus the target
(most recent). At test, participants determined if objects were seen previously and whether they were most recently paired with a face or a scene.
Behavioral results showed that associative memory performance decreased
with increasing interference. fMRI results revealed activity in the left midVLPFC increased with higher interference. Further, activity in parahippocampal place area was enhanced when participants successfully remembered a target scene associate, and inhibited when participants correctly
rejected a scene lure. These results suggest that one way in which post-retrieval selection resolves interference in memory is by inhibiting processing of irrelevant retrieved associates and enhancing processing of relevant
ones.

Poster Session B

NEUROANATOMY
B111
INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY IN CORTICAL STRUCTURE I: NOT UNIFORM ACROSS CORTICAL SUBREGIONS David Vazquez1, Omesh

Ranasinghe1, Adam Felton1, Adam Daily1, Christine Chiarello1; 1University of
California, Riverside — Recent advances in neuroimaging techniques allow
us to examine cortical morphometry across various metrics. Such measurements of surface area, thickness, and gyrification are not uniform across the
cortex. What is yet unknown is the extent of the variability among healthy
adults for these cortical measurements, and whether this variability is uniform across various regions of the cortex. To explore the degree to which
cortical surface area, thickness and local gyrification (LGI) vary among 200
young adults, we computed the coefficient of variation (CV) for each measure for 68 FreeSurfer parcellations (Destrieux et al., 2010). For all measures,
variation was not uniform across the cortex (CV range 10.6 - 33.4 for surface
area; 4.5 - 15.4 for thickness; 4.05 and 11.9 for LGI). Surface area showed
the greatest between-subject variation of the three measures (median CV:
surface area = 17.63; thickness = 7.37; LGI = 5.9). Inter-subject variability
maps will be presented to illustrate areas with high and low variability.
For thickness and surface area, high variability regions were generally not
found in adjacent, or nearby regions. In contrast, for LGI we found the
most inter-subject variability centered in insular and opercular regions. The
superior frontal gyrus was the least variable region across all three cortical
measures. Correlates of the regional differences in inter-subject variability
are described in companion posters (Chiarello et al.; Daily et al.). We suggest that such differences provide an important population-level metric of
cortical organization.

B112
INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY IN CORTICAL STRUCTURE II: INVESTIGATING A POTENTIAL ROLE FOR DEGREE OF POSTNATAL SURFACE AREA EXPANSION Christine Chiarello1, David Vazquez1, Adam

Felton1, Adam Daily1; 1University of California, Riverside — A recent study
indicated that postnatal expansion of cortical surface area is nonuniform
(Hill et al., 2010). High expansion regions in the lateral temporal, parietal,
and frontal cortex had double the rate of postnatal growth as compared
to low expansion regions in medial temporal, occipital, and insular cortex.
Data from our laboratory also document substantial regional differences in
the extent of intersubject variability in surface area, as well as thickness and
degree of gyrification - high variability regions have 2-3 times greater intersubject variation than low variability regions (companion poster, Vazquez
et al.). If this individual variation is strongly influenced by postnatal experience, high expansion regions should also have greater between-subject
variability than low expansion regions. To test this idea, we computed the
coefficient of variation for cortical surface area, thickness, and local gyrification in a sample of 200 healthy young adults. We contrasted values
for FreeSurfer parcellations corresponding to high expansion areas (lateral
STG, STS, temporal pole, MTG, postcentral gyrus and sulcus, IPS, SFS, MFS,
MFG, anterior cingulate) with low expansion parcellations (parahippocampal gyrus, collateral & lingual sulci, calcarine and parieto-occipital sulci,
precuneus, Heschl’s gyrus, insula). Across all three measures of cortical
structure, there was greater between-subject variability in low expansion as
compared to high expansion, regions F(1,102) = 26.6, p < .0001. Contrary to
the prediction, regions with lower postnatal expansion are more variable in
cortical structure across individuals. Longer periods of postnatal development do not appear to promote between-person variation in some regional
measures of cortical organization.

B113
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN CORTICAL STRUCTURE III: VARIABILITY PREDICTS DEGREE OF STRUCTURAL HEMISPHERIC
ASYMMETRY Adam Daily1, David Vazquez1, Adam Felton1, Christine Chi-

arello1; 1University of California, Riverside — Reliable structural asymmetry
has been observed in many cortical regions. Data from our laboratory indicate regional differences in inter-subject variability for several neocortical
metrics (companion poster, Vazquez et al.). However, the relationship
between hemispheric asymmetry and regional inter-subject variability
is unknown. Given that certain regions show a high degree of variability
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

89

Poster Session B	
between individuals, we reasoned that in those regions the two hemispheres should differ more in cortical morphology, producing greater
asymmetry. In a sample of 200 young adults, we investigated the correspondence between inter-subject variability in a particular cortical region
and hemispheric asymmetry within that region. We computed the coefficient of variation (CV) for cortical surface area, thickness, and Local Gyrification Index (LGI) for 68 cortical subregions using FreeSurfer. For each
cortical metric within each hemisphere, we correlated regional CV with the
absolute value of the corresponding asymmetry quotient (AQ). Significant
positive correlations (all ps < .001) were obtained for all measures: surface
area (LH r = .47; RH r = .52), thickness (LH r = .85; RH r = .81), and LGI (LH
r = .58; RH r = .64). We suggest that greater inter-subject variability within
a region is an indication of less biological constraint. Our findings indicate
that such reduced constraint allows greater hemispheric differentiation.
Inter-subject variation, which is often treated as a nuisance variable, may
help elucidate some features of cortical organization.

B114
BILATERAL ATYPICAL PARIETAL SULCAL PATTERN IN DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA Kiho Im1,2, Nora Raschle2,3, Sara Smith3, P.Ellen

Grant1,2,4, Nadine Gaab2,3,5; 1Fetal Neonatal Neuroimaging and Developmental Science Center, Division of Newborn Medicine, Boston Children’s Hospital,
Boston, 2Harvard Medical School, 3Laboratories of Cognitive Neuroscience,
Division of Developmental Medicine, Department of Medicine, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, 4Deptartment of Radiology, Boston Children’s Hospital,
Boston, 5Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge — Previous MRI
studies observed decreased cortical volume, reduced white matter organization and functional alterations in pre-literate children at familial risk
for developmental dyslexia (DD). Sulcal patterns are hypothesized to relate
to white matter and cortical functional organization under genetic influence. Therefore we hypothesized that sulcal patterns would be atypical in
pre-readers with a familial risk and young readers with DD. We analyzed
the sulcal pattern using graph-based sulcal pattern comparison method in
pre-readers/beginning readers with and without familial risk of DD (n =
15, 16; mean age = 70.4, 69.5 months) as well as child readers with and without DD (n = 13, 14, mean age = 116.2, 127.9 months). Bilateral parietal sulcal
patterns were significantly atypical in pre-readers/beginning readers with
a familial risk of DD compared to controls. An atypical right parietal sulcal
pattern was further correlated with reduced phonological processing and
rapid automatized naming skills. Significantly atypical bilateral parietal
sulcal patterns were also shown in children with DD compared to controls,
as well as its relationship with phonological processing and single word
reading. As sulcal patterns are determined during prenatal development,
our sulcal pattern analysis provides further support for atypical early brain
development in DD and suggests that DD may originate from altered
arrangement or connections of cortical areas in bilateral parietal regions.
Future studies are needed to determine if sulcal pattern analysis can identify children at risk for DD as neonates or even fetuses.

B115
HEARING-AID USE AND WHITE-MATTER INTEGRITY AFTER
EARLY DEAFNESS Martha M. Shiell1,2,3, François Champoux2,3,4, Robert J.

Zatorre1,2,3; 1Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, 2BRAMS International Laboratory for Brain, Music, and Sound Research, 3CRBLM Centre for
Research on Brain, Language, and Music, 4Université de Montréal — In people
with early deafness, superior temporal cortical regions show decreased
white-matter volume and integrity (e.g. Kim et al. 2009, Neuroreport).
Despite that these changes have been attributed to disuse-driven atrophy
of auditory cortex, research with adolescents suggests no relationship with
residual auditory input through a hearing-aid (Miao et al., 2013, Am J Neroradiol). To our knowledge, the role of residual hearing in adults has not
been examined. We tested the hypothesis that auditory input through a
hearing-aid inhibits atrophy of white-matter in adults with early and
profound deafness. We recruited 18 hearing and 16 deaf adults. We used
magnetic resonance imaging to collect T1- and diffusion-weighted images,
and analyzed these data with tract-based spatial statistics (FMRIB’s Software Library) to compare groups on fractional anisotropy (FA), a metric
of white-matter integrity. Consistent with previous research, deaf people
showed decreased FA in Heschl’s gyrus in the right hemisphere (p < 0.001,
uncorrected), and a sub-threshold trend in the left-hemisphere. We then

90

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
looked at the variation of FA within this region in the deaf group, according
to duration of hearing-aid use, expressed as percent years of lifetime. In
the right-hemisphere Heschl’s gyrus, FA correlated with duration of hearing-aid use, with longer hearing-aid use associated with higher FA (R =
0.55, p = 0.0138, one-tailed). We conclude that hearing-aid use can preserve
white-matter integrity in auditory regions, despite profound deafness. This
finding is consistent with evidence that auditory input from hearing-aids
can inhibit cross-modal reorganization (Shiell et al., 2013, in review).

B116
USING PCA TO EVALUATE THE EFFECTS OF CARDIORESPIRATORY
FITNESS ON CORTICAL THINNING AND COGNITION IN HEALTHY
OLDER ADULTS. Mark Fletcher1, Kathy Low1, Nils Schneider-Garces1, Ben-

jamin Zimmerman1, Chin-Hong Tan1, Rachel Boyd1, Edward Northrup1, Alexander Gorsuch1, David Cui1, Christine Ventrella1, Gabriele Gratton1, Monica Fabiani1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Research has shown that
differences in cardiorespiratory fitness (CRF) are correlated with age-related variations in neuropsychological performance and volumetric brain
measures during aging. Here we examined differential cortical thinning
patterns, and associations between anatomy and cognition, in a group of
healthy older adults differing in fitness (N=54, ages 55-87). To increase
statistical power, we used PCA to group brain regions whose volumes
were correlated across subjects, and a similar PCA to group neuropsychological test scores. Subjects participated in neuropsychological testing and
structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI). CRF was estimated using
a non-exercise prediction model proposed by Jurca and colleagues (2005).
Participants were split by age and gender before being classified as highor low-fit. Measurements of cortical thinning/volume were obtained using
FreeSurfer© and were normalized for head size. The results confirmed
that cortical thinning patterns differed in high- versus low-fit older adults.
High-fit older adults had increased “thicknesses” with age encompassing
medial superior frontal, superior temporal and precentral cortical regions.
Additionally, CRF was positively associated with a factor encompassing
basal ganglia volume, whereas age was negatively associated with factors
encompassing regions of the lateral cortex and corpus callosum. High-fit
older adults also had higher scores on a factor related to performance in
verbal fluency, vocabulary and the “Riddles” subscore of the KBIT. Our
data indicate that higher CRF is associated with preserved anatomy and
higher cognition in older adults.

B117
ALCOHOL’S EFFECT ON THE CORTISOL AWAKENING RESPONSE

Tony Cunningham1, Enmanuelle Pardilla-Delgado1, Jennifer Rawding1, Kelsey
Blomeke1, Michelle Wirth1, Jessica Payne1; 1University of Notre Dame — The
cortisol awakening response (CAR) is a sharp increase in cortisol that
occurs at awakening from sleep. It is a reliable biomarker of HPA activity
and has high intra-individual reliability over time. Both previously experienced psychosocial stress, and perceived upcoming stress influence the
CAR. As such, the CAR is pronounced on weekdays, but less so on weekends when people are less stressed and often sleep in later. However, little
attention has been paid to the effects of acute physiological stress on the
CAR. Alcohol consumption impacts the HPA axis, generally increasing
cortisol and affecting sleep architecture in light-drinking populations, yet
how it affects the CAR remains unknown. We employed a within-subjects
design to investigate alcohol consumption’s influence on the CAR. Saliva
samples were collected one weekend morning after alcohol consumption (avg. 4.5 ±2.2 drinks) and another weekend morning after subjects
abstained from alcohol. Baseline samples were taken upon awakening
and subsequent samples were taken 30, 45, and 60min post-awakening.
Although data collection is ongoing, we already see a significant increase
in cortisol from baseline to maximum concentration during sampling in the
alcohol consumption condition (t(16)=2.2,p=.043). A significant change was
not observed in the abstinence condition, however, which is more typical of
a weekend morning. Area under the curve with respect to cortisol increase
(AUCi) indicates a trend toward increased CAR after consuming alcohol
(t(16)=1.833,p=.085). These results point to an acute effect of alcohol consumption on the CAR in a normal college population and implicate alcohol
consumption as a physiological stressor.

2014 Annual Meeting	

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control
B118
RELIABILITY OF NEGATIVE BOLD RESPONSE ACROSS AGE
GROUPS Keith McGregor1,2, Atchar Sudhyadhom3, Bruce Crosson1,2, Andrew

Butler1,4; 1Center for Visual and Neurocognitive Rehabilitation, Atlanta VA Medical Center, 2Department of Neurology, Emory University, 3Department of Radiation Oncology, UCSF, 4Department of Physical Therapy, Georgia State University — Within the motor system, there have been numerous reports within
cross-sections of individuals of sustained negative BOLD in the ipsilateral
primary motor areas respective to the moving hand (Newton et al., 2005;
Stefanovic et al., 2004; Riecker et al., 2006; Lenzi et al., 2007; McGregor et al.,
2011). In this context the evoked negative BOLD likely represents an active
inhibition of the ipsilateral primary motor areas mediated by transcallosal
mechanisms (Meyer et al., 1995, 1998; Stefanovic et al., 2004; Lenzi et al.,
2007; McGregor et al., 2011). However, despite its obvious potential and
increasing representation in imaging related literature, the within-subject
reliability of evoked negative BOLD has, to our knowledge, never been
tested. The current fMRI investigation tests multi-session within-subject
reliability of negative BOLD in the motor system using high-spatial resolution (2mm x 2mm x 2mm) echo planar imaging. Sixteen participants (18-69
years) were scanned over three sessions while engaging in a simple finger
opposition task previously shown to evoke a negative BOLD response in
the ipsilateral cortex of healthy younger adults (Allison et al., 2000; Riecker
et al., 2006; McGregor et al., 2011). After session co-registration for both
anatomic and functional runs, we analyzed the spatial reliability of suprathreshold voxels activity in sensorimotor cortex.

B119
SOCIAL AND NON-SOCIAL VIOLATIONS OF EXPECTANCY RELY
ON TWO DIFFERENT SUBREGIONS OF THE MEDIAL PREFRONTAL WALL. Charlotte Desmet1, Marcel Brass1; 1Department of Experimental

Psychology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium — The dorsal and posterior
part of the medial prefrontal cortex (pMPFC) is often described in cognitive control literature. It seems that this region is active when we monitor our performances. For example, this region is active when we make
errors. Also when we observe errors by others this region is activated. This
is in line with current research that suggests a general role for the pMPFC
in detecting salient events. Interestingly, a region more ventral and anterior in the medial prefrontal cortex, the anterior medial prefrontal cortex
(aMPFC), is involved in processing social situations. Moreover, this region
is considered part of the mentalizing system and is active when we try to
understand why somebody is performing a specific action. This brain area
strongly responds to situations of social incongruency, or to violations of
expectancies in social situations. For example, this region is activated when
we observe somebody performing an unusual, although correct, action. In
the current meta-analysis we integrated studies from these two research
fields. Our results indicate that there are indeed two systems in the medial
prefrontal wall that respond to violations of expectancies; one general purpose system in the pMPFC and one system responding to social situations
in the aMPFC. Further, this distinction seems to rely on the intentionality of
the observed behaviour. Moreover, when a certain behaviour is intentional
we use the more ventral part of the MPFC, while observing unintentional
behaviour (such as errors) we use the more dorsal part of the MPFC.

B120
EVIDENCE FOR COMPENSATORY AND PATHOLOGICAL CEREBELLAR CONNECTIVITY IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE Sara B. Festini1,

Jessica A. Bernard2, Youngbin Kwak3, Scott Peltier1, Nicolaas I. Bohnen1, Martijn
L. T. M. Muller1, Praveen Dayalu1, Rachael D. Seidler1; 1University of Michigan,
2
University of Colorado Boulder, 3Duke University — Parkinson’s disease is a
progressive neurodegenerative disorder associated with both motor and
cognitive impairments. We have previously reported altered resting state
functional connectivity between the basal ganglia and the cerebral cortex
in Parkinson’s disease, including hyperconnectivity in Parkinson’s patients
OFF medication compared to healthy controls that is down-regulated by
L-DOPA medication (Kwak et al., 2010). Although the basal ganglia are
a primary target of degeneration in Parkinson’s disease, other structural
and functional brain changes involving the cerebellum have been observed.

Poster Session B
For instance, it has been suggested that Parkinson’s patients may recruit
cerebellar networks to compensate for striatal dopaminergic denervation
(e.g., Palmer et al., 2010). We implemented a lobule-based cerebellar resting
state functional connectivity analysis, comparing intra-cerebellar and cerebellar-cortical connectivity in patients ON and OFF medication and healthy
controls. Twenty-five Parkinson’s patients and twenty-three matched controls completed structural and functional MRI scans. Functional scans were
collected at rest, while participants viewed a fixation cross for 8 minutes.
Outside the scanner participants completed a battery of motor and cognitive assessments. Results indicate that PD OFF display increased cerebellar
connectivity, whereas PD ON display decreased connectivity relative to
controls. Behavioral regressions reveal that hyperconnectivity in PD OFF
may reflect compensatory cerebellar recruitment, as greater connectivity
can be associated with faster motor performance, better cognition, and
reduced disease severity. Nonetheless, increased connectivity in PD OFF
can also be detrimental and associated with slower motor performance and
worse disease severity. Our results provide evidence for both compensatory and pathological cerebellar connectivity in Parkinson’s disease.

B121
PREFERRED TEMPO IS FASTER IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE Nathan-

iel S. Miller1, Kelvin L. Chou1, Nicolaas I. Bohnen1, Martijn L. T. M. Müller1,
Rachael D. Seidler1; 1University of Michigan — Parkinson’s disease (PD) is
characterized by slowed movement (bradykinesia). Previous studies suggest that slowing of the “internal clock” underlies bradykinesia; however,
support for this relies upon indirect measures of the clock (Yahalom et al.,
2004). The spontaneous motor tempo (SMT) task, or the preferred rate of
hand tapping, directly measures internal clock rate (McAuley et al., 2006).
Previously, we demonstrated faster hand, foot and speech SMT in patients
relative to controls, but neither medication state nor affected side influenced
SMT (Miller et al., 2013). Though these findings suggest that the internal
clock speeds up in PD, motor symptoms may have biased our measure.
Here, we used a direct, perceptual measure of clock rate, preferred perceptual tempo (PPT), to estimate clock rate without motor bias. Thirty-eight
controls and 36 patients (ON and OFF medication) rated their preference
(e.g., “too fast or too slow”) for 21 monotone sequences of different tempi.
Sequences were logarithmically spaced and centered on participants’ SMT.
Mirroring our earlier findings, patients (both ON and OFF medication) had
faster PPT relative to controls [Fs(1,72)=4.29&6.30, ps<.05], but medication
state did not affect PPT [p=.23]. PPT correlated with hand and foot SMT
in both patients and controls [rs = .36-.76, ps<.03], but PPT only correlated
with speech SMT in controls (r(36)=.53, p<.01). These findings support the
notion that the internal clock speeds up in PD. We conclude that motor
symptoms do not affect SMT; however, the internal clock may be less
involved in speech timing in PD.

B122
CONSISTENCY OF SELF-PACED UNIMANUAL AND BIMANUAL
TAPPING Alison Colbert1, Kaitlin Oswald1, Rachel Bellono, Jin Bo1; 1Eastern

Michigan University — To execute bimanual coordination tasks efficiently,
complex interhemispheric communication between motor areas via the
corpus callosum must occur. Previous studies reveal that unsynchronized
bimanual tasks are more challenging than synchronized bimanual tasks
due to increased interhermispheric interaction between motor areas, and
unimanual task execution is more complex than similar synchronized
bimanual tasks. The current study examined the consistency of unimanual and bimanual tapping in a continuous tapping task. Forty-three young
adults (39 with Edinburgh handedness scores > 0) tapped their index finger
repetitively at 1s rate without auditory/visual guidance in five conditions:
unimanual tapping with either the left or right hand, synchronized bimanual tapping, and 180ms out-of-phase unsynchronized bimanual tapping
led by either the left or right hand. Results generally revealed that synchronized bimanual tapping resulted in greatest mean variability (left hand
variability ranging from marginally significant to significant P = .231- .046;
right hand variability marginally significant P = .189-.347). In the left-lead
condition, out-of-phase bimanual tapping had the next greatest mean variability (P = .238-.051), followed by left-hand unimanual tapping (P = .223.046). However, in the right-lead condition, out-of-phase bimanual tapping
and right-hand unimanual tapping resulted in similar variability (P = .641
- .829). These results suggest that synchronized bimanual tapping is not
the easiest task to perform. When the movements are self-paced, temporal
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

91

Poster Session B	
control predominantly relies on the cerebellum and is less influenced by
interhemispheric interconnectivity through the corpus callosum. Thus, the
unimanual tapping becomes less complex, whereas synchronized bimanual tapping is more difficult.

B123
THE EFFECTS OF HANDEDNESS ON UNIMANUAL AND BIMANUAL
TAPPING Kaitlin Oswald1, Alison Colbert1, Rachel Bellono1, Jin Bo1; 1Eastern

Michigan University — Tasks requiring bimanual coordination are essential
to daily functioning. To execute tasks requiring bimanual coordination efficiently, complex interhemispheric communication between motor areas
must occur. The current study examined effects of handedness on the consistency of unimanual and bimanual movements. Forty-three young adults
(39 with Edinburgh handedness scores > 0) performed finger tapping tasks
in five conditions: unimanual tapping with the left or right hand, synchronized bimanual tapping, and out-of-phase bimanual tapping led by either
the left or right hand. It was predicted that out-of-phase bimanual tapping
would reveal more variability than unimanual tapping, and synchronized
bimanual tapping would have the lowest variability. In addition, individuals with reduced handed dominance would have lower variability in synchronized bimanual movements, but higher variability in unimanual and
out-of-phase bimanual tapping than those with strong handed dominance.
Results generally revealed that the out-of-phase bimanual tapping resulted
in greatest mean variability, followed by unimanual tapping. The synchronized bimanual condition had the least mean variability (left hand variability ranged from marginal to strong significance: P = .67 - .01; right hand
variability marginally significant: P = .49- .05; between hands variability
strongly significant: P < .00). Handedness score was significantly correlated
with the variability for right-hand unimanual tapping and right-hand lead
out-of-phase bimanual tapping (both P <.05). These results suggest that
stronger right-handed individuals tend to perform well on tasks in which
the right hand plays dominant roles. More left-handers are under recruitment to further evaluate the importance of handedness on unimanual and
bimanual coordination.

B124
WHAT AFFECTS AUDITORY FEEDBACK IN SPEECH MOTOR CONTROL? Clara Martin1,2, Jon Andoni Duñabeitia1, Caroline A. Niziolek3, Manuel

Carreiras1,2, John F. Houde3; 1BCBL, San Sebastian, Spain, 2Ikerbasque, Bilbao,
Spain, 3University of California at San Francisco — When a speaker’s auditory feedback is altered, he compensates for the perturbation by altering
his own production, which demonstrates the role of auditory feedback in
speech motor control. In the present study, we explored the role of hearing
competence and executive control in this process. Spanish native speakers
performed (1) an altered feedback compensation experiment, (2) a numerical Stroop task and (3) a hearing competence questionnaire. (1) In the
compensation experiment, subjects had to produce the pseudoword “pep”
while perceiving their auditory feedback in real time through earphones.
The auditory feedback was first unaltered and then progressively altered in
F1 and F2 dimensions until maximal alteration (F1 -150; F2 +300). Around
80% of the participants compensated for the alteration. (2) Individual measures of inhibition of conflicting information capacities were obtained from
the results in the Stroop task. When comparing participants with high
versus low level of inhibition, we observed that the former compensated
slower than the latter. (3) Additionally, we compared participants with
high versus low hearing competence, based on subjective values obtained
from the questionnaire. Participants who self-reported a high hearing competence compensated slower and to a lesser degree than participants with
low hearing competence. We concluded that speech motor control depends
on hearing competence and executive control capacities. We suggest that
being good at inhibiting conflicting information (and/or having good hearing competence) makes participants better at detecting and inhibiting conflicting altered auditory feedback, leading to a slower compensation.

B125
ERP COMPONENTS UNDERLYING PRISM ADAPTATION

Stephane
MacLean1, Yoko Ishigami1, Cameron Hassall1, Olave Krigolson1, Gail Eskes1;
1
Dalhousie University — Adapting to visual field-displacing prism goggles
plays a crucial role in improving spatial neglect, by shifting visual orienting
in the opposite direction. Immediate strategic recalibration of visuomotor

92

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
aiming and slower visuo-motor spatial realignment (Redding & Wallace,
2002) are suggested processes involved in PA. Vocat et al (2011) showed
that event-related brain potentials (ERPs) were associated with size of
errors during PA. The purpose of our study was to replicate and extend
these findings to examine ERPs over a longer and more typical time course
of adaptation. Twenty-two participants executed goal directed reaching
movements to targets presented on a touchscreen monitor. During reaching, participants wore goggles that contained sham or prism lenses alternating over 13 blocks. Endpoint errors and the ERPs associated with movement completion were examined as a function of time-course (divided into
early, middle, and late thirds within each block) and averaged over sham
and prism conditions. Adaptation to prism goggles was confirmed by a
decrease in error magnitude over the prism blocks, and by an increase in
errors in the following sham blocks (aftereffect) that also diminished over
time. Movement completion elicited two ERP components with different
time course properties during exposure: an ERN component that remained
constant in latency and amplitude during each block, and a P200 component that showed a decrease in amplitude from early to late phases of adaptation. These results suggest two neural processes underlying prism adaptation: an invariant ERN response sensitive to error commission and a P200
response possibly reflecting conscious visuomotor re-calibration.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Multisensory
B126
MAGNIFICATION OF THE HAND INCREASES MOTOR EVOKED
POTENTIAL H. Branch Coslett1, Olu Faseyitan1, Jared Medina2; 1University of

Pennsylvania, 2University of Delaware — Enlarging the image of one’s hand
has been demonstrated to increase tactile acuity and alter the perception of
pain. To date there is little evidence of magnification effects on motor performance. MEPs, a measure of motor system excitability, were assessed in
the first dorsal interosseus muscle of 17 right-handed normal subjects using
single-pulse Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) at 120% of motor
threshold. There were 3 blocks of 40 trials. In the first and third blocks subjects sat in a comfortable chair gazing at their right hand resting on a table
directly in front of them. In the second block subjects viewed their hand
through a 2.2x magnifying lens. For each subject, the grand mean MEP
from all artifact-free trials (>95% of trials) was determined; trials deviating by more than 2 SDs from the grand mean were discarded. To adjust
for the variability in MEPs across subjects, each MEP was divided by the
grand mean. Mean MEPs for the three blocks were .967, 1.074, and .974
respectively; that is, magnification increased mean MEP by approximately
10%. The mean MEP with magnification was significantly larger than the
first and third conditions (p=.027 and p=.028, respectively) and the first and
third conditions did not differ from each other. The effect was also significant across subjects as 14/17 subjects had larger MEPs with magnification
(Chi-square p<.05). These findings have implications for the understanding of visuo-motor interactions and may have important consequences for
therapy.

B127
ERP MARKERS OF PERCEPTION AND ACTION REVEAL THAT THE
MAGNITUDE OF DELAY MATTERS FOR MEMORY-GUIDED REACHING Leanna Cruikshank1, Jeremy Caplan1, Anthony Singhal1; 1University of

Alberta — Delayed action research has suggested that perceptual information about a visual stimulus decays over several seconds. In exchange,
visuomotor behaviour is thought to rely more on working memory as
delays increase. Recently, Cruikshank et al. (2012) found that the N170
ERP component reflected ventral-stream processes linked to motor planning and perception for action. Specifically, the N170 was larger for actions
that relied on perceptual-based information. However, the delay was very
short (tens of ms). Behavioral and neuroimaging studies suggest that when
longer delays are employed, reactivation of ventral areas is necessary in
order to access a stored representation of the target’s characteristics. Therefore, the N170 may reflect not only perception-for-action processes, but the
accuracy of the representation. We traced the timecourse of the N170 in
memory-guided reaching when 1, 2, and 3 s delays separated target occlusion and response initiation. We also tested whether the P300 component
might track the increasing demand on working memory with increasing
delay. During reach-initiation, the N170 was more negative and peaked

2014 Annual Meeting	
earlier for the 1-s than the 2-s and 3-s delays and correlated significantly
with performance at the longest delay. The P300 was more positive for the
2-s and 3-s delays than the 1-s delay. These results suggest that the neural
mechanisms involved in movement planning change for delays beyond 1
s. The larger N170 and P300 may reflect an impoverished visual perceptual representation in the ventral stream and an increasing tax on working
memory, respectively.

B128
THE SOUND-INDUCED PHOSPHENE ILLUSION

Silvia Convento1,
Martina Fusaro1, Giuseppe Vallar1,2, Nadia Bolognini1,2; 1University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy, 2IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy — Crossmodal illusions show how perception can be dramatically altered by
interactions between senses. For example, when a single flash is accompanied by multiple beeps, it is perceived as multiple flashes. This effect is
known as the Sound-induced Flash illusion (Shams et al., 2000). To verify
whether this illusion is generated in primary visual areas, and the association between visual cortical excitability and auditory stimulation, we create
the Sound-induced Phosphene illusion. In Experiment 1, healthy participants performed the standard task for the Sound-induced Flash illusion
and the phosphene version of the same task, in which external flashes were
replaced by phosphenes induced by Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
(TMS) of the primary visual areas. In Experiment 2, we then characterized
the temporal window within which sounds can alter vision perception.
When TMS is accompanied by two auditory beeps, the second beep induces
the perception of an illusory second phosphene, namely the Sound-induced
Phosphene Illusion. This perceptual effect, namely the “fission” of a single
phosphene, due to multiple beeps, is not matched by a “fusion” of double
phosphenes due to a single beep and is characterized by an early auditory
modulation of the TMS-induced visual responses (~80 ms). We conclude
that auditory alteration of visual perception as reflected by the Sound-induced Phosphene illusion is causally linked to the auditory modulation of
activity in the visual cortex. An auditory stimulation may cause a phenomenological change in the conscious visual experience produced by occiptial TMS, revealing crossmodal binding mechanisms within early stages of
visual processing.

B129
CATEGORY REPRESENTATION ACROSS THE OLFACTORY SENSORY HIERARCHY Jaryd Hiser1, Takuya Sato2, Wen Li1; 1University of Wis-

consin-Madion, 2Kikkoman USA R&D — Human olfactory sensory encoding
is an area that is understudied, and it is unclear how odor categories are
represented. Using pattern correlation and classification (support vector
machine/SVM), this study examined representations of odor category,
odor affective valence, and motivational value in ensemble neuronal activity at different levels of the olfactory sensory hierarchy. Participants (N=20)
smelled an odor at a merely detectable level from one of three categories
(food, floral, or wood) while viewing a picture that was congruent or
incongruent to the odor, and then made a category decision on the odor.
Based on SVM pattern classification, fMRI response patterns in all levels of
olfactory sensory hierarchy could be separated by perceived odor category.
However, only in anterior piriform cortex, a low-level olfactory cortex, is
stimulus-based odor classification supported. These findings suggest that
the perceptual experience rather than the sensory input dominates the
response patterns in the olfactory sensory hierarchy (except for the lowlevel area that preserves considerable fidelity to the sensory input). Pattern
correlation analysis showed greater relatedness in response patterns for
within than between category trials in posterior piriform cortex, orbitofrontal cortex, and amygdala, albeit only based on perceived (vs. actual) odor
categories. Notably, this effect was primarily observed in the food category,
suggesting that response convergence is facilitated by the incentive value
of the percept. This dimensional measure of categorization aligns with the
behavioral results that showed greater accuracy and faster response times
for food classification.

B130
SEQUENTIAL ROLES OF PRIMARY SOMATOSENSORY CORTEX
AND POSTERIOR PARIETAL CORTEX IN TACTILE-VISUAL CROSSMODAL WORKING MEMORY: A SINGLE-PULSE TRANSCRANIAL
MAGNETIC STIMULATION (SPTMS) STUDY Yixuan Ku1, Di Zhao1,

Poster Session B
Yong-Di Zhou2; 1The Key Lab of Brain Functional Genomics, MOE & STCSM,
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, School of Psychology and Cognitive Science, East China Normal University, 2Department of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University — Both monkey neurophysiological and human EEG studies
have shown that association cortices, as well as primary sensory cortical
areas, play an essential role in sequential neural processes underlying tactile-visual cross-modal working memory. In the present study, to further
examine the neural mechanisms of tactile-visual cross-modal working
memory, we applied individual MRI-based single-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation (spTMS) to bilateral primary somatosensory cortices (SI)
and the right posterior parietal cortex (PPC), while subjects were performing a tactile-visual cross-modal delayed matching-to-sample task. Time
points of spTMS were 300ms, 600ms, 900ms after the onset of the tactile
sample stimulus in the task. The accuracy of task performance and reaction
time were significantly impaired when spTMS was applied to the right SI,
(contralateral to tactile stimulation) at 300ms. Performance impairment on
accuracy was also observed when the right PPC was stimulated at 600ms.
These results indicate that SI and PPC play distinct roles in sequential
neural processes of cross-modal associations and working memory.

B131
READING BRAILLE BY TOUCH AND BY SIGHT: THE PRELIMINARY
RESULTS OF A LONGITUDINAL FMRI STUDY ON MULTIMODAL
READING IN SIGHTED SUBJECTS. Katarzyna Siuda1, Łukasz Bola2,

Małgorzata Paplińska3, Ewa Sumera4, Marcin Szwed1; 1Jagiellonian University,
2
University of Warsaw, 3The Maria Grzegorzewska Academy of Special Education, 4Institue for the Blind and Partially Sighted Children, Cracow — Reading Braille in congenitally blind subjects activates the Visual Word Form
Area, a ventral visual stream area known to develop expertise for reading in sighted (Reich et al., 2011). This surprising finding challenges the
canonical, sensory-based (visual, tactile...) division-of-labour in the brain.
To further investigate this issue, we sought to determine which brain
regions are activated by Braille reading in sighted readers who lack the
large-scale plasticity that appears in blind’s visual system. The subjects
were 34 sighted Braille students and teachers. Some already learned how to
read visually presented Braille (VisualBraille), e.g. through correcting blind
children’s homework, but no one read it tactilely. All performed a Lexical
Decision Task on words in latin alphabet and VisualBraille. Next, the subjects underwent an fMRI experiment involving reading latin, VisualBraille
and TactileBraille, scrambled controls, and touching and imagining objects.
Currently, the subjects are enrolled in an intensive TactileBraille course, to
be followed by an identical fMRI. Here we describe only the results of the
first fMRI. Behavioural data revealed a strong word length effect in VisualBraille, suggesting that it was read sequentially. fMRI showed that VisualBraille strongly activates the VWFA relative both to scrambled control and
to latin reading. Major VisualBraille activations in the left Inferior Frontal
Gyrus and Inferior Parietal Sulci suggested an important attentional component in this process. Additionally, the Lateral Occipital Tactile Visual
area was activated by touching objects vs. imaging objects, replicating the
results of Amedi et al., 2001. These results first describe VisualBraille reading mechanisms.

B132
COMPENSATORY CROSS-MODAL PLASTICITY AND CORTICAL
RESOURCE RE-ALLOCATION IN EARLY-STAGE HEARING LOSS

Julia Campbell1, Anu Sharma1; 1University of Colorado at Boulder — Auditory
deprivation is associated with re-organization of the cortex. For example, in
deafness, cross-modal re-organization has been shown to take place where
intact sensory modalities, such as vision, recruit auditory cortical regions
for enhanced visual processing. Additionally, in hearing loss, atypical
cortical networks are often utilized for auditory processing. This resource
re-allocation increases cognitive load, which has recently been associated
with an increased risk for dementia in older adults with hearing loss. However, it remains unclear whether cortical re-organization is caused only by
near-total auditory deprivation, as in deafness, or whether individuals with
early-stage hearing loss also exhibit this compensatory plasticity. With this
in mind, we used high-density EEG to record visual and auditory evoked
potentials (VEP and AEPs) in 17 adults, 9 with early-stage hearing loss.
Results for the hearing loss group indicated that decreased VEP latency correlated well with poor speech perception in background noise on a clinical
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

93

Poster Session B	
test (r = -0.7, p = 0.001). Source localization (sLORETA) showed evidence
of cross-modal plasticity, with auditory cortical areas activated by visual
stimulation (Campbell and Sharma, 2013, submitted). Furthermore, source
localization during auditory processing revealed decreased temporal cortical activation and increased frontal network activity in early-stage hearing loss (Campbell and Sharma, 2013, Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience).
Overall, our findings provide the first evidence that cross-modal plasticity
and cortical resource re-allocation occur in early-stage hearing loss, and
may be an important factor in clinical outcomes. Supported by NIDCD
F31DC011970 to JC and NIDCD R01DC0625 to AS

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
B133
DYNAMIC SHIFTS IN CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN FRONTAL, OCCIPITAL, HIPPOCAMPAL AND STRIATAL REGIONS CHARACTERIZE
STATISTICAL LEARNING OF SPATIAL PATTERNS Elisabeth A. Karuza1,

Lauren L. Emberson1, Matthew E. Roser2, Michael Gazzaniga3, Daniel Cole1,
Richard N. Aslin1, Jozsef Fiser4; 1University of Rochester, 2University of Plymouth, 3UC Santa Barbara, 4Central European University — Extensive behavioral evidence has revealed that humans automatically develop internal
representations that are adapted to the temporal and spatial statistics of
the environment. However, the neural systems underlying this statistical
learning process are not fully understood. Recently, various neuroimaging
methods have been employed to examine this topic, but these studies have
focused exclusively on temporally ordered stimuli. Since spatial structure
is a hallmark of object and scene perception in vision, the present functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study investigated the substrates and
processes underlying complex spatial pattern learning. Neuroimaging
data were obtained while 20 subjects passively viewed artificially created
scenes with a pre-specified pair-based statistical structure. After three runs
of exposure to 144 different 6-element scenes, subjects performed a yes/no
task on base-pairs and cross-pairs. Using seed regions defined by relating
magnitude of activation to this post-exposure behavioral learning performance, we examined changes in functional connectivity over the course of
learning. In addition to a general increase in connectivity throughout exposure, we find a specific connectivity relationship between frontal, occipital,
hippocampal and subcortical areas that was dynamically reconfigured as
learning progressed. Specifically, we show that connectivity with frontal
regions shifted from early visual areas to subcortical areas when comparing early and late phases of exposure. These results suggest that learning
is not fully captured by a single, fixed “learning” network, but is reflected
at least partially in dynamic shifts in connectivity across numerous cortical
and subcortical areas.

B134
THE NOTION OF THE MOTION: THE NEUROCOGNITION OF
MOTION LINES IN VISUAL NARRATIVES Neil Cohn1, Stephen Maher2;
1

University of California, San Diego, 2McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School
— Motion lines appear ubiquitously in drawings to depict the path of a
moving object, most popularly in comics. Some researchers argue that
these lines tie to the “streaks” appearing in the visual system when a
viewer tracks an object (1). However, previous studies do not use motion
lines’ natural context of comics, only depict limited actions (usually just
running), and only use offline measurements of behavior like recall or subjective ratings. Here, we directly examined the cognition of motion lines by
comparing images in comic strips that depicted normal motion lines with
images that either had no lines or reversed, anomalous lines. In Experiment 1, participants’ self-paced viewing times were faster to images with
normal lines than no lines, which were faster than to anomalous lines. In
Experiment 2, using event-related panels (ERPs), we found a posterior positivity to the absence of normal lines (anomalous and no lines), consistent
with positivities to event comprehension in language and visual actions (2).
This effect differed from the frontal positivity evoked by the presence of
anomalous lines, resembling a P300a. These results suggested that normal
motion lines do not just facilitate comprehension, but the absence of lines
impairs the understanding of depicted events. Furthermore, participants’
“comic reading expertise” modulated the magnitude of effects in both
experiments, suggesting motion lines are not tied to aspects of the visual

94

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
system, but rather are conventionalized parts of the “visual language” of
comics. 1. D.C. Burr, Current Biology 10,12 (2000) 2. G. Kuperberg, Brain
Research 1146 (2007)

B135
DISTINGUISHING THREE PREFRONTAL PROCESSES IN PERCEPTUAL DECISION-MAKING: A TMS-FMRI STUDY Dobromir Rahnev1,

Alina Larson1, Mark D’Esposito1; 1UC Berkeley — The prefrontal cortex (PFC)
is thought to control several aspects of perceptual decision-making including attentional, decisional, and metacognitive processes. Based on previous
research, we hypothesized that these control mechanisms are performed by
separate regions along the lateral PFC. We tested this hypothesis by applying, on different days, theta-burst transcranial magnetic stimulation (TBS)
to the frontal eye fields (FEF), dorsolateral PFC (DLPFC), and anterior PFC
(aPFC), as well as to somatosensory cortex that served as a control region.
These regions were functionally identified for each individual (N = 17) on
a separate day in which subjects performed our psychophysical task in the
MRI scanner. The task combined spatial attention, speed-accuracy manipulation, and confidence ratings. The results confirmed our hypothesis about
differential involvement of the three PFC regions in our task. First, TBS to
FEF impaired attentional processes: it decreased the difference in response
times between invalidly and validly cued stimuli. Second, TBS to DLPFC
affected the decisional mechanisms in that it led to decreased ability to
follow speed/accuracy instructions. Indeed a diffusion model fit to the data
showed that after TBS to DLPFC subjects were impaired in adjusting the
decision threshold in trials in which they were asked to emphasize speed
or accuracy. Third, TBS to aPFC affected metacognitive processes such that
it altered the extent to which subjects’ confidence ratings predicted their
accuracy on a trial-by-trail basis. Overall, our study provides causal evidence for a mapping of separate control processes related to perceptual
decision-making to regions the lateral PFC.

B136
PHOBIC RESPONSES TO MASKED STIMULI: A DISSOCIATION
BETWEEN PHYLOGENETIC AND ONTOGENETIC PHOBIAS Nicholas

Root1, Kelsey Baron1, Zubin Shah1, Vilayanur Ramachandran1; 1Center for Brain
and Cognition, University of California San Diego — Although past studies
have shown that masked images of phobic objects elicit skin conductance
responses (SCRs) in phobic subjects, the phobias in the study - snake and
spider - were both phylogenetic in origin. We wondered if subjects with
ontogenetic phobias, such as a needle phobia, would show a similar pattern of SCRs. We recruited subjects with snake, spider, and needle phobias,
and measured their SCR while they viewed images of their phobias that
were sometimes masked using Continuous Flash Suppression. We found
an interaction between phobia type and conscious awareness: in the unconscious case, SCR to phylogenetic and ontogenetic phobic objects differed.
We suggest that the physiological responses to phylogenetic and ontogenetic phobias might be driven by different brain mechanisms.

B137
EXPLORING THE NEURAL DYNAMICS OF OCCIPITAL AND PARIETAL PHOSPHENES WITH COMBINED TMS-EEG Jason Samaha1,

Olivia Gosseries1, Bradley R. Postle1; 1University of Wisconsin - Madison —
One promising approach to mapping the neural dynamics of consciousness is to stimulate brain regions that give rise to conscious percepts while
simultaneously recording brain activity. Applying transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) to early visual cortex can induce brief visual percepts
called phosphenes. Several groups have also reported phosphenes resulting from a posterior parietal stimulation site, but the neural signatures of
these percepts are poorly understood. We investigated the neural dynamics
associated with awareness of phosphenes by finding stimulation thresholds for each participant such that approximately 50% of trials gave rise
to conscious percepts while the other half did not. This was done for both
occipital and parietal stimulation sites. Concurrently recording electroencephalography (EEG) allowed us to contrast activity in phosphene-absent
from phosphene-present trials, while holding all stimulus parameters constant. Preliminary analyses of the TMS-evoked response reveal a relatively
late (>300ms) event-related potential component at the site of stimulation
(O2 and P4) that differentiates the phosphene-present from phosphene-absent trials. Additionally, pre-stimulus oscillatory activity in the alpha

2014 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session B

and theta bands at these parietal and occipital sensors was predictive of
whether or not stimulation would result in report of a conscious percept.
These findings are in line with theoretical accounts of consciousness involving late, re-entrant processing, and support previous findings indicating
that low-frequency oscillatory dynamics can index the moment-to-moment
excitability of cortical areas.

THINKING: Decision making

B138
ONLINE CORRECTIVE HAND MOTIONS TO SUPPRESSED VISUAL
INFORMATION DURING SACCADES Elon Gaffin-Cahn1, Bradford

ity of dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) respond
initially to unconditioned rewarding stimuli, but after conditional training,
to arbitrary stimuli that are predictive of incoming reward (Schultz et al.,
1986). This dynamics is typically interpreted in terms of a specific class of
reinforcement learning algorithms, called temporal difference (TD) learning (Schultz et al., 1997). This approach suggested that VTA computes TD
signals to formulate reward expectations. Nonetheless several empirical
findings challenged the classical TD-related explanation of VTA dynamics
(Pan et al., 2005). Moreover, it remained unclear whether such a temporal
dynamics was computed directly by the VTA or originated from other brain
structures. Here we propose a novel neuro-computational account of VTA
dopaminergic dynamics. Our findings are based on an already existent
neural model concerning reinforcement learning operations in the anterior
cingulate cortex, the VTA and their interactions: the Reward Value Prediction Model (RVPM, Silvetti et al., 2011). We propose that VTA dynamics
derives from processing of signals afferent from the ACC, with the purpose
of training yet other brain areas. To test this hypothesis, we ran four computer simulations where we administered to the RVPM several sessions of
classical conditioning. Through the ACC-VTA interaction, we successfully
managed to reproduce the most relevant findings on dopamine dynamics,
like dopamine shifting from reward period to cue period, summation and
overshadowing effects, blocking, and dopamine dynamics in paradigms
with multiple cues. These results allowed us to provide a comprehensive
set of simulations about dopaminergic activity of mammalian brainstem.

Mahon1,2; 1Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, 2Department of Neurosurgery, University of Rochester Medical Center —
Navigating the environment frequently necessitates the online correction
of a body movement. In humans, these updates are most often mediated
through vision. Even when the environment is stable, producing a fast
and accurate updated motor plan has an added dimension of complexity
because our eyes are repeatedly moving to fixate on different parts of the
environment. Previous research shows that online visuomotor corrections
can be made during a saccade, despite individuals being perceptually
unaware of any environmental disturbance to high contrast, broadband
targets due to saccadic suppression. However, the fate of stimuli that are
subject to intra-saccadic suppression is unknown. For example, are low spatial frequency gratings which are presented during a saccade suppressed
entirely, or are they only suppressed to visual perception but still available
to influence the motor system? We tested this across a series of experiments
in which participants saccaded and pointed to low contrast, spatial frequency-filtered images and isoluminant images. During the saccades, the
stimuli were displaced. We found that visual information suppressed to
perception retains a powerful influence over the motor system. We further
explored the timing and spatial frequency characteristics of stimuli in order
to define the range within which stimuli do not break through to perceptual
awareness, but nevertheless contribute to be available to visuomotor processes. Our findings promote the idea that the visuomotor system acts in an
optimal manner and is not limited by constraints on perception.

B139
FEMALE SUPERIORITY IN RED COLOR PERCEPTION Soyeon Kim1,

Marisa Carrasco2, Samantha Chen1, Mohamed Al-Haj1, Stuart Fuller2, Rosemary Tannock1; 1University of Toronto, 2New York University — Objectives:
Females may be superior to males in perception of the color red. This sexual
dimorphism may have its origin in hunter-gather societies in which females
needed to hone their skills in gathering ripe red fruits or edible leaves to
enhance survival of their clan. We hypothesized that if red color perception had been advantageous for females, traces of that sexual dimorphism
should still be discernible. However, findings to date are equivocal, in part
because most studies have focused solely on discrimination of hue rather
than color saturation, which influences the vividness of a color and so
highly relevant for spotting edible fruit. In the present study, we investigated sex differences in hue and color saturation discrimination. Methods:
We examines color perception in 30 healthy adults (50% male; Mean age:
24) using a novel psychophysical paradigm to measure the perceived color
saturation (intensity) of red versus blue, with contrast sensitivity as a control condition. Participants were required to determine whether the more
colourful stimulus (or that with higher contrast) is tilted to the left or right.
We also used an established measure of hue perception (Farnsworth-Munsell 100 Hue Test). Results: We found that females were more accurate in
discriminating red saturation than males (p = .02; ES =.95), but there were
no sex differences in accuracy in discriminating blue saturation, contrast
sensitivity, or perception of hue. Conclusion: The robust superiority in Red
saturation discrimination in females demonstrated in this study supports
evolutionary hunter-gatherer theories which posit sex-specific functional
specializations.

B140
MID-FRONTAL ORIGIN OF DOPAMINE TEMPORAL DIFFERENCE
DYNAMICS Massimo Silvetti1, Tom Verguts1; 1Ghent University — The major-

B141
BASAL GANGLIA RELOADED: A MODEL OF TONIC DOPAMINE
EFFECTS ON SELECTIONS IN A CHANGING ENVIRONMENT Vin-

cenzo G. Fiore1, Francesco Rigoli1, Rick Adams1, Raymond J. Dolan1; 1Functional Imaging Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging at UCL
— Two major families of models have described the neural dynamics and
mechanisms characterising the striato-thalamo-cortical loops and the associated selection performed within the basal ganglia (Gurney et al. 2001a,b,
Frank et al. 2004, and subsequent). We assess key features of these models
under different conditions of dopaminergic release and concentrations of
either D1 and D2 dopamine receptors. Simulations show the main role
played by tonic dopamine within the striatum is to alter the gain of channels present in the basal ganglia: increased dopamine release enhances the
gain of the most salient stimuli (via D1) clearing the signal from noise and
-if strongly increased- causing maintenance of selection despite changes
in the environment, resembling compulsive behaviour or addiction (distractors are ignored and selection of weakened/vanished stimuli can be
preserved). Decreased dopamine enhances the gain of the least salient
stimuli (via D2) favouring a switch to competing options and behaviour
that adapts to changes in the environment (in healthy agents it favours
exploration, in pathological agents it causes ambitendency). Thus selection
-of actions, attention or goals- is determined by a balance among direct,
indirect and hyperdirect (via the subthalamic nucleus) pathways. Although
D1 and D2 activities contribute to GO and NoGO effects, changes in their
activity ratio lead to more complex effects. In particular, higher D2 activity
(as postulated in schizophrenia) dramatically increases the system’s sensitivity to small changes in dopaminergic transmission, causing instability
of response selection or simultaneous selection of competing responses.
Behavioural tests of these predictions are ongoing.

B142
DOPAMINERGIC INTERVENTION IMPROVES PROBABILISTIC
REWARD-LEARNING IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE. Joseph Kim1,

Scott Wylie1, David Zald1, Daniel Claassen1; 1Vanderbilt University — In the
current study, we sought to examine the effect of levodopa on probabilistic reward-learning in Parkinson’s disease (PD). Specifically, we investigated: (i) whether levodopa monotherapy improves reward-learning in
PD patients, (ii) whether the magnitude of levodopa-dependent changes
in reward-learning is mediated by PD patient’s disease severity, and (iii)

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

95

Poster Session B	
whether and how levodopa alters choice-behavior patterns over the course
of the task, as compared to age-matched healthy controls and patients at
baseline. We used a dynamic foraging task in which participants must
choose between two locations based on probabilistic differences in reward
feedback that reverse over time. We fit 19 PD patients’ choice-behavior
from this task using a reinforcement-learning model. Results indicated
that Off-medication motor symptom severity positively correlated with the
magnitude of improvement in reinforcement-learning on medication (r=.58,
p < 0.01). Secondly, while healthy controls exhibited a pattern of increased
improvement (more frequently choosing the side associated with greater
reward probability) as the task progressed, PD patients Off-levodopa
showed the opposite pattern, reflecting a “deterioration” of choice-behavior over time (i.e., significant Time by Group interaction, p < 0.05). In contrast, PD patients On-levodopa showed a trend toward improved performance as the task progressed, which suggested that levodopa-dependent
improvement in reward-learning may be partly due to a dopamine-based
restoration of improved learning over time. These results highlight the
importance of dopamine functioning in probabilistic reward-learning, with
levodopa monotherapy producing improvements proportional to baseline
motor deficits, and suggest that these improvements are related to modulation of reward-learning circuitry affected in PD.

B143
PROCESSING OF POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE FEEDBACK IN
HEALTHY AGING Martina Rustemeier1, Christian Bellebaum2; 1Ruhr University

Bochum, Germany, 2Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Germany — The basal
ganglia and the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) both belong to the so-called
reward system. They receive dopaminergic projections and are critically
involved in reward feedback processing. Probably due to an age-associated
decline of the dopamine level, aging is associated with altered processing
of feedback stimuli. In young adults, a bias for better learning from negative feedback is reflected in processing differences between positive and
negative feedback. The present study compared feedback processing in
older (mean age 65 years) and younger (mean age 25 years) healthy positive and negative learners. Participants performed a probabilistic feedback
learning task with monetary rewards, while event-related potentials (ERPs)
were recorded. We expected that older, as younger, negative learners show
stronger responses to negative feedback, as reflected in their amplitudes
of the feedback-related negativity (FRN), an ACC-driven ERP component,
despite a general attenuation of the FRN. An interaction between age and
feedback type emerged. Younger subjects showed higher FRN amplitudes
for negative feedback than older participants. In contrast to the seniors, the
younger subjects differentiated between feedback types with higher FRN
amplitudes for negative than positive feedback. Besides, an interaction
between learning group and feedback type was found. Across age groups,
only positive learners differentiated between positive and negative feedback. This effect was driven by reduced FRN amplitudes for positive feedback in positive learners. Our results indicate age-associated differences in
feedback processing. But independent of age, the individual learning bias is
reflected by the way how different feedback types are processed.

B144
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN TEMPORAL DISCOUNTING
AMONG OLDER ADULTS: A FUNCTIONAL MRI STUDY Kameko

Halfmann1, William Hedgcock1, Joseph Kable2, Natalie L. Denburg1; 1University
of Iowa, 2University of Pennsylvania — Temporal discounting refers to the
tendency to value immediate gains more than distant gains. The subjective value of an immediate compared to distant gain varies substantially
from one person to the next. In the last decade, a corpus of research has
been conducted to understand the neural correlates of temporal discounting and subjective value. In fact, research in young adults has shown that
there is a network of neural regions reliably associated with the subjective
valuation of rewards. This network of regions includes areas such as the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex and striatum, both of which are also linked
to age-related decline. Contradictory to intuition, advancing age is associated with lower discount rates. However, to date, little work has investigated whether the same network observed in young adults is linked to
subjective value among older adults. We aimed to fill this gap. We used an
incentive-compatible intertemporal choice task to measure individual discount rates in twenty-nine healthy older adults (aged 56-90). Participants
completed this task while undergoing BOLD-fMRI. Results are not fully

96

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
consistent with previous work in younger adults. In other words, among
older adults, subjective value was not associated with the typical pattern
of activation. Further analysis demonstrated that individual differences in
complex decision-making modify the relationship between activation and
subjective value. This occurred in the absence of differences in intellectual
or cognitive abilities. This is consistent with the view that there are deviations in affective processing among older adults, which impact the neural
instantiation of subjective value.

B145
THE INFLUENCE OF MOTIVATION ON COGNITIVE FATIGUE IN
INDIVIDUALS WITH MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS: AN FMRI STUDY. Ekat-

erina Dobryakova1, John DeLuca1, Helen Genova1, Nancy Chiaravalloti1, Glenn
Wylie1; 1Neuropsychology and Neuroscience Laboratory, Kessler Foundation
Research Center — Large numbers of individuals with multiple sclerosis
(MS) experience cognitive fatigue. Cognitive fatigue has been associated
with impairment of a fronto-striatal network that has also been shown to
be involved in affective and cognitive processes (e.g. effort calculation and
reward valuation), suggesting a possible link between cognitive fatigue
and reward processes. Here, we explored this link in persons with MS.
We hypothesized that an inflated perception of effort requirements to perform an action and underestimation of the reward value leads to cognitive
fatigue that arises when the functioning of the these regions is disrupted
(Dobryakova et al., 2013). Manipulating motivational salience during a task
may modulate the expression of cognitive fatigue in individuals with MS.
We recruited individuals with MS who experience cognitive fatigue and
healthy subjects (HC). While performing a task in an MRI scanner they
were presented with a reward and a no reward condition where they were
able to win a monetary reward or were not presented with such opportunity. Self-reported fatigue ratings were also acquired during the scan. Data
showed that striatal activity in MS group is less robust relative to HCs, who
showed significantly increased striatal activation when winning money.
MS subjects reported a 20% decrease in cognitive fatigue during the task
when switching from the reward to a no reward condition. This suggests
that MS subjects with fatigue may judge a given reward amount differently
from HCs and that motivation can modulate

B146
RAPID INTERMITTENT DEEP BRAIN STIMULATION BIASES
BEHAVIOR IN FINANCIAL DECISION-MAKING TASK Shaun Patel1,2,

Sameer Sheth1, Matthew Mian1, Sarah Bourne1, Jimmy Yang1, Alice Flaherty1,
Emad Eskandar1; 1Harvard Medical School, 2Boston University School of Medicine — We report single-unit responses recorded from the human subthalamic nucleus (STN) in patients undergoing deep brain stimulation while
engaged in a financial decision-making task. The task is modeled as a simplified version of the classic card game “war”. The subject is dealt a card
and asked to make a high or low wager ($5 or $20). Immediately following their choice they are shown their opponent’s card––the player with the
highest card wins. We recorded 20 individual neurons from 5 patients. We
found that during the go-cue period, neuronal activity in the STN predicted
whether the subject would ultimately bet high or low on trials where the
probability of a positive or negative outcome were equal (6-card trials,
two-tailed t-test, p = 0.03). To explore this further, we used intermittent
electrical stimulation to assess changes in financial decision-making. Using
modified stimulator we applied one of three stimulation conditions during
6-card trials: no stimulation, 1 sec of stimulation at the fixation, or 1 sec
of stimulation at the go-cue epoch. We found that intermittent stimulation
at the go-cue epoch––the same period STN neurons encode the upcoming
decision––biases subject to make a low wager (binomial proportion, 95%
c.i.). Fixation and no stimulation categories had no effect on decision-making. In this study, we demonstrated that neuronal activity in the dorsal STN
predicts financial decisions. We then showed that we could apply intermittent electrical stimulation through the implanted electrode to bias the
decision signal and ultimately alter the subject’s behavior.

2014 Annual Meeting	

THINKING: Problem solving
B147
SOURCES OF INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY IN MATH PROBLEM
SOLVING SKILLS IN CHILDREN WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER Teresa Iuculano1, Kaustubh Supekar1, Katherine Cheng1, Vinod

Menon1; 1Stanford University — Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by a complex phenotype including social, communication and sensorimotor processing deficits. Yet, recent
evidence suggests that some individuals with ASD might exhibit cognitive
strengths in various domains. One domain in which individuals with ASD
often seem to succeed is mathematics, yet heterogeneity has been largely
reported in the population. Here we use psychometric as well as neurobiological measures to investigate sources of individual variability in math
problem solving skills in a population of 17 children with ASD (mean age
= 9.85, SD = 1.7). We found no correlations between ASD’s calculation abilities and intelligence scores, nor symptoms severity scores (all ps = n.s).
Individual variability in math problem solving was instead significantly
explained by neurobiological factors. Specifically, analyses of functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) signal - acquired during math problem solving - showed that activation levels as well as multivariate activation
patterns of activity of the fusiform gyrus in the ventral temporal-occipital
cortex (VTOC) uniquely predicted individual math problem solving abilities in ASD. Moreover, the strength of the functional coupling between the
same region in the VTOC and the medial temporal lobe (MTL) significantly
correlated with better math problem solving abilities in ASD. These results
suggest that sources of individual variability in ASD’s math problem solving skills arise from a unique pattern of brain organization characterized
by greater recruitment of posterior regions of the ventral stream and their
functional coupling with memory systems.

B148
NEUROMYTHOLOGY OF EINSTEIN’S BRAIN

Terence Hines1; 1Pace
University — The idea that Einstein’s brain was different from normal brains
in both cellular structure and external morphology is based on studies that
are chock-a-block with statistical, methodological and conceptual errors.
These will be explored in detail in this poster. Diamond et al. (1985) claimed
that Einstein’s brain had more glial cells than control brains. This study
used inappropriate control brains, incorrect statistics and probably selectively reported positive results. Anderson and Harvey (1996) found greater
neuron density, but not more neurons, in one small area of Einstein’s right
frontal lobe. Studies of the patterns of sulci and gyri in Einstein’s brain
found differences found differences between Einstein’s brain and control
brains in the details of the gyral patterns. Falk et al. (2012) performed an
excruciatingly detailed analysis that did,in fact, demonstrate that the gyral
pattern of Einstein’s brain wasn’t the same as that of control brains. But
who would have expected anything else? Human brains differ. The differences that were found were hardly ones that would suggest superior intelligence, although the authors desperately tried to spin their results to make
it appear so. Similar problems exist for the recent claim by Men et al. (2013)
that Einstein’s corpus callosum was different from that of control brains.

B149
NEURAL BASIS OF NOVELTY AND USEFULNESS IN INSIGHTFUL
CHUNK DECOMPOSITION Jing Luo1, Furong Huang1, Xiaoping Ying2;
1

Department of Psychology, College of Education, Capital Normal University,
Institute of Sociology, Chinese Academy of Social Sciences — Although it
has been widely recognized that the novelty and usefulness are two key
features of creative thinking, the cognitive brain mechanism underlying
these two processes are still unknown. This study tried to separate these
two processes through insightful or non-insightful chunk decomposition
task. In the study, the novelty was defined as the way of chunk decomposition was novel or not, while the usefulness was defined as the results of
chunk decomposition was valid or not. We found: (1) the brain was most
ready to process the “familiar and useful” type of chunk decomposition,
then the “familiar and useless” and “novel and useful” one, and finally the
“novel and useless” one. This was not only manifested in the difference
in response time (RT) across the four types of decomposition, but also in
the difference in the degree of suppression on the default mode network
2

Poster Session B
(DMN) activity. (2) The key area for the declarative and episodic memory
system, the hippocampus, was found to be responsive to the usefulness
of chunk decomposition, whereas the key area for the non-declarative or
procedural memory system, the caudate in basal ganglia, was found to be
responsive to the novelty of chunk decomposition. These findings reveal
insight is not only a declarative learning process as usually proposed, but
also a non-declarative process accompanying robust incremental learning
and re-chunking of habit.

B150
HORMONAL CONTRACEPTIVES SHOULD, BUT MAY NOT, INFLUENCE COGNITION Lena Ficco1, Brittany J. Lewis1, Neil Berthier1; 1University of Massachusetts Amherst — The present study explores the cognitive
effects of ethinyl estradiol (EE2), a common hormonal contraceptive. As an
estradiol superagonist (Blair et al., 2000), EE2 has the potential to influence
estrogen-sensitive cognitive processes, such as verbal (Mordecai, Rubin,
& Maki, 2008) and spatial abilities (Zurkovsky, Serio, & Korol, 2011). To
test this hypothesis, three groups of healthy young women completed a
battery of estrogen-sensitive and -insensitive tasks. Subjects included naturally cycling females, tested near menses when estrogens are low, and two
groups of hormonal contraceptive users. Hormonal contraceptive users
were tested during either their hormone-free interval phase when endogenous estrogens and EE2 are low or active pill phase when endogenous
estrogens are low and EE2 levels are high. Salivary estradiol levels were
assayed. Results from a pilot study suggested significant differences in
estradiol levels and navigation abilities favoring naturally cycling females
over sugar pill phase females only; however, this study was underpowered
(N = 30) and these findings were not replicated in a follow-up study which
was sufficiently powered (N = 65). It is possible that the cognitive effects of
EE2 are small enough to be detected only by very large sample sizes (in the
thousands); however, this is not likely considering the high affinity of EE2
for estrogen receptors and the documented moderate to large effects of sex
on spatial and verbal tasks (effect sizes of nearly 1.0 and 0.5, respectively,
for review see Kimura, 2004). The present study does not provide evidence
of cognitive EE2 effects.

LANGUAGE: Other
B151
NATIVE AND NON-NATIVE PERCEPTION OF NARRATIVE SPEECH

Hia Datta1,2, Jason Zevin2,3; 1Speech Language Pathology, Molloy College,
2
Sackler Institute of Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Cornell Medical College, 3Department of Psychology, University of Southern California — Studies
of the neural mechanisms of second language (L2) processing often focus on
specific “components” of language such as speech sounds, words or grammar. However, understanding real-world L2 processing involving simultaneous demands across multiple levels of language processing requires use
of naturalistic stimuli. Here, we applied cross-correlation analyses to compare response reliability between native and non-native listeners while listening to a continuous spoken narrative. Data were acquired from 11 native
English and 11 native Japanese speakers while they listened to a recording of the “Pie Man” story used in Lerner et al.’s (2011) in a Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) scanner. The preprocessed timeseries
for each individual was correlated against the averaged timeseries for the
10 other individuals in their language group, permitting direct comparisons between groups. Significant correlations were observed in the Superior Temporal Gyrus, Middle Temporal Gyrus and Precuneus regions for
English listeners. The activations of these brain regions, also reported by
Lerner et al. 2011, suggest that the English listeners’ processing of narrative
discourse includes low level auditory processing of sounds (STG), semantic
processing of words (MTG) as well as cognitive processes such as perceptual monitoring, memory retrieval and imagery. Significant correlations
for the Japanese listeners were limited to bilateral STG and middle Frontal
Gyrus. Differences between groups surfaced in a broad network, plausibly
related to deeper processing of the story by the English compared to the
Japanese listeners.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

97

Poster Session C
ATTENTION: Other
C1
REWARD ASSOCIATIONS MEDIATE UNCONSCIOUS ATTENTIONAL CAPTURE DURING -SUBSTITUTION MASKING. Joseph A.

Harris1, Sarah E. Donohue1, M. Ariel Schoenfeld1, Hans-Jochen Heinze1, Marty
G. Woldorff1,2; 1Otto-von-Guericke Universität Magdeburg, 2Duke University — It
has previously been reported that visual stimuli associated with reward are
more likely to capture attention. As yet unknown is whether such reward
associations are necessarily consciously detected and how such detection may modulate visual processing. Here we examined the influence of
reward associations in the awareness-disrupting paradigm of object-substitution masking (OSM). In OSM, a visual-image array is briefly presented
that includes a parafoveal target cued by surrounding dots. When the
dot-cue offset is delayed relative to the image array, a striking perceptual
reduction of the dot-surrounded target image is observed. The current
study consisted of two stages: (1) a reward-association induction stage
involving location discrimination of targets of either monetarily rewarded
or unrewarded colors, and (2) an OSM stage involving orientation discrimination of OSM-cued elliptical targets of either the previously rewarded or
unrewarded color. Neural measures of lateralized attentional shifts were
recorded with MEG. Reward associations were successfully achieved in the
induction phase (faster and more accurate for rewarded than unrewarded
targets, along with enhanced attention-shift-related N2pc MEG responses).
This reward association appeared to transfer to the OSM phase, with better
target-orientation discrimination in the unmasked condition for ellipses of
the previously rewarded versus unrewarded color. In the masked condition,
however, targets of the previously rewarded versus unrewarded color did
not differ in their susceptibility to masking. Nevertheless, masked ellipses
of the previously rewarded color evoked an enhanced N2pc whether they
were detected or not, suggesting that reward associations facilitate attentional capture even when not consciously detected.

C2
ERP EVIDENCE OF COGNITIVE DEFICITS IN BREAST CANCER
SURVIVORS WITH CANCER-ASSOCIATED COGNITIVE CHANGES

Julia Kam1, Todd C. Handy1, Lara A. Boyd1, Teresa Liu-Ambrose1, Sherri
Hayden1, Kristin L. Campbell1; 1University of British Columbia — Many breast
cancer survivors (BCS) have reported cognitive changes following chemotherapy treatment. However, standard neuropsychological tests have
been challenged in identifying a reliable cognitive profile to reflect these
reported symptoms, highlighting the need to develop outcome measures in
the laboratory that are more sensitive to these changes experienced in daily
life. One cognitive domain that is relatively difficult to measure in neuropsychological assessments but is crucial to daily function is the ability to
maintain attention over longer periods of time. Accordingly, we examined
whether BCS who self-reported cognitive issues up to 3 years following
cancer treatment (n=17) performed differently from healthy controls (HC)
(n=12) in a task that required sustained attention. Participants performed
a target detection task at fixation while event-related potentials (ERPs)
were recorded. Interspersed between each visual stimulus was a task-irrelevant tone. The ERPs to the auditory tones and visual targets were then
compared between BCS and HC. We found that the visual-evoked P3 ERP
component elicited by visual targets was smaller in BCS relative to HC.
Nevertheless, auditory sensory-evoked N1 ERP components did not seem
to differ between groups. This indicates that BCS showed attenuation in
cognitive processing of task-relevant visual stimuli compared to HS. Our
data thus suggests objective cognitive deficits can be observed in breast
cancer survivors who self-report cognitive changes, underscoring the value
of a less traditional measure of performance as a sensitive measure of daily
functioning.

C3
NEURAL NETWORKS INVOLVED IN ORIENTING ATTENTION TO
REPRESENTATIONS IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY Kristina C. Backer1,2,

Bradley R. Buchsbaum1,2, Claude Alain1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman
Research Institute — A current trend in attention research aims to understand the neural substrates and behavioral consequences of orienting
attention to representations in short-term memory (STM). Yet it remains
largely unknown if this process can be modulated by the particular feature
used to gain access to a particular representation. Thus, the goal of this
study was to examine the brain regions involved in orienting attention to
STM representations, on the basis of their sensory modality or semantic
category. During fMRI scanning, participants heard two sounds and saw
two pictures (i.e., four unique, unimodal items) simultaneously. After a
brief delay, a symbolic visual retro-cue, representing a particular Modality
(Auditory or Visual), a particular Category (Animal or Music, corresponding to two of the four items), or all four items (Neutral), was shown. During
the following delay, participants rehearsed the cued items, until making a
Present/Absent response about a single probe (picture or sound) stimulus. Generally, participants responded faster to the probe on modality and
category retro-cue trials, relative to Neutral trials, with no differences in
accuracy across retro-cue conditions. We conducted a univariate analysis
on the fMRI data, time-locked to retro-cue onset. We found modality-specific activation in the sensory cortex congruent with the sensory modality of
the retro-cued representations. Furthermore, a contrast between Modality
and Category retro-cues exposed distinct neural networks, illustrating that
the type of feature used to access STM representations indeed substantially
modulates the brain regions involved.

C4
ATTENTIONAL PROCESSES UNDERLYING THREAT AND RELIEF
SIGNALS Andreatta Marta1, Wieser Matthias1, Glotzbach-Schoon Evelyn1,

Wiemer Julian1, Pauli Paul1; 1Department of Psychology, University of Würzburg — Termination of threat induces relief which is followed by a safety
period, both characterized by positive feelings. Threat and cues signaling
threat drive attention, but whether relief drives attention remains unclear.
Notably, impaired processes of danger and safety have been implicated in
anxiety disorders. Goal of the study was to investigate attentional processes
underlying a relief-associated cue. To this purpose, forty-eight participants underwent a discriminative learning, in which a blast of white noise
(unconditioned stimulus, US) was associated with a visual cue (conditioned
stimulus, CS+) but not with another cue (CS-). In the aversive group, CS+
preceded and signaled US, whereas in the relief group, CS+ followed US
and was associated with the relief. Ratings for CSs valence and arousal as
well as steady-state visual evoked potentials (ssVEPs) to the flickering cues
(15Hz) were collected. After conditioning, both aversive- and relief-CS+
were rated as more negative and arousing than CSs-. ssVEP amplitude
to the aversive-CS+ was significantly larger compared to CS- suggesting
greater allocation of attentional resources. Interestingly, ssVEP amplitude
was lower to the relief-CS+ compared to CS- (although marginally) and
aversive-CS+. In summary, on explicit level threat and relief signals were
reported as equally aversive, possibly because of their temporal proximity to the threat. However, as indicated by the ssVEPs, these two signals
have different effects in reflexive attention. Thus, threat signal requires
attentional resources in order to prompt appropriate avoidance responses,
whereas threat termination allows individuals to relax and there is no need
to monitor the cue.

C5
VULNERABILITY TO DISTRACTION IN PATIENTS WITH PARKINSON’S DISEASE IS LINKED TO LOW CORTICAL CHOLINERGIC
FUNCTION Kamin Kim1, Martijn Müller1, Nicolaas Bohnen1, Martin Sarter1,

Cindy Lustig1; 1University of Michigan — Positron emission tomography (PET)
studies show that in addition to dopaminergic deficits, a subset of patients
with Parkinson’s disease (PD) also exhibit low cholinergic function. Human
studies and rodent models of PD show that in combination with dopa-

98

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting	
minergic lesions, cortical cholinergic cell loss is associated with reduced
executive and attention function (Bohnen et al., 2012; Kucinski et al., 2013).
The present study explores the specific nature of attentional impairment in
low-cholinergic PD patients, testing the hypothesis that low cortical cholinergic activity is associated with increased vulnerability to distraction. 18
PD patients previously assessed using cholinergic [11C]PMP and striatal
dopaminergic [11C]DTBZ PET and 13 age, gender, and education-matched
healthy controls (HC; data collection ongoing) completed two attention
tasks with distractor manipulations. The first task, the human analogue
of the rodent distractor condition sustained attention task (Demeter et al.,
2008; McGaughy & Sarter, 1995), is a signal detection task with either a
static or rapidly-changing background. The second is a duration-discrimination task (Continuous Temporal Expectancy Task, O’Connelll et al., 2009)
that shows rapid performance declines over time, to which we added a
video distractor (Berry et al., 2013). Low cortical cholinergic function but
not thalamic cholinergic or striatal dopaminergic activity was associated
with more severe distractor impairment on both tasks in PD. These similar
findings from two different task paradigms provide converging evidence
that increased distractibility in PD patients is linked to decreased cortical
cholinergic function.

C6
DISRUPTED CONSCIOUS AWARENESS CAUSED BY DAMAGE TO
CORTICAL WHITE MATTER IN ACUTE STROKE PATIENTS AND ITS
RELATIONSHIP WITH LONG-TERM COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENTS

Kelly L. Brandstatt1, Andrew M. Naidech1, Michael D. Berman1, Joel L. Voss1;
1
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine — Disruptions of conscious awareness occur during periods of delirium following acute brain
injury. We localized brain damage associated with these disruptions using
acute CT scans from 80 patients with intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) who
were scored for delirium using the Confusion Assessment Method during
hospitalization. Voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping was performed
using delirium scores and hematoma locations. Hematomas occupied the
thalamus and basal ganglia in the majority of patients, irrespective of delirium scores. Hematoma of the right cortical white matter, including superior
longitudinal fasciculus and anterior cingulum bundle, was uniquely associated with delirium (statistical maps used a corrected P<0.05 threshold).
Damage to long-range cortical white-matter connections due to the neurotoxic effects of hematoma was therefore likely responsible for disruptions
of conscious awareness. This finding is consistent with theories proposing that distributed cortical networks are necessary for normal conscious
awareness. Acute delirium was also associated with poorer life quality due
to disrupted cognition at 12-month follow-up, suggesting that disruptions
of cortical connectivity persistently disrupts cognition in addition to producing acutely impaired conscious awareness.

C7
NEUROBEHAVIORAL MECHANISMS OF ATTENTION NETWORKS
IN TBI Sudhin, A Shah1, Mary, M Conte1, Andrew, M Goldfine2, Yelena Goldin3,

Keith Cicerone3, Nicholas, D Schiff1; 1Weill Cornell Medical College, 2Burke
Rehabilitation Center, 3JFK Johnson Rehabilitation Center — Severe traumatic
brain injury (TBI) leads to persistent debilitating neurocognitive and functional impairments that limit quality of life in a significant proportion of
patients. There is currently insufficient data regarding the precise nature
of attentional deficits in TBI, which limits diagnostic precision and optimal treatment delivery. We assessed the Attention Network Test (ANT) in
13 TBI patients tested 6 months post-injury and 25 healthy controls with
simultaneously recorded electroencephalography (EEG). The ANT is a
time-efficient and simple task developed for the neuropsychological study
of the alerting, orienting and executive attention networks (Fan et al., 2002).
The procedure is a combination of a cued reaction time task and the flanker
task and assesses the efficiency of attentional networks by measuring how
response times are influenced by alerting cues, spatial orienting cues, and
congruent versus incongruent flankers. The TBI patients in our population all suffered a moderate-severe injury with loss of consciousness or
post-traumatic amnesia and were atleast 6 months post-injury (medically
stable for atleast 2 months). Consistent with prior research, efficiency of
the executive network is reduced compared to the healthy controls. Power
spectral analysis of the EEG revealed re-organization of brain activation
patterns generated during the ANT task in individuals with TBI. These

Poster Session C
results demonstrate the sensitivity of EEG to altered attentional function in
TBI. Improving our understanding of the underlying architecture of attention deficits in individuals with TBI will advance the development and
selection of accurate diagnostic techniques and effective treatments.

C8
INCREASED CAPACITY FOR TIME PERCEPTION IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER Anna Remington1, Nilli Lavie2; 1Centre for Research in

Autism and Education, Institute of Education, University of London, UK, 2Institute
of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London — Autism Spectrum
Disorder (ASD) research portrays a mixed picture of attentional abilities
with demonstrations of enhancements (superior visual search performance) and deficits (higher distractibility). Using Load Theory of Attention and Cognitive Control (e.g. Lavie, 2005), our previous work suggests
that ASD is characterised by an increase in visual perceptual capacity. This
enhanced capacity enables the processing of additional stimuli, which can
manifest both as increased distractibility and higher detection sensitivity (Remington et al 2009; 2012). Thus far, increased perceptual capacity
associated with ASD has only been established in the visual domain. Here
we examine what effect the enhanced capacity has on time perception.
Specifically, would time perception in ASD be less affected by increased
visual load than in neurotypicals? High-functioning adults with ASD and
matched neurotypical controls were asked to attend to a rapid stream of
crosses and detect any red cross (low load condition) or upright yellow and
inverted green crosses (high load condition). The duration of each stream
was 6 or 12 seconds. Following each stream, participants were required
to reproduce the time duration of the stream. High perceptual load led to
shortening of the perceived time in the controls, but not in the ASD group.
In the 6 second trials the ASD participants were more accurate than controls
across the load conditions. This suggests that increased visual perceptual
capacity in ASD confers an advantage in time perception, and provides a
new line of support for our hypothesis of increased perceptual processing
capacity in ASD.

C9
DECREASES IN OSCILLATORY ALPHA POWER VERSUS
INCREASES IN SLOW NEGATIVE WAVES: REWARD-PROSPECT
REVEALS DIFFERENTIAL ROLES IN ATTENTIONAL PREPARATION
FOR COGNITIVE TASK PERFORMANCE Berry van den Berg1,3, Ruth M.

Krebs2, Monicque M. Lorist3,4, Marty G. Woldorff1; 1Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, 2Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent
University, 3BCN Neuroimaging Center, University of Groningen, Groningen,
4
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Groningen — Task
performance is influenced by our ability to prepare for upcoming information, which is especially helpful if the cognitive system is challenged,
such as in the presence of conflicting stimuli. Here we used event-related
potentials (ERPs) as well as event-related spectral perturbations (ERSPs)
to study how motivation, induced by the prospect of monetary reward,
influences the neural processes related to attentional preparation and cognitive task performance. In a cued-reward Stroop paradigm, participants
had to discriminate the font color of color-words. Prior to each target, a cue
indicated whether there was the prospect of reward on that trial for fast
and accurate performance. Behaviorally, we found improved task performance on trials with reward prospect, as indicated by faster response times
(RTs) to the target Stroop stimuli. We also found that two different measures of cue-triggered preparatory brain activity that have been associated
with attention varied systematically. More specifically, we observed larger
amplitudes of the front-central slow-wave contingent negative variation
(CNV) ERP wave and reduced occipital and fronto-central alpha power on
reward-prospect (versus no-reward-prospect) trials and on fast-RT (versus
slow-RT) targets. There was a striking dissociation, however, in the interaction of reward prospect and task performance for the alpha and CNV
effects: CNV amplitude was predictive of the performance level on no-reward- prospect trials but not on reward-prospect ones, whereas decreased
alpha amplitude was predictive of performance on reward-prospect trials
but not on no-reward-prospect ones. These results indicate that CNV activation and alpha decreases reflect different aspects of preparatory attentional processes.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

99

Poster Session C	

ATTENTION: Spatial
C10
COGNITIVE CONTROL NETWORK CONTRIBUTIONS TO LONGTERM MEMORY GUIDANCE OF VISUAL SPATIAL ATTENTION. Maya

L. Rosen1, Chantal E. Stern1, Samantha W. Michalka1, Kathryn J. Devaney1,
Lingqiang Kong1, David C. Somers1; 1Boston University — Recent studies
have focused on the competitive interactions between the Default Mode
Network (DMN), involved in long-term memory retrieval, and the Dorsal
Attention Network (DAN), involved in top-down attention. Although the
two networks may interact competitively, evidence suggests that long-term
memory can help to guide spatial attention more efficiently than visual cues
(Jiang and Chun, 1998; Summerfield et al., 2006, 2011), suggesting cooperation between these networks under certain conditions. Because there is
little evidence for direct communication between the DMN and DAN, we
hypothesize that a third network, the Cognitive Control Network (CCN), is
recruited when long-term memory is used to guide spatial attention. Participants (n=23) performed a one-shot change detection task on visual scenes
using long-term memory (LTM) or a visual stimulus cue (STIM) to guide
attention while undergoing fMRI scanning. ROIs from three networks were
mapped onto individual subjects from a cluster-based analysis of intrinsic
functional connectivity of 1000 brains (Yeo et al., 2011). The univariate fMRI
results demonstrate that in the LTM-guided attention condition compared
to the STIM-guided condition three nodes of the CCN are recruited: dorsal
inferior parietal lobule, posterior callosal sulcus, and dorsal medial superior parietal lobule. The intrinsic functional connectivity results demonstrate that nodes of the CCN are significantly positively correlated with
nodes of both the DMN and DAN, while there is no positive correlation
between the DMN and DAN. Taken together, these findings suggest that
posterior nodes of the CCN are positioned to govern the flow of information between the DMN and DAN.

C11
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN DISTRACTIBILITY PREDICT
INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN ATTENTION NETWORKS Omar Singleton1,2,3, Meghan Robinson1, David Salat1,2,3, Joseph

DeGutis1,3, William Milberg1,3, Regina McGlinchey1,3, Michael Esterman1,3,4; 1VA
Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA, 2MGH/MIT/HMS Athinoula A. Martinos
Center for Biomedical Imaging, Charlestown, MA, 3Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 4Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA — A wealth of task-based neuroimaging studies has
implicated both task-negative and task-positive brain networks in attention
control, including the default mode network (DMN) and the ventral and
dorsal attention networks (VAN, DAN). However, less work has investigated whether attentional abilities, such as resisting external visual distraction, are predictive of intrinsic resting functional connectivity or structural
integrity of these networks. In order to address this question, the current
study first recruited 33 participants to complete a resting functional and a
structural MRI scan. In a follow-up session, individuals completed a visual
search task with salient distractors. Specifically, during visual search for a
unique shape, the presence of intermittent task-irrelevant but salient color
singletons disrupted search efficiency, a measure of distraction known as
“attentional capture.” Resting state analyses of DMN, VAN, and DAN
were conducted in FreeSurfer FSFAST using seed-based connectivity.
These analyses revealed that individual differences in attentional capture
were related to VAN-DMN connectivity, such that greater capture was
associated with greater coupling between VAN and the DMN. The structural analyses were performed using well-validated cortical thickness
techniques in FreeSurfer. These analyses revealed that greater attentional
capture was associated with thinner cortical surfaces in multiple regions
across both VAN and DMN. Together, these results suggest that that the
VAN, associated with exogenous attentional control, functions optimally
when it is more differentiated from the DMN in its intrinsic fluctuations. In
addition, the structural integrity of these networks likely also contributes
to their optimal functioning.

100

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

C12
SALIENT DISTRACTOR EXPERIENCE REDUCES PD AMPLITUDE

Daniel Vatterott1, William Bush1, Shaun Vecera1; 1University of Iowa — Salient,
irrelevant distractors often capture observers’ attention, but experience
enables observers to efficiently ignore distracting items (Vatterott & Vecera,
2012). This behavioral work posited that observers must initially attend to
salient stimuli in order to effectively reject them (i.e., experience-dependent
distractor rejection). In the current study, we used electrophysiological
measures (ERPs) to investigate the brain responses that occur when observers select (N2pc) or inhibit items (Pd; Luck & Hillyard, 1994; Hickey, Di
Lollo, & McDonald, 2009). Observers saw four briefly appearing letters and
responded as to whether a target letter was present. On 50% of the trials,
one non-target item was a salient color singleton distractor. Observers were
slower to report target presence when the salient distractor was present
compared to absent. Importantly, distractor related slowing was greater in
the first half of blocks compared to the second half of blocks. For target
absent trials, salient distractors evoked a negative deflection in the N2pc
time window. For target present trials, a Pd was observed contralateral to
salient distractors. The primary impact of experience was a reduction in
the amplitude of the distractor related Pd in the second half of trials. These
results suggest that distractor experience changes distractor rejection from
an active, time-consuming process to a more passive, less time-consuming
form of distractor rejection.

C13
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF RE-CANCELLATION BEHAVIORS
IN UNILATERAL NEGLECT Murielle Wansard1, Christine Bastin2, Thierry

Meulemans1; 1Department of Psychology, Behavior and Cognition, University
of Liège, Belgium, 2Cyclotron Research Centre, University of Liège, Belgium —
The present study focused on re-cancellation behaviors in unilateral neglect
(i.e., the tendency to search repeatedly items located on the right side in
visual search tasks), and used a neuropsychological approach to identify
the cerebral correlates of this deficit. Fourteen patients suffering from left
neglect and 14 elderly age-matched controls performed a cancellation task
without visual feedback. Neglect patients cancelled fewer targets than controls, and re-cancelled an abnormally high number of targets. Lesion maps
were used to compare the location of brain damage in neglect patients with
the highest versus the lowest percentage of re-cancellations. Anatomical
data revealed that the right insula is commonly damaged in 5 out of 6
patients with the highest re-cancellation percentage, but is spared in the
subgroup of patients with the lowest re-cancellation percentage. These
results suggest that damage to the right insula may contribute to pathological visual search in spatial neglect, possibly by reducing interaction
between the ventral and dorsal attention network (the latter being more
directly involved in spatial processes).

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
C14
BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL CORRELATES OF AFFECTIVE INTERFERENCE DURING WORKING MEMORY Madison L. Stroup1, David

A.S. Kaufman1, William M. Perlstein2,3; 1Saint Louis University, Saint Louis, MO,
2
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 3Malcom Randall VAMC, Gainesville, FL
— Affective interference has been shown to differentially impact higher-order cognitive functions. However, the mechanisms by which the valence of
emotionally salient information impact cognitive processes remain unclear.
The current study investigated whether affective interference differentially affects the maintenance of task-relevant representations in working
memory (WM). We acquired high-density event-related potentials (ERPs)
from 19 participants while they completed low and high “oad” conditions
of a delayed matching-to-sample task with emotionally valenced (pleasant and unpleasant) and neutral interfering pictures. Behaviorally, results
indicated that the emotional valence of interfering pictures differentially
affected task performance. Positively valenced distracters were associated
with significantly faster WM probe reaction times than negatively valenced
distracters (p < .02). There was also a significant interaction between
valence and load such that emotionally valenced (i.e., arousing) distract-

2014 Annual Meeting	
ers were associated with significantly faster WM probe reaction times in
comparison to neutral distracters in the high working memory load condition (p < .003). P3 amplitudes to WM probes were significantly greater
following positively valenced distracters. Furthermore, positive frontal
slow wave components of WM probe-related ERPs were enhanced for
positively valenced relative to negatively valenced distracters in the high
WM load condition (p < .04). These findings suggest that emotional valence
may differentially affect interference resolution during cognitive processes.
Positively valenced stimuli may promote enhanced interference resolution,
particularly with increased cognitive load, resulting in stronger attentional
control over task-relevant stimuli. Thus, competition for resources between
cognitive and affective processes may resolve discriminately as a function
of recent affective context.

C15
THE TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF MOTIVATED COGNITIVE CONTROL: RELATIONSHIPS TO SOCIAL ANHEDONIA Yu Sun Chung1,

Deanna Barch1,2,3; 1Department of Psychology, Washington University in Saint
Louis, St. Louis, MO, 2Department of Psychiatry, Washington University in Saint
Louis, MO, 3Department of Radiology, Washington University in Saint Louis,
MO — Recent evidence suggests that reward incentives improve cognitive control function in motivationally salient situations, potentially via
enhancing internal representations of goal supported by the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) (e.g., Jimura et al., 2010). This effect is referred
to as motivated cognitive control. However, relatively little known about
the individual difference characteristics that influence this effect. Here we
examined the hypothesis that variability in reward-related traits such as
anhedonia (reduced pleasure from potentially rewarding social or physical stimuli) would modulate either or both sustained and/or cue-related
transient aspects of motivated cognitive control. 27 individuals performed
a response conflict task developed by Padmala et al. (2011) during scanning, where participants were asked to categorize images as either houses
or buildings with either congruent or incongruent overlaid words. Participants performed a baseline condition without knowledge of monetary
incentives, followed by reward blocks with monetary incentives on some
cued trials (reward cues) for fast and correct responses. Using a state-item
design, we examined the temporal dynamics of motivated cognitive control
through both the sustained context-dependent and transient cue-related
components of reward processing. We replicated previous work by showing both increased sustained activity during reward vs. baseline blocks
in the bilateral DLPFC and transient cue-related activity in the striatum.
Importantly, individuals with higher social anhedonia showed less of an
increase in transient trial-by-trial activity as a function of reward in the
putamen. Together, our results suggest that reduced social hedonic experience may be related to reduced transient reward cue-related activity in
the striatum.

C16
NEGATIVE MOOD DIMINISHES REAPPRAISAL SUCCESS Seth Kall-

man1, Noam Zerubavel1, Kevin Ochsner1; 1Columbia University — The connection between negative affect and increased alcohol consumption has been
well established both in popular culture and the scientific literature. This
dysregulated behavior, sometimes referred to as “drinking to cope,” might
occur for several reasons. On one hand, negative affect may increase the
bottom-up incentive salience of alcohol cues. Alternatively, it may decrease
peoples’ ability to exercise effective top-down self-regulation. To shed light
on these possibilities, we had healthy college students view pictures of alcohol and rate their urge to drink the depicted beverages. They were asked to
do this while either looking naturally or using cognitive reappraisal to reinterpret the stimuli in terms of their negative consequences. Critically, they
made these judgments following either a neutral or a negative mood induction. This design allowed us to examine the effects of negative mood on
natural responses, regulated responses, and the difference between them
(operationalized as “regulation success”). The results showed that participants were able to successfully use reappraisal to reduce their reported
desire to drink the alcoholic beverages. However, there was a significant
interaction with mood, such that regulation success significantly declined
in the negative mood condition. Interestingly, the majority of participants
held the metacognitive belief that the negative mood increased their ability

Poster Session C
to think of negative consequences. While this could have conceivably aided
reappraisal, our results suggested otherwise. Overall, this study provides
experimental evidence that negative affect can impair cognitive reappraisal.

C17
PERSONALITY TRAITS MEDIATE THE EFFECT OF TASK-IRRELEVANT EMOTIONS ON WORKING MEMORY Alessandra Galli1, Jan

Derrfuss1,4, Christian J. Fiebach1,2,3; 1Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, The Netherlands, 2Department
of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 3IDeA Center
for Individual Development and Adaptive Education, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 4School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, United Kingdom — It
has been suggested that emotions will enhance performance only when
the emotional information is task-relevant. Yet, studies investigating the
impact of task-irrelevant emotional stimuli on working memory found heterogeneous results, including reports of performance enhancements after
emotional distraction. This variability may result from inter-individual
differences in personality traits, which may mediate the emotion effect on
working memory. We used a delayed-match-to-sample task where participants (n = 44) encoded an abstract shape, followed, during the maintenance period, by a task-irrelevant positive, negative, or neutral vocalization
(Study 1). Another group (Study 2; n = 33) heard the irrelevant emotional
vocalization right before the sample onset. In both tasks, participants could
be split into individuals whose performance was enhanced (Study 1: 50%;
Study 2: 63,6%) vs. impaired by task-irrelevant emotions (Study 1: 50%;
Study 2: 36,4%), relative to neutral distractors. Individuals whose performance was enhanced had high depression scores (BDI), low positive affect
(Dutch PANAS equivalent), and low scores on the behavioural inhibition/
approach scales (BIS/BAS). The opposite was true for individuals whose
performance was impaired. These predictors classified the two groups with
71% accuracy. Study 2 replicated these findings, with a greater emphasis
on the BAS-Drive sub-scale (classification accuracy 63%). These differential
effects on performance were reliably observed for d-prime as well as for
parameters of the diffusion model, e.g., drift rate. Our results suggest that
task-irrelevant emotions have similar effects on working memory encoding and maintenance and highlight the importance of taking into account
individual psychological characteristics when studying emotion-cognition
interactions.

C18
EFFECTS OF REM SLEEP ON NEURAL ACTIVITY DURING EMOTIONAL AND NEUTRAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL Kelly Bennion1, Jessica

Payne2, Elizabeth Kensinger1; 1Boston College, 2The University of Notre Dame
— Sleep has a profound effect on memory consolidation, conferring a preferential benefit to emotional relative to neutral stimuli. Behavioral and
neuroimaging evidence suggest that this selective benefit may stem from
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. However, it is not fully understood how
REM sleep during a consolidation interval influences neural activity during
the subsequent retrieval of emotional versus neutral stimuli. In the present study, participants viewed images composed of a negative or neutral
object superimposed on a neutral background. After a twelve-hour delay
including a full night of sleep (recorded via polysomnography), participants underwent a recognition task during fMRI in which they viewed
negative and neutral objects and backgrounds separately, distinguishing
new objects and backgrounds from those previously studied. Confirming
the emotional memory enhancement effect, memory was enhanced for negative relative to neutral objects following sleep. Activity during successful
object retrieval (hits > misses) was assessed, inputting each participant’s
percentage of REM sleep as a regressor. REM percentage correlated with
increased activity in the precuneus, precentral gyrus, lingual gyrus, insula,
and cerebellum during the retrieval of negative objects, but only the thalamus during the retrieval of neutral objects (p < .001, 9 voxels). This suggests
that for emotional stimuli in particular, REM sleep during consolidation
may lead to a retrieval network that is similar to the network that is active
during REM sleep (e.g., Maquet et al., 2000) and that REM sleep is linked
to retrieval-related activity in regions that typically support emotional
memory (e.g., Sterpenich et al., 2007, 2009).

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

101

Poster Session C	

C19
DEPRESSIVE MOOD AND INTENTIONALITY OF EMOTION PROCESSING: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Stephanie Bas-

tidas1, Lucy J. Troup1; 1Colorado State University — Depressive disorders
have been associated with altered patterns of emotion processing. It is
unclear whether these differences occur independently from intentionality
during emotion processing. The current study aimed to examine the effect
of implicit and explicit processing on the relationship between depressive
mood and event-related brain potentials to emotional facial expressions.
Electroencephalogram was recorded from 19 electrodes (10-20 International
System) while participants performed sex discrimination (implicit) and
emotion discrimination (explicit) judgments of faces showing happy, sad,
and neutral expressions. Explicit processing was associated with greater
mean P1 (80-140ms) and N170 (140-200ms) amplitudes for sad and neutral
than happy faces in depressed but not in control individuals. These differences were also reflected as greater P1 and N170 amplitude to happy faces
in controls than in depressed individuals. No effects of group or emotion
were found during implicit processing or for P3 and late positive potential
(LPP) latency and amplitude in either condition. Results suggest depressive mood is associated with early differences in processing of happy facial
expressions when attention is directed to emotional features of the stimuli
but not during incidental processing of facial expression.

C20
DELAY AND TRACE CONDITIONING DIFFERENTIALLY INFLUENCE
THE PERCEPTION OF TIME DURING THREAT ANTICIPATION Jessica

I. Lake1, Warren H. Meck1, Kevin S. LaBar1; 1Duke University — Conditioning
procedures serve as important examples of learning and memory which
have informed the study of fear and anxiety. Delay and trace conditioning are associated with distinct neural correlates, with trace conditioning
notably dependent on hippocampal processes. Given recent evidence
implicating the hippocampus in temporal processing, in conjunction with
substantial evidence that emotional stimuli distort time perception, we
hypothesized that delay versus trace conditioning might differentially distort time perception during threat anticipation. To address this question,
participants were sequentially presented with two squares and instructed
to discriminate whether the second square, which varied in duration (6001000ms), was longer or shorter in duration than the first square (800 ms).
In a between-subjects design, we manipulated whether the color of the first
or second square signaled the possibility (50% probability) for aversive
electrical stimulation to co-terminate with the second square, creating trace
and delay interval conditions, respectively. During delay conditioning,
durations were overestimated on threat versus neutral trials, supporting
previous evidence that threat-related stimuli are overestimated in duration. Alternatively, during trace conditioning, durations were underestimated on threat versus neutral trials as a function of subjective arousal
ratings of the aversive stimulation. These findings suggest that delay and
trace conditioning distort time through distinct mechanisms, even when
the overall task structure was matched. This mechanistic dissociation may
have important implications for our understanding of the functional roles
of neural substrates underlying the conditioning of aversive events and for
informing the study of threat anticipation processes in healthy and anxiety-related populations.

C21
NEURAL BASIS OF VERBAL MORAL PROCESSING IN INCARCERATED FEMALES WITH PSYCHOPATHIC TRAITS Samantha Fede1,2,

Jana Schaich Borg3, Carla Harenski2, Lora Cope4, Vikram Rao2, Prashanth Nyalakanti2, Walter Sinnott-Armstrong3, Kent Kiehl1,2; 1University of New Mexico,
2
Mind Research Network and Lovelace Biomedical and Environmental Research
Institute, 3Duke University, 4University of Michigan — Psychopathy is notorious for profound moral insensitivity and widespread antisocial behavior.
Prior studies of psychopathy have found abnormal brain structure across
paralimbic regions and aberrant engagement during moral processing in
the amygdala, insula, temporoparietal junction (TPJ), anterior cingulate
(ACC), and posterior cingulate (PCC). Despite potential sex differences
in psychopathy, these studies largely focused on male samples. Methods:
Incarcerated adult females (N = 191) were scanned on a 1.5T mobile magnetic resonance imaging system. Psychopathy was assessed using the Hare

102

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
Psychopathy Checklist-Revised (PCL-R). Participants were shown words
and phrases describing 50 morally wrong (e.g., incest) and 50 morally not
wrong (e.g., sharing) concepts and asked to identify them as “wrong” or
“not wrong.” Results: During the processing of wrong versus not wrong
stimuli, PCL-R scores were negatively related to activity in the caudal ACC,
PCC, and caudate. When examining not wrong stimuli, these regions plus
the insula were positively related to psychopathy; for wrong stimuli, the
putamen and TPJ were negatively related to psychopathy scores. Discussion: The negative association between psychopathy scores and hemodynamic response in regions associated with moral processing is consistent
with previous studies. Similarly, the positive association between psychopathy scores and neural engagement during the viewing of not wrong
stimuli in the ACC, PCC, and caudate replicates results from an adult
male sample, where increased engagement of caudal ACC may indicate a
conflict or error detection process. Overall, these results reinforce that psychopaths demonstrate an abnormal hemodynamic response during moral
processing, regardless of sex.

C22
REPRESENTATIONAL SIMILARITY OF SOCIAL AND VALENCE
INFORMATION IN THE MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX Robert

Chavez1, Todd Heatherton1; 1Dartmouth College — A widely held belief in
cognitive neuroscience is that certain cortical areas can serve multiple functions. This may be particularly characteristic of areas such as the medial
prefrontal cortex (MPFC) where several types of complex information
integration are thought to occur. However, it remains an open question
as to whether or not this region serves multiple kinds of cognitive representations simultaneously when stimuli contain a diverse set of high-level
information. In the current study, we employed a large-scale automated
meta-analysis tool (NeuroSynth) together with multi-voxel pattern analysis to investigate the representational similarity of social and valence
information in the MPFC. During functional magnetic resonance imaging
scanning, participants (N=48) were shown a series of photos matched for
arousal and basic visual properties from the International Affective Picture
System. Each picture’s content varied on both sociality (social, non-social)
and valence (negative, neutral, positive) dimensions. Using NeuroSynth,
we isolated areas within the MPFC in which social and valence information
share overlapping spatial activations in the neuroimaging literature. These
areas were then used as regions of interest for a representational similarity
analysis and multi-dimensional scaling across social and valence categories. Our results showed a high degree of representational similarity coherence both within sociality categories and within valence categories, but not
across them (e.g., positive social pictures were highly dissimilar to negative
non-social pictures). These results suggest that the MPFC may encode both
social and valence information within the same stimuli, allowing this area
to serve multiple types of cognitive processes simultaneously.

C23
EMOTION REGULATION FOR NONVERBAL AUDITORY STIMULI:
COGNITIVE, AFFECTIVE, AND PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES. Anais Stenson1, Stephan Hamann1; 1Emory University — Individ-

uals can regulate or modify their emotional reactions to stimuli by using
cognitive emotion regulation strategies such as reappraisal, where evaluations of stimuli are altered to modify their affective meaning. Reappraisal
can be highly effective in altering subjective, physiological, and neural correlates of emotional responses. However, because most reappraisal studies
have used visual stimuli, little is known about reappraisal processes associated with auditory or other nonvisual stimuli. We investigated individuals’ ability to decrease their emotional responses to emotionally negative
and neutral nonverbal sounds, as measured by subjective arousal ratings
and concurrent physiological measures of emotion. On each trial, subjects
listened to short (3 second) emotionally negative (e.g., snarling dogs) and
neutral (e.g., brushing teeth) nonverbal sounds twice, while either reappraising the sounds to decrease their emotional reactions or not regulating
their reactions. Stimuli were adapted from normed auditory emotion stimuli and adjusted for low-level perceptual properties. Emotional responses
were assessed by online ratings of emotional arousal and psychophysiology (skin conductance, electrocardiogram, and respiration), and memory
for the stimuli was later tested. Consistent with studies of emotion regulation for visual stimuli, reappraisal was successful in decreasing affective
responses. Reappraisal significantly decreased online ratings of emotional

2014 Annual Meeting	
arousal for negative sounds. These preliminary findings suggest that cognitive emotion regulation strategies usually studied in the context of visual
stimuli are also effective in modulating responses to emotional stimuli in
the auditory modality, possibly via similar neural mechanisms.

C24
GENDER DIFFERENCES OF PREFRONTAL ACTIVITY IN PROCESSING FACE AND VOICE Ming-Chun Lee1,2, Shih-tseng Tina Huang1,2;
1

Department of Psychology, National Chung-Cheng University, Taiwan, 2Center
for research in Cognitive Science, National Chung-Cheng University, Taiwan —
The present study investigated the integration of emotional face and voice.
Twenty young adults participated. Congruous and incongruous faces and
voices of angry and sad emotion were presented. In a congruous angry (or
sad) pair, an angry (or sad) face was presented with an angry (or sad) tone.
The incongruous angry pairs contained an angry face presented with a neutral tone, or a neutral face with an angry tone. Similarly, the incongruous
sad pairs contained sad face with neutral tone or neutral face with sad tone.
In the event-related potential procedure, congruous emotional pairs were
presented in 80% and the incongruous pairs were in 20% of the trials. The
results found the latency of P120 and N170 were greater at Pz than at Fz
and Cz. Results also found higher mean amplitudes (MAs) of P300-500 on
sad than on angry pairs. Similarly, the MAs at F3 and F4 found greater on
sad than on angry pairs. It was also found a significant interaction of emotion and sex on P3 at F3 and F4, suggesting male participants performed
higher activation on the sad pairs than on the angry pairs. The results suggested a greater activation at the parietal lobe at the initial phase and male
tended to perform higher activation in the integration of sad pairs of face
and tone than angry pairs.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional
responding
C25
VISUAL AWARENESS OF EMOTIONAL STIMULI CHANGES THE
BEHAVIORAL FATE OF AMYGDALAR RESPONSES AND AMYGDALAR-PFC COUPLING Regina C Lapate1, Bas Rokers1,2, Do Tromp1,

Nadia Orfali1, Samuel Doran1, Nagesh Adluru1, Andrew L Alexander1, Richard J
Davidson1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2Utrecht University — How does
conscious awareness influence the processing of affective information?
Non-conscious processing of emotional stimuli has been associated with
increased affective coloring of subsequently presented neutral stimuli (e.g.,
Murphy & Zajonc, 1993), but the neural mechanisms for this effect remain
unclear. Here, we examined the neural correlates of conscious awareness of
emotional stimuli using functional and structural neuroimaging. While in
the scanner, we manipulated the visibility of fearful faces and flowers using
continuous flash suppression. To index affective coloring, participants rated
the likeability of neutral faces presented seconds later. To estimate the integrity of participants’ white matter fibers, we acquired diffusion-weighted
images. The fMRI results indicated that BOLD responses in the right amygdala increased to fearful faces (relative to flowers) independently of awareness. However, the behavioral consequences of right-amygdalar responses
to fearful faces differed by awareness, correlating with greater affective
coloring of neutral faces only in the unaware condition. Replicating prior
work, prefrontal-cortical (PFC) activation increased with awareness, but it
was the (inverse) coupling between the amygdala and medial and lateral
PFC that predicted a reduction of affective coloring in the aware condition.
Accordingly, in the aware condition, participants with greater structural
integrity in the uncinate fasciculus, a major white matter pathway connecting amygdala and PFC, showed less affective coloring, and greater inverse
coupling between the amygdala and medial PFC. Collectively, these results
suggest that while emotional encoding by the amygdala does not require
awareness of emotional stimuli, function of a critical emotion-regulatory
network depends on awareness to impact behavior.

Poster Session C

C26
MAOA GENE ALLELES AFFECT FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN
EMOTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS Martin Klasen1,2, Dhana Wolf1,2, Pat-

rick Schelenz1,2, Ute Habel1,2, Jonathan Repple1,2, Thomas Eggermann3, Klaus
Zerres3, Florian Zepf2,4, Klaus Mathiak1,2,5; 1Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy, and Psychosomatics, Medical School, RWTH Aachen University, Germany, 2JARA-Translational Brain Medicine, RWTH Aachen University, Germany,
3
Institute of Human Genetics, Medical School, RWTH Aachen University, Germany, 4Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychotherapy, and
Psychosomatics, Medical School, RWTH Aachen University, Germany, 5Institute
of Psychiatry, King’s College London, London, UK — Low expressing alleles
of the monoamine oxidase A gene (MAOA-L) have been associated with
affective dysregulation and impulsive aggression. Recent models associate MAOA-L with an excess in brain serotonin, which may modulate the
functional coupling of the amygdala with other emotional brain regions
and lead to an affective vulnerability, characterized by a negative bias in
emotional appraisal and experience. This may be reflected by habitually
increased functional and effective connectivity in brain networks supporting emotional appraisal and experience. In an fMRI experiment, we measured brain activity of 66 male subjects during resting state and assessed
blood samples to determine MAOA expression. Functional and effective
connectivity analyses (Granger Causality Mapping) were performed with
bilateral amygdala as seed region. Compared to high expressing allele carriers, MAOA-L individuals showed higher functional connectivity of the
amygdala with emotion processing nodes in the anterior and posterior cingulate cortex as well as in the anterior insula, along with networks supporting social evaluation, memory retrieval, and visual imagery. Accordingly,
the effective connectivity analysis revealed a higher directed influence of
the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex on amygdala activity for the MAOA-L
carriers. The observed neural network patterns show habitually enhanced
functional coupling in the low expressing allele carriers. They indicate a
negative emotional bias during self-referential processes, memory retrieval,
and scene imagination. The results of our study thus support the notion of
an emotional dysregulation associated with the MAOA-L genotype. We
suggest the modulated amygdala connectivity as an endophenotype of
altered emotional processing in male MAOA-L carriers.

C27
EFFECT OF PARTIAL SLEEP DEPRIVATION ON EMPATHY FOR
PAIN IN AN FMRI EXPERIMENT Gustav Nilsonne1,2, Sandra Tamm1,2,

Paolo d’Onofrio1, Hanna Thuné1,3, Johanna Schwarz1, Predrag Petrovic2, Håkan
Fischer1, Göran Kecklund1, Torbjörn Åkerstedt1,2, Mats Lekander1,2; 1Stockholm
University, 2Karolinska Insitutet, 3The University of Nottingham — Disturbed
sleep affects emotional responding. It is however unknown whether disturbed sleep affects empathy for pain. We have investigated the effect of
partial sleep deprivation on empathic responding. Predefined regions of
interest were the bilateral anterior insulae and the medial cingulate cortex,
which is postulated to form a core network for empathy. 16 healthy volunteers (mean age 24, SD 3, 6 female) participated in a trial of partial sleep
deprivation (3h sleep) using a cross-over design, monitored by polysomnography at home. During fMRI, participants viewed pictures of hands
being stung by needles or poked with a Q-tip. Across sleep conditions, pain
stimuli caused significantly increased activity in the anterior insulae (p <
0.005) and medial cingulate cortex (p < 0.001), using region-of-interest analyses. In addition, whole-brain analyses showed significant activation in the
left inferior parietal (p < 0.001) and left primary sensorimotor cortices (p
< 0.001). Partial sleep deprivation caused participants to report increased
levels of unpleasantness (p < 0.01) when viewing pain stimuli and caused
non-significantly decreased activity in the left inferior parietal cortex (p =
0.07) in response to pain stimuli. These findings suggest that sleep deprivation affects empathic processing in the brain.

C28
EFFECTS OF SOCIAL SUPPORT ON BRAIN RESPONSES TO PAINFUL STIMULATION IN ROMANTIC COUPLES Marina Lopez-Sola1, Luka

Ruzic1, Jason T. Buhle2, Jacob M. Parelman1, Tor D. Wager1; 1University of
Colorado Boulder, 2Columbia University — Social attachment and romantic
bonding are powerful reinforcers, associated with approach behaviors,
openness and exploration, and increased wellbeing while reducing negaCognitive Neuroscience Society

103

Poster Session C	
tive affect and arousal. Social support can have important effects on physical and emotional pain in real-life settings such as during childbirth, where
it has shown to significantly reduce the duration of labor and the rates of
labor-related complications and to significantly improve mother-infant
bonding. However, the neural correlates of such distress-alleviating effects
during pain perception remain to be elucidated. This fMRI study assesses
the effects of social support from the romantic partner on brain responses
to acute thermal pain in healthy women (N=30), using a hand-holding paradigm. We compared pain-related responses during runs in which female
participants held the hands of their romantic partner vs. runs in which
they held a pneumatic squeezable device. Receiving social support from
the romantic partner significantly reduced pain-related intensity and, to
a greater extent, pain unpleasantness. Importantly, it also reduced anxiety associated with the pain anticipation cue while increasing perceived
comfort during the pain experience. Preliminary fMRI results show significant reduction of acute pain responses during partner hand-holding in a
number of pain-processing regions including somatosensory cortices, thalamus, insula/basal ganglia, and regions of the medial frontal cortex and
anterior cingulate cortex. Overall, these results suggest that receiving social
support from the romantic partner in a pain-related context exerts a protective effect both at the subjective and neural levels.

C29
TRAIT GUILT IS ASSOCIATED WITH INCREASED ACTIVITY IN
VENTROLATERAL AND VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX
DURING ACTS OF RESTITUTION. Ambrose Ty1, Derek Mitchell1, Eliza-

beth Finger1; 1Western University, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry
— Guilt is a social emotion that promotes prosocial and moral behaviours.
Guilt arises from harming an individual and may lead the guilty individual to attempt to repair the harmed relationship, a process known as
restitution. Currently, the neural regions prompting feelings of guilt and
acts of restitution are not known. To identify the neural regions supporting
feelings of guilt and prompting acts of restitution, we employed a novel
social decision-making fMRI paradigm involving donations to charities
along with measures of guilt following each decision and indices of trait
guilt. Whole brain, voxel-wise analysis demonstrated that acts of restitution (helping someone after harming them) were associated with increased
BOLD signal in right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC) and medial
prefrontal cortex (mPFC) BOLD signal compared to acts of harm (harming
someone after previously harming them) (p<0.005). Furthermore, there was
a significant positive correlation between trait guilt as indexed by the Guilt
Inventory and BOLD signal in vlPFC and mPFC during such decisions of
restitution (R = 0.782, p<0.001 and R = 0.593, p<0.025, respectively). The
present results are consistent with past studies indicating that vlPFC and
dmPFC are important for processing aversive social cues (angry faces) and
to resolve decision conflict (reversal learning), and suggest that individual
differences in trait guilt and related prosocial behavior may be mediated by
these regions of prefrontal cortex.

C30
EMOTIONAL FACIAL EXPRESSION EVALUATION IN A STRESS
INDUCTION TASK Hedwig Eisenbarth1, Luke Chang1, Julie Spicer2, Helena

Yardley1, Tor Wager1; 1University of Colorado Boulder, 2Columbia University —
Social stress elicits several physiological and psychological reactions that
have been documented with the use of the Trier Social Stress Test (TSST).
It has been shown that more fearful expressions are predictive of higher
cortisol responses as well as with a higher cardiovascular response. We
compared two groups that underwent the TSST procedure (n = 39) and a
control group (n = 22) for facial expressions during the different stages of
the task. A subsample of the stress group (n = 20) received a brief gratitude
writing intervention before the TSST. A machine learning-algorithm-based
program (CERT) was used to evaluate facial expressions (anger, contempt,
disgust, fear, joy, sadness, surprise and neutral) for emotional content,
based on the videos taken of the participants during the TSST. The most
prominent emotional facial expressions detected throughout the task were
contempt and sadness. During the course of the task, contempt does not
significantly change, whereas fear, sadness and surprise are more pronounced during providing a speech or doing a math task and a more
reduced directly after the tasks. The two stress groups show significantly
less joy and more sadness compared to controls in the phase of the instruc-

104

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
tion for the speech (anticipation), the stress group with intervention shows
more joy in the phase directly after the speech compared to the stress group
without intervention. If facial expressions can be diagnostic of actual stress
and successful coping due to a brief intervention, these differences should
also be reflected to a BOLD stress response.

C31
A REPLICATION AND EXTENSION OF THE AFFECTIVE NEUROSCIENCE PERSONALITY SCALE (ANPS 2.4) Laura Feren1, Ken Davis2;
1

Brandman University/ Chapman University System, Irvine, CA, 2Pegasus International, Greensboro, NC — Based on evidence for brain emotion systems,
parsed into six distinct groups (Panksepp, 1998), the Affective Neuroscience Personality Scales (ANPS) were constructed (Davis, Panksepp & Normansell, 2003) to estimate self-reported influences of six neurally-based
brain emotion networks, which were labeled PLAY, SEEKING, CARE,
FEAR, ANGER, and SADNESS and which were validated against a Big
Five (BF) adjective-based personality tool. A replication of that work is
reported here using a slightly revised ANPS 2.4 and a more extensive list
of 164 adjectives (SPE 2). The data from 84 Northern California community
college students who responded to all items on both instruments (requiring
about 30 minutes) replicated the strong correlations between ANPS scales
and BF scales reinforcing the link between affect and personality. This data
provided further evidence for the emotional and physiological bases of personality and that a great deal of personality variability would be related to
strengths and weaknesses found in these six brain systems. In addition,
adjectives were identified that could be used by observers -- such as therapists, care givers, family members, and other colleagues -- to estimate the
strengths and weaknesses in these six brain emotions. Exploratory factor
analysis supported previous findings linking the ANPS 2.4 to the BF model
of personality as well as supporting Positive and Negative Affect as two
higher-order personality themes. The relationship between the self-report
ANPS 2.4 and BF adjective scales and observer-rated adjective scales are
discussed in terms of primary and tertiary personality elaborations previously discussed by Davis & Panksepp (2011).

C32
EARLY POSTERIOR NEGATIVITY FOR DETECTING EMOTIONAL
FACIAL EXPRESSIONS: AN ERP STUDY Reiko Sawada1, Wataru

Sato1, Shota Uono1, Takanori Kochiyama2, Motomi Toichi1; 1Kyoto University,
2
Advanced Telecommunications Research Institute International — Previous behavioral studies have shown that emotional facial expressions are
detected faster than are neutral expressions. However, the neural mechanisms underlying rapid detection of emotional facial expressions remain
unclear. Moreover, no research has investigated the contribution of emotional significance by comparing detection of emotional with that of neutral targets embedded within neutral distractors. Thus, we measured ERPs
during a visual search task in which participants detected emotional facial
expressions or control stimuli, “anti-expressions”, within crowds of neutral expressions. Anti-expressions were created by computer-morphing
techniques contain equivalent amounts of visual change as emotional
facial expressions, compared with neutral facial expressions, but they were
categorized as neutral expressions. Twenty volunteers participated in the
ERP experiment, engaging in visual search tasks in which they were presented with an array of faces and were asked to answer whether all faces
were the same or a discrepant face was exist. After the ERP experiment,
they evaluated all stimuli in terms of subjective experiences of emotional
arousal and valence. Behavioral results indicated that emotional expressions were detected faster and rated as more emotionally arousing than
were anti-expressions. ERP results showed that emotional expressions
elicited larger early posterior negativity (EPN), at 200-400 ms, compared
with anti-expressions. Furthermore, the larger EPN was related to faster
detection and higher arousal. These results suggest that faster detection of
emotional versus neutral facial expressions is implemented via activation
of the posterior visual cortices at 200-400 ms, which is involved in processing emotional significance.

2014 Annual Meeting	

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Other
C33
TESTING THE ROLE OF ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX IN POLITICAL
“FIRST IMPRESSIONS” Chenjie Xia1,2, Kaitlyn Shannon1, Dietlind Stolle1,

Elisabeth Gidengil1, Lesley Fellows1; 1McGill University, 2Harvard University —
Recent studies in the emerging field of neuropolitics suggest that voters’
decisions can be influenced by automatic evaluations of social traits. Perceived competence based on candidates’ appearance is an important predictor of voting behavior when no other information is supplied. Lesion
and neuroimaging studies have implicated orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) in
judgments of social traits on the one hand, and in economic decision-making on the other. We asked whether lesions affecting lateral OFC disrupt
the ability to judge pertinent social traits of political candidates, change
the influence of these judgments on voting decisions, or both. A simulated
election paradigm was administered to 9 patients with LOFC lesions, 16
patients with frontal lobe lesions sparing the LOFC, and 30 healthy participants. Participants were shown head-and-shoulder photographs of
real (but unknown to the participants) political candidates and asked to
choose the winner among pairs of candidates. They then judged the competence and attractiveness of each candidate based on the same photographs. Patients with LOFC lesions did not differ from the other groups
in their ability to detect these social traits. Consistent with prior work, the
appearance of competence was an important predictor of voting behavior
amongst healthy participants and patients with lesions sparing the LOFC.
This relationship between social trait assessment and voting behavior was
much weaker in patients with LOFC lesions. LOFC may not be necessary
for judgment of social traits based on physical appearance, but it seems to
play a crucial role in how these judgments modulate electoral decisions.

C34
MEASURING THE EFFECTS OF TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION ON FRONTAL CORTICAL EXCITABILITY WITH
CONCURRENT FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
IN UNIPOLAR DEPRESSION Evangelia G. Chrysikou1, Gavin K. Hanson1,

Christopher H. Ramey1, W. Jake Thompson1, Laura E. Martin2,3, Rick E. Ingram1;
1
University of Kansas, 2University of Kansas Medical Center, 3Hoglund Brain
Imaging Center — Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) is a noninvasive, painless neuromodulation method, involving the application of
weak direct currents (1-2 mA) through electrodes on the scalp. A limited
but growing number of studies suggest that tDCS holds promise for the
treatment of depression, particularly for patients who fail to respond to
pharmacological or psychological interventions alone. However, despite
its advantageous characteristics such as low cost, ease of use, and reliable
sham methodology, tDCS treatment has not progressed from such proofof-concept investigations to routine clinical use. This shortcoming is largely
due to lack of knowledge on the precise effects of tDCS on cortical excitability, connectivity, and metabolic function for different patient groups. The
goal of this study was to establish the specific and direct effects of tDCS on
brain plasticity using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) concurrently with tDCS in patients diagnosed with unipolar depression and
healthy control subjects during cognitive and emotion regulation tasks.
Participants completed one run of a cognitive and two runs of an emotion
regulation task while undergoing fMRI, first without receiving concurrent
tDCS and then after receiving either excitatory (anodal) tDCS at 1.5mA
over left prefrontal cortex or sham stimulation. Results of whole-brain and
region-of-interest analyses, as well participants’ task performance, contribute to our understanding of the efficacy of tDCS as a possible treatment for
depression and can guide future studies that will focus on the optimization
of tDCS treatment approaches for individual patients.

C35
A TWIN STUDY IDENTIFYING THE ORIGIN OF ABNORMAL AUTOMATIC RESPONSES TO THREAT-RELATED STIMULI IN PTSD F.

Caroline Davis1,2, Michael B. VanElzakker1,3, Lindsay K. Staples1,4, Natasha
B. Lasko1,2, Scott Orr1,2, Roger K. Pitman1,2, Lisa M. Shin1,3; 1Massachusetts
General Hospital, 2Harvard Medical School, 3Tufts University, 4UCLA — Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a common and often debilitating psy-

Poster Session C
chiatric condition that can occur after experiencing highly stressful events.
Research is beginning to identify biologic abnormalities, or “markers,”
found in PTSD, but one key challenge is determining whether such markers
are acquired characteristics of the disorder or familial vulnerability factors
that increase risk for developing PTSD after trauma exposure. One brain
region that has been consistently implicated in the pathophysiology of
PTSD is the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), which shows hyperactivity both at rest and during cognitive processing. Here, we used a masked
faces paradigm to characterize automatic dACC responses to threat-related
stimuli. Using a unique design employing monozygotic (MZ) twins discordant for combat exposure (some of whom have since developed PTSD),
we also aimed to characterize the origin of any observed functional brain
abnormalities. During fMRI scanning, 19 male MZ twin pairs (eight PTSD)
viewed alternating blocks of masked fearful and happy faces. Participants
with PTSD and their combat-unexposed cotwins without PTSD showed
heightened dACC activation while viewing masked fearful faces; consistent with the idea that dACC hyperreactivity to potential threat is a familial
risk factor for developing PTSD. We also observed a main effect of combat
exposure, in which dACC responses to masked fearful faces were elevated
in the combat exposed twins, irrespective of diagnosis. Thus, while combat
exposure appears to generally amplify dACC responses to threat-related
stimuli, individuals with PTSD and their identical combat-unexposed cotwins have exaggerated dACC responses, consistent with a familial vulnerability factor.

C36
NEURAL CORRELATES OF INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN GENEROUS PREFERENCES Andrew Fox1, Nathan Vack1, Abigail Freeman1, Richard

Davidson1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison — Acts of generosity are critical
for building and maintaining successful societies. Although quantifying
and increasing generous behavior, as opposed to selfish behavior, is of
great societal interest, little is known about the mechanisms that give rise to
generous preferences. We examined the neural underpinnings of generous
preferences using a novel revealed preference economic game in combination with functional MRI. During their MRI, each of 28 participants made
100 forced-choice decisions between money for themselves and money
for anonymous strangers. Behavior in this task has convergent and face
validity and is moderately stable over time (Fox et al., in prep). The value
of a dollar for a stranger compared to a dollar they get to keep was estimated for each subject using logistic regression across choices. In-scanner
behavior was highly correlated with behavior outside of the scanner (r=.97,
p<.001). In the scanner, self- and other-offers were presented sequentially
and counterbalanced to facilitate separation of the neural signals specific to
other-valuation. Brain regions that tracked self- and other-amounts were
separately identified using parametric modulation analyses. On average,
activation in the anterior insula tracked the amount offered to the other
person more than the self (p<.05, FWE-corrected), but this was not reflected
in individual differences in other-oriented valuation. Individual differences in other-oriented-valuation were negatively correlated with variation
in self vs. other amount tracking in the lateral pfc (p<.05, FWE-corrected),
such that more generous individuals showed decreased tracking of other-amounts and increased tracking of self-amounts in the lateral pfc.

C37
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF SEXUALLY EVOCATIVE SPEECH Simon Rigoulot1, Marc D. Pell1; 1School of Communication

Sciences and Disorders, McGill University — During social communication,
speech prosody helps to infer the true intentions of the speaker in reference to what is actually said. We investigated here what brain processes
allow listeners to detect sexual innuendos, when speakers intentionally
play on a possible sexual interpretation of an otherwise innocent utterance.
We recorded the electroencephalogram of 25 participants while they were
hearing sentences that were innocent or could have a sexual meaning (“she
inspected his letter/package this morning”). For each type of sentences,
half was spoken with a neutral tone and the other half was spoken with a
sexual intonation. At the end of each sentence, participants were asked if
they heard a specific word, to ensure that they attentively listened to the
sentences. We found two positive components sensitive to the nature of
sentences (innocent/sexual) and the tone in which they were uttered (neutral/sexual). The amplitude of the first component, peaking at 150 ms in
bilateral temporo-parietal areas, was larger in the left than in the right area
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

105

Poster Session C	
in response to sentences that could have a sexual meaning. For the second
component, peaking at 250 ms in central area, analyses revealed an effect of
interaction between the nature of the sentences and the prosody of the voice
with larger amplitudes when innocent sentences were spoken with a sexual
prosody, suggesting an effect of incongruency for these sentences. These
data extend knowledge of the brain mechanisms involved in the decoding
of the real intentions of speakers during interpersonal communication.

C38
PLACEBO-INDUCED CHANGES IN THE NEUROLOGICAL PAIN
SIGNATURE ARE DISSOCIABLE FROM EXPECTANCIES Scott Scha-

fer1, Tor D. Wager1; 1University of Colorado Boulder — The goal of this study
was to determine whether placebo-induced reductions in pain-related
fMRI activity depend on conditioned experience, belief, or a combination
of the two. We induced placebo analgesia in 40 subjects using standard
conditioning procedures. Experience was manipulated between subjects,
such that half received four conditioning sessions (LONG group), while
the other half received a single session (SHORT group). We tested effects
on thermal pain under Control (C) and Placebo (P) conditions. After an
initial test, we reversed placebo expectancies by revealing that the placebo
was inert, and re-tested participants. We focused on responses in the Neurological Pain Signature (NPS, Wager et al. 2013), an fMRI-based activity
pattern that is sensitive (90+%) and specific in discriminating the intensity
of thermal pain within individual participants. Prior to the reveal, neither
SHORT nor LONG groups showed a [C - P] difference in NPS responses
during pain. However, NPS responses were reduced overall [C + P] in
the LONG vs. SHORT groups, and the effects of temperature (46 vs. 45.5
degrees) on NPS responses were abolished in the LONG group. Following
the reveal, NPS responses were reduced by placebo [C > P] in the LONG
group, in spite of almost complete reversal of expectancies, whereas the
SHORT group showed an increase in NPS pattern expression [P > C]. These
findings suggest that prior conditioning experience is crucial in shaping
placebo-responses on pain-related fMRI responses, and its effects may persist when belief in the placebo treatment is reduced or eliminated.

C39
SOCIAL PROBLEM SOLVING AND EMPATHY IN ALCOHOL DEPENDENCE Tobias Schmidt1, Patrizia Thoma1, Patrik Roser2, Georg Juckel2, Boris

Suchan1; 1Department of Neuropsychology, Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
Ruhr-University Bochum, Universitätsstraße 150, D-44780 Bochum, Germany,
2
Department of Psychiatry, Ruhr-University Bochum, LWL University Hospital,
Alexandrinenstraße 1-3, D-44791 Bochum, Germany — Social problem solving abilities and empathy are fundamental for everyday functioning. Presently, little is known about specific changes of these aspects of social cognition in alcohol dependence. Our study investigates distinct components of
empathy and social problem solving in patients with alcohol dependence
and depression in comparison with healthy controls. Forty-nine recently
detoxified patients with alcohol dependence (ALC), twenty patients hospitalized for depression (DEP) and fifty-one healthy controls (HC) completed
a computerized task assessing different components of empathy (emotion recognition, personal concern and affective perspective taking) and
a scenario-based test of the ability to understand and solve interpersonal
problems. Response accuracy was impaired in both the ALC and the DEP
group relative to the HC group on the emotion recognition task, while only
ALC patients made significantly more errors than the HC group during
the affective perspective taking task. ALC patients, but not the DEP group
were also significantly impaired relative to healthy controls with regard to
the generation and selection of both socially acceptable and practical solutions for interpersonal problems and they also perceived problematic social
situations as significantly more awkward. Furthermore, ALC patients
made significantly more errors with regard to the interpretation of sarcastic
stories relative to healthy controls. Our data provide evidence of specific
patterns of altered empathic responding and social problem solving in
alcohol-dependent individuals in comparison with depressed patients and
healthy controls.

106

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

C40
INTER- AND INTRA-SUBJECT SYNCHRONIZATION OF ELECTROMAGNETIC BRAIN ACTIVATIONS DURING NATURALISTIC STIMULATION CONDITIONS Wei-Tang Chang1, Iiro P. Jääskeläinen2, John W.

Belliveau1, Samantha Huang1, An-Yi Hung1, Stephanie Rossi1, Jyrki Ahveninen1;
1
Harvard Medical School/Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA,
United States, 2Aalto University School of Science, Espoo, Finland — An
increasing number of fMRI studies use naturalistic stimuli such as movies
to trigger cognitive and emotional processes that would be difficult to elicit
with more simplified stimuli. Naturalistic stimulation has been much more
scarcely utilized during magnetoencephalography (MEG) and EEG, which
(unlike fMRI) provide high-resolution spatiotemporal estimates of population-level neuronal activity instead of its metabolic correlates. It is, consequently, still uncertain whether reliable and replicable patterns of MEG/
EEG activity can indeed be observed during free viewing of a movie stimulus. Here, right-handed healthy subjects watched a 17-min video clip from
movie “Crash” (Lionsgate Films, 2004) twice during simultaneous MEG
and EEG recordings. Physiological noise components, such as ocular and
cardiac artifacts, were removed from the recorded data using the DRIFTER
algorithm. The MEG/EEG raw time series were multiplied with a minimum norm estimate (MNE) inverse operator to yield a dynamic estimate
of cortical activity during movie viewing. We then calculated within-subject between-run correlations (WSBRC) of cortical activity over 1030-s windows at every 200 ms, and analyzed inter-subject synchronization patterns
by averaging the resulting 45 pairs of correlation coefficients between the
WSBRC time series. The most significant ISC-WSBRC occurred in occipital/inferior temporal visual and superior temporal auditory cortices, and
in the posterior cingulate, precuneus, pre- and postcentral gyri, and right
inferior and middle frontal gyri. Our results show that reliable patterns of
broadband MEG/EEG activity can be measured during free movie viewing, and that the most replicable activations are consistent with previous
fMRI studies using the same stimuli.

C41
HOW DOES THE BRAIN REPRESENT DIFFERENT WAYS OF
UNDERSTANDING THE SAME STORY? Yaara Yeshurun1, Janice Chen1,

Erez Simony1, Christopher J Honey1, Uri Hasson1; 1Princeton University —
Different listeners can interpret the same story in starkly different ways,
depending on their prior views of the world and the characters’ goals and
beliefs. In this functional magnetic resonance imaging study we investigated how different interpretations of the same narrative are represented
in the brain. Forty subjects listened to an auditory story whose depiction of
character relationships and mental states was highly ambiguous. Subjects
were randomly assigned to receive one of two possible pre-story “introductions”, which cued radically different interpretations of the subsequent
story. Behavioral results suggested comparable levels of comprehension
between the two groups (p = 0.8), but significant differences (p < 10-9) in
the interpretation of the narrative. Next, to track neural representations
of the story interpretation: we used a temporal-based classifier to identify regions whose activity could differentiate between subjects presented
with one introduction or the other. Most brain areas responded in similar
manner across both groups. However, different response time-courses to
the identical auditory input were detected within the bilateral posterior
temporal-parietal junction, the precuneus, bilateral inferior frontal gyrus
and the right hippocampus. Prior studies have shown that many of these
regions, linked to the default mode network and language systems, are sensitive to the absence or presence of a meaningful interpretation for incoming information. Here we show that activity in these regions is different
even for two plausible interpretations of the same incoming information.

C42
RELATION BETWEEN AN OXYTOCIN RECEPTOR GENE VARIANT,
FACE RECOGNITION AND AMYGDALA ACTIVATION Hakan Fischer1,2,

Anna Zettergren3, Johanna Lovén2, Joakim Svärd2, Johan Milding3, David
Johansson3, Natalie C Ebner4, Lars Westberg3; 1Stockholm University, 2Karolinska Institutet, 3University of Gothenburg, 4University of Florida — The ability to recognize faces of persons we encounter is crucial for most social
interactions. The neuropeptide oxytocin has been shown to be essential
for social recognition in mice, by actions on oxytocin receptors in medial

2014 Annual Meeting	
amygdala. In line with these results, recent studies indicate that oxytocin
treatment increases face recognition abilities also in humans. Furthermore,
several studies have shown associations between oxytocin receptor gene
(OXTR) variants and various aspects of social behaviors as well as risk for
autism. The aim of the current study is to explore if OXTR variants may be
associated with the ability to recognize faces and related amygdala activity.
Eleven single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the OXTR were genotyped in about 60 subjects who had performed a face memory task when
scanned with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). One of the
OXTR variants, rs7632287, - located downstream of the gene and previously associated with risk of autism spectrum disorders - was associated
with the ability to recognize faces (p=0.01) as well as with amygdala activation during the encoding phase (p=0.004) of the face memory paradigm.
In conclusion, our results provide support for the notion that oxytocin may
regulate social recognition in humans using similar neural mechanisms as
previously described in rodents.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring &
inhibitory control
C43
THE NEURAL BASIS OF MONITORING GOAL PROGRESS- AN
FMRI STUDY Yael Benn1, Thomas L. Webb1, Betty Chang1, Yu-Hsuan Sun1,

Iain D. Wilkinson1, Tom F.D. Farrow1; 1University of Sheffield, UK — The neural
basis of goal progress monitoring has received little attention relative to
other processes involved in goal directed behavior (e.g., attention, motor
control, and response inhibition). Studies of error monitoring have identified the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) as being sensitive to conflict
detection, and involved in triggering corrective action. However, conflict
detection does not capture several important aspects of progress monitoring, such as monitoring progress over time (e.g., toward losing weight), or
monitoring where there is no discrepancy (e.g., when progress is good).
In the present research, 20 healthy participants underwent fMRI while
playing a computer game involving monitoring progress toward either a
numerical or a visuo-spatial target. Activation in the ACC was observed
only when participants monitored their progress with respect to a clear
reference value, implying that progress towards more general goals, such
as “being a good person”, are less likely to result in a conflict. Activations
were also observed in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), and several parietal regions. The DLPFC is likely to be activated due to its role in
updating working memory as well as control actions. Results further suggest that DLPFC activations are likely to be partially modulated and fedback to and from regions of the parietal cortex, to support processes such as
periodically attending to information, calculation, and magnitude processing. These findings are important for understanding the processes involved
in monitoring progress over time, and how these overlap with, but also
distinct from, the processes involved in monitoring for conflict or errors.

C44
HUMAN STRIATAL RESPONSES DURING SELF-COMMITTED AND
OBSERVED ERRORS Iiro P. Jääskeläinen1, Hanna-Leena Halme1, Yigal

Agam2, Enrico Glerean1, Juha M. Lahnakoski1, Mikko Sams1, Karoliina Tapani1,
Jyrki Ahveninen2, Dara S. Manoach2; 1Aalto University School of Science,
Espoo, Finland, 2Massachusetts General Hospital — Human striatum has
been implicated in error processing. Here, we compared striatal responses
during self-committed errors and observation of errors committed by
others. During 3-Tesla functional magnetic resonance imaging, twenty
healthy participants played a computer game in which moles and rabbits
emerged from two holes in a garden. Their task was to club any moles that
emerged but if a rabbit emerged, to club the other, empty, hole. Failing
to club the mole and clubbing the rabbit both counted as errors. Correct
actions were indicated with green “%” and errors with red “X”. Next, participants passively observed a recording of another person’s game play.
Finally, participants watched movie clips depicting errors in naturalistic
settings such as figure skaters falling down. The putamen exhibited significantly stronger responses bilaterally during both self-committed errors
and observed errors in the naturalistic video clips than during observed
errors in the recorded game play. Further, right putamen showed significantly stronger responses during self-committed errors than when observ-

Poster Session C
ing errors in the naturalistic videos. Significantly stronger responses were
also observed in bilateral globus pallidus and right caudate nucleus, during
self-committed errors than during observed errors in the recorded game
play. In conclusion, the strongest striatal responses arose during self-committed errors while observing errors by others in naturalistic free viewing
conditions activated the putamen. In contrast, we failed to see any putamen
activation when observing errors committed by others during the cartoon
game. Thus, ecological validity of stimuli seems to be important when
investigating how striatum processes observed errors.

C45
HYPERACTIVE ERROR MONITORING IN OCD CAN BE MODULATED BY TASK DEMANDS Julia Klawohn1, Julia Preuss1, Anja Riesel1,

Rosa Grützmann1, Tanja Endrass1,2, Norbert Kathmann1; 1Humboldt-Universität
zu Berlin, 2Otto-von-Guericke-Universität Magdeburg — Performance monitoring has repeatedly been shown to be hyperactive in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), as indexed by an enhancement of the
error-related negativity (ERN) of the event-related brain potential (ERP).
Evidence suggests that this hyperactivity is independent of current symptom state in OCD. It is unclear, however, whether performance monitoring
can still be modulated in patients with OCD in order to meet situational
demands. The present study investigated whether ERN amplitudes can be
reduced in OCD patients by manipulating attentional demands and monitoring capacity. Patients and matched control participants were examined
in a dual-task paradigm, combining a response conflict flanker task and a
working memory n-back task with two difficulty levels. We hypothesized
that error monitoring in the flanker task would be reduced with increasing
difficulty of the concurrent n-back task. Analysis of behavioral data showed
increased reaction times and decreased response correctness with increasing n-back difficulty, confirming the manipulation of experimental task
load. ERP results revealed significant decreases of ERN amplitudes with
dual task difficulty in both groups. These results indicate that both patients
with OCD as well as healthy controls are able to modulate performance
monitoring according to task demands and that changing the attentional
focus can modifiy hyperactive action monitoring in OCD. On the basis of
such findings new treatment approaches for OCD, e.g. attentional trainings, may be developed.

C46
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF TIME-BASED PROSPECTIVE
MEMORY Kevin Oksanen1, Emily Waldum1, Todd Braver1, Mark McDaniel1;
1

Washington University in St. Louis — In daily life, we often need to remember to perform an action after, or at, a specific period of time (e.g., take pizza
out of oven in 15 minutes). Surprisingly, little is known about the neural
mechanisms that support this memory, termed time-based prospective
memory (PM). Here we pioneered a paradigm that enabled examination
of both sustained and transient processes engaged during time-based PM.
Participants (N=20) performed a demanding on-going task during fMRI
scanning, with and without an additional time-based PM demand. During
the PM condition participants could access a hidden clock with a specific
response (in the control condition, pseudo-clocks randomly appeared and
their presentations were removed via the same response). Analyses tested
for sustained activation associated with the PM condition, and transient
activation associated with clock-checks and the execution of PM responses.
Contrary to prior findings with event-based PM (i.e., remembering to perform a future action when a specific event occurs; McDaniel et al, 2013), no
sustained PM-related activity was observed in anterior prefrontal cortex
(PFC) or elsewhere in the brain; instead, transient clock-related activity
was observed in this region. Critically, the activation was anticipatory,
increasing before clock-check responses. Anticipatory activity prior to PM
response execution was weaker in aPFC, but strong in pre-SMA (relative to
clock-check responses), suggesting a functional double dissociation related
to volitional decision-making. Together, the results suggest aPFC activity
dynamics during time-based PM reflect a distinct transient monitoring process, enabling integration of PM intention with current temporal information to optimally schedule upcoming PM-related actions.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

107

Poster Session C	

C47
THE BRAIN CARES ABOUT QUALITATIVE RATHER THAN QUANTITATIVE SURPRISE: THE P3 REFLECTS MISMATCH BETWEEN
PREDICTED AND ACTUAL VALENCE OF ACTION OUTCOMES IN
A REWARD CONTEXT Denise Janssen1, Edita Poljac1, Harold Bekkering1;
1

Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University
Nijmegen, the Netherlands — Whether reward prediction errors are of a
qualitative or quantitative nature remains a matter of debate. The current
electroencephalography study addressed this debate by examining how
the valence and magnitude of prediction errors interact in modulating the
outcome-evoked response. In each trial, participants were primed with
a cue that predicted the outcome of that trial with 75% validity. Possible
outcomes were a win or a loss of 30 or 10 points. In 25% of the trials, the
actual outcome deviated from the predictive cue. The P2 component was
independently modulated by the valence and the magnitude of the outcome, for both predicted and unpredicted outcomes. In contrast, the P3
was selectively sensitive to mismatch between the predicted and actual
valence of the outcome, meaning that the actual size of the prediction error
did not modulate the P3. Furthermore, the P3 effect did not differentiate
between positive and negative prediction errors. Satisfaction ratings however showed that participants did differentiate between positive and negative prediction errors at a conscious level. Losses were overall rated as
less satisfactory than wins, with negative prediction errors resulting in an
additional lowering of satisfaction. Interestingly, the way that valence mismatch affected subjective experience correlated positively with the way it
modulated the P3. To conclude, the P3 reflects a special class of prediction
error - namely a mismatch between predicted and actual valence of the
outcome, which suggests that the brain cares about qualitative rather than
quantitative surprise in a reward context.

C48
RIGHT DORSAL LATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND THE CONFLICT ADAPTATION PROBED WITH TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT-CURRENT STIMULATION I-Wen Huang1, Chi-Fu Chang1, Chi-Hung Juan1; 1Institute
of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central University, Jhongli, Taiwan — To
survive in the complex and dynamic environment, it is important that we
have to detect and resolve the conflict situations. According to the conflict
monitoring theory (Botvinick et al., 2001), the anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) detects the conflict and conveys this information to right dorsal
lateral prefrontal cortex (rDLPFC) or other brain areas, which would then
adjust the level of cognitive control to adapt the next oncoming conflict
circumstance. The conflict adaptation effect is one of the outcomes reflects
such cognitive control adjustment which can be observed the reduced reaction time (RT) of incongruent trial when the previous trial type is also incongruent (I-I) in conflict tasks. In this experiment, we used a color flanker task
combined with non-invasive transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)
over rDLPFC to test its role in conflict adaptation. To avoid a priming effect,
we excluded all the stimulus and response repetitions. Behavioral result
revealed the conflict adaptation effect that was driven by the reduced RT
in I-I condition. Most importantly, anodal tDCS eliminated such behavioral
effects. Furthermore, cathodal tDCS decreased the RT of current congruent
trial after the previous incongruent trial. These data suggested a causal role
of rDLPFC in cognitive control adjustments. In addition, the results showed
dissociation between different stimulation especially for the better performance in the low-conflict condition after preceding high-conflict situation
when we applied cathodal tDCS.

C49
BRAIN NETWORK ACTIVITY DURING SELF CONTROL OF SMOKING BEHAVIOR Andrew Melrose1, Louise Cosand1, Isabel Woyke2, John Mon-

terosso1; 1University of Southern California, 2Radboud University — Traditional
conceptions of self-control involve competition between appetitive urges
(analogous to a gas pedal), and executive functioning (analogous to a brake
pedal). We had 36 nicotine dependent individuals in acute withdrawal
complete an fMRI self-control challenge in which they were given several
opportunities to smoke, but were encouraged to resist, “on as many trials
as you can manage” Participants self-reported urge to smoke, and their faegerstrom score (severity of dependence) were both negatively associated
with self-control performance. In contrast with the tradition gas vs. brake

108

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
conception, we did not observe a relationship between executive function
scores (e.g., Stroop, CPT, Stop-Signal Task) and self-control success. The
only cognitive measure that was related to performance on the task was
estimated IQ, which was associated with better performance (though not
significantly so with correction for multiple comparisons). An independent
component analysis identified three network components that were more
active when participants were not smoking (but could smoke) relative to
periods when smoke was unavailable. Of note, individual differences in the
prominence of one of these networks significantly predicted task performance. Specifically, better self-control performance was observed among
participants who had greater signal within a network that included visual
cortex, bilateral fronto-parietal (sectors typically observed in executive
function tasks), and bilateral anterior insula and ventral striatum (sectors
typically associated with appetitive response). Taken together, our results
hint that integration between regions supporting appetite, and regions supporting executive control (rather than isolated executive function capacity)
may be predictive of self-control success.

C50
ALPHA SUPPRESSION AND ACTION MONITORING IN YOUNG
CHILDREN Jennifer McDermott1, Sarah Jo Torgrimson1, Kathryn Anzuoni1,

Phillip Desrochers1; 1University of Massachusetts-Amherst — EEG alpha suppression is associated with imitation and motor learning. Currently little is
known about this dynamic process in early childhood, including whether
alpha suppression fluctuates over the course of task performance. Using
a multi-step motor sequence task presented across multiple blocks, variance in EEG alpha suppression was assessed in young children (n=18, 11
female, M= 5.6 years olds) as they repeatedly “watched” and then “copied”
the actions of an experimenter. Baseline EEG to a fixation mark was collected prior to the start of each block. Reactivity to action observation and
execution differed in the left hemisphere at the frontocentral region (FC3)
over the course of the task (F(2,16)=3.86, p=0.04). Specifically, children
showed enhanced alpha suppression during action observation as compared to action execution in the first block of the motor sequence paradigm
(t(17)=2.96, p=.009). As the task progressed, differences in alpha suppression between action observation and action execution diminished, suggesting decreased need for neural resources as task familiarity was achieved.
Moreover, reduced alpha suppression during action observation was associated with impaired self-monitoring skills (r(16)=.75, p=.000) assessed via
maternal report on the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function
(BRIEF). Altogether, these results highlight two sets of novel findings: 1) in
early childhood the magnitude of alpha suppression to action observation
varies across task performance, whereas alpha suppression to action execution remains stable and 2) the ability to attend to the actions of others is
associated with the meta-cognitive ability to monitor one’s own actions and
self-regulate across settings.

C51
INHIBITION-INDUCED FORGETTING: WHEN MORE CONTROL
LEADS TO LESS MEMORY Yu-Chin Chiu1, Tobias Egner1; 1Center for Cog-

nitive Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC — The ability to inhibit
pre-potent responses is considered a key aspect of executive function, but
the relation of response inhibition to other cognitive operations is poorly
understood. Here we examined the effects of inhibitory control on stimulus
processing through the lens of incidental memory encoding. In a face-gender go/no-go task, participants responded to go cues (e.g., male faces)
and withheld responses to no-go cues (e.g., female faces, counter-balanced
across participants) over 4 (Experiment 1) or 6 (Experiment 2) repetitions
of 120 unique face identities. Consistent with prior studies, go/no-go performance indicated that participants learned to associate inhibition with
no-go cues, as the probability of responding to these cues decreased with
the number of cue exposures (both experiments, p’s < .05). After a short
filler task (~5 min.), participants received a surprise recognition memory
test involving the “old” task stimuli intermixed with a set of new faces. In
both experiments, recognition memory for no-go items was worse than for
go items (Exp 1: 55% vs. 63%; Exp 2: 64% vs. 71%, p’s <.01). In Experiment
3, we inserted occasional dot probes during the same go/no-go task to test
whether this memory effect may be due to response inhibition sapping
attention away from stimulus processing. As expected, we found inferior
probe detection for no-go trials than for go trials (92% vs. 96%, p <.01).

2014 Annual Meeting	
Together, these results suggest that exerting inhibitory control impairs
memory encoding, possibly due to shifting attention resources away from
external stimuli to motor inhibition processes.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Other
C52
MIND WANDERING IMPAIRS TEXTBOOK READING COMPREHENSION AND RETENTION Amishi Jha1, Lisa Cameron1, Alexendra Mor-

rison1, John Kounios2; 1University of Miami, 2Drexel University — Recent work
suggests that the occurrence of mind wandering has important implications for classroom learning. Here, we examine the inverse relationship
between mind wandering and both reading comprehension and retention
in a task contextualized for students. University students (N=57) read a
chapter from an introductory psychology textbook sentence-by-sentence
on a computer screen. Readers advanced to the next sentence via button
press. Sentences from another chapter of the book were embedded intermittently as mind wandering probes. For each sentence, participants were
instructed to indicate whether it was in-context or out-of-context. Mind
wandering was measured subjectively by asking participants to key-press
when they noticed off-task thinking, and objectively by examining failure
to notice out-of-context sentences. Retention was measured by quiz performance following the reading task. Results were compared to established
measures of mind wandering and sustained attention (Cognitive Failures
Questionnaire, CFQ; and the sustained attention to response task, SART).
Correlations revealed that higher quiz performance was accompanied by
a better ability to notice out-of-context sentences, and a lower incidence of
self-reported mind wandering. Reading quiz performance was also positively correlated with the ability to sustain attention on the SART. Also,
self-reported mind wandering during the reading task was positively correlated with the CFQ and mind wandering probes during the SART. These
results indicate that mind wandering may be a stable feature across tasks,
and even outside of the laboratory environment. Further, mind wandering
has a detrimental effect on reading comprehension and retention.

C53
PREDICTION ERRORS AND RESTART COSTS: EVIDENCE FOR
A GENERIC LEARNING SYSTEM WITHIN THE MEDIAL-FRONTAL
CORTEX Olave Krigolson1; 1Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Dal-

housie University — A growing body of evidence supports the notion that
within the medial-frontal cortex there is a generic reinforcement learning
system tasked with the adaptive modification of behavior. Indeed, studies
using event-related brain potentials have demonstrated that the error-related negativity (ERN) is modulated in a manner reflective of a reward prediction error. Having said that, the evidence supporting this contention is
not completely clear. Here, we had participants perform a learnable task in
which they acquired the ability to categorize “blobs” over the course of five
training sessions. We made two specific predictions: one, that the reward
positivity (RP) - the positive going aspect of the fERN would diminish over
time as predicted by a computational task model that used a temporal difference learning algorithm. Two, that increases in the amplitude of the RP
would reflect neural restart costs that we would observe at the start of the
second, third, fourth, and fifth training sessions. Our data supports both
of these hypotheses. First, we found that a contrast of correct and incorrect feedback early in learning yielded a feedback ERN. Second, we found
that the amplitude of the RP diminished with learning as predicted by our
computational model. Third, at the start of each day after the first day of
training we observed a brief increase in the amplitude of the RP that went
away with further practice. In sum, our results provide further support
for the hypothesis that a generic reinforcement learning system within the
medial-frontal cortex drives human learning.

C54
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THE BALANCE OF GABA TO GLUTAMATE IN PREFRONTAL CORTEX PREDICTS THE ABILITY TO
SELECT AMONG COMPETING OPTIONS Alejandro De La Vega1, Mark

Brown2, Hannah Snyder3, Debra Singel2, Yuko Munakata1, Marie Banich1;
1
Department of Psychology & Neuroscience, University of Colorado Boulder,
2
Department of Psychiatry, University of Colorado Denver, 3Department of

Poster Session C
Psychology, University of Denver — Individuals vary greatly in their ability
to make a choice when presented with a multitude of options. Here we
investigate the neural underpinnings of these individual differences. Using
magnetic resonance spectroscopy, we found that the balance of inhibitory
versus excitatory neurotransmitters in prefrontal cortex influences the ability to select among task-relevant options in two language production tasks.
The greater an individual’s concentration of GABA relative to glutamate in
prefrontal cortex, the faster they were able to select a relevant word. This
outcome is consistent with our computational modeling of this task, which
predicts that greater net inhibition in prefrontal cortex increases the efficiency of resolving competition among task-relevant options. Moreover,
the association with the GABA/glutamate ratio was specific to selection,
and was not observed for executive function ability in general. These findings are the first to link the balance of excitatory and inhibitory neural
transmission in prefrontal cortex to specific aspects of executive function.

C55
LONGITUDINAL CHANGES IN STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY RELATED TO GREY MATTER VOLUME IN BREAST CANCER
PATIENTS TREATED WITH CHEMOTHERAPY Carole Scherling1, Bar-

bara Collins2,3, Joyce MacKenzie3, Andra Smith2; 1Memory and Aging Center,
Neurology, UCSF, Sandler Neuroscience Center, San Francisco, CA, 2School
of Psychology, University of Ottawa, Vanier Hall, Ottawa, Canada, 33Ottawa
Hospital, Civic Campus, Ottawa, Canada — Purpose: Cognitive impairment
after chemotherapy have been reported in the literature. Working memory
impairments are most commonly reported- frequently studied using neuropsychological assessments and imaging. However, functional deficits
likely have structural explanations. Changes in neural network connectivity have been revealed in chemotherapy-treated cancer patients (Hosseini,
2012). The current study extends this investigation with a prospective longitudinal analysis. Methods: Female breast cancer patients and individually-matched healthy controls (n=20 each; age/education matched) underwent magnetic resonance imaging. Baseline was prior to chemotherapy but
after surgery, time2 was one month following treatment, and time3 was
one year after treatment. Controls followed a similar scanning protocol.
Data were segmented into grey matter volumes using voxel-based-morphometry (VBM8) and entered into the Graph-Analysis Toolbox (GAT)
pipeline. Results: From baseline to time2, patients reveal reduced graph
theory metrics, consistent with previous reports of reduced small-world
network properties (Hosseini, 2012), with a partial recuperation at time3.
Following the same pattern, frontal networks become less associated at
time2 compared to baseline, with another partial recovery at time3. Neuropsychological tests reveal slowest processing speed at time2, with some
increases at time3. Conclusions: This is the first prospective study to investigate structural connectivity in a chemotherapy-treated sample. Results
support previous conclusions, revealing volumetric decreases and functional deficits after treatment, with partial recuperation with time. Further
investigations are required to understand how chemotherapy affects brain
structure, identify long-term functional deficits, and uncover vulnerability factors aiding deficit creation/recuperation. Survivorship has increased
with recent medical advances- hence post-treatment quality-of-life issues
should be a medical focus.

C56
SAVINGS IN VISUOMOTOR ADAPTATION FOLLOWING AN
UNLEARNING SESSION WITH OR WITHOUT VISUAL FEEDBACK

Jinsung Wang1, Shancheng Bao1, Yuming Lei1; 1University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee — Individuals can adapt their movements to various conditions
in which visual and proprioceptive (motor) information are dissociated
with each other. Following adaptation to such a condition, a neural representation associated with the visual-motor dissociation is thought to be
stored in the nervous system. One way to investigate the nature of this
neural representation is to examine savings, that is, the extent to which
the adaptation is retained following a period of unlearning. In this study,
we examined the amount of savings in visuomotor adaptation following
an unlearning period in which online visual feedback of targeted reaching movements was either provided or removed. Brain activity following
the two types of unlearning sessions was also examined using functional
MRI. The experiment consisted of 6 sessions: familiarization, visuomotor
adaptation, unlearning, visuomotor re-adaptation, unlearning, visuomoCognitive Neuroscience Society

109

Poster Session C	
tor re-adaptation. During the adaptation/readaptation sessions, subjects
adapted to a rotated display while performing reaching movements with a
joystick device in a 3.0 T MRI scanner. During the two unlearning sessions,
they performed reaching movements under a normal display condition
first with, then without, visual feedback, or vice versa. Our behavioral data
demonstrated that the savings observed in the re-adaptation sessions was
greater following the unlearning session with visual feedback. Our imaging
data showed that the brain regions activated during the two re-adaptation
sessions were the same, although the intensity of activity in these regions
differed between the two sessions. These findings suggest that the availability of visual feedback during visuomotor adaptation can influence the
neural substrates of unlearning.

C57
DOMAIN SPECIFICITY IN TWO SCORING PROTOCOLS FOR
THE REY OSTERRIETH COMPLEX FIGURE Emily Sharp1,2,3, Elizabeth

Lertiz1,3, William Milberg1,3, Regina McGlinchey1,3, Laura Grande1,2; 1VA Boston
Healthcare System, 2Boston University School of Medicine, 3Harvard Medical
School — The Rey Osterrieth Complex Figure (ROCF) is a measure of
non-verbal memory and visuospatial functioning. Given the role of planning and organization required to accurately complete the copy, the ROCF
Copy subtest has been suggested as a sensitive indicator of executive function (EF). The current study investigated the relationship between ROCF
copy and EF. We compared two ROCF scoring protocols, one assessing
learning and memory (Myers & Meyers; 1995) and another assessing organization, the Planning Subscale of the Boston Qualitative Scoring System
(BQSS). We hypothesized the BQSS would be associated with performance
on EF tasks, whereas the Myers & Myers (MM) would not. A sample of
31 community dwelling African Americans completed a standard battery
of neuropsychological measures. Results indicated that the BQSS scores
predicted performance on standardized measures of EF (Trails B and Digit
Span Backwards), but not memory performance (CVLT-II). In contrast, MM
scores predicted performance on memory, but not EF measures . Results
suggest that the scoring protocols may assess for different underlying cognitive processes, and the use of the BQSS in assessing ROCF copy performance may provide additional important information regarding executive
function abilities.

C58
DECREASE OF DEFAULT MODE NETWORK DEACTIVATION IN
RULE-BASED CATEGORIZATION DURING THE DEVELOPMENT
OF AUTOMATICITY Farzin Shamloo1, F. Gregory Ashby2, Sebastien Helie1;

1
Purdue University, 2University of California Santa Barbara — The default
mode network (DMN) is a set of brain regions in which BOLD signal is
suppressed during attentional focus on tasks or the external environment.
Because automatic task processing requires less attention, development of
automaticity in a rule-based categorization task may result in less deactivation of the DMN. We tested this hypothesis by analyzing the functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data of 15 participants that were each
trained in rule-based categorization for 20 sessions on consecutive workdays (Helie, Roeder, & Ashby, 2010). Each participant was scanned on its
1st day (with no previous practice), 4th day (after 1,680 trials of practice),
10th day (after 5,160 trials of practice) and 20th day (after 11,040 trials of
practice). The results show deactivation of the following DMN regions:
orbitomedial prefrontal cortex (days 1, 4, 10), inferior parietal lobule (day
4), and middle temporal gyrus (day 20). In addition, analysis of variance
shows a statistically significant decrease in orbitomedial prefrontal cortex
deactivation between days 1 and 20 (the most robust DMN region), suggesting that automatic rule-based categorization does not inhibit DMN
regions as much as rule-based category learning. These results provide preliminary evidence that DMN inhibition is reduced when the rule-based categorization task becomes more automatic, consistent with the hypothesis
that automatic task processing requires less attentional focus. Keywords:
Default Mode Network; Rule-based Categorization; Automaticity; fMRI;

C59
COGNITIVE CONTROL OF INFORMATION PROCESSING IN
AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER Melissa-Ann Mackie1,2, Jin Fan2,3; 1The
Graduate Center, City University of New York, 2Queens College, City University
of New York, 3Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai — Incoming informa-

110

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
tion to the brain vastly exceeds its information processing capacity. Cognitive control is one mechanism that flexibly constrains information processing, aiding to prioritize information reaching conscious awareness. This
flexible, purposeful allocation of mental resources is essential to adaptive
behavior, but can be compromised by neurological disorder. Individuals
with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) comprise one such group demonstrating a rigid, inflexible cognitive style, suggesting possible cognitive
control deficits, and inefficient information processing. Although prior
investigations have attempted to elucidate the nature of these deficits in
individuals with ASD, whether there is an underlying general information
processing deficit associated with cognitive control performance remains
unclear. The present study aimed to challenge the cognitive control of
information processing in 15 adult individuals with ASD and 15 healthy
controls using three tasks that systematically manipulate information processing load. The tasks allowed investigation of the efficiency of simple
information processing; information processing across a range of values of
cognitive load; and rapid information processing capacity. Efficient performance on these tasks requires cognitive control to prioritize information
processing according to task demands. Results demonstrated that individuals with ASD performed significantly less efficiently under low cognitive
load, across a range of values of cognitive load, and had reduced rapid
information processing capacity relative to controls. Further, task performance was related to reported ASD symptom domains. These findings
suggest that individuals with ASD may have a core deficit in information
processing underlying inefficient cognitive control, contributing to the clinical presentation of the disorder.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory
C60
ACTIVE CONVERSION OF SENSORY INFORMATION TO ABSTRACT
REPRESENTATION Kara J. Blacker1, Akiko Ikkai1, Balaji M. Lakshmanan2,

Joshua B. Ewen2,3, Susan M. Courtney1,2,3; 1Johns Hopkins University, 2Kennedy
Krieger Institute, 3Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine — Extensive
research has demonstrated that working memory (WM) for sensory-based
information relies on interactions between sensory and prefrontal cortices; however, we also maintain non-sensory information in WM and the
neural mechanisms for creating and storing such abstract representations
are poorly understood. The current study used electroencephalography
(EEG) to investigate the process by which concrete, sensory information
is converted into abstract, relational WM representations. Previous studies
that focused on sensory information storage demonstrated that increased
alpha (8-13Hz) power corresponds to suppression of task-irrelevant sensory information. We hypothesized that the conversion of concrete information to relational information in WM would be marked by an increase in
alpha power at posterior electrode sites, as all sensory information becomes
task-irrelevant. Participants encoded two colored circles into WM, then
after an initial maintenance period, a cue indicated whether they were to
convert those items to another concrete representation (i.e., egocentric vertical spatial location) or to a relational representation (i.e., relative vertical
location between the two items). A time-frequency analysis, allowing for
visualization of the dynamics of the power spectra in both the frequency
and time dimensions, revealed that alpha power increased over posterior
electrodes when concrete information was converted to a relational representation, but not when the information was converted to another sensory
representation. This active conversion occurs approximately 1000-ms after
the cue. These findings suggest that abstract representations are stored in
WM independent of sensory representations and that posterior regions are
suppressed during this process of conversion because these regions become
task-irrelevant.

C61
THE WORKING MEMORY STROOP EFFECT: WHEN INTERNAL
REPRESENTATIONS CLASH WITH EXTERNAL STIMULI Anastasia Kiy-

onaga1, Tobias Egner1; 1Duke University — If working memory (WM) can be
thought of as attention directed at internal representations, then maintaining an item in WM should impact behavior comparably to visually attending that item. It is well-known that the meaning of a color-word stimulus

2014 Annual Meeting	
can interfere with naming its ink color when the two are incompatible (i.e.,
the Stroop effect). In a series of experiments, we test whether holding a word
internally in WM, rather than attending to it externally, can produce analogous interference effects in a perceptual color-discrimination task. Participants remembered a word shown in black ink (“red”, “blue”, “green”, or
“yellow”) for a delayed match-to-sample task. During the delay, they indicated the color of a rectangular patch drawn in red, blue, green or yellow
ink. Participants were slower to perform this perceptual judgment - as well
as the later WM probe - when the internally maintained word meaning
was incompatible with the ink color of the visually displayed patch. Moreover, the size of this “working memory Stroop effect” was equivalent to the
classic “attentional” Stroop effect. In additional experiments we show that,
just like the classic Stroop, this WM Stroop effect was also susceptible to
manipulations of the degree of conflict in the stimulus vs. response dimensions, as well as the proportions of compatible vs. incompatible trials. These
results indicate that WM maintenance and external attention likely activate
the same representations - causing a tradeoff between attention to internal
content and external stimuli - consistent with models that conceptualize
WM as internal attention.

C62
ASSESSMENT OF WORKING MEMORY LOAD ON TEMPORAL
EXPECTATION PROCESSES DURING VISUAL DISCRIMINATION

Theodore Zanto1, Helen Liu1, Peter Pan1, Adam Gazzaley1; 1University of California San Francisco — Visual discrimination ability is enhanced by cues
to when the target will appear. This cue-based advantage diminishes with
age and has contributed to the hypothesis that age-related cognitive decline
might in part stem from deficient expectation processes. Here, we address
whether a concurrent working memory load adversely affects expectation
processes. Twenty-three young adults (19-33 years) participated in a temporally-cued, visual target discrimination task while electroencephalography
(EEG) data were recorded. During the task, participants were instructed to
hold zero, three, or six numbers in working memory and were probed on
each trial following the discrimination response. Temporal cues enhanced
discrimination performance. Neural activity prior to target onset was modulated based on cued information, as indexed by the contingent negative
variation, alpha band (8-12 Hz), and beta band (12-30 Hz) activity. However, only beta band activity increased with working memory load. Importantly, the magnitude of anticipatory beta band modulation decreased with
a high working memory load and this magnitude of beta band modulation
predicted cue-based performance changes. These data were compared to
previously collected data from older adults (62-82 years) engaged in the
same discrimination task without a concurrent working memory load.
Interestingly, older adults’ performance did not benefit from cued information nor did they modulate pre-target beta band activity. Moreover,
older adults exhibited an overall increase in beta band activity, similar to
younger adults with a high working memory load. Together, these results
suggest that expectation processing declines in older adults may be related
to limitations in available cognitive resources.

C63
TEMPORAL PREDICTABILITY ATTENUATES DECAY IN SENSORY
MEMORY Anna Wilsch1, Molly J Henry1, Björn Herrmann1, Jonas Obleser1;

1
Max Planck Research Group “Auditory Cognition”, Max Planck Institute for
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — Increased alpha
power (8-13 Hz) during attentionally demanding tasks has been associated
with improved performance. Temporal predictability of the occurrence of
sensory information can also enhance stimulus encoding and thus improve
performance, but the joint influence of both factors on the processes of sensory memory is unclear. Using magnetoencephalography (N=20) during
a demanding delayed matching-to-sample task, we manipulated stimulus
encoding by varying the temporal predictability (fixed vs. jittered cue-stimulus time interval) for a pair of pure-tone patterns (S1-S2; discriminability
individually adjusted) embedded in white noise and varied the retention
delay (1, 2, 4 s in-between S1 and S2). We hypothesized that longer retention
delays in sensory memory would impair performance (using signal detection theory and area under the ROC-curve) and modulate alpha power (as
assessed using spectral analysis), but expected both effects to benefit from
temporally predictable S1 onsets (fixed condition). Neural and behavioral
data support these hypotheses: Task performance parametrically declined
with longer retention delays, but this decline was less steep for fixed than

Poster Session C
for jittered S1 onset-time. During S1 retention, alpha power at posterior
sensors decreased with longer retention delays, most likely reflecting attentional processes directly linked to the sensory memory decay. However,
alpha decreased less with retention delay after temporally predictable
S1 onsets. Across participants, individual modulation of posterior alpha
power predicted individual performance modulation. The results show
that temporal predictability yields benefits that outlast improved sensory
encoding, and attenuate the decay of alpha power as an indirect indicator
for sensory memory.

C64
MODELING OUTPUT GATING DURING SELECTION FROM WORKING MEMORY: BEHAVIOR, DOPAMINE AND NEUROSTIMULATION Christopher Chatham1, David Badre1; 1Brown University — Corticostri-

atal interactions are though to act as a gate to select the input to working
memory (WM). However, not all information in WM is relevant for behavior simultaneously. For this reason, a second “output gate” might advantageously govern which contents of WM influence behavior. A previous fMRI
study showed that frontostriatal input gating circuits may also support
output gating, with contextual representations in prefrontal cortex (PFC)
influencing striatum to select which items in WM will drive responding
(Chatham et al., Neuron, 2013). Here, we assess whether a computational
model of output gating can account for the full array of data by extending an existing model of hierarchical corticostriatal interactions (Collins &
Frank, Psych. Review 2013). The model learns our task efficiently, using
only simulated dopaminergic reinforcement learning signals within a biologically-plausible corticostriatal circuit. The model not only reproduces
the mean reaction time patterns of our task, but also the distributional characteristics of reaction time in the two conditions requiring output gating.
Two further features of this model will be discussed. First, the performance
of the model during the conditions requiring input gating indicates the
need for a global manipulation of response threshold, through pooling of
conflict signals across independent levels of hierarchical tasks. Second, the
model predicts the effects of stimulation and dopaminergic manipulation
of PFC during selection from working memory.

C65
DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX BOTH REPRESENTS AND
MANIPULATES MENTAL IMAGES Alexander Schlegel1, Prescott Alexan-

der1, Peter Tse1; 1Dartmouth College — In Baddeley’s (1986) model of working memory, the brain manipulates mental representations via a central
executive system that directs activity in subsystems like the visuospatial
sketchpad. Many neuroimaging studies implicate a network including
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and posterior parietal cortex (PPC)
as the neural correlate of this model (e.g. Schlegel, et al., 2013). Current
understanding suggests that DLPFC acts as Baddeley’s central executive,
directing transformations of mental representations in other regions rather
than storing representations directly. For instance, Crowe and colleagues
(2013) showed that neurons in monkey prefrontal cortex transmit executive control signals to parietal neurons. In the current functional magnetic
resonance imaging study, we asked whether DLPFC merely directs the
manipulation of mental imagery or if it is also involved in representing
mental images themselves. We developed a hierarchy of abstract shapes
and an orthogonal hierarchy of mental operations that could be performed
on those shapes. In each of a series of trials, human participants performed
a particular mental operation on a particular shape. Using multivariate pattern classification methods on neural activity in DLPFC, we could decode
both the shape that participants imagined and the operation that they
performed. Representational similarity analyses showed that the informational structures of both DLPFC and PPC correlated significantly with
both the shape and the operation hierarchies, although DLPFC correlated
more with the operation hierarchy and PPC correlated more with the shape
hierarchy. Our results suggest that information is distributed throughout
specialized nodes of the frontoparietal network rather than localized to particular regions.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

111

Poster Session C	

C66
EFFECTS OF SPORT-RELATED CONCUSSION AND FOOTBALL
EXPOSURE ON THE NEURAL MECHANISMS OF WORKING
MEMORY Eleanna Varangis1, Kelly Giovanello1, Chris Foster1, Zachary Kerr1,

J. D. DeFreese1, Kevin Guskiewicz1; 1University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
— Sport-related concussions have been linked with an increased likelihood
of memory complaints, dementia, and early-onset Alzheimer’s disease.
Aside from concussions, football players have also been shown to receive
sub-concussive hits that are not captured by their concussion history but
may be reflected by their overall football exposure. Currently it is unclear
whether such memory impairments later in life reflect discrete concussive
events or are a function of exposure to sub-concussive hits. In this study,
participants between the ages of 50-65 (N=63) were stratified based on
football exposure (college or NFL; weighted hours of contact sport) and
concussion history (0-2 or 3+ concussions; actual number of concussions
sustained). All participants completed an fMRI-adapted N-back task as a
measure of working memory (WM) at three different WM loads: 0-back,
1-back, and 2-back. Behavioral results showed no group differences in
N-back accuracy or reaction time. However, univariate fMRI analyses
revealed that concussion history explained more functional recruitment differences than did exposure. Parametric fMRI analyses indicated that with
increasing load, functional neural differences during WM were explained
more by concussion history than by exposure or by the interaction between
concussion history and exposure. These findings suggest that both football exposure and concussion history may contribute to differential neural
recruitment in WM, but that concussion history plays a larger role than
does exposure alone.

LANGUAGE: Lexicon
C67
LEXICAL ENHANCEMENT DURING PRIME-TARGET INTEGRATION:
ERP EVIDENCE FROM MATCHED-CASE IDENTITY PRIMING Marta

Vergara-Martinez1, María Jiménez1, Pablo Gómez2, Manuel Perea1; 1Universitat
de València, Spain, 2DePaul University, Chicago — In lexical decision, masked
repetition priming is robust for words, but not for nonwords. What is the
reason for this dissociation? At the behavioral level, a number of experiments (e.g., Jacobs et al., 1995) have revealed that matched-case identity
PRIME-TARGET pairs are responded to faster than mismatched-case
identity prime-TARGET pairs for nonwords (e.g., JUDPE-JUDPE < judpeJUDPE), but not for words (JUDGE-JUDGE = judge-JUDGE). These findings suggest that prime-target integration processes are enhanced when
the stimuli tap onto lexical representations, overriding physical differences between the stimuli (e.g., case). For pseudowords, the absence of an
(abstract) lexical level would prevent prime-target from being integrated
into the same perceptual object, revealing a behavioral advantage for
matched-case identity priming. To examine the time course of this phenomenon, we conducted an ERP masked priming lexical decision experiment that manipulated matched vs. mismatched case identity in words
and pseudowords stimuli. Behavioral results replicated previous findings.
More importantly, although case identity-priming effects were found at
very early time epochs (N/P150 case effects for words and nonwords),
they disappeared for words, but not for nonwords, around 200 ms after
target onset (N250 case effects for nonwords only). These findings suggest
that different-case word forms (lower- and uppercase) tap onto the same
abstract representation, leading to prime-target integration very early in
processing. In contrast, different-case pseudoword forms are processed as
two different entries. The implications of these findings for neural accounts
of visual-word recognition are examined.

C68
CHARACTERIZING PREOPERATIVE HEMISPHERIC ASYMMETRIES OF CORTICAL STRUCTURES AND LANGUAGE FUNCTIONS
IN LEFT-HEMISPHERE TUMOR PATIENTS VIA NAVIGATED TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION Noriko Tanigawa1, Nico Sollmann2,

Theresa Hauck2, Sebastian Ille2, Bernhard Meyer2, Florian Ringel2, Sandro M.
Krieg2; 1University of Oxford, 2Technical University of Munich — The present
study quantifies the volumetric asymmetry of gray matter of language-re-

112

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
lated cortical structures and investigates in what ways these structural
indices were associated with perisylvian tumor locations and object-naming performance in preoperative language mapping via navigated transcranial magnetic stimulation (nTMS). Data from 10 right-handed, German-speaking, left-hemisphere perisylvian tumor patients were analyzed
(3 frontal, 3 parietal, 4 temporal). For each patient, anatomical magnetic
resonance (MR) images were taken. These imaging data were processed in
FreeSurfer v.5.1.0 for automatic measurement of the structural indices. The
gray matter volume asymmetry quotient (GMAQ) was calculated as (L-R)/
(L+R). The same set of MR images were used for the preoperative nTMS
language mapping. Patients were asked to name familiar objects presented
on a computer screen. Only the correctly responded pictures without nTMS
were presented in the nTMS condition. All object-naming error types were
collapsed. The GMAQ rightward asymmetry in the supramarginal gyrus
(SMG) and the superior temporal gyrus (STG) were associated with tumor
locations, such that with these two structural measures, a support vector
machine classifier (R e1071 package) correctly categorized patients into the
three tumor location groups 80% of the times in cross-validation, where
the baseline classification accuracy was 40%. The error rate of the left STG
increased from the frontal to parietal to temporal tumor groups. By adding
this functional measure, the classification accuracy increased to 90%. Gray
matter volume asymmetry in STG and SMG and the associated gradient
difference in naming deficit may jointly suggest the importance of STG in
word production.

C69
RESOLVING PAPIAMENTO-DUTCH CONFLICTS Niels Schiller1,2, Leti-

cia Pablos1,2, Maria del Carmen Parafita Couto1,2; 1Leiden University Center for
Linguistics, 2Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition — In Papiamento-Dutch
bilingual speech, the nominal construction is a potential ‘conflict site’ if
there is an adjective from one language and a noun from the other. Do we
expect e.g. rode biña (red wine) or biña rode, and còrá wijn or wijn còrá?
Cantone and MacSwan (2009) argue that the language of the adjective
determines word order, so that wijn còrá and rode biña would be possible,
but not biña rode or còrá wijn. Myers-Scotton (2002), on the other hand,
expects the word order to follow that of the morphosyntax in the rest of
the sentence, so that wijn còrá and biña rode would be expected where the
rest of the sentence is in Papiamento, but rode biña and còrá wijn might be
expected where the morphosyntax is Dutch. So far, these theoretical differences have not been reconciled, but ERP work on Welsh-English bilinguals
points to the fact that the language of the verb is important (Parafita, Boutonnet, Davies, Deuchar & Thierry, 2013). Electrophysiological data using
the event-related brain potential (ERP) technique were collected to provide objective measures of the neurocognitive processes underlying code
switching in Dutch-Papiamento bilinguals. The results support previous
findings with Welsh-English bilinguals, namely, that the relative order of
the noun and the adjective is determined by verb inflection (Parafita et al.,
2013). In addition to understanding the mechanisms involved in processing
languages with conflicting grammars, the use of ERPs generates insights
into the validity of theories of code switching.

C70
THE ROLE OF VISUAL REPRESENTATIONS DURING THE LEXICAL
ACCESS OF SPOKEN WORDS Gwyneth Lewis1, David Poeppel1; 1Department of Psychology, New York University — Under strong embodied accounts
of language processing, meaning must be grounded in perceptual experience. Pulvermüller (1999) presents evidence that neuronal ensembles in
spatially distinct perceptual and language areas become simultaneously
activated while processing a word form and perceiving the real world referent. What role (if any) do visual representations associated with words
play during lexical access? Spoken word recognition involves phonological
access in superior temporal (ST) regions followed by contact with stored
lexical representations in the posterior middle temporal gyrus (pMTG)
(Hickok & Poeppel, 2007). To determine whether visual representations
contribute to speech recognition, we examine, using magnetoencephalography (MEG), effects from phonological and lexical variables on ST and
pMTG areas, compared with that of imageability (the ease with which a
word links to visual representations) on visual cortices. Embodied accounts
predict early modulation of visual areas by imageability - concurrently
with or prior to modulation of pMTG by lexical variables. Stimuli were
synthetic speech generated from 400 monosyllabic, monomorphemic,

2014 Annual Meeting	
nouns, varying in imageability, and 400 matched nonwords. Participants
responded to stimuli in a lexical decision task with simultaneous MEG
recording. We employed the lexical, phonological, and perceptual variables
in a correlational time course analysis, with trial-by-trial activation assessed
in occipital, ST, and pMTG regions of interest. The variables modulated the
ROIs during different time windows. Critically, visual regions reflected an
imageability effect prior to effects of lexicality on pMTG. This surprising
effect supports a view on which sensory aspects of a lexical item are not a
consequence of lexical activation.

C71
SECOND LANGUAGE EXPOSURE MODULATES FIRST LANGUAGE
LEXICAL PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS AND LINEAR MIXED MODELS Naveed Sheikh1, Debra

Titone1; 1McGill University — The neural organization of first language (L1)
knowledge is traditionally thought to be relatively immutable in adulthood. However, recent data show evidence of neuroplasticity in L1 lexical
knowledge that is related to L2 experience. For example, word frequency
effects in L1 are larger at higher levels of second language (L2) exposure
(Whitford & Titone, 2012). Thus, L2 experiences re-organize L1 knowledge.
However, neurocognitive data on these L2 exposure-induced re-organizations are sparse. Here, we combined event-related potentials (ERP) and a
masked priming paradigm (Holcomb & Grainger, 2006) to examine how
L1 frequency effects vary as a function of L2 exposure for 29 bilingual participants. English target words followed masked primes that were either
identical to the targets or nonwords. Mean ERP amplitudes for early lexical stages of processing (N1) and late semantic stages of processing (N400)
were fit to linear mixed models (LMM), which allowed us to examine how
frequency effects across items vary as a function of continuous individual
differences in L2 exposure across participants. In the identical prime condition, N1 amplitudes were more negative for low frequency compared
to high frequency words. However, N1 amplitudes were more negative
overall, without any frequency effect, at higher levels of L2 exposure. N400
amplitudes were also more negative for low compared to high frequency
words. However, amplitudes were less negative for low frequency items
at higher levels of L2 exposure. Thus, L2 experiences re-organize L1 lexical
knowledge, which manifests during early lexical and late semantic stages
of word processing.

C72
GREATER EXPECTATIONS: A DEVELOPMENTAL INCREASE IN THE
INFLUENCE OF TOP-DOWN INFORMATION ON SPOKEN WORD
PROCESSING IN MANDARIN CHINESE Jeffrey Malins1,2, Danqi Gao3,

Ran Tao3, James Booth4, Hua Shu3,5, Marc Joanisse1, Li Liu3,5, Amy Desroches6; 1The University of Western Ontario, London, Canada, 2Haskins Laboratories, New Haven, CT, 3State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience
and Learning & IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal University, 4Northwestern University, 5Center for Collaboration and Innovation in
Brain and Learning Sciences, Beijing Normal University, 6University of Winnipeg,
Canada — In recent years, researchers have become increasingly interested
in developing models of spoken word processing that account for tonal
languages such as Mandarin Chinese. However, to date, most investigations have focused solely on adults. In the current study, we considered
the development of Mandarin spoken word processing by examining how
typically developing children and adults responded to different types of
phonological similarity. A group of children (N = 17, mean age 10;5) and a
group of adults (N = 17, mean age 24) performed a picture-word matching
task while we recorded ERPs. In each trial, subjects were presented with
a picture of an item, which generated an expectation of a spoken form.
Subsequently, they heard a Mandarin monosyllabic word that either confirmed or violated this expectation. Subjects were asked to make an active
judgment regarding whether or not the spoken word matched the picture.
Mismatching items were related to expected word forms in one of several
ways: shared onset (tang2-tao2), shared rhyme (tang2-lang2), shared segments (tang2-tang1), shared tone (tang2-niu2), or were completely unrelated (tang2-xia1). Both children and adults showed sensitivity to these different types of phonological similarity; however, the two groups differed
in that the adults showed a reduced N400 for rhyming forms compared
to the children. This was taken as evidence of a stronger influence of top-

Poster Session C
down information on spoken word processing in the adults. These results
are discussed in the context of current theories of spoken word recognition,
as they add an important developmental constraint to these theories.

C73
NETWORK DYNAMICS OF READING AND SPEECH SYSTEMS
ACROSS LANGUAGES Pedro M. Paz-Alonso1, Stephen J. Frost2, Myriam

Oliver1, Peter J. Molfese2, Atira Bick3, Wen-Jui Kuo4, Denise H. Wu4, Ovid J.
Tzeng4, Kenneth R. Pugh2,5, Jay G. Rueckl5,2, Ram Frost3, Manuel Carreiras1;
1
Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language (BCBL), Spain, 2Haskins Laboratories, USA, 3Hebrew University, Israel, 4National Central University, Taiwan,
5
University of Connecticut, USA — Languages differ on how they code speech
into print. Each language’s solutions may shape how the brain processes
speech and print differently, balancing the weight of common and specific brain networks. Here we investigate how readers of Spanish, English,
Hebrew and Chinese, four languages with very different coding solutions,
process speech and print signals in their native languages. In particular we
will address a) to what extent the brain activation of the reading and speech
systems depends on the language orthographic depth and b) whether the
neural dynamics among brain regions commonly activated during speech
and print vary as a function of language characteristics. Healthy native
speakers of Spanish (n=17), English (n=17), Hebrew (n=16), and Mandarin Chinese (n=17) were scanned while making animacy judgments about
spoken and written words. The results revealed a) a similar pattern of
print-speech activation overlap across languages, but also stronger bilateral ventro-occipital engagement for reading in opaque (Chinese, Hebrew,
English) relative to transparent (Spanish) orthographies; and b) that while
speech and reading evoked similar patterns of functional connectivity
across languages, differences in the neural interactions of regions along
the ventro-dorsal axis of the temporal cortex for reading and speech were
more pronounced for Hebrew and Chinese than for English and Spanish.
All together our results suggest that the network dynamics among regions
within the speech and reading circuitries are modulated by the statistical
properties of the linguistic environment.

LANGUAGE: Other
C74
SPEECH PERCEPTION WITHOUT A MOTOR SYSTEM Alena Stasenko1,

Cory Bonn1, Alex Teghipco1, Frank Garcea1, Bradford Mahon1; 1University of
Rochester — The exact role played by the motor system in action recognition is currently debated, both in the domains of language and manual
action. Here we report evidence from a neurological patient with dysfunction of the speech motor system, and whose speech is marked by frequent
phonological and articulatory errors. The motor dysfunction in the patient
was confirmed with ultrasound imaging of the tongue during speech, in
which we find high variability in the tongue position across utterances.
Using categorical perception tasks, we show that while the patient shows a
normal categorical boundary for perception of speech sounds, the patient is
unable to label the same stimuli in a follow-up identification task. In addition, functional connectivity, computed over resting functional magnetic
resonance imaging data, indicate that the patient’s frontal lesion has deregulated the normal pattern of functional connectivity between Perisylvian
language areas and the rest of the brain. These data indicate that contrary
to motor-type theories of speech perception, motor processes are not constitutive of perceptual processes. However, motor processes may play a role
in phoneme identification, a function that may depend on frontal-temporal
connectivity.

C75
THE EFFECT OF LANGUAGES ON THE PRODUCTION AND RECOGNITION OF NUMBERS IN GERMAN-FRENCH BILINGUALS Aman-

dine Van Rinsveld1, Christine Schiltz1, Sonja Ugen1; 1University of Luxembourg
— How do bilinguals produce and recognize two-digit number words?
We investigated this question at different language proficiency levels
in German-French bilinguals. German two-digit number words indeed
follow the unit-decade order, whereas in French the order is decade-unit.
Our study was conducted in Luxembourg where pupils learn both languages at primary school. Moreover mathematics are taught in German
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

113

Poster Session C	
at primary school but in French at secondary school. Pupils from grades
5 (primary school), 8 (beginning of secondary school) and 11 (middle of
secondary school) performed two numerical tasks: In the number recognition task, participants were presented a spoken number word that they
had to recognize among four visually presented Arabic numbers. In the
number production task, participants had to pronounce visually presented
Arabic numbers. Both tasks were performed in German and in French and
we compared language-related performance differences for the 3 levels of
language proficiencies. Participants of all levels recognized and produced
number-words more efficiently in their dominant language (i.e. German).
However, this advantage for the dominant language was especially prominent at the lowest level of language proficiency when mathematics education was implemented in the dominant language (i.e. German). Furthermore, performance levels decreased with increasing number size, but over
and above this general trend, participants of all proficiency levels showed
specific difficulties with the complex structure of French number words
over 60. Taken together, these results support the view that number and
language processing are tightly associated, since language proficiency and
language structure influence very simple and basic numerical tasks.

C76
EXPECTATION-BASED NEURAL ADAPTATION DEFICITS IN DYSLEXIA Sara D. Beach1, Carlos Cardenas-Iniguez2, Marianna D. Eddy3,4, John D.

E. Gabrieli1, Tyler K. Perrachione5; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2University of Chicago, 3US Army NSRDEC, 4Tufts University, 5Boston University —
Repeated presentation of a stimulus results in attenuated neural responses
- a phenomenon called “repetition suppression.” The magnitude of this
suppression is greater when repetition is expected, highlighting the modulatory role top-down mechanisms play in rapid sensory plasticity. Individuals with dyslexia exhibit reduced neurophysiological adaptation to stimulus repetition, and dysfunctional neural adaptation may underlie learning
impairments in this disorder. Here, we investigated the effect that topdown neuromodulatory mechanisms have on repetition suppression-indexed sensory plasticity in dyslexia. We recorded EEG from adults with
(n=20) and without (n=20) dyslexia. Participants viewed pairs of faces or
words. In separate conditions, the probability of the second stimulus being
a repeat of the first was either high (expected) or low (unexpected). Both
groups exhibited repetition suppression for face-evoked responses over
posterior and central sites 250ms after the repeated stimulus. For controls,
the magnitude of repetition suppression over central sites was enhanced by
expectation of repetition. Expectation did not modulate repetition suppression in individuals with dyslexia. Both groups likewise exhibited repetition
suppression for word-evoked responses. The magnitude of repetition suppression was greater in controls for early (N170) and late (P300) components. Expectation of stimulus repetition significantly enhanced the magnitude of repetition suppression for controls, but this effect was more limited
in individuals with dyslexia. Overall, individuals with dyslexia appear to
exhibit less expectation-mediated enhancement of repetition suppression
than controls. This suggests that top-down neuromodulation may be less
effective at enhancing sensory processing in this disorder, representing a
possible biological mechanism for adaptation-based learning deficits in
dyslexia.

C77
PARIETAL AREAS INVOLVED IN SUBTRACTION AND MULTIPLICATION: DOES DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA MAKE A DIFFERENCE?

Silke M. Goebel1, Amy Goodwin1, Mark Hymers1, Agnieszka Jaroslawska2,
Maggie J. Snowling3; 1University of York, UK, 2MRC CBU, Cambridge, UK,
3
University of Oxford, UK — Parietal lobe activation during arithmetic tasks
depends on the type of arithmetic operation: both intraparietal sulci are
typically activated during subtraction, while the left angular gyrus is often
recruited during multiplication. Adults with developmental dyslexia (DD),
a specific learning disorder that affects the development of reading and
spelling, show clear difficulties in arithmetic, in particular in fact retrieval
(e.g. multiplication). It has been suggested that those fact retrieval deficits
are due to their weaknesses in phonological awareness, the ability to segment and manipulate speech sounds. The left angular gyrus has been suggested to play an important role during verbal fact retrieval. In the current
fMRI study, we compared the parietal networks for arithmetic in adults
with and without DD. Nine adults with phonological DD (aged 19-27

114

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
years) and nine matched controls carried out a multiplication and subtraction task in the fMRI scanner. During multiplication, controls activated a
left-lateralised parietal network, including the intraparietal sulcus, inferior
and superior parietal lobules. Adults with DD activated a wider bilateral
network of parietal areas, suggesting more reliance on quantity-processing
during multiplication. Patterns of parietal activity during subtraction were
similar in both groups. In a separate ROI analysis, the left angular gyrus
showed a greater difference in BOLD signal between multiplication and
subtraction for controls than for participants with DD. The results of this
study provide preliminary evidence for a possible neural basis of arithmetic fact retrieval deficits in adults with dyslexia.

C78
INVESTIGATING NEURAL CORRELATES OF IMPLICIT MEMORY
AND READING ABILITY Peter Molfese1, Louisa Bogaerts3, Stephen Frost1,

Einar Mencl1, Jay Rueckl1,2, Nicole Landi1,2, Ken Pugh1,2; 1Haskins Laboratories, 2University of Connecticut, 3Ghent University — Previous reports linking implicit memory and reading ability using the serial reaction time task
(SRTT) have shown mixed results. To date, only a handful of studies have
explored the neurobiological correlates of the SRTT, identifying significant regions of activation in the medial temporal lobe, hippocampus, and
putamen. Our study extends previous work by both 1) treating reading
ability as a continuum; 2) investigating the relationship between reading
ability and brain activation during implicit motor learning as measured by
fMRI. In the current study, 32 individuals representing a full range of reading abilities performed the SRTT in a block-design fMRI paradigm. Behavioral results show consistent reductions in reaction times (RT) in structured
(i.e., repeated sequence) compared to random sequence trials. Negative
correlations were found between RT and measures of both reading fluency
and decoding for both random and structured trials. Brain activations partially replicate previous fMRI SRTT findings with activations in bilateral
temporal lobe, hippocampal, and putamen regions. Additionally, brain-behavior analyses of reading ability revealed a correlation between bilateral
hippocampal activation and pseudoword decoding for structured trials,
which was not present for random trials.

C79
A TEST OF OPEN BIGRAM MODELS: READING OF TRANSPOSED
WORDS BY TYPICAL AND POOR READERS Jackie Liederman1, Laura

Sancho2; 1Boston University, 2University of California, San Diego — Open
bigram (OB) models posit that letter order in a word is coded by left-toright ordered letter pairs. In contrast, Konisha & Norris (2013) demonstrated that transpositions of non-contiguous bigrams spanning three
letters in the target (e.g., BS –aBoliSh) showed robust priming effects,
equivalent in size to contiguous bigrams (e.g., BO-aOBlish ) with little effect
of direction of the displacement. In our study, Poor Readers (PRs), vs. Typical Readers (TRs) were presented with words containing letter transpositions. They were instructed to pronounce the “actual” word by ignoring
the typos. Transpositions were counterbalanced in terms of 1) distance (1,
2 or 3 spaces from the point of origin), 2) maintenance of left to right letter
order (yes or no), and 3) word length (9-11 letters). At the end of the session,
the untransposed versions of the words were presented to provide individualized measures of reading accuracy and rate. “Transposition costs”
(for speed/accuracy) were computed as [(untransposed – transposed)/
untransposed*100]. For both TRs and PRs, in reading (as opposed to priming), transpositions of three spaces were significantly more disruptive than
those of one or two spaces, and reversal of letter order to the left was significantly most disruptive. In addition, separation of digraph bigrams (e.g.,
“SH” in establiSHment to “estaHbliSment”) had no greater transposition
costs than separation of two consonants other than the digraph in the same
word (“BL”) to create eLstaBishment, and there was a significant effect of
direction. Reading does not parallel priming data.

C80
NATIVE PHONOLOGICAL RULES MODULATE EARLY AUDITORY
BRAIN RESPONSES Yue Sun1, Sharon Peperkamp1, Maria Giavazzi2, Leon-

ardo Barbosa1, Sid Kouider1, Martine Adda-Decker3, Charlotte Jacquemot2;
Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique, Ecole Normale
Supérieure, Paris, France, 2Equipe Neuropsychologie Interventionnelle, Ecole
Normale Supérieure, Paris, France, 3Laboratoire de Phonétique et Phonologie,
1

2014 Annual Meeting	
Université Paris 3, Paris, France — Perception of speech sounds is influenced
by listeners’ experience with their native language. Previous behavioral
and imaging studies have mostly investigated the perception of non-native speech sounds and demonstrated that exposure to native sound shapes
listeners’ perceptual space such that non-native sound inputs are perceptually transformed into native sounds. However, in everyday life, listeners have to deal with their own language rather than foreign languages
and strikingly, knowledge on their native language may also bias their
perception of native sounds. For instance, in French, the sound [g] is perceived as [g] in /igmo/, while the same sound can be perceived as [k] in /
igdo/. While the existence of such transformation is known and explained
by compensation for French voice assimilation rule, the question of when
it occurs during speech processing is still unclear. Here, we investigated
this question using EEG recordings. French listeners were asked to detect
change between items. In the first condition (/igmo/-/ikmo), the change
was well detected; whereas in the second condition (/igdo/-/ikdo/), the
change was not detectable because /igdo/ is perceptually transformed into
/ikdo/. In particular, our electrophysiological data show an early negative component (MMN) at 130 ms in response to the sound change only
in the /igmo/-/ikmo/ condition, but not in the /igdo/-/ikdo/ condition,
suggesting that the transformation takes place at early stages of sound perception. In conclusion, our findings demonstrate that native phonological
rules impact listeners’ perception of native sounds and that the resulting
transformation involves early perceptual mechanisms rather than late conscious reconstruction.

C81
FUNCTIONAL BRAIN IMAGING PREDICTS FOREIGN LANGUAGE
LEARNING SUCCESS IN THE CLASSROOM Zhenghan Qi1, Tyler Per-

rachione2, Michelle Han1, Keri Garel3, Ee San Chen1, Amy Finn1, John Gabrieli1;
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Boston University, 3Massachusetts
General Hospital — Foreign language learning is one of the most challenging educational activities for adults, including learning to comprehend and
produce a new vocabulary and grammar that are represented by foreign
speech sounds. We used functional MRI to measure the neural response
to linguistic and nonlinguistic pitch (tones) in adults before and after an
intensive, 4-week, classroom-based introductory Mandarin Chinese course.
Learning achievement was measured by performance on the HSK (Level
I), a standardized test of Mandarin proficiency assessing both aural and
written vocabulary and grammar. Activation in bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) to linguistic pitch in
pre-training brain images significantly predicted students’ performance on
the post-training HSK (FDR=0.05, p<0.05). A behavioral assessment of lexical tone perception also significantly predicted classroom learning achievement (r=0.52, p=0.007). We also observed that, compared to the pre-training
scans, students at the end of the Mandarin course evinced an increase in the
neural response of left DLPFC and left IFG to linguistic versus nonlinguistic pitch (FDR = .05, p < .05) - a result paralleling behavioral improvement
in lexical pitch perception after training. In addition to demonstrating the
plasticity of the neural systems for language in adulthood, these results
reveal that individual differences in neural responses to foreign-language
speech sounds before training can predict learners’ holistic attainment of
the foreign language, including speech, vocabulary, and grammar.

1

LANGUAGE: Semantic
C82
RECOVERY OF MEANING DURING READING: AN EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL STUDY ON THE PROCESSING OF ELLIPTICAL SENTENCES Bobby Ruijgrok1, Crit Cremers1, Lisa L. Cheng1, Niels O. Schiller1;

1
Leiden University — The interpretation of elliptical sentences (e.g. “The man
bought a book in Boston and the woman [...] a cd in Houston”) requires a
process of semantic recovery. Ellipsis may be resolved by inserting a copy
of the missing structure (e.g. “bought”). Such a “copy-paste” procedure
predicts a low processing cost - regardless of the size of the antecedent.
In contrast, a more laborious inferencing mechanism may be required for
ellipsis resolution, which predicts the activation of relatively more processing resources. We studied the online processing of a particular type of ellipsis, i.e. “gapping”, in Dutch. We recorded event-related brain potentials

Poster Session C
while Dutch participants read sentences containing gapping constructions
interspersed with filler sentences. Three elliptical conditions were compared with their non-gapped counterpart (control condition). The gapped
sentences differed with respect to the omitted structure: verb only (as
above), verb plus object, or verb plus object and adjunct. The latter structure was replaced by “ook” (too). We observed a broadly distributed early
negativity following the occurrence of omitted structures. In addition, the
negativity appeared to be more sustained if larger structures are elided.
These results suggest that different resolution strategies are involved in the
recovery of meaning during gapping resolution. If only a verb is gapped, a
copy-paste procedure applies. Recovery of larger structures requires more
effort pertaining to broadly distributed processing resources.

C83
N400 PROCESSES INHIBIT INAPPROPRIATELY ACTIVATED LOWCLOZE PROBABILITY SENTENCE ENDINGS LEARNED AT PRIOR
OCCURRENCES. Ana Lucia Fernandez Cruz1, Katrina Gong1, J. Bruno

Debruille1; 1McGill University — When a low-cloze probability word ends
a sentence frame, their association is stored in working memory. Thus,
a second occurrence of that sentence frame will probably automatically
activate short-term memory representations corresponding to this word.
However, if this sentence frame now ends with another word, activations
of the first word’s representations are inappropriate and might have to be
inhibited. These representations of the first word should then be harder to
re-activate. Thus, if the sentence frame is presented a third time and subjects asked to produce the first word that comes to mind, they will less
frequently come up with the initial word. The hypothesis that the N400
indexes inhibition predicts that the inhibitions generate additional N400
activity in the event-related brain potentials (ERPs). To test this hypothesis,
3 series of 3 blocks were presented to 26 participants. The first block of each
series contained 50 sentences ending with a low-cloze probability word.
The second blocks included again these 50 sentences ending now with a
new low-cloze probability word. Each third block included only the 50 sentence frames. After each of them, subjects had to verbalize aloud the first
word that came to mind. In accordance with the N400 inhibition hypothesis, N400s elicited by new words at second blocks were larger at lateral
frontal sites F4 and F3 when first words were not verbalized at third blocks
than when they were. We thus propose that these additional frontal N400s
activities could index the inhibition of inappropriately activated working
memory representations.

C84
ERP CORRELATES OF PREDICTION AND PLAUSIBILITY IN SENTENCE COMPREHENSION Megan D. Bardolph1, Cyma Van Petten2,

Dianne Thornhill2, Seana Coulson1; 1UC San Diego, 2Binghamton University
— We investigated the nature of prediction during reading by manipulating sentence constraint, predictability, semantic relation, and plausibility
and examining their impact on ERPs. Previous studies suggest that multiple factors influence the presence and scalp distribution of late positive
potentials to less-than-predictable words. A frontal positivity for low-cloze
compared to high-cloze sentence completions has been observed in several
studies. Thornhill and Van Petten (2012) used high and low constraint sentences ending with either the best completion (highest cloze probability), a
word semantically related to the best completion, or an equally plausible
word that was semantically unrelated to the best completion and observed
that, following the N400, all of the less predictable endings elicited a larger
frontal positivity than the high constraint best completion. Other studies
have found a parietally distributed positivity for incongruent sentence
completions relative to congruent completions, but previous studies have
not examined both unpredictable congruent and incongruent completions.
We thus expanded the Thornhill and Van Petten stimulus set by adding
semantically implausible completions (e.g., “Gary doesn’t think a husband
should cheat on his... WIFE/SPOUSE/TAXES/CEMENT.”). ERPs were
recorded while participants read each sentence. Across participants, each
sentence frame was paired with all four ending types. N400 amplitude was
modulated by cloze probability and semantic relatedness, confirming previous findings. We found a frontally distributed positivity for all ending
types relative to the best completion, suggesting that this potential may
reflect a failed lexical prediction of any kind. No sentence type elicited a
parietally distributed positivity.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

115

Poster Session C	

C85
THE EFFECT OF ATYPICAL ANTIPSYCHOTICS ON THE FRONTAL
N400S OF HIGHLY SCHIZOTYPAL PARTICIPANTS Ola Mohamed Ali1,

Aisha Walker1, Ana Lucia Fernandez Cruz1, J. Bruno Debruille; 1McGill University
— The N400 is a negative event-related potential (ERP) elicited by potentially meaningful stimuli. It has been reported to be abnormally large in
healthy participants with schizotypal tendencies. This could be due to the
contextually inappropriate semantic activations that underlie tendencies
for delusions and disorganization. Antipsychotics could alleviate the corresponding symptoms by acting on such activations, as suggested by the
reduction of N400 amplitudes reported 15 hours after intake of olanzapine,
during a semantic categorization task. Here, we investigate the immediate
effect of antipsychotics on the N400 in this population. ERPs were recorded
during this task before and 90 minutes after the effect of a placebo (n=24),
of 1 mg of risperidone (n=24) or of 2.5 mg of olanzapine (in progress). Reaction times and accuracies were unaffected by placebo. Reaction times were
unaffected by risperidone, while accuracies slightly decreased. In the placebo group, an N400 increase was seen only in the later part of the frontal
N400 in the mismatch condition, suggesting a possible effect of training
on this ERP. With risperidone, larger frontal N400s were observed in both
match and mismatch conditions, throughout the N400 time window. The
increase in the N400 amplitude could reflect the boosting of inhibitory processes that might be indexed by this ERP. Thus far, these results also suggest that the immediate effects of antipsychotics on the processes indexed
by the N400 could differ from their later effect.

C86
GETTING OVER THE HILL: EFFECTS OF VERBAL FLUENCY ON
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN AMBIGUOUS IDIOM COMPREHENSION Nyssa Z. Bulkes1, Christopher M. Grindrod1; 1University of Illinois at

Urbana-Champaign — Although many studies have investigated language
comprehension across the lifespan, few age-related declines, other than
word-finding difficulty, have been documented. Despite the apparent persistence of many language functions into older adulthood, higher-level language abilities, such as integrating word meanings with the linguistic context, may be subject to age-related changes. Few studies have explored aging
effects on semantic integration during figurative language comprehension.
The goal of the current study was therefore to address this question by
investigating age-related differences in ambiguous idiom comprehension.
In this study, younger and older adults listened to idiom- or literal-biased
sentences ending in ambiguous idioms (e.g., tie the knot). Participants then
decided whether a visual target word was related or unrelated in meaning
to the sentence while response time and accuracy were recorded. Younger
adults and a subgroup of older adults - those with high verbal fluency were faster and more accurate only when a target related to the figurative
meaning followed an idiom-biased sentence. In contrast, older adults with
low verbal fluency did not exhibit any priming of targets following idiomor literal-biased sentences, indicating they did not activate the figurative
meaning. Thus, age-related changes in integrating figurative meanings
with the surrounding context appear to be modulated by verbal fluency.
Given that verbal fluency has been linked to the integrity of frontal cortical
areas and, more specifically, to the efficacy of frontotemporal circuits, the
current findings argue that frontal brain regions may contribute to meaning
integration during idiom comprehension.

C87
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE IPSI- AND CONTRALESIONAL FRONTAL AND TEMPORAL REGIONS IN LANGUAGE RECOVERY IN
APHASIA Jordyn A. Sims1, Kushal Kapse1, Peter Glynn1, Swathi Kiran1;

1
Aphasia Research Laboratory, Boston University, Sargent College — While
our understanding of the neural basis of language recovery in aphasia has
increased tremendously, there is still an ongoing debate regarding the role
of the ipsilesional spared tissue and contralesional homologues in facilitating language processing (Turkeltaub et al., 2011). In this project, we systematically examine the relationship between the degree of spared tissue in the
ipsilesional cortex and BOLD signal activation in specific ipsilesional and
contralesional regions of interest, in 14 patients with chronic post-stroke
aphasia. Methods: Structural ROIs were taken from the AAL atlas and spatially normalized lesion maps were subtracted from them to determine the

116

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
amount of damaged tissue. Percent signal change was calculated within the
resulting ROIs for semantic condition (relative to baseline visual processing
condition) during a semantic processing fMRI task using Marsbar. The percentage of spared tissue, (calculated as (Anatomical ROI Volume –Lesion
Volume)/(Anatomical ROI Volume)) was lowest for IFG pars opercularis
(IFGop), IFG pars triangularis (IFGtri), and middle temporal gyrus (MTG).
Results/Conclusions: (1) LIFGop is the most lesioned region. (2) Task accuracy is correlated with increased activation in LIFGop and LIFGtri (3) The
more the spared tissue in LIFG (op,tri,orb), MTG and Ang/SMG, the less
activation in ipsilesional regions (LMFG, LSFG) and contralesional regions
(RMTG, RAng/SMG). (4) The more the spared tissue in LSFG and LACC,
the more the activation in R frontal regions (RIFG) – these regions appear
to work in tandem. References: Turkeltaub, et al. (2011) Are networks for
residual language function and recovery consistent across aphasic patients?
Neurology, 76, 1726-1734.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
C89
BRAIN ACTIVITY DURING TESTING PREDICTS LATER LEARNING
SUCCESS Xiaonan Liu1, Peipeng Liang2, Kuncheng Li2, Lynne Reder1; 1Car-

negie Mellon University, 2Capital Medical University — People learn better
when re-study opportunities are replaced with tests. While researchers
have begun to speculate on why testing is superior to study, few studies
have directly examined the neural underpinnings of this effect. In this fMRI
study, participants engaged in a study phase to learn arbitrary word pairs,
followed by a cued recall test (recall second half of pair when cued with
first word of pair), re-study of each pair, and finally another cycle of cued
recall tests. Brain activation patterns during the first test (recall) of the studied pairs predicts performance on the second test. Importantly, while subsequent memory analyses of encoding trials also predict later accuracy, the
brain regions involved in predicting later memory success are more extensive for activity during retrieval (testing) than during encoding (study).
Those additional regions that predict subsequent memory based on their
activation at test but not at encoding may be key to understanding the basis
of the testing effect.

C90
ALPHA, BUT NOT THETA, OSCILLATIONS EXPLAIN INDIVIDUAL-VARIABILITY IN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS LINKED TO
MEMORY-OUTCOME Yvonne Y Chen1, Jeremy B Caplan1; 1University of

Alberta — Oscillations and event-related potentials (ERPs) have been linked
to memory outcome, when recorded during encoding and retrieval phases
of recognition-memory tasks. Jacobs et al. (2006) and Klimesch et al. (2010)
suggested alpha-band (8-12 Hz) desynchronization and theta-band (4-8
Hz) synchronization correspond to so-called “dual-processes,” familiarity
and recollection, which in turn have been proposed for retrieval-related
ERPs, the FN400 and the late parietal positivity, respectively. Here we
tested this oscillation-ERP mapping by quantifying oscillations and ERPs
linked to memory outcome. Rather than attempt to distinguish recollection
and familiarity, we tested a pre-condition for the hypothesized mapping:
that oscillation- and ERP-measures explain shared variance across participants. Sixty participants performed old/new recognition. We quantified
oscillations and ERPs at test by computing the difference between hits and
misses. As predicted, the alpha measure (at Oz) correlated with the FN400
measure (at Fz, previously linked to familiarity), r(59)=0.33, p<0.05. Both
the alpha and FN400 measures correlated significantly with hit rates and
negatively with response times across participants, supporting their relevance to memory outcome. In contrast, the theta-oscillation measure (at
FCz), apart from differentiating hits from misses, did not explain variability
in either ERP or behaviour across participants, questioning the hypothesis that theta oscillations support recollection-based recognition-memory.
An analogous pattern held during study. Our findings are consistent with
alpha oscillations reflecting visual inattention, and with frontal-midline
theta oscillations reflecting relational memory processes that are not essential for item-memory tests (Glaholt & Caplan, 2007; Nyhus & Curran, 2010).

2014 Annual Meeting	

C91
FUNCTIONAL NETWORKS ASSOCIATED WITH GENERALIZATION
AND DISCRIMINATION UNDERLYING RECOGNITION Peter Wais1,

Daniel Steiner1, Adam Gazzaley1, Craig Stark2; 1University of California, San
Francisco, 2University of California, Irvine — Models based on findings from
psychology, neuroscience and/or neuro-computational simulations hold
that long-term memory (LTM) is supported by one process that results
in generalized awareness of prior experience and by another process that
discriminates mnemonic information enabling episodic retrieval. LTM processes depend upon memory regions of the medial temporal lobe (MTL).
In order to examine long-range functional neural networks that support
memory retrieval in connection with MTL regions, we collected wholebrain fMRI data while 20 young adult participants completed an adaptation
of the Stark Behavioral Pattern Separation: Object task. The analysis of task
performance used old/new responses to lures, which were quite similar
stimuli to the targets, in order to reveal participants’ false alarms based
on underlying pattern completion and correct rejections based on underlying pattern separation. Our motivation was to compare functional neural
results between regions associated with successful retrieval (i.e., activity or
connectivity greater for hits than for misses) and regions associated with
processes we interpreted as generalization (i.e., underlying pattern completion) and discrimination (i.e., underlying pattern separation). fMRI results
associated with a memory contrast (i.e., hits > misses) revealed regions of
interest in the MTL, including bilateral hippocampus. Trial-wise functional
connectivity analyses based on these MTL seed regions revealed longrange functional networks that supported recognition based on discrimination differentially from recognition based on generalization. The results
implicate the key role of cognitive control regions in episodic retrieval.

C92
REDUCED REINSTATEMENT IN MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER
DURING PAIRED-ASSOCIATE RECALL James Sorenson1, Ben Levy2, Ian

Gotlib1; 1Stanford University, 2University of San Francisco — Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is a prevalent disorder that has been associated with
difficulty retrieving detailed, specific episodic memories, and with structural and functional anomalies of the hippocampus, which is crucial for the
successful formation and retrieval of episodic memories. The neural substrates of episodic recall, however, are not well characterized in depression.
In this study we test the hypothesis that depressed individuals have difficulty reinstating prior experiences during retrieval. Diagnosed depressed
(MDD) and healthy control (CTL) community members are scanned as they
complete both encoding and retrieval in a paired-associate task. During
encoding, participants learn to associate cue words (concrete nouns) with
images of either famous people or places. During retrieval, participants are
presented with the cue words and are asked to bring the associated images
back to mind. Following scanning, participants again see the cue words and
are asked to recall the associated stimuli. Analyses indicate that depressed
individuals show reduced cortical reinstatement of stimulus-category
information during retrieval. Specifically, during retrieval nondepressed
individuals recruited the left parahippocampal gyrus - a region that preferentially responded to places during encoding for all participants - but
depressed participants failed to reinstate activity in this region even when
they were successful at recalling the associated place. Thus, depressed individuals’ memory anomalies may be related to difficulty reactivating specific details when given partial memory cues.

C93
SCENE-SELECTIVE PARAHIPPOCAMPAL CORTEX TRACKS TEMPORAL CONTEXTS COMPOSED OF FACES Adam E. Hasinski1, Troy

A. Smith1, Per B. Sederberg1; 1The Ohio State University — Recent research
has shown that parahippocampal place area (PPA) may selectively process temporal context--the recent experience that precedes an event (TurkBrowne et al., 2012). However, it is unclear whether this context-sensitive
processing in the PPA was due to the stimuli being scenes, or whether
the activity in the PPA depends more generally on temporal context. To
test the scene and context accounts of PPA, we modified the event-related
fMRI paradigm used by Turk-Browne and colleagues to show sequences of
non-famous faces as stimuli. These faces do not contain any scene information, but they can form the temporal context of an item that follows them.

Poster Session C
Consequently, any sensitivity in PPA to temporal context would be attributable to the contextual information present, providing strong support to
the contextual processing account. Alternatively, if temporal context did
not modulate activity in PPA, PPA would most accurately be described
as a scene-processing region, with context-based modulation only occurring when scene information is present in temporal context. In support of
the contextual processing account of PPA, we found that temporal context
modulated activation to face stimuli in PPA. Specifically, PPA showed
attenuated activation to repeated faces only when the original temporal
context of those faces (i.e. the faces that initially preceded them) were also
repeated. This finding implicates PPA in context processing, even in the
absence of scene information.

C94
THE EFFECTS OF TYPE 1 DIABETES ON BRAIN ACTIVITY DURING
VISUOMOTOR PROCESSING AND INCIDENTAL ENCODING Brenda

A. Kirchhoff1, Staci E. Scott2, Jo Ann V. Antenor-Dorsey3, Jonathan M. Koller3,
Brianna C. Kolody3, Heather M. Lugar3, Madison L. Stroup3, Jason C. Bell3,
Ana Maria Arbelaez3, Tamara Hershey3; 1Saint Louis University, 2University
of Missouri - St. Louis, 3Washington University — Prior research has shown
that type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) affects cognitive function, including
episodic memory, and regional gray and white matter volumes. However,
little is currently known regarding the effects of T1DM on brain activity
patterns during performance of cognitive tasks. Therefore, this fMRI study
compared euglycemic BOLD hemodynamic responses during visuomotor processing and incidental encoding in adolescents and young adults
with T1DM versus non-diabetic controls. During fMRI scanning, participants performed 1) a checkerboard task in which they made keypresses to
indicate the onset and offset of flickering checkerboard stimuli and 2) two
incidental encoding tasks (interacting visual imagery and vowel counting)
on unrelated word pairs. After scanning, participants’ memory for the individual words and the associations between paired words was tested. Preliminary analyses of brain activity patterns during the checkerboard task
demonstrated that the magnitude and shape of the BOLD hemodynamic
response in sensorimotor and early visual cortex does not appear to substantially differ between individuals with T1DM and controls. Preliminary
analyses of brain activity patterns during the incidental encoding tasks
demonstrated that individuals with T1DM have greater activity in select
cortical regions than controls. In addition, T1DM individuals’ memory for
word associations was correlated with their brain activity during encoding
in the hippocampus. Interestingly, the results of our prior structural neuroimaging research have suggested that severe hypoglycemia exposure can
alter hippocampal volume. These preliminary results suggest that BOLD
fMRI can be reliably used to assess brain activity in T1DM and is sensitive
to regionally-specific dysfunction in T1DM.

C95
SEX DIFFERENCES IN VOLUME AND STRUCTURAL COVARIANCE
OF THE ANTERIOR AND POSTERIOR HIPPOCAMPUS Jonas Pers-

son1, Nathan Spreng2,3, Gary Turner4, Agneta Herlitz5, Arvid Morell6, Eva Stening1, Lars-Olof Wahlund7, Johan Wikström6, Hedvig Söderlund1; 1Department
of Psychology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Laboratory of Brain and
Cognition, Department of Human Development, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY,
3
Human Neuroscience Institute, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 4Department
of Psychology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 5Aging Research
Center, Karolinska Institute, Solna, Sweden, 6Department of Radiology, Uppsala
University Hospital, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 7Section for Clinical Geriatrics, NVS Dept., Karolinska Institute, Karolinska University Hospital,
Huddinge, Sweden — Sex differences in episodic and spatial memory are
frequently observed, suggesting there may be sex-related structural differences in the hippocampus. Earlier findings are inconsistent, possibly
due to known variability along the hippocampal longitudinal axis. Here,
we assessed potential sex differences in hippocampal volume and structural covariance with the rest of the brain in young men and women (N
= 76), considering the posterior (pHC) and anterior (aHC) hippocampus
separately. We also investigated potential associations between aHC and
pHC structural covariance and episodic and spatial memory performance.
Women exhibited a larger pHC than men adjusted for brain size. Using partial least squares, we identified two significant patterns of structural covariance of the aHC and pHC. The first included brain areas that covaried
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

117

Poster Session C	
positively and negatively in volume with both the aHC and pHC in men,
but showed greater covariance with the aHC in women. The second pattern
revealed distinct structural covariance for the pHC and aHC that differed
between men and women: men demonstrated a reliable pattern of structural covariance between pHC and the medial and lateral parietal lobes
and the prefrontal cortex, whereas women demonstrated a reliable pattern
of structural covariance between aHC and the anterior temporal lobe bilaterally. There were no reliable associations between structural covariance
patterns and performance. Our findings identify sex as a potential moderating factor when investigating hippocampal structure and connectivity.

C96
ENHANCEMENT OF HIPPOCAMPAL NETWORKS AND ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY VIA NONINVASIVE STIMULATION Jane Wang1,

Anthony Ryals1, Evan Gross1, Mehmet Dokucu1, Lynn Rogers2, Molly Hermiller1,
Kelly Brandstatt1, Joel Voss1; 1Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, 2Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago — Few findings substantiate the
influential notion that the hippocampus supports associative memory by
binding together elements of experience that are individually processed
by distributed brain regions. We explored the causal role of hippocampus by using noninvasive electromagnetic stimulation of human hippocampal brain networks to identify changes in associative memory caused
by enhancing the interactivity of hippocampus with distributed regions.
Individualized measures of intrinsic functional connectivity of hippocampus were used to locate subject-specific stimulation targets. A total of 12
subjects participated in our experimental design that counterbalanced one
week of treatment stimulation with one week of sham control stimulation. Target sites and associated hippocampal networks were stimulated
with repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) for a total of five
daily sessions. Stimulation increased functional connectivity within hippocampal networks, and this was associated with selective improvements
in associative memory performance that outlasted the period of stimulation. Furthermore, the magnitude of the performance increase correlated
with the magnitude of the estimated intensity of stimulation, with subjects
receiving higher stimulation intensities showing greater improvements in
memory performance. No improvements were identified for tests of attention, language, and perceptual functions. These findings demonstrate that
hippocampal brain networks can be enhanced in humans using noninvasive stimulation, providing direct evidence that hippocampal interactivity
with distributed regions plays a causal role in associative memory.

C97
PROBING MEMORY BEFORE A DELAYED MATCH-TO-SAMPLE
CONJUNCTION TASK INDICATES ENHANCED LEARNING Danying

Wang1, Leun J. Otten1; 1University College London (UCL), UK — Brain activity
before an event can affect the likelihood that the event will later be remembered. Such activity may reflect a brain state that supports the encoding
of information into episodic memory. Here, we tested this idea by investigating what happens to a memory probe delivered while an episodic task
is being anticipated. Scalp-recorded electrical brain activity was obtained
while 24 healthy adults performed a delayed match-to-sample task. The
task involved the consecutive presentation of three grayscale images of
objects in one of nine locations, followed by a comparison stimulus. Participants either had to remember the locations of the objects (feature condition) or the objects in their particular locations (conjunction condition).
The conditions were randomly intermixed and signalled with a cue presented 5 s before task onset. In half of the trials, a colour image of an object
was presented 3 s into the anticipation interval. Memory for this probe was
tested at the end of the experiment with a surprise recognition test. Recognition memory was better for probes from the conjunction than feature
condition. These probes also elicited larger retrieval-related activity over
frontocentral scalp sites over an extended time period. Surprisingly, however, encoding-related activity for the probes at study was larger in the
feature than conjunction condition. The findings generally support the idea
that learning can be enhanced by certain brain states. A brain state conducive to episodic memory encoding may be induced by asking individuals
to prepare for a task involving the binding of multiple types of information.

118

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

C98
POST-RETRIEVAL MONITORING IN EPISODIC MEMORY IS MODULATED BY TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATIONS
OVER THE LEFT POSTERIOR PARIETAL CORTEX Nai-Feng Chen1,

Chi-Hung Juan1, Neil G. Muggleton1, Chien-Ming Lo1, Shih-kuen Cheng1; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central University, Taiwan — Recent
functional neuroimaging studies consistently reported the activation of left
lateral parietal cortex (LPPC) during episodic memory retrieval. However,
it is unclear how the LPPC is causally related to memory retrieval. The
present study employed transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) and
event-related potentials (ERPs) to investigate the role of LPPC in memory
retrieval. Participants engaged in three sessions of source memory task
under three stimulation conditions: sham, anodal, and cathodal respectively. In each session, participants studied words that were presented with
one of four faces in the first day and performed source memory judgments
in the second day. The interval between two stimulation conditions was a
week. tDCS was delivered over the P3 site of the 10-20 system for 15 minutes prior to the test phase and ERPs were recorded during the test phase.
It was predicted that source memory performance and the left parietal
Old/New effect, thought to index recollection process, would be modulated by the tDCS. We did not find the source memory performance and
the left parietal old/new effect to be modulated by the tDCS. Nevertheless,
there was a greater right frontal effect following the anodal stimulation in
comparison to cathodal and sham stimulations. The findings suggest that
post-retrieval monitoring might be modulated after LPPC stimulation.

C99
DIFFERENTIAL CONTRIBUTIONS OF MEDIAL PREFRONTAL
CORTEX AND HIPPOCAMPUS TO SELF-PROJECTION AND
SELF-REFERENTIAL PROCESSING Jake Kurczek1, Shreya Ahuja2, Emily

Wechsler2, Neal Cohen3, Daniel Tranel1, Melissa Duff1; 1University of Iowa, 2The
Hockaday School, 3University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign — Converging evidence points to a shared neural network for self-projection, the ability to
remember the past and think about the future. Consistent with neuroimaging findings of hippocampal activation during event construction tasks,
patients with hippocampal amnesia are impaired in their ability to (re)construct events of the past and the future. While fMRI studies of constructed
experiences implicate the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), it remains
unknown whether the mPFC is critical for such processes. The current
study compares performance of five patients with bilateral mPFC damage
medial, six patients with bilateral hippocampal damage, and eleven demographically matched comparison participants on an event construction
task. Participants were given a neutral cue word and asked to (re)construct
events across four time conditions: real past, imagined past, imaged present, future. These event narratives were analyzed for the number of internal and external details to quantify the extent of episodic re-experiencing.
Given the literature on the involvement of the mPFC in self-referential
processing we also analyzed the event narratives for self-reference. The
patients with mPFC were unimpaired in their ability to construct highly
detailed episodic events across time periods (p = 0.54), but were impaired
in their incorporation of the self (p < 0.001), while patients with hippocampal damage were impaired in their ability to construct highly detailed episodic events across time periods (p < 0.001), but not in their incorporation
of the self (p = 0.82). The results suggest a striking dissociation of the neural
and cognitive contribution to self-projection and self-referential processing.

C100
THE EFFECTS OF FACE AGE ON MEMORY ENCODING: NEURAL
SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES IN ACTIVITY AND FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY Caitlin R. Bowman1, Indira C. Turney1, Nancy A. Dennis1,

Reginald B. Adams, Jr.1; 1The Pennsylvania State University — Face processing
has been shown to recruit a robust neural network including the ventral
temporal lobe, medial prefrontal cortex (PFC) and fusiform gyrus. While
factors such as race have been shown to moderate processing within this
network, little is known about the effect of the age of a face stimulus on such
processing. The current study utilized fMRI to examine neural responses
in young adults to infant, younger, and older adult faces during memory
encoding. Results revealed a common face encoding network across all
aged faces including medial PFC and bilateral hippocampus. With regard

2014 Annual Meeting	
to differences, compared to all other faces, older adult faces elicited greater
activity in early visual cortex, whereas younger adult faces elicited greater
activity in bilateral hippocampus and PFC. Infant faces showed overall
reduced activity compared to all other faces. Further, connectivity analyses
revealed relatively similar processing with the left MTL for all aged faces.
The right MTL, however, showed greater connectivity within the typical
encoding network for young adult faces compared to older and infant faces
and greater connectivity across a diffuse neural network for infant faces,
but did not show a consistent pattern of unique connectivity for older faces.
Together, results suggest that young adults process young adult faces as
typical to-be-remembered items. Results also suggest that older faces may
be encoded based on their visual distinctiveness and infant faces may
recruit diffuse cognitive processes due to their lack of familiarity compared
to young adult faces.

C101
THE EFFECT OF FUTURE RELEVANCE ON EMOTIONAL MEMORY
TRADEOFFS AFTER SLEEP AND WAKE Alexis Chambers1, Tony Cun-

ningham1, Jessica Payne1; 1University of Notre Dame — Sleep selectively
benefits memory for salient information, including emotional information
and information expected to be relevant later. However, it is unknown how
these two salience cues interact during consolidation intervals that span
wakefulness and sleep. Participants encoded scenes composed of negative or neutral foreground objects placed on neutral backgrounds. Half
the participants were then informed of the subsequent recognition test,
while the other half were not. When there was no knowledge of future
testing, negative objects were well-remembered at the cost of the neutral backgrounds on which they were placed [t(40)=2.6,p=.01], an effect
observed only in participants who slept [t(17)=2.8,p=.01]. When informed
of imminent testing, however, both the sleep [t(20)=6.0,p<.001] and wake
groups [t(19)=4.7,p<.001] displayed this tradeoff. Moreover, there was an
instruction (told/not told) x valence (negative/neutral) x scene component (object/background) [F(76)=4.3,p=.04] interaction. This was driven by
superior memory for negative objects relative to their paired backgrounds
when participants were informed of future testing, compared to when they
were unaware [t(76)=2.6,p=.01]. While the wake group showed a threefold increase in this emotional memory tradeoff when the information had
future relevance [t(39)=2.02,p=.05], no additional increase was afforded
by sleep. This suggests that (1) future relevance and emotional salience
interact to increase memory for emotional components of scenes during a
consolidation period filled with wakefulness, while (2) the sleeping brain
already actively tags emotionally salient information as important for later
memory, such that explicit instruction of an upcoming memory test does
not further improve emotional memory.

C102
THE HIPPOCAMPUS BINDS NOVEL INFORMATION TO DOMINANT MEMORY TRACES TO SUPPORT BOTH MEMORY STABILITY
AND CHANGE Donna J. Bridge1, Joel L. Voss1; 1Northwestern University

Feinberg School of Medicine — Memory is paradoxical in that some features remain relatively static over time, whereas other features are constantly modified to incorporate new information. We tested the notion
that a single hippocampal associative novelty binding (ANB) mechanism
supports both stability and change by binding dominant information in
memory to associatively novel contexts. Healthy subjects (n=17) underwent concurrent fMRI and eye tracking while completing a spatial association task. After studying objects in unique locations (Location1) on a scene
background image (Context1), subjects completed a reactivation phase
with a new background scene (Context2) by moving each object to a new
location (Location2). During Passive reactivation, subjects moved objects
to predetermined locations on the screen. During Active reactivation, subjects recalled each object’s associated location and moved it accordingly.
Object-location recognition memory was then tested in Context1 or Context2. For Passive reactivation, the original location maintained dominance
in memory, in that subjects remembered Location1 even when later testing
occurred in the associatively novel context, Context2. In contrast, for Active
reactivation, the new location became dominant in memory, in that subjects
remembered Location2, even when testing occurred in the associatively
novel context, Context1. Hippocampal activity selectively corresponded to
ANB in both conditions, when the dominant location-memory was bound
to associatively novel context information. Hippocampal ANB therefore

Poster Session C
allows dominant memories to be projected into future contexts and also
to infiltrate previous memories, such that memory is adaptively tuned to
information that is most salient. Findings of impaired ANB in individuals
with unilateral hippocampal resection will be discussed.

C103
THE EFFECTS OF ANTICIPATORY STRESS ON THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY RETRIEVAL Stephanie Gagnon1,

Alex Gonzalez1, Anthony Wagner1; 1Stanford University — Our ability to store
and retrieve memories allows us to access knowledge about the past to
inform decisions and actions in the present. The process of recollecting
specific, associative details about past events involves, in part, engagement
of frontoparietal control mechanisms. When confronted with a stressful
situation, controlled processing is often impaired, and activity in frontoparietal networks may be disrupted. Here, we investigated whether acute
anticipatory stress, operationalized by threat of shock, influences memory
retrieval processes. To the extent that associative retrieval requires controlled processes, we hypothesized that performance will be vulnerable
to interference under conditions of stress relative to safety. During encoding, images of faces were paired with either object or place associates. At
retrieval, subjects (N=24) viewed old and new face cues while we recorded
physiological measures (skin conductance; heart rate) and neural activity
with electroencephalography (EEG). If subjects recognized the face as old,
they were asked to recollect the paired associate. Stress during retrieval did
not influence face recognition, whereas associative memory was selectively
affected; more specifically, face-object associations were impaired by anticipatory stress, while face-place associations were unaffected. EEG time-frequency analyses revealed reduced recollection-related responses over
parietal cortex approximately 500 - 800 ms post-stimulus onset for threat
relative to safe blocks. Together, these findings suggest that stress disrupts
the retrieval of associative information, and alters the parietal correlates of
remembering.

C104
THE EFFECTS OF NEGATIVE EMOTION ON RELATIONAL BINDING INFORMATION WITH EYE MOVEMENT MEASURES Judy

Yi-Chieh Chiu1, Inge Karosevica1, Jim Monti1, Neal Cohen1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Much research reports an impairing effect of
emotion on memory for peripheral information that accompanies central
items of events. However, few studies have specifically queried the effects
of negative emotional stimuli on memory accuracy for binding relations
between item and peripheral information (such as what peripheral information accompanied a specific item), independent of how well these various components are remembered in isolation. The current study examines
the effects of negative emotional stimuli on memory for bindings between
background scenes, negative or neutral in valence, and arbitrarily paired
faces. In addition to behavioral accuracy on a recognition task, we collected
eye movements during both viewing and test of the face-scene pairs. This
allowed us to obtain a more sensitive measure of memory behavior and
to record differences in the viewing of paired stimuli containing negative
versus neutral valence. At test time, for negative compared to neutral trials,
participants were slower to choose the correct paired face to a background
scene, from among 2 other previously studied familiar faces, and exhibited
more transitions in viewing between the 3 face choices. Study time data
additionally showed less proportion of viewing time to faces in the presence of paired negative scenes, compared to neutral scenes. Collectively,
data suggest negative emotion leads to poorer memory representation of
binding information, and identifies study time viewing patterns as a contributing factor to the differential memory behavior at recognition time for
paired stimuli containing negative emotional information.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Priming
C105
IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT CONTRIBUTIONS TO STATISTICAL
LEARNING Laura Batterink1, Ken Paller1, Paul Reber1, Helen Neville2; 1Northwestern University, 2University of Oregon — Statistical learning refers to
acquiring the ability to detect regularities in the environment. A fundamental assumption typically made about statistical learning is that it is implicit

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

119

Poster Session C	
in nature - it commonly occurs in the absence of conscious effort and seems
to produce negligible explicit knowledge. However, this assumption has
not been rigorously tested. Explicit learning may also play a role. We measured behavior and brain potentials to examine whether the knowledge
gained via statistical learning results entirely from implicit learning. Learners were exposed to a continuous stream of repeating nonsense words and
we then tested (a) explicit memory via a familiarity-judgment task with
a remember/know procedure and (b) implicit memory via a speeded target-detection task. Both tasks showed statistical learning effects. On the
familiarity task, accurate responses were associated with subjective feelings
of stronger recollection, and learned words elicited an enhanced late positive component relative to nonword foils, which suggests that familiarity
judgments were supported at least partially by explicit memory. On the
target-detection task, both reaction times and P300 amplitude differed as a
function of syllable position, reflecting facilitation attributable to statistical
learning. Familiarity did not positively correlate with RT or P300 effects on
the target detection task, suggesting that these two tasks rely upon dissociable mechanisms. Taken together, these results provide evidence that both
implicit and explicit knowledge are accrued during statistical learning. The
common assumption that statistical learning operates entirely implicitly is
thus disputable.

C106
IMPLICIT RELATIONAL MEMORY IS FLEXIBLE: AN EYE MOVEMENT STUDY OF CONTEXTUAL CUING Youcai Yang1, Anthony Greene2;

1
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 2University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee —
Implicit memory has often been construed as inflexible. The present experiment is designed to use eye movement to explore the extent that implicit
memory is capable of rapid relational flexibility. We examined this by
manipulating learned relations and examining how new information was
incorporated. Participants were recruited for a 27 blocks contextual cueing
test with both eye-movement and reaction time as dependent variables. All
participants were asked to identify the orientation of one rotated target “T”
among 11 distractors “L” in each 12 repeated arrays and 12 novel arrays
for each block. After nine blocks (Set A), the target switched with a distractor in diagonal quadrant for another nine blocks (Set B), then the target
switched back to its initial location (Set A). We found faster reaction time
in the repeated configuration at the end of Set A. After the target switched
with a distractor (Set A to Set B), we noticed a temporary increase in reaction time before locating target in the first few blocks of Set B. In contrast,
when the target switched back to its original location (Set B to Set A), no
such behavior cost was observed; that is, on the first reversal trial we found
immediate and full facilitation. The eye tracking data showed that participants changed their search strategy to include both learned locations. This
experiment suggests that implicit performance is rapidly modified as relations change.

C107
ANTIPRIMING ACCOMPANIES REPETITION PRIMING IN AUDITORY WORD IDENTIFICATION Katie L. Galazen1, Gabrielle F. Gloston1,

Katrina B. Archambault1, Benjamin Munson1, Chad J. Marsolek1; 1University of
Minnesota — In visual object and visual word identification, antipriming is
a phenomenon that accompanies repetition priming. In particular, identifying one set of objects or words has the effect of both (a) enhancing subsequent identification of the same set of objects or words (repetition priming)
and (b) impairing subsequent identification of a different set of objects or
words (antipriming). How generalizable is this finding? Our aim was to
determine whether antipriming accompanies repetition priming in auditory word identification. The experiment consisted of four phases. In the
first phase, participants rated auditory tones and did not process any verbal
information. In the second phase, participants identified spoken words that
were presented at a very low volume, and this enabled a baseline measure
of word identification when none of the words have recently been primed
or antiprimed. In the third phase, participants heard and rated a new set of
words presented at normal volume, enabling easy identification. Finally, in
the fourth phase participants again identified words that were presented
at a very low volume, some of which were repeated from the third phase
(primed words) and some of which were new (potentially antiprimed
words). Primed words were identified significantly faster than baseline (a

120

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
repetition priming effect), and antiprimed words were identified significantly slower than baseline (an antipriming effect). These results indicate
that antipriming generalizes to auditory word identification.

C108
THE EFFECTS OF ATTENTION AND TASK RELEVANCE ON REPETITION SUPPRESSION: AN FMRI STUDY Chun-Yu Lin1, Han-Yuan Lai1,

Chih-Hao Lien1; 1National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan — Priming refers
to the change in speed, accuracy or bias in processing a stimulus without
conscious awareness of prior exposures to the same stimulus. Neuroimaging studies have found that priming is often accompanied with repetition suppression (RS), the reduction of neural responses when a stimulus
is presented repeatedly. Some theories proposed that RS is an automatic,
low-level process, which would occur whenever a stimulus is repeated,
and that RS is the neural basis of behavioral priming. This hypothesis has
become popular; however, more and more recent findings have challenged
this view. The aim of this study was to further investigate the patterns of
RS under different conditions in order to elucidate the nature of RS and
its relationship to behavioral priming and recognition. In Experiment 1,
face and scene pictures were presented in a priming task and a continuous recognition task. RS was found in fusiform face area (FFA) and parahippocampal place area (PPA) for face and scene stimuli, respectively. But
the patterns in the priming and the recognition tasks were not identical. In
Experiment 2, face and scene pictures were used for different types of recognition tasks, including a traditional YES/NO, a YES-only and a NO-only
recognition task. This was to examine the effects of attention and task relevance (whether it is the target) on RS in the recognition tasks. The results
indicated the role of attention in RS, and suggest the need for a more comprehensive model for repetition suppression.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Skill learning
C109
INHIBITION OF PRIMARY MOTOR AREA (M1) CAUSES RECRUITMENT OF THE VISUAL-SPATIAL NETWORK DURING LEARNING.

Leonora Wilkinson1, Adam Steel1, Sunbin Song1, Devin Bageac1, Kris Knutson1,
Eric Wassermann1; 1National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke —
In previous studies, continuous theta burst TMS (cTBS) over M1 impaired
subsequent motor sequence learning and early recall/consolidation. However, it is unknown if this stems from inhibition of M1 alone or a network
including M1. We examined the effects of M1 cTBS with fMRI to see how
cTBS impairs sequence learning/early recall. Immediately after real or
sham cTBS, participants underwent fMRI, while performing a probabilistic serial reaction time task. Both groups, demonstrated comparable online
learning, associated with activation in the midbrain, superior frontal gyrus,
BA 8, bilateral lingual gyrus, bilateral premotor cortex and thalamus. However, when learning followed sham, we saw more connectivity between
regions in the motor learning network (left superior temporal gyrus, left
cuneus, left inferior parietal lobule, supplemental motor area, left cerebellum and left M1) than after real cTBS. When learning took place after real
cTBS, there was a shift from connectivity in the motor learning network to
the visuo spatial network (anterior cingulate, right middle temporal gyrus,
lingual gyrus, right middle temporal gryus, declive, midbrain, right middle
occipital, and right M1. This suggests that M1 is a critical node in the motor
learning network and inhibiting it causes a compensatory shift to the visual-spatial network. The learning and early implicit recall impairments
caused by M1 cTBS may be due to these distributed effects.

C110
THE RELIABILITY OF IMPLICIT LEARNING MEASURES VARIES

Priya Kalra1, Amy Finn2, John Gabrieli2; 1Harvard Graduate School of Education,
2
Massachussetts Institute of Technology — Many studies have used tasks
such as Artificial Grammar Learning (AGL), Serial Reaction Time (SRT),
and Probabilistic Classification (PCT) to investigate the construct of implicit
learning. However, few studies have considered the reliability of these
measures. Reber (1993) suggested that measured differences are likely to
reflect simple measurement error because implicit learning ability is highly
uniform across (healthy adult) individuals. In the current study, we investigate the reliability of implicit learning measures, the construct validity of

2014 Annual Meeting	
implicit learning (as measured by AGL, SRT, and PCT), and individual differences in implicit learning. Sixty-four healthy young adults participated
in a test-retest study (N=64). At Time 1, each participant performed multiple implicit learning tasks (AGL, SRT, PCT, and prototype-distortion category learning) and a measure of explicit learning (California Verbal Learning Task, CVLT). Each participant returned 7-14 days later (Time 2) and
performed alternate versions of the same task. Individual IQ and personality scores were also measured at Time 2. Test-retest reliability (correlation
between T1 and T2 scores) was found to be low-to-moderate for all implicit
learning tasks (AGL: 0.01; category learning: 0.07; SRT: 0.36; PCT: 0.46). In
contrast, T1-T2 explicit learning (CVLT) correlation was high (0.80). Correlations between tasks also ranged from low to moderate (lowest: AGL&
SRT: 0.01; highest: AGL & PCT: 0.51). These results suggest that for some
tasks used to measure implicit learning, Reber’s prediction was correct, but
for other tasks meaningful individual differences may exist. As a corollary,
reliability varies across tasks commonly used as measures of implicit learning.

C111
PERSONALITY CORRELATES OF IMPLICIT PERCEPTUAL-MOTOR
SEQUENCE LEARNING: REWARD RESPONSIVENESS AND COMPULSIVITY Eric W. Gobel1, Faith K. Ostrowski1, Kelsey M. Garr1, Monika

E. Magierska1; 1University of Illinois at Chicago — The Serial Interception
Sequence Learning (SISL) task, where participants must correctly sequence
precisely timed movements cued by moving stimuli, attempts to mimic
requirements of real-world perceptual-motor skills in the laboratory. Practice with a repeating pattern leads to a performance benefit specifically for
the practiced sequence, which does not depend on explicit knowledge (i.e.,
implicit learning). Previous neuroscientific research has suggested that
sequence learning in the SISL task depends on intact dopaminergic signaling in corticostriatal circuits and is accompanied by activation of the ventral
striatum. Therefore, there may be a relationship between skill learning ability and personality traits influenced by dopaminergic corticostriatal functioning. Since the dopaminergic system is sensitive to reward and central
to reinforcement learning, participants with greater reward responsiveness
may demonstrate higher skill learning ability. Additionally, obsessive-compulsive personality disorder is thought to arise in part from dysregulated
corticostriatal processing, so participants with a compulsive personality
may also show altered skill learning ability. To test these hypotheses, participants performed the SISL task and then completed questionnaires measuring reward responsiveness and various dimensions of obsessive-compulsive personality traits. As in previous studies, participants demonstrated
implicit learning of the practiced sequence. Surprisingly, the magnitude of
the sequence-specific performance benefit was moderately greater for those
who were less responsive to reward and those who were less cognitively
inflexible (i.e., less compulsive). These results raise questions about how
reward responsiveness contributes to dopamine-dependent learning and
suggests that cognitive flexibility - also thought to be modulated by dopamine - might be associated with skill learning.

C112
FORGETTING HOW TO RIDE A BIKE: MEASURING THE DECAY
RATE OF IMPLICIT KNOWLEDGE Daniel J. Sanchez1, Hristo Bojinov2,

Patrick Lincoln1, Dan Boneh2, Paul J. Reber3; 1SRI International, 2Stanford
University, 3Northwestern University — The belief that implicit procedural
knowledge is retained long after initial learning is so widely assumed that
it has become a common aphorism. Yet, there have been few attempts
to quantify the forgetting of implicit learning and empirical approaches
have produced inconsistent results about the robustness of long-lasting
implicit knowledge. Here, to assess the forgetting rate of implicit knowledge, we used the Serial Interception Sequence Learning (SISL) task to
measure knowledge expression at variable time points after training. The
Serial Interception Sequence Learning (SISL) task has been shown to produce robust perceptual-motor implicit sequence knowledge with minimal
influence from concomitant explicit knowledge. In this task, participants
make precisely-timed motor responses that intercept cues moving down
a computer screen. Three groups of participants were trained on a 30-item
repeating sequence (75-105 sequence repetitions) and knowledge expression was assessed either immediately, 1-2 days, or 1-2 weeks after training.
Sequence knowledge, measured as the difference in performance accuracy

Poster Session C
between trained and novel sequences, was well fit by a model containing log(trained sequence repetitions), b = 1.65%, [1.40, 1.89; 95% CI], and
log(delay in hours), b = -.328%, [-.659, -.003; 95% CI], with the intercept
(initial knowledge) set to zero, r2 = .43. Based on this model, roughly 30
minutes of training (100 sequence repetitions) would produce knowledge
that would likely be detectable for at least a month following the initial
training session. This suggests that implicit sequence learning mechanisms
do in fact produce long-lasting knowledge representations following relatively short periods of initial practice.

C113
NEURAL PATTERN STABILITY IN THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE
AND NEOCORTEX PROMOTES MATURATION OF MEMORY-BASED
PROBLEM SOLVING SKILLS WITH DEVELOPMENT Shaozheng Qin1,

Jared Filseth1, David Geary4, Vinod Menon1,2,3; 1Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, Stanford Unversity, 2Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University, 3Program of Neuroscience, Stanford University, 4Department of Psychological Sciences, Interdisciplinary Neuroscience,
University of Missouri — The ability to efficiently retrieve basic facts from
memory and bring them to bear in ever-changing situations is a cardinal
feature of mature memory-based problem solving. For instance, children’s
math problem solving becomes more dependent on direct retrieval but less
on counting strategies and a pattern continues to stabilize through adolescence into adulthood. Little, however, is known about the neurodevelopmental basis of these maturational transitions. We integrated event-related
fMRI and cognitive assessment of fact retrieval while solving single-digit
addition problems in 20 children (aged 7-9), 20 adolescents (aged 14-17)
and 20 young adults (aged 18-22). Strategies for solving addition problems
were assessed using a well-validated trial-by-trial manner. Participants
underwent fMRI while solving addition problems. Innovative trial-bytrial representational similarity analysis (RSA) with a searchlight method
was used to compute a measure of trial-by-trial neural pattern stability.
With development, participants became increasingly dependent on direct
retrieval but less dependent on counting. Trial-by-trial RSA revealed a significant main effect of pattern stability in the medial temporal lobe (MTL),
parietal, temporal and frontal cortices. Critically, pattern stability in the
MTL (the left anterior hippocampus and perirhinal cortex), the left inferior frontal cortex and the inferior temporal cortex showed a linear-trend
increase with development, while the right inferior parietal sulcus showed
an initial increase from childhood to adolescence and then declined during
adulthood. Our findings provide novel evidence that maturation of memory-based problem solving is characterized by both protracted and transient
changes in the functional organization of the MTL and neocortical systems.

C114
A SMALL-WORLD FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORK IS ASSOCIATED WITH LEARNING UNDER CONTEXTUAL INTERFERENCE

Chien-Ho Janice Lin1,2, Allan Wu3, Barbara Knowlton3, Marco Iacoboni3, MingChang Chiang1; 1National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, 2Yeong-An Orthopaedic
and Rehabilitation Clinic, Taiwan, 3UCLA — INTRODUCTION: Brain networks
underlying various cognitive tasks have small-world topology, a feature
associated with efficient communication across different regions. In motor
learning, interleaved practice of different tasks generally induces superior
retention than repetitive practice, a phenomenon called the contextual-interference (CI) effect. We investigated whether motor learning with greater
CI strengthens brain network efficiency. METHODS: Over 2 successive
days, 16 young adults practiced serial reaction time tasks (three distinct
4-element sequences) arranged in either repetitive or interleaved order 2-4
weeks apart. Retention was evaluated on Day 5 in an MR scanner. Using
psychophysiological interaction analysis (PPI) across 90 brain regions, we
identified a directed functional network underlying CI effects on learning, where between-region connectivity was greater in the interleaved
than repetitive conditions. The network was considered small-world if the
small-world index S > 1, where S is the ratio of clustering coefficient over
characteristic path length of the network, normalized by that of random
networks. RESULTS: Both motor learning and network efficiency improved
after interleaved compared to repetitive practice; after interleaved practice,
the functional network during retention on Day 5 had small-world topology (S = 2.99). Moreover, the left inferior frontal gyrus and temporal pole
were most connected with other regions, and therefore considered as hubs
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

121

Poster Session C	
of the network. CONCLUSION: Improved motor learning following interleaved practice is associated with an efficient brain network showing smallworld topology. Moreover, training with CI strengthens functional linkage
between areas mediating visual memory (temporal pole), and motor planning/ execution (prefrontal cortex).

C115
CEREBELLAR ACTIVATION DURING PRACTICE IS CORRELATED
WITH MOTOR SEQUENCE TRANSFER Renee E. Shimizu1, Allan D. Wu1,

Jennifer J. Choi1, Barbara J. Knowlton1; 1UCLA — Effective learning results
not only in improved performance on a practiced task, but also in the ability to transfer the acquired knowledge to novel, similar tasks. The present
study utilized functional magnetic resonance imaging to identify the neural
substrates of motor sequence learning that lead to more effective transfer.
Participants practiced three 8-element keypress sequences in an interleaved
order during a training phase, and then were given three novel sequences
during a transfer phase. Participants showed significant overall learning
during the practice phase as indicated by a significant decrease in response
time (RT), as well as significant sequence-specific knowledge of the practiced sequences. Furthermore, participants on average demonstrated positive transfer as indicated by a significant decrease in RT during the transfer phase in comparison to the first training session. Whole-brain analyses
revealed that cerebellar BOLD activity bilaterally in lobules I-IV as well as
in left lobules V and VI during the practice phase was positively correlated
with subsequent transfer performance. This effect was independent of RT
during training. It is possible that greater recruitment of the cerebellum
during training results in the gain of more generalized task knowledge,
such as improved response conflict resolution or maintenance of stimulus-response associations, which enhances later transfer performance.

METHODS: Neuroimaging
C116
WHAT DO DIFFERENCES BETWEEN UNIVARIATE AND MULTIVOXEL ANALYSES MEAN? INFLUENCES OF SPATIAL- AND SUBJECT-LEVEL VARIANCE ON FMRI ANALYSIS Tyler Davis1, Karen LaRocque2, Jeanette Mumford3, Ken Norman4, Anthony Wagner2, Russell Poldrack3;
Texas Tech University, 2Stanford University, 3University of Texas, 4Princeton
University — Multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) has led to vast changes
in how fMRI data are analyzed and interpreted. Many studies now report
both MVPA results and results from standard univariate general linear
models (GLM), often with the goal of drawing different conclusions from
each. Because MVPA results can be sensitive to latent multidimensional
representations and processes whereas univariate analyses cannot, one conclusion that is often drawn when results differ is that the activation patterns
underlying MVPA contain a multidimensional code. In the current study,
we conducted simulations to formally test this assumption. Our results
reveal that MVPA is sensitive to the magnitude of spatial variability- that
is, variability in the effects of experimental variables across voxels - even
when a single underlying dimension can characterize this variability. Moreover, we also find that MVPA is insensitive to between-subject differences
in mean activation across space, which is the primary variance component
that affects univariate group-level significance tests. Together, these results
suggest that MVPA effects may be significant in the absence of univariate
effects due to differences in sensitivity to spatial and subject-level variance
between the two analysis types. On their own, differences between MVPA
and univariate analysis do not afford conclusions about the nature of the
neural code. Instead, principled tests of the informational content and/or
dimensionality of activation patterns are critical for drawing strong conclusions about what significant MVPA results indicate.

1

C117
ENHANCEMENTS TO THE NEUROSYNTH FRAMEWORK FOR
AUTOMATED SYNTHESIS OF FMRI DATA Tal Yarkoni1, Luke Chang2,

Alejandro De La Vega2; 1University of Texas at Austin, 2University of Colorado
Boulder — The explosive growth of the human neuroimaging literature has
led to major advances in understanding of human brain function, but has
also made aggregation and synthesis of neuroimaging findings increasingly difficult. To address this problem, we recently introduced a highly

122

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
automated brain mapping framework called Neurosynth that uses text
mining, meta-analysis and machine learning techniques to automatically
conduct large-scale, high-quality neuroimaging meta-analyses, address
long-standing inferential problems in the neuroimaging literature, and
facilitate decoding of broad cognitive states from brain activity in both
entire studies and individual human subjects (Yarkoni et al, 2011). Here
we describe new extensions and improvements to this framework, including: (1) considerable expansion of the database (to nearly 9,000 studies); (2)
improved metadata annotation, enabling meta-analyses based on methodological features of studies (e.g., software package employed, scanner field
strength, etc.); (3) a revamped website designed around a comprehensive
REST API, enabling other web services to easily consume Neurosynth data;
(4) improved 2D and 3D visualization via an improved and modularized
JavaScript viewer; (5) integration with the recently developed NeuroVault
repository of user-uploaded whole-brain images; and (6) new clustering
and network modeling features that support fully automated parcellation
and decoding of complex activation patterns. These additional features
improve usability, broaden the range of potential applications, and promote interoperability with other neuroinformatics platforms. The Neurosynth data and code are freely available on the web (neurosynth.org;
github.com/neurosynth).

C118
THE COGNITIVE CONNECTOME PROJECT: MAPPING THE NEURAL
REPRESENTATION OF NORMATIVE VARIANCE IN COGNITION G.

Andrew James1, Tonisha E. Kearney-Ramos1, Jennifer L. Gess1, Jennifer S. Fausett1, Clinton D. Kilts1; 1University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences — The
translation of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) into clinical
decision making requires that we first understand the neural representation of normative cognitive variance in well-characterized samples of
healthy adults. We have addressed this need by initiating the Cognitive
Connectome Project, which pairs clinical neuropsychological assessments
of cognition with canonical neuroimaging tasks. To date, we have acquired
a demographically diverse sample of 52 participants [29 females; mean
(sd) age = 32 (10) years, age range= 19-50 years]. Participants completed a
battery of neuroimaging tasks and neuropsychological tests spanning the
following cognitive domains: motor ability, visuospatial perception, attention, language, memory, affective processing, decision making, and executive function. As a proof of concept, we present results from the Judgment
of Line Orientation (JLO) task, a neuropsychological test of visuospatial
perception that we directly replicated as an fMRI task. Participants’ JLO
accuracy was significantly correlated inside and outside the MRI scanner
(Spearman rho= 0.75, p<0.0001), indicating the neuroimaging task to be a
valid replication of the neuropsychological instrument. We report the JLO
task to significantly recruited the dorsal visual network (t>6.4). However,
network activity negatively regressed to JLO accuracy (t<-2.7, p<0.01), suggesting that participants who performed best recruited less of this network.
Furthermore, median-split analysis showed brain activity to be more variable for poorly performing participants, which may reflect suboptimal or
maladaptive task strategies. In conclusion, we present a conceptual and
theoretical framework for studying normative brain-behavior relationships
and extending these findings into making patient-specific clinical inferences.

C119
DIFFUSION TENSOR IMAGING OF ADULTS WITH ADHD: PRELIMINARY FINDINGS FROM A SUBSTANTIALLY LARGE COHORT Yuliya

Yoncheva1, Krishna Somandepalli1, Clare Kelly1, Adriana DiMartino1, Mariana
Lazar1, Michael Milham2, F. Xavier Castellanos1,3; 1NYU Child Study Center, New
York, NY, 2Child Mind Institute, New York, NY, 3Nathan S. Kline Institute for
Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY — Recent diffusion tensor imaging
(DTI) studies have reported white matter (WM) abnormalities in adults
with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). We examined
potential whole-brain WM alterations using DTI (3T, 3x3x3mm voxels, 64
diffusion directions) in 42 adults with ADHD and 67 healthy controls. The
groups (age: M=31.4, SD=9.4 years; 43 F) were matched for age, gender,
IQ and notably in-scanner head motion (all p>0.5). Following standard
tensor fitting, fractional anisotropy (FA), mean diffusivity (MD), and axial
diffusivity (AD) were derived and analyzed via tract-based spatial statistics. Threshold-free cluster enhancement (TFCE) was used to correct for

2014 Annual Meeting	
multiple voxel-wise comparisons. T-tests contrasting ADHD with controls
revealed no significant differences for FA (p>0.60), MD (p>0.48), or AD
(p>0.43). This lack of significant between-group differences also held when
the two ADHD subtypes, combined (n=23) or predominantly inattentive
(n=18), were analyzed separately. Our non-significant between-group differences are generally consistent with the implied results of previous investigations. Most diffusion-weighted studies of ADHD in adults that have
reported positive results have employed region-of-interest analyses. Furthermore, prior findings from whole-brain contrasts have been uncorrected
for multiple comparisons, increasing type 1 errors. Finally, differential
head motion has been shown to elicit spurious group differences in WM
(Yendiki et al, 2014). Since how to best select an optimal correction method
remains an open question, we present and discuss alternative approaches.
The current results highlight that group comparisons must attend to potential confounders, particularly motion, and that reports of WM alterations
in ADHD must be interpreted with caution when uncorrected for multiple
comparisons.

C120
CHARACTERISTICS OF NETWORK ACTIVATION AND CONNECTIVITY RELATED TO REWARD CONTINGENCIES IN A MONOZYGOTIC
TWIN SAMPLE Craig Moodie1, Ruskin Hunt2, Steve Malone2, Kathleen

Thomas2, Angus MacDonald III1,3; 1Department of Neuroscience, University
of Minnesota Medical School, 2Institute for Child Development, University of
Minnesota, 3Department of Psychology, University of Minnesota — In recent
work, we have shown that intrinsic connectivity networks (ICNs) derived
from fMRI data capture signal from all brain regions independently and
simultaneously. These ICNs are stable across time at rest and during task,
and are also sensitive to task demands. Moreover, using a previous monozygotic twin sample, ICN morphology and connectivity were determined
to be consistent across tasks, while the ICNs also exhibited task-responsiveness and familiality, which suggests that ICNs are trait-like. Given the context that all ICNs are always present irrespective of state, the next logical
step was for this study to address how compatible ICNs were with regions
of interest (ROIs) in a typical general linear model (GLM) of activation.
Hence, GLMs and independent component analyses (ICAs) of data from
a delayed response two-choice reward task were completed using a larger
twin sample (n = 50 pairs). The GLMs revealed that the visual cortex and
basal ganglia were activated in response to rewards, which recapitulated
previous findings. On the other hand, the ICAs showed that all ICNs were
indeed present during the task but specific ICNs, e.g.: visual ICNs, were
related to task elements such as anticipation. Preliminary analyses show
a correspondence between the activation beta weights and the correlation
coefficients relating the ICN time courses to the task. Since this is a twin
sample, familiality will be assessed in both the GLM and ICA analyses in
order to determine the familiality of activation and connectivity in this
reward paradigm.

C121
SOS LASSO: A NEW METHOD FOR FINDING DISTRIBUTED REPRESENTATIONS IN FMRI DATA. Christopher Cox1, Nikhil Rao1, Robert

Nowak1, Timothy Rogers1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison — Univariate
analyses of fMRI data derive power by making the strong assumption that
meaningful signal is anatomically localized in the same way across subjects. This approach improves signal when the assumptions are met but can
destroy signal where the location or nature of the neural code varies across
subjects. Multivariate pattern analyses (MVPAs) often relax localizationist
assumptions by analyzing each subject independently, but because fMRI
yields a large number of noisy measurements it can be difficult to recover
signal without bringing in other strong assumptions. We introduce a novel
technique, the “sparse overlapping sets Lasso” (SOSlasso), that represents
a middle ground between these poles. Like other MVPA approaches, SOSlasso assumes that the exact location and nature of the neural code can vary
across individuals; but like univariate approaches, it also assumes that such
variability is not completely arbitrary: signal-carrying voxels are assumed
to be located in roughly similar locations across individuals. In application to simulated data we show how SOSlasso can discriminate signal-carrying from non-signal-carrying voxels better than other common MVPA
approaches under a range of different model signals, and also succeeds
in cases where univariate methods will necessarily fail. In application to a

Poster Session C
well-known published dataset, we demonstrate marked improvements in
classifier performance and interpretability of classifier weights. The consideration of the simulated and real data together illustrate what such results
might imply about the structure of neural representations.

C122
ALTERED RESTING STATE FUNCTIONAL NETWORK ORGANIZATION IN AUTISM, PHENYLKETONURIA, AND TRAUMATIC BRAIN
INJURY Rachel M. Zamzow1, Jeffrey D. Johnson1, Gary Yao1, David Q. Bev-

ersdorf1, Shawn E. Christ1; 1University of Missouri — It has previously been
suggested that functional connectivity, as measured by functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), is altered in individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders or conditions with neurological symptoms. In the present
study, we used graph theoretical analysis to examine how the organization of functional networks differs based on diagnosis. Resting state fMRI
data was collected from 67 individuals with autism spectrum disorder
(ASD) (mean age = 14.7), 8 individuals with phenylketonuria (PKU) (mean
age = 24.8), 17 individuals with traumatic brain injury (TBI) (mean age =
38.1), and a comparison group of 81 typically developing individuals (TD)
(mean age = 16.3). Partial correlation matrices for 90 cortical and subcortical regions were generated and then topological properties were compared
between groups. The groups differed significantly across several topological properties. The ASD group demonstrated greater mean degree, global
efficiency, cost, and mean strength, as compared to the TD, PKU, and TBI
groups (p < .05, in all instances). The PKU group showed greater mean clustering coefficient and mean local efficiency (p < .05, in all instances) than the
other three groups. Lastly, the TBI group displayed greater characteristic
path length than the other groups (p < .05, in all instances). Accordingly,
ASD, PKU, and TBI may be associated with a bias toward local connectivity, although in different respects. The results of the present study indicate
alterations in functional network organization in multiple neurological
disorders and conditions. Further analysis is needed to characterize these
alterations within the contexts of development and symptom severity.

C123
SEX DIFFERENCES IN THE CLINICAL EXPRESSION AND RESTING STATE BRAIN CO-ACTIVITY IN BIPOLAR DISORDER Sara Kim-

mich1,3,5, Lisa Eyler2,3,4,5, Sanja Kovacevic3; 1UCSD Department of Cognitive
Science, 2UCSD Department of Psychiatry, 3Veterans Medical Research Center,
4
Veterans Affairs Hospita, 5UC San Diego — The course and expression of
bipolar disorder(BD) clearly differs between women and men. Women
more often have a seasonal pattern of mood disturbance,and are more
likely to experience rapid cycling than men. Men are more likely to have
a comorbid substance use disorder,while women more frequently have
comorbid anxiety disorders. Previous studies have observed sex effects in
connectivity of the default mode network (DMN) of healthy individuals,
but more research is needed to see whether a similar effects holds among
BD patients. This study investigates how sex differences in DMN activity
among BD I patients compared to individuals without BD, and how sex differences may relate to clinical or cognitive differences in BD. We compared
27 euthymic patients with bipolar I disorder to 28 age and gender comparable healthy participants using functional magnetic resonance image during
a period of eyes open rest. Averaged functional activity between the nodes
of the DMN(medial prefrontal cortex,posterior cingulate, and bilateral
angular gyrus) revealed that BD females tend to have greater co-activity
within the default mode network than male BDs,which contrasted with the
pattern of greater connectivity among male healthy participants compared
to females(p=.01). Negative psychotic symptoms were more pronounced
in male than female bipolar participants(p=.07). There was a significant
negative correlation of average DMN connectivity with negative symptoms(r(28)= -.44, p=.05). These results suggest subtle sex differences in the
inter-relationship of resting brain activity within the DMN that may relate
to clinical differences between men and women with bipolar disorder,including severity of negative psychotic symptoms.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

123

Poster Session C	

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control
C124
DIFFERENTIAL MU SUPPRESSION TO IMITATION AND OBSERVATION OF FACE AND HAND ACTIONS Mike Datko1, Jaime Pineda1;

1
University of California, San Diego — Amplitude in the EEG frequency
band known as mu (8-13 Hz) is typically attenuated during the execution,
observation, and imagination of biological motion. Numerous studies have
concluded that this mu suppression or event related desynchronization
reflects motor resonance or activation of brain areas involved in visuomotor integration including the human mirror neuron system. Most studies
that have shown this type of result have only examined observation and
execution of hand actions or hand-object interactions, while very few have
used tasks that include facial actions. The present study compared mu suppression, measured with a 32-channel active-electrode EEG system, during
the observation and imitation of non-object oriented hand actions as well as
non-affective face actions in healthy adult subjects. Each viewed either still
images or short video clips of finger actions or non-affective face actions
such as moving the lips to the left or right. Before each trial, subjects were
instructed to either imitate or simply observe the face or hand action. The
mu suppression index (MSI) was calculated using the ratio of mu power
during the video clip to mu power during the still image condition for each
type of stimuli. Significant and widespread mu suppression was found to
both imitation and observation of finger actions, whereas significant and
widespread mu enhancement was found to imitation and observation of
non-affective face actions. These patterns were not the same for other EEG
frequency bands. These results suggest different and generalized mechanisms for visuomotor integration of perceived hand actions compared to
face actions.

C125
PROPRIOCEPTION ALONE DRIVES BODY SCHEMA PLASTICITY

Marie Martel1,2, Lucilla Cardinali2,3, Christophe Jouffrais4, Livio Finos5, Alessandro Farnè2,3, Alice Catherine Roy1,2; 1CNRS, Laboratory of Language, Brain and
Cognition (L2C2), UMR5304, Institute of Cognitive Sciences, 69675 Bron Cedex,
France, 2University Claude Bernard Lyon I,Lyon, France, 3INSERM U1028, CNRS
UMR5292, Lyon Neuroscience Research Center, ImpAct Team, Lyon, France,
4
IRIT UMR 5505,Toulouse, France, 5University of Padova, Padova, Italy — Proprioception is considered as the major sensory input to Body Schema (BS),
yet no empirical data show that proprioception is sufficient to BS update.
We investigated BS plasticity in complete absence of vision. In a previous
experiment (Cardinali et al, 2009), we have established that tool-induced BS
plasticity is observable on the kinematics of subsequent free-hand movements. Here, we examined the kinematics of blindfolded right-handed
subjects required to reach for an object before and after having performed
the same action with a mechanical grabber. In experiment one, free-hand
and tool reaching took place in the same sagittal plane. To test for genuine
tool integration in the BS, in a second experiment tool-use was maintained
in the sagittal plane but free-handreaching was performed in the frontal
plane. Furthermore, to assess Body Image (BI) sensitivity to tool-integration, subjects had to estimate their forearm’s length in both experiments.
In the BS task, we found that after tool-use, subject free-hand movement
kinematics showed longer latencies and smaller amplitude peaks. These
consequences of tool-use are consistent with an increased length in the BS
representation of the arm. Interestingly, the same modifications were found
when comparing free hand movements of subjects with longer vs. shorter
arms. In the BI task, forearm length did not vary, confirming that body
image was immune to tool integration. Our results demonstrate for the
first time that proprioception is sufficient for tool integration in the body
schema, whereas vision is unnecessary.

C126
ATTENTION SHAPES MOTOR RESONANT RESPONSES DURING
ACTION OBSERVATION Guglielmo Puglisi1, Antonella Leonetti1, Gabriella

Cerri1, Paola Borroni1; 1University of Milano, Medical School, Milano, Italy —
Observation of others’ actions evokes in motor cortex a subliminal “motor
resonance” (MR) response which reflects the motor program encoding the
observed actions. While often described as an automatic and cognitively
unmediated response, there is some experimental evidence suggesting that

124

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
MR can in fact be modulated by cognitive processes. To verify the role of
attention in MR we used a peripheral vision paradigm to dissociate attentional and visual focuses in observers. Two groups observed a 4s video of a
hand grasping a ball, shown at 10° from foveal fixation. TMS-evoked motor
potentials (MEPs) were recorded in muscles of their resting right hand
(OP and ADM), at different delays during the observation of the video. In
Experiment 1 subjects were asked to maintain their gaze on a fixation point,
while viewing the video in periphery; in Experiment 2 different subjects
were asked to do the same but also to pay (covert) attention to the video
showed in periphery. Eye movements were monitored. Results of Exp.1
show that while MEPs in both muscles were significantly modulated by
observation of actions in peripheral vision, the resulting MR responses were
grossly imprecise in timing and muscle specificity, thus not reflecting the
motor program encoding the observed action. However when subjects paid
covert attention, the specificity of the MR response improved, showing a
MEP modulation similar (though not identical) to the modulation recorded
during observation of the same action in foveal vision. These results support the hypothesis that MR responses are shaped by attentional processes.

C127
VISUOMOTOR ADAPTATION AND COGNITIVE DECLINE IN THE
ELDERLY Jeff Schaffert1, Rebecca Neill1, Chi-Mei Lee1, Jin Bo1; 1Eastern

— Visuomotor adaptation requires adjusting movements in response to
sensory input. Errors between planned and actual movements generally
result in adaptive changes, which reduce the occurrence of similar errors
in the future. Studies have shown that increasing error feedback can
enhance adaptation in both healthy young participants (Wei et al., 2005)
and hemiparetic stroke survivors (Patton et al., 2006). Limited literature on
dementia and motor learning has indicated that mildly demented participants may rely more on sensory feedback when making movements. Thus,
the purpose of this study is to evaluate the role of visual error feedback
on visuomotor adaptation on neurotypical and mildly cognitive-declined
elderly participants. A center-out visuomotor adaptation task is employed
where the error feedbacks are either enlarged (gain of 2:1) or regular (gain
of 1:1). Various neuropsychological tests, including the Montreal Cognitive
Assessment (MoCA) and the Dementia Rating Scale-2 (DRS-2), are used to
assess cognitive functions. It is hypothesized that individuals with cognitive
decline will show worse visuomotor adaptation than controls in the regular
feedback condition. However, little group differences in the enlarged feedback condition will be found. Five older adults have been tested so far. One
of them showed mild cognitive decline. Visual inspection on individual
data revealed overall learning in the normal feedback condition. However,
the patterns in the enlarged conditions were not clear. Further participants
will be recruited for objective statistical analyses.

C128
MOTOR IMAGERY IN DIFFERENT AFFORDANCE CONTEXTS Ya-Ting

Chen1, Wei-Chun Hsu2, Hao-Ling Chen1, Wen-Feng Huang1, Chun-Fu Yeh1,
Chien-Te Wu1; 1School of Occupational Therapy, College of Medicine, National
Taiwan University, 2Graduate Institute of Biomedical Engineering, National
Taiwan University of Science and Technology — Motor imagery has been commonly studied with the well-established hand rotation paradigm in which
participants are required to discriminate the laterality of a hand rotating in
different angles on one or more axes for each trial. Most of previous literature has shown that biomechanical constraints and numbers of rotation
axes are two main factors modulating participants’ reaction times (RT) in
the task. The modulation of different contexts of affordance (i.e., the characteristics of an object that potentiates actions) upon motor imagery remains
unclear. The present study therefore modifies the original hand rotation
paradigm to address this question. For each trial, participants (n=15) were
required to discriminate the laterality of a 3-D hand stimulus displayed on
a screen. Specifically, each stimulus depicts either a bare-hand or a handwith-tool (a spoon or scissors) rotated on the frontal plane (0°, 60°, 120°,
180°, 240° and 300°), sagittal plane (0°, 60° and 300°) and/or transverse
plane (prone or supine). The data were analyzed separately for the internal
rotation (IR, 0°, 60°, 120° on the frontal plane) and external rotation (ER, 0°,
240° and 300° on the frontal plane) conditions. Two-way ANOVAs (TOOL
x ANGLE) reveal significant TOOL main effects for both ER (F2,13=7.762,
p=0.003) and IR (F2,13=4.768, p=0.017). In particular, the mean RT is higher
for the hand-with-tool than the bare-hand condition, indicating that affor-

2014 Annual Meeting	
dance indeed enhances the engagement of motor imagery. However, only
IR shows significant angle main effects (F2,13=10.704, p=0.001), suggesting
that IR induces a higher degree of motor imagery than ER.

C129
THE “IMAGERY” FITT’S LAW OF MOTOR CONTROL IN HUMAN
BRAIN WITH SINGLE-TRIAL EEG ANALYSIS Chun-Fu Yeh1, Wei-Chun

Hsu2, Yi-Hung Liu3, Po-Ming Chen3, Yu-Tsung Hsiao3, Ya-Ting Chen1, Chien-Te
Wu1, Hao-Ling Chen1; 1School of Occupational Therapy, National Taiwan University, 2Graduate Institute of Biomedical Engineering National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, 3Mechanical Engineering, Chun Yuan Christian
University — Fitt’s Law, a delineation of the relationship between movement time and task difficulties, is widely applied to model motor control
strategy of goal-directed arm movements. Compared to easy task (e.g.,
reaching with short distance), performing a difficult task (e.g., reaching
with long distance) requires longer movement time. Since motor imagery
(MI) shares similar neural substrates with real motion, Fitt’s Law extracted
from real movement may also be applied to the same movement in MI.
The current study therefore aimed to provide neurophysiological evidence
for this hypothesis. Participants (N=15) were instructed to perform motor
imagery tasks involved with posting pegs into slots with three distances
(Ipsilateral side: 35% (short) and 70% (long) of functional arm length (FAL);
contralateral side: 70% FAL, 15 trials each). A combination of Principal
component analysis (PCA) and the k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) algorithm
were adopted to classify the normalized band power (BP) of single-trial
EEG signals between short and long distances of ipsilateral side (C1), and
those between ipsilateral and contralateral FAL distances (C2). The mean
classification accuracy is 59.73% (maximum: 63.66%, minimum: 57.81%)
for C1 (N=13), and 66.01% (maximum: 74.50%, minimum: 57.54%) for C2
(N=15). Our results demonstrate that it is possible to classify motor imagery
patterns defined by different “imagery” movement path in human brain
using single-trial EEG analysis with very few trials (i.e., 15 in the current
case). Furthermore, our findings support the hypothesis that Fitt’s Law can
also be applied in motor imagery.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Other
C130
THE INFLUENCE OF SPATIAL ARRANGEMENT ON GOAL SELECTION AND TASK COMPLETION Grayden Solman1, Alan Kingstone1;
1

University of British Columbia — A range of evidence indicates that the
arrangement of objects in space has important influences on our decisions
about which goals to pursue, and about how to go about achieving those
goals. As a result of these influences, human behaviour can be understood
as emerging from the interplay between an individual’s deliberate intentions, and the opportunities present in the environment. We present results
from a novel continuous performance sequential object access task combining large-scale search and open-ended decision-making, to investigate
how goal pursuit is influenced by the arrangement of objects in space. Our
results indicate a balance between optimal choices and familiar choices,
indicating that incidental features of environmental layouts and early experiences may have lasting influences on task efficiency.

C131
AUTOMATICITY IN SOCIAL SIMON EFFECT: WORKING MEMORY
LOAD IMPAIRS ACTION CO-REPRESENTATION Hyojeong Kim1, Jae-

Yoon Lee1, Do-Joon Yi1; 1Yonsei University — As a social being, we need to
undertand others’ actions as quickly and accurately as possible. Action
undertanding can occur at many levels. We sometimes grasp others’ intention unintentionally. Other times, however, we have to effortfully draw
inferences about their goals. In the context of joint action, the social Simon
effect (SSE) demonstrates that we are influenced by unintended representation of co-actor’s actions (Sebanz, Knoblich, & Prinz, 2003). This effect has
been described to be quasi-automatic, but it is not known in what aspect it
is automatic and in what other aspect it is not. Thus, we asked participants
to do a social Simon task with or without a concurrent working memory
(WM) task. One group of participants maintained a single digit in their
mind during WM load blocks (low load group) while the other group maintained five digits (high load group). As results, the low load group showed

Poster Session C
SSE both during no load and low load blocks. In contrast, the high load
group did not show any SSE during either no load or high load blocks.
However, the high load group showed intact SSE in the first no load block
if the block was administered before the first high load block. These results
suggest that SSE is not an automatic phonomenon given that it requires
cognitive resource. SSE may be automatic only in the sense that it happens
without intention.

C132
SELECTIVE INCREASE IN SALIENCE NETWORK CONNECTIVITY
FOLLOWING ANTERIOR TEMPORAL LOBE RESECTION Matthew J

Sutterer1, Michelle W Voss1, Joel Bruss1, Daniel Tranel1, Matthew A Howard1;
1
University of Iowa — Little work has been done investigating the role of
focal lesions on intrinsic functional connectivity networks, and even less
research has addressed how these networks change following a lesion-inducing injury over the course of recovery and reorganization. Using a within-subjects approach, we characterized functional network characteristics
before and shortly after the onset of a focal lesion to the medial temporal
lobe. Resting-state fMRI data were collected in patients undergoing surgery
for medically intractable epilepsy at two time points: one month prior and
two weeks following resection of the anterior temporal lobe. Seed-based
functional connectivity analyses were employed to assess preoperative to
postoperative changes in the salience, fronto-executive, and default mode
networks. We hypothesized that focal resection of the anterior temporal
lobe would selectively affect the salience and default mode networks, as
these networks include resected areas in the amygdala, temporal pole, and
hippocampus. The fronto-executive network does not involve medial temporal lobe areas, and was predicted to be unaffected by focal damage. We
observed significant increases in the average connectivity of nodes in the
salience network from preoperative baseline to acute postoperative assessments, while the default mode and fronto-executive networks showed
no significant changes. Our results suggest early increased recruitment
of non-resected salience network regions following focal damage to the
medial temporal lobe, possibly reflecting spontaneous recovery and reorganization processes. Future directions include additional measurements
of functional networks 6 months following surgery.

C133
TEMPORAL INTEGRATION OF SELF AND OTHER DURING JOINT
ACTION: A DUAL-EEG STUDY OF PIANO DUOS. Giacomo Novem-

bre1,2, Daniela Sammler1, Peter Keller2; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2The MARCS Institute, University
of Western Sydney, Australia — The capacity to coordinate our actions with
those of another is a crucial component of social cognition, but only a few
studies have explored the brain signatures associated with the integration
of actions produced by interactive individuals. The present dual-EEG study
used a joint musical task to examine the neural markers associated with the
integration of self-generated and other-related actions (in one individual’s
brain) in real time. Pairs of pianists were required to play complementary
musical phrases under conditions eliciting variable levels of inter-personal coordination accuracy. We compared keystroke timing accuracy
and EEG signatures across conditions for which the pianists had or had
not previously trained each others’ musical parts, to assess the stronger or
weaker integration of self and other-related musical actions, respectively.
Consistently with previous research, preliminary results suggested that
alpha power (8-12 Hz) over centro-parietal electrodes was particularly
suppressed during trials associated with higher inter-personal coordination accuracy. This suppression was more enhanced when the players had
practiced each other’s parts. Thus, these results support the hypothesis that
alpha oscillations constitute a marker for the integration of actions related
to others with those that are internally generated.

C134
ABSTRACT CATEGORIES OF FUNCTIONS IN ANTERIOR PARIETAL LOBE Anna Leshinskaya1, Alfonso Caramazza1,2; 1Harvard University,

2
University of Trento, Italy — Humans flexibly use thousands of objects to
achieve goals. The connections between goals and objects must be sufficiently abstract to allow the selection of relevant objects even when their
affordances are not obvious from their physical shapes - for instance, to
know that both a painting and a vase can decorate a room. To identify such

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

125

Poster Session C	
abstract function representations, an fMRI experiment was conducted. Participants viewed a variety of objects and evaluated their utility to each of
four goals (dress up for a night out, decorate a house, protect your body
from the cold, or keep objects dry in a flooded basement). The first two
share a common, broader goal of decoration, while the latter two are both
broadly protection goals. This grouping is specific to goal similarity, and
orthogonal to the physical way in which the goals are accomplished. To
identify representations of “decorate” and “protect” categories, an multivoxel pattern searchlight analysis was performed across the cortex, and
identified regions in which neural patterns were more similar for the pairs
of similar-goal than dissimilar-goal conditions. Function category representations were found anterior inferior parietal lobe, a region previously
implicated in representing concrete action goals. This finding extends our
understanding of the nature of the representations in this region, by illustrating its capacity to represent highly abstract categories of functions, such
as would be particularly useful for flexibly selecting objects to accomplish
them based on functional criteria such as their aesthetic value, rather than
shape or manner of manipulation.

C135
INFLUENCE OF PERSPECTIVE AND HAND USED ON SENSORIMOTOR EEG RESPONSES DURING ACTION OBSERVATION Ashley

R. Drew1, Peter J. Marshall1; 1Temple University — An increasing amount
of research in social-cognitive neuroscience has examined sensorimotor
EEG rhythms (e.g., mu/beta rhythms over central sites) during the observation of hand actions being performed by others. This study addresses
an important gap in the literature by examining two determinants of these
EEG responses: 1) the effect of the hand used to carry out the action (left/
right) and 2) the participant’s visual perspective on the action (egocentric/
allocentric). EEG was recorded from undergraduate participants (N=28)
during the observation of video clips showing an actor’s hand reaching for,
grasping, and lifting a cylindrical object. The hand used by the actor (left/
right) and the perspective from which the action was filmed (egocentric/
allocentric in relation to the participant) were varied. For the egocentric
perspective, significant differences in event-related EEG desynchronization between left and right hand actions were found over right mid-frontal,
right central, and bilateral mid-parietal sites. For the allocentric perspective, an effect of the hand used was apparent bilaterally at occipital sites
but not at other regions. The results show that actions viewed from egocentric and allocentric perspectives are associated with different EEG response
profiles. A particularly salient finding is that sensorimotor rhythms over
central electrode sites were only sensitive to the hand used to carry out an
observed action when that action was seen from a first-person perspective.
This finding assists in clarifying the interpretation of prior and future studies involving changes in sensorimotor EEG rhythms during the observation
of hand actions.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
C136
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF VISUAL PERCEPTUAL ORGANIZATION
IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS Bart Boets1, Lien Van Eylen1, Ilse

Noens1, Maarten Demeyer1, Stefan Sunaert1, Jean Steyaert1, Johan Wagemans1; 1KU Leuven, Belgium — Atypical visual processing has often been
reported in autism spectrum disorders (ASD), in particular superior local
and inferior global processing. Here we used Gabor patterns that dynamically evolve from random to organized to investigate texture segmentation
and contour integration of nonexistent and everyday objects in 19 adolescents with ASD and 19 matched typically developing controls (all males,
aged 11-18 years, full scale IQ > 75). We performed functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) while participants executed an object detection
task comprising texture based nonexistent figures, texture and contour
based nonexistent figures, and texture and contour based everyday objects,
relative to a baseline condition of randomly reorienting Gabor stimuli. The
behavioral data revealed that both groups performed similarly in terms of
accuracy and response time across all conditions, and that the detection of
figures in the texture condition was less accurate and slower than in the
other conditions. Classical subtraction-based fMRI analyses showed that
the conditions with more organized Gabor patterns systematically activated hierarchically higher areas along the ventral visual stream. Ado-

126

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
lescents with ASD showed the same pattern of brain activity as typically
developing adolescents, suggesting that visual perceptual organization is
intact in ASD at the behavioral as well as at the neural level. To investigate
possible group differences in efficiency of communication between various
brain regions implicated in visual processing, these analyses will be supplemented with a structural connectivity analysis comprising fiber tracking
of the inferior longitudinal and inferior fronto-occipital fasciculi and with a
functional connectivity analysis.

C137
PREDICTING VISUAL FEATURE CONJUNCTION LEARNING RATE
FROM BASAL GANGLIA ACTIVITY Eric A. Reavis1, Sebastian M. Frank1,

Peter U. Tse1; 1Dartmouth College — The ability to learn to process visual
feature conjunctions quickly and efficiently is important for many visual
activities, such as reading and driving. Adults can learn to quickly and accurately detect arbitrary visual feature conjunctions, such as color and shape,
in a visual search task with trialwise response accuracy feedback, but the
rate of conjunction learning varies widely between individuals. We hypothesized that response accuracy feedback might elicit an endogenous reward
response involving the dopaminergic system, and that individual differences in the magnitude of this endogenous reward response might predict
visual feature conjunction learning rate. To test these hypotheses, we used
functional MRI to measure activity evoked by accuracy feedback (“correct”
vs. “incorrect”) while participants solved difficult multiple-choice arithmetic problems. Activity in the basal ganglia, a known target of dopaminergic neurons, was higher for correct feedback than incorrect feedback.
We trained the same participants on a visual search task for an arbitrary
conjunction of visual features outside the scanner, with trialwise response
accuracy feedback. As expected, rate of learning for feature conjunctions
varied substantially between participants. Consistent with our hypothesis,
conjunction learning rate was predicted by the difference in basal ganglia
activity evoked by correct vs. incorrect feedback delivery on the unrelated
math task: the greater the difference in basal ganglia activity evoked by
correct vs. incorrect feedback, particularly in the caudate nucleus, the faster
the participant learned efficient processing of visual feature conjunctions.
This suggests that reward-related dopaminergic signals may play a role in
facilitating visual feature conjunction learning.

C138
IMPAIRED OCULOMOTOR BEHAVIOR PREVENTS READING AND
SCENE PERCEPTION IN NEGLECT PATIENTS Silvia Primativo1,2, Lisa

Saskia Arduino3,4, Maria De Luca2, Roberta Daini5, Marialuisa Martelli1,2; 1Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 2IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome,
Italy, 3LUMSA University, Rome, Italy, 4ISTC-CNR, Rome, Italy, 5University of
Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy — Unilateral spatial neglect (USN) is a composite and multifaceted neuropsychological disorder. Around 40% of patients
show also a reading impairment (i.e., Neglect Dyslexia, ND). Recent findings of this research group demonstrated that ND is the consequence of the
concomitant presence of USN and a non-lateralized eye movement deficit.
Here we aim at clarifying the features of the altered eye movements both
describing in detail the impaired eye movements behaviour and investigating how it affects also non-reading tasks, such as scene exploration. Using
the controls eye movements performance in the verbal scene description
task as a reference, patients were divided on the basis of their fixation
location correlations with that of controls. The oculo-motor behaviour
has been also examined by means of several saccadic tasks. The reading
behaviour has been evaluated using words presented with and without
text context. Patients identified by an impaired eye movement behaviour in
scene exploration and in the saccadic tasks, produced left lateralized errors
in reading single words and words presented within a text passage. The
abnormal oculomotor behaviour during reading confirms the groups distinction based on image exploration. We conclude that roughly 40% of USN
patients show an eye movement deficit, which prevents both reading and
scene perception. This large percentage of impaired patients indicates that
the oculomotor behaviour requires particular attention during the diagnostic phase in order to program the best rehabilitation strategy.

2014 Annual Meeting	

C139
VISUAL DETECTION IMPROVEMENTS WITH FRONTAL BETA PATTERNS OF RHYTHMIC NON-INVASIVE NEUROSTIMULATION
DEMONSTRATED BY SHIFTS OF THE PSYCHOMETRIC FUNCTION

Romain Quentin1, Marine Vernet1, Seth Elkin-Frankston3, Lorena Chanes1,
Monica Toba1, Antoni Valero-Cabre1,2; 1CRICM INSERM U975/Université Paris
6, 2CNRS 7225 Paris, 3Boston University — Rhythmic Transcranial Magnetic
Stimulation (TMS) has demonstrated an ability to enhance brain oscillatory
activity at the input frequency. Using this approach, we recently reported
that uniform 30 Hz TMS patterns delivered pre-target on the right Frontal
Eye Field (FEF) were able to improve the visual detection of near-threshold targets. Here, by recording the effects of these same TMS patterns on a
complete psychometric function, we tested if this facilitatory visual impact
was restricted to such stimulus contrast or could also be extended to other
contrast levels. 14 participants performed a two alternative forced-choice
visual task in which they were requested to report the right of left location
of a lateralized Gabor. During the trials, participants received on the right
FEF and 16 ms prior to target onset, either real/sham 30 Hz bursts or duration-matched non-uniform TMS bursts encompassing the same number
of pulses. Participant detection performance for each TMS condition was
fitted to a Gumbel function to reconstruct the psychometric curve. In agreement with prior observations, only frequency specific 30 Hz frontal patterns
but not non-uniform bursts increased detection rates. Such effect occurred
for the upper (i.e.,above 75% performance) but not the lower half of the
psychometric curve. Our results support a causal role for frontal high-beta
oscillatory activity in the modulation of contrast sensitivity and prove that
such facilitatory mechanism is not solely restricted to near threshold targets
but can be extended to a wider range of suprathreshold stimulus contrasts.

C140
THE IMPACT OF HIGH-BETA FRONTAL PRE-TARGET OSCILLATIONS ON VISUAL DETECTION SENSITIVITY IS PHASE INDEPENDENT Lorena Chanes1, Marine Vernet1, Romain Quentin1, Antoni Vale-

ro-Cabre1,2,3; 1Université Pierre et Marie Curie, CNRS UMR 7225-INSERM UMRS
S975, Centre de Recherche de l’Institut du Cerveau et la Moelle (ICM), 75013
Paris, France, 2Laboratory for Cerebral Dynamics Plasticity & Rehabilitation,
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA, 3Cognitive Neuroscience and Information Technology Research Program, Open University of
Catalonia (UOC), 08035 Barcelona, Spain — Right frontal high-beta episodic
activity induced through 4-pulse Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS)
bursts delivered 17 ms prior to target onset has been shown to increase conscious visual detection of near-threshold targets. Interestingly, the phase
of pre-target occipital oscillations has been causally linked to shifts in local
excitability and found able in EEG studies to predict visual detection accuracy. However, its influence over visual performance behavior in frontal
cortical locations remains to be causally explored. We addressed this issue
in a population of 14 healthy participants by varying in steps of a quarter of
phase during one and a half cycles the time interval (i.e., 17, 25, 33, 42 or 50
ms) between the last pulse of high-beta 4-pulse rhythmic TMS bursts and
the onset of lateralized low-contrast (50 % consciously seen) Gabor stimuli. Participants performed a forced-choice visual discrimination followed
by conscious visual detection task under the influence of either sham or
real TMS delivered pre target onset. We report for the first time phase-dependent improvements of visual discrimination performance associated to
high-beta frontal activity. More importantly, our results suggest that previously reported enhancements of conscious visual detection sensitivity (d)
by high-beta frontal activity are phase-independent. Interestingly however,
oscillation phase modulated detection response criterion (beta). As prior
reports demonstrated a role for frontal gamma activity in criterion shifts,
we hypothesize that this outcome could reflect cross-frequency phase-topower interactions between beta and gamma frontal oscillators.

C141
HEY, HEY, WE’RE THE MONKEYS? IS ABILITY AND N170
RESPONSE TO HUMAN- AND MONKEY-LIKE FACES GRADED?

Nicole A. Sugden1, Lan (Mary) Wei1, Raj Sandhu1, Ben Dyson1, Margaret C.
Moulson1; 1Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada — Nearly all adults
are own-race face experts, in that own-race faces are better remembered,

Poster Session C
discriminated, and identified, as compared to other-race faces (Meissner
& Brigham, 2001). This other-race effect (ORE) is also evident in greater
amplitude and longer latency of the N170 to other-race faces (e.g., Bentin et
al., 1996) . Faces may be perceived as more or less “other” based on physiognomic differences (e.g., colour; Balas et al., 2011), familiarity (Hancock
& Rhodes, 2008), or social expectations (Shriver et al., 2008). To determine
whether there is a gradation in the behavioral and neurological response
to “other” face types, we used transformed faces that graded from human
to monkey. Eighty participants completed a task rating faces for attractiveness, performing a surprise memory task, and rating the monkey- or
human-ness of the face. The more human-like the face was rated to be, the
better the recognition of the face (r(80)=.448, p<.001). Currently, we are
testing participants on the same paradigm while recording ERPs to look
for potential gradation in the N170. We expect that more human-like faces,
in addition to being better remembered, will elicit smaller, faster N170
responses. This would suggest that there are gradations in what is considered “own-face”, which are apparent early in perceptual processing. These
findings may help tease apart what influences basic perceptual processing
of faces.

THINKING: Decision making
C143
COGNITIVE CONTRIBUTORS TO IMPAIRED DECISION-MAKING
IN MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT Alison Perez1, Erin Venza1, Audette

Rackley1, Justin Eroh1, Raksha Mudar2, Winston Chiong3, Sandra Chapman1;
The Center for BrainHealth at the University of Texas at Dallas, 2University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 3University of California San Francisco — Declines
in decision-making ability in older adults may be the first sign of cognitive
decline related to disease. Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) is an initial
indicator of future dementia; therefore understanding decision-making
ability in adults with MCI will help to elucidate initial cognitive processes
that initially diminish with disease. The purpose of this study is to examine
cognitive factors related to decision-making behavior in both healthy adults
and adults with MCI. In a sample of 15 older adults with MCI and 15 age
and gender matched controls (60-85 years old), we examined the consistency of their decision-making through a financial behavioral task in which
participants chose between risky gambles and sure choices. This paradigm
measures consistency of decision-making behavior as well as susceptibility
to contextual bias. Adults with MCI were significantly less logically consistent in their decision-making behavior than healthy controls, (p=0.002).
Adults with MCI were more risk-seeking overall when faced with a loss,
than healthy controls, (p <.001). In adults with MCI, MMSE scores were
significantly correlated with decision-making behavior (p=.034). In both
normal controls and adults with MCI, an executive function of strategic
control was also significantly correlated with decision-making behavior
(p=.044) Novel findings indicate decline in decision-making is evident, even
in early stages of disease. Individuals with MCI are more likely to be susceptible to contextual bias, possibly leading to detrimental outcomes. Also,
cognitive control processes were significantly related to decision-making
behavior suggesting that cognitive control should be further investigated
for its contribution to decision-making.
1

C144
CHIPS OR CHOCOLATE? PERSONAL PREFERENCE REVEALED IN
REACHING Grace Truong1, Craig S. Chapman2, Tina S.-T. Huang1, James

T. Enns1; 1University of British Columbia, 2University of Alberta — Potential
action targets in the environment generate competition between actions
plans (Cisek, 2007). This competition results in reach movements that are
“spatially averaged” between potential targets, leading to less direct/more
curved reach trajectories (Chapman et al., 2010), indicating that trajectories
can reflect target processing in real-time (Freeman, Dale, & Farmer, 2010).
We questioned whether reaching kinematics would be sensitive to target
competition determined by subjective preference. If so, it would imply that
hedonic preferences are accessible as observable cognition, without requiring explicit participant reports. Participants (n=32) were presented with
four snack options, presented in pairs as pictures on a touch-interactive
table. On each trial, participants reached to select the item they preferred
more. As incentives, two trials were randomly chosen at the end and participants received the snack they chose on those trials. Subsequently, particiCognitive Neuroscience Society

127

Poster Session C	
pants rated all snack options on a 9-point liking scale. We predicted “easy”
decisions (choices between options with a larger preference difference)
would produce faster and more direct movements than “hard” decisions
(choices between options with a small preference difference). We found
that reaction time, the directness of the reach, and an interaction between
these measures were significant predictors of preference. Interestingly,
reach-directness was predictive of preference when reaction times were
fast, but not when slow. This shows that reach trajectories do carry subjective target competition signals, but that they become increasingly less
informative as reach initiation is slowed down. This places an important
constraint on using action kinematics as an index of observable cognition.

C145
DECISIONS ABOUT DECISIONS - HOW SIGNAL RELIABILITY
AFFECTS METACOGNITIVE JUDGEMENTS Annika Boldt1, Vincent de

Gardelle2,3, Christopher Summerfield1, Nick Yeung1; 1University of Oxford, 2Laboratoire de Psychologie de la Perception, CNRS, 3Université Paris Descartes
— Human observers effortlessly and accurately judge the subjective probability of being correct in their decisions, leading to the view that metacognition is an integral part of decision-making. It remains a challenge for most
models of confidence, however, to explain in what way precisely confidence is calibrated with objective performance, under which circumstances
this calibration is reduced, and the influence other cues have on these metacognitive judgements. The present study aims at manipulating such a cue,
namely the reliability of evidence supporting the initial decision. Participants had to judge the average colour of an array of eight coloured shapes,
of which we critically manipulated the variability of information (De Gardelle & Summerfield, 2011). Our behavioural and EEG results suggest that
in addition to objective accuracy on a given trial, other variables such as
response time and reliability of evidence play a role in the generation of
metacognitive judgements. Specifically, the results suggest that this effect
is due to more selective information sampling in the case of more variable
stimulus arrays, resulting in under-confidence.

C146
EEG THETA-BAND PHASE-COUPLING FOR THE COUNTRY-OF-ORIGIN EFFECT Byoung-Kyong Min1, Erin Cho2, Kwangsu Cho3, Jungyeon

Sung3, Junhyuk Choi1; 1Korea University, 2Parsons The New School for Design,
3
Sungkyunkwan University — This study investigates EEG theta-band
phase-couplings associated with the country-of-origin (COO) effect in
the context of a mobile phone design. COO refers to the country where
a particular product is made, which often serves as a signal for product
quality. EEG data were collected from 15 healthy individuals while they
performed a choice-reaction task in the context of mobile phone design.
We observed distributed anterior-posterior theta-band phase-coupling,
indicating crosstalk between anterior and posterior regions when forming
a design preference based on COO information. The long-range theta-band
phase-coupling networks were detected across the anterior and posterior
regions for the favorable COO, which showed concentrated phase-couplings, particularly within the anterior region. In contrast, for the unfavorable COO, although anterior-posterior phase-couplings were still detected,
theta-band phase-couplings were particularly concentrated in the posterior
region. We attributed our findings to item-context binding and a conflict in
decision-making involving central executive working memory. Our study
provides neurophysiological evidence for the most critical conceptual foundation of COO studies in the social sciences. That is, the processing of COO
cues involves substantial cognitive activity, which has a significant effect
on a consumer’s preference decision for a product.

C147
A TEST OF THE WARRIOR/WORRIER HYPOTHESIS FOR THE COMT
VAL158MET POLYMORPHISM Kaileigh Byrne1, Darrell A. Worthy1, Valerie

S. Knopik3,4, John E. McGeary3,4, Christopher G. Beevers2, W. Todd Maddox2;
Texas A&M University, 2University of Texas at Austin, 3Rhode Island Hospital,
4
Brown University — The catechol O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene catalyzes the methylation and inactivation of catecholamine neurotransmitters
and consequently regulates dopamine signaling and degradation in the
prefrontal cortex. Our study (N=328) investigates the role of the COMT
Val158Met single nucleotide polymorphism on a two-choice reflective decision-making task with and without a social pressure manipulation. In this
1

128

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
task, the reward associated with the sub-optimal option decreases over time
but offers more immediate reward on each trial, while the reward associated with the optimal option increases over time but offers less immediate
reward on each trial. Prior research has shown that methionine (Met) carriers excel on memory and attention tasks compared to valine (Val) homozygotes. However, COMTVal158 has been associated with an advantage in
response to challenging or stressful situations where rapid disengagement
of cortical circuits is optimal. The warrior/worrier hypothesis (Goldstein,
et al., 2005) posits that COMT may moderate response to challenging situations in which Met carriers (worriers) demonstrate enhanced executive
functioning ability in no-pressure situations, while Val homozygotes (warriors) may perform better under pressure due to increased extracellular
dopamine released in stressful circumstances. Our results demonstrate
that in the absence of pressure, Met carriers outperform Val homozygotes
in selecting the optimal decision strategy. However, under pressure, Met
carriers’ performance declines by over 25%. In contrast, Val homozygotes
show a less pronounced decline in performance of 10% and outperform
Met carriers on the task. These results show support for the warrior/worrier hypothesis.

C148
DIFFERENTIAL NEURAL RESPONSES TO REWARD FEEDBACK
FOR SELF VERSUS OTHERS PREDICTS LEARNING-GUIDED
PRO-SOCIAL BEHAVIOR René San Martín1,2,3, Youngbin Kwak1, John Pear-

son1, Marty G. Woldorff1,2, Scott A. Huettel1,2; 1Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, 2Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke
University, 3Centro de Neuroeconomía, Universidad Diego Portales, Santiago,
Chile — Many real-world decisions are made in social contexts in which
choices depend not only on personal goals, but also on potential benefits for
others. Economists have formalized these pro-social behaviors in models
in which outcomes for others are integrated into the decision-making process after being transformed into subjective payoffs for oneself. We used
event-related potentials (ERPs) in a social gambling task to investigate the
neural mechanisms underlying the differential processing of outcomes for
others versus for oneself. Participants had to choose between four visual
cues which they learned by trial-and-error were associated with different
expected values for self and for a charity institution. We found that the
frontocentral feedback-related negativity component (FRN, latency 225 ms)
was larger for losses than for gains, as expected, and that this difference
was significantly greater in response to self-relevant outcomes than for
charity-relevant outcomes. Individual differences in this differential FRN
effect, however, did not predict differences in self-versus-charity earnings.
In contrast, outcomes for oneself elicited larger P3 responses (latency 300600 ms) than did outcomes for charity, regardless of the valence (win vs.
loss). Moreover, individual differences in pro-social behavior were predicted by this differential P3 activity: the greater the self-versus-charity P3
difference, the greater the difference in cumulative earnings for self versus
charity These findings confirm and extend previous research showing that
the P3 reflects goal-oriented behavioral adjustment. Moreover, they indicate that individual differences in pro-social behavior are linked to individual differences in the processes underlying P3 neural responses to self-relevant vs. others-relevant outcomes.

THINKING: Development & aging
C149
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HEMISPHERIC LATERALIZATION FOR
NUMERICAL PROCESSING Yuan Deng1, Jessica Cantlon2; 1Institute of

Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 2University of Rochester — Evidence from brain imaging studies on both children and adults have shown
that prefrontal cortex and parietal cortex are recruited in cognitive tasks
involving symbolic and non-symbolic numerical forms. Numerical processing networks are often bilaterally activated although a right lateralization bias has been reported in parietal cortex for young children, and left
parietal cortex activation is found to be more pronounced in adults. Little
is known about how this lateralization pattern changes over the course of
development. The present study focuses on understanding the developmental changes of cortical lateralization in the numerical processing network in children. We tested 26 children from 4 to 11 years old on a match-

2014 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session C

ing task during fMRI to localize number-specific activated areas in bilateral
prefrontal cortex and parietal cortex. Then, activations within these regions
from a free-viewing video task were used to measure the lateralization
indexes. Our results showed that both parietal and frontal region showed
a shift from a bilateral activation pattern in younger children to a left-lateralized pattern in older children. Greater left-lateralized activation in posterior parietal cortex was associated with higher scores on math achievement
tests. Moreover, we found that the relation between leftward lateralization
of parietal cortex and math achievement was driven by the functional connectivity between frontal and parietal region in the left hemisphere. These
finding suggest that the development of the fronto-parietal network plays
a critical role in leftward lateralization of parietal cortex - which predicts
early math achievement in children.

C150
CHANGES IN FEEDBACK PROCESSING FROM ADOLESCENCE
TO YOUNG ADULTHOOD: AN FRN FOLLOW-UP STUDY Tina Zottoli1,

Elvira Kirilko2, Jill Grose-Fifer2,3; 1St. Joseph’s College, New York, 2John Jay
College of Criminal Justice, 3City University of New York, Graduate Center —
Adolescent risk-taking may be partly attributable to immature incentive
processing. In cohort studies, we and others have shown that the amplitude of the feedback-related negativity (FRN), an ERP component elicited
by feedback, decreases with age. For this study, we recorded the FRN in
a sample of adult males (18-20 years) who had participated in an earlier
study when they were adolescents (14-16 years). The same simple gambling
task was used to elicit the FRN in both studies. Between Time 1 (T1) and
Time 2 (T2), FRN amplitudes decreased, as did the latency of the FRN after
high-loss feedback. In general, these reductions were more pronounced for
participants who were younger than 16 at T1 and for participants for whom
T1 and T2 were more than four years apart. Larger FRN amplitudes at T1
and T2 were associated with higher trait anxiety scores measured at T2, and
the relative difference in FRN amplitude for wins and losses at T1 and T2
was positively associated with sensation seeking at T2. Our data suggest
that the FRN may have utility as a putative marker for personality traits
associated with risk taking; and the relatively late maturation of incentive
processing for high-loss feedback might partly explain reports of diminished risk aversion in adolescent boys.

C151
MULTIPLE LEARNING SYSTEMS IN ADOLESCENCE

Juliet Y. Davidow1, Karin Foerde2, Adriana Galván3, Daphna Shohamy1; 1Columbia University,
2
New York University, 3University of California - Los Angeles — In the adult
brain, learning is accomplished by multiple systems, particularly the hippocampus and the striatum. These systems are engaged in different contexts, build different kinds of representations, and interact to support learning-guided behavior. However, far less is known about the cognitive and
brain mechanisms underlying learning during the critical developmental
stage of adolescence. Here we used behavioral studies combined with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in healthy adolescents to begin
to address this gap. We leveraged recent research showing that delaying
feedback during reinforcement learning shifts learning from the striatum
to the hippocampus and thus investigated how feedback timing modulates
learning in adolescents. Participants (adolescents aged 13-17 and adults
aged 25-30) were scanned with fMRI while engaged in a probabilistic feedback-learning paradigm with outcomes presented immediately, or after 7
seconds. We found that adolescents outperformed adults in the delayed
feedback condition and had better episodic memory for feedback events.
We also found distinct relationships between memory-sensitivity (d-prime)
and age. We fit a reinforcement-learning model to examine trial-by-trial
learning related responses. Though there were not differences in optimal
choice performance between age groups, adolescents had a lower learning rate than adults for immediate feedback, suggesting more incremental
learning in this condition. Further, we found that adolescents displayed
enhanced prediction error signals in the ventral striatum and in the hippocampus during learning. Together, our results suggest alterations in the
balance between the striatum and the hippocampus during adolescence,
providing insight into the development of the balance between different
forms of learning.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

129

Poster Session D
ATTENTION: Auditory
D1
PERCEPTUAL LOAD MODULATES NEURAL CORRELATES OF
AUDITORY ATTENTION IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS. Debra

Karhson1, Edward Golob1,2; 1Tulane Univeristy, Neuroscience Program, 2Center
for Aging — Atypical sensory reactivity to visual and/or auditory stimuli is
prevalent among individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Data
from cognitive neuroscience research suggests that changes in attention
can alter sensory processing at several levels of analysis, and thus could
be contributing to changes in sensory reactivity. Furthermore, attentional
pathways are modulated by the individual difference variable of working
memory capacity (WMC). This study examined the relationship between
sensory reactivity, individual difference, and auditory attention in ASD
by using electroencephalography (EEG) technique. Participants (n=32, 16
with ASD and 16 age- and IQ-matched controls) completed a sensory profile, complex operation span task, and performed a modified 3-stimulus
(target, non-target, and distractor) oddball task under varying perceptual
load (high or low). Event-related potential (ERP) analysis assessed measures of cognitive control (N200, ~200ms latency), attentional processing
(P3a and P3b, ~300ms latency) and sustained attention (slow wave, ~400600ms latency). Behavioral data demonstrates a significant positive correlation between sensory sensitivities and WMC in participants with ASD.
Under high perceptual loads, target stimuli elicited large N200 amplitude
followed by smaller P3b amplitudes in ASD compared to typically developing controls (p<0.05), suggesting an uneven distribution of attentional
resources early in processing. Late negative slow wave potentials of white
noise distractors were significantly modulated by varying auditory perceptual load (p<0.005) and may indicate difficulty in individuals with ASD to
integrate bottom-up stimuli processing with top-down goals. Data suggests
atypical distribution of limited attentional resources in auditory processing in individuals with ASD, particularly in high perceptual load environments.

D2
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE BASAL GANGLIA FOR SUBJECTIVE
RHYTHMIZATION - EVIDENCE FROM ALPHA OSCILLATIONS Chris-

tian Obermeier1, Sonja A Kotz1,2; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2University of Manchester, School of
Psychological Sciences, UK — When we listen to identical tones in isochrony
(i.e. an equitone sequence), we perceive some tones as more salient than
others. This phenomenon is termed subjective rhythmization (e.g. Brochard et al., 2003). It is assumed that this effect is due to internal dynamic
fluctuations of attention, which are related to changes in oscillatory brain
activity, i.e. a relative increase in the alpha band (8-12 Hz) for strong versus
weak beats. It has been proposed, that such adaptive temporal processing recruits a wide-spread cortico-subcortical network including premotor areas, the thalamus, the basal ganglia and the cerebellum (Schwartze
& Kotz, 2013). The basal ganglia, for instance, play an important role in
sequencing, beat and rhythm perception, but also in attention regulation all potentially relevant processes in subjective rhythmization. Using EEG,
we explored whether the basal ganglia crucially modulate this effect. For
this purpose, we presented healthy participants and patients with lesions
in the basal ganglia with equitone sequences containing one or two intensity-attenuated deviants at strong and weak positions. Whereas healthy
adults showed subjective rhythmization as indicated by a relative alpha
enhancement for perceptually strong as compared to weak tones, no such
effect was found in the basal ganglia patients. Preliminary topographic and
source analyses suggest the involvement of classical sensorimotor regions
as well as areas involved in temporal-processing (bilateral SMA, left IPL).
The present findings provide new evidence for the crucial modulatory role
of the basal ganglia for subjective rhythmization and in favor of a widespread cortico-subcortical network involved in temporal processing.

130

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

D3
CREATIVITY AND P50 ERP SENSORY GATING: SELECTIVE
VERSUS LEAKY ATTENTION IN DIVERGENT THINKERS AND CREATIVE ACHIEVERS. Darya Zabelina1, Mark Beeman1; 1Northwestern Univer-

sity — The present study investigates neural markers of sensory gating in
creative people. We examine a very early neurophysiological response - an
event-related potential (ERP) that occurs 50 ms after stimulus onset. The
P50 ERP in response to the second of two auditory clicks is a well-established marker of sensory gating. Reduced sensory gating, or leaky sensory
filter, indicated by the failure to suppress response to the second auditory
click, is viewed as a marker of vulnerability to some psychopathology, particularly to schizophrenia spectrum disorders (SSD; Oilincy et al., 2010).
We hypothesized that individual differences in sensory gating should be
associated with individual differences in creativity. Creativity was assessed
in two different ways: 1. Divergent thinking (ATTA; Goff & Torrance, 2002)
- a standard laboratory test of creative cognition; 2. and an assessment of
people’s real-world creative achievements (CAQ; Carson et al., 2002). We
found that the two measures were differentially associated with sensory
gating. Divergent thinkers had more selective sensory filters, suggesting
that performance on this measure, although thought to assess creative
cognition, may in fact draw on cognitive processes such as selective focus
and inhibition, rather than on broad or leaky attention. Real-world creative
achievers, on the other hand, showed reduced sensory gating, suggesting that people with real-world creative achievements may indeed have
“leaky” sensory filters. We conclude that different types of creativity may
each emphasize different types or degrees of attention. Specifically, divergent thinkers appear to have selective, while creative achievers may have
leaky sensory filters.

D4
LOW-FREQUENCY PHASE TRACKING AT A CROWDED COCKTAIL
PARTY Dillon A. Hambrook1, Matthew S. Tata1; 1University of Lethbridge —

In noisy environments your brain can select one auditory stream from a
mixture of competing sounds - the cocktail party effect. Selective attention
to a single stream gives that stream access to cognitive mechanisms of different brain areas. One theory suggests that endogenous neural oscillations
facilitate communication between these different subsystems, but neural
oscillations are also influenced by exogenous stimuli. Low frequency (3-8
Hz) electroencephalogram (EEG) activity tracks changes in the acoustic
energy present in rhythmic stimuli such as speech. Tracking is enhanced
for attended speech. It has been hypothesized that by selectively entraining neuroelectric dynamics to the acoustic dynamics of a single stream,
the selected speech gains privileged access to a synchronized network that
performs tasks that includes memory encoding and response planning.
Competing inputs are excluded from this network. While evidence from
experiments with two speakers suggests that selective entrainment may be
a mechanism which solves the cocktail party problem, it remains unclear
how such a mechanism would function in a more crowded scene. Using a
multi-speaker virtual reality audio system we created a simulated “cocktail
party” with up to seven simultaneous speakers while listeners performed a
selective listening task. We recorded neuroelectric dynamics with dense-array EEG. By cross-correlating EEG activity with signals derived from the
acoustic dynamics of individual target and distractor streams we identify
phase-locked activity unique to each stream. We show reduced phaselocked activity evoked by the target stream as distractors are added to the
scene. Furthermore, phase-locked power differentiates correctly and incorrectly identified targets.

D5
DIFFERENCES IN NEURAL MECHANISMS FOR SELECTIVE ATTENTION ARE IMPACTED BY BILINGUAL EXPERIENCE AND SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS Jimena Santillan1, Byron DeVos1, Pawel Buczkowski1,

Helen Neville1; 1University of Oregon — It has been proposed that when bilinguals want to produce one of the two languages they speak, the non-target
language has to be inhibited in order to produce the target language. This

2014 Annual Meeting	
is the basis for the bilingual advantage hypothesis, the idea that bilinguals
enjoy an advantage in inhibitory control. To date, multiple studies testing
this hypothesis have yielded inconsistent evidence. Socioeconomic status
(SES) has been proposed as a potential confound that may account for some
of these inconsistencies. The present study took advantage of the high temporal resolution of the event-related potential (ERP) technique to examine
whether there are differences between English monolinguals and Spanish-English bilinguals in very early stages of inhibitory control processing
when controlling for SES. Participants completed an auditory selective
attention ERP paradigm in which they were simultaneously presented with
two different narrative stories and were asked to attend to only one story
while ignoring the other. Brain responses elicited by identical sound probes
embedded in both narratives were compared when they appeared in the
attended story to when they appeared in the unattended story. Preliminary results show that, when matched for SES, bilinguals exhibit a larger P1
attentional modulation than monolinguals, suggesting that they are more
efficient at enhancing the signal of the attended story and inhibiting the
signal of the distracting story. This early attention effect was also larger in
higher SES bilinguals compared to lower SES bilinguals, consistent with
previous evidence indicating that SES has an effect on selective attention.

D6
PSYCHOPATHY IS ASSOCIATED WITH ABNORMAL HEMODYNAMIC AND ELECTROCORTICAL CONTEXTUAL BASELINE FEATURES IN AUDITORY TARGET DETECTION TASKS. Nathaniel E.

Anderson1, Vaughn R. Steele1, J. Michael Maurer1, Kent A. Kiehl1,2; 1The Mind
Research Network, Albuquerque, NM, 2University of New Mexico, Albuquerque,
NM — A great deal of research has demonstrated that various forms of psychopathology are associated with abnormal brain responses during simple
target detection tasks. Extant research has largely demonstrated attenuated
brain responses during target detection among individuals characterized
by externalizing vulnerability, including substance dependent individuals
and those exhibiting antisocial traits. There has been more variability, however, among reports examining psychopathy, a disorder characterized by
externalizing symptoms as well as emotional processing deficits and abnormalities in certain fundamental attentional processes. This study examined
hemodynamic activity (fMRI) and event-related potentials during an auditory oddball target-detection task with incarcerated individuals and healthy
controls in an attempt to parse the contributing effects of psychopathy,
antisocial behavior, and substance dependence. Contrary to expectations,
the most substantial differences were not observed during the target condition; but rather, psychopaths showed robust differences in brain activity
during processing of the frequent, standard stimuli. Widespread negative
associations between psychopathy and brain responses to standard stimuli
were found in both fMRI and ERP data, during independent recording sessions. A differential in standard stimulus processing has broad implications
for our understanding of the fundamental cognitive features of psychopathy. In the target detection task, brain activity during standard stimuli represent a kind of baseline contextual condition for the neural representation
of more salient features of the environment - i.e. response targets. These differences in baseline neural responses may help to account for psychopaths’
apparent abnormalities in basic attentional processes.

ATTENTION: Development & aging
D7
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN EARLY NOVELTY PROCESSING:
USING PCA TO PARSE THE OVERLAPPING NOVELTY P2 AND N2

Kirk Daffner1, Brittany Alperin1, Katherine Mott1, Eliza Ryan1, Phillip Holcomb2;
1
Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 2Tufts University —
Many investigators have reported an age-related increase in the anterior
P2, which indexes the motivational salience of visual events as determined
by novelty or task relevance. We tested the hypothesis that this finding is
due to an age-associated reduction in the temporally and spatially overlapping anterior N2 component, which indexes the mismatch between novel
visual stimuli and stored representations. The amplitude of the anterior N2
has been shown to decrease with age. Temporospatial principal component
analysis (PCA) was used to investigate whether age-associated changes
in the P2 and N2 would still be present after decomposing overlapping

Poster Session D
waveforms into their underlying components. One hundred five subjects,
ages 18-85, participated in a visual novelty oddball task. A temporospatial
factor representing the P2 exhibited an age-associated increase in amplitude in response to novel stimuli. A temporospatial factor representing the
N2 demonstrated an age-related decrease in amplitude in response to novel
stimuli. The size of the P2 factor inversely correlated with the size of the N2
factor, even after controlling for age. The results from the PCA suggest that
age-related changes in the anterior P2 and N2 in response to novel stimuli
are not simply the result of temporal-spatial overlap between these components, but likely represent the activity of independent cognitive operations. One hypothesis is that the age-related increase in anterior P2 activity
(marking an augmentation in motivational salience) serves as a compensatory mechanism for diminished anterior N2 activity (indexing the reduced
ability of older adults to process ambiguous or conflicting representations).

D8
INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY MEDIATES AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN COGNITION David Madden1, Emily Parks1,

Ying-hui Chou1, Sally Cocjin1, David Hoagey1, Michele Diaz1, Guy Potter1, Nankuei Chen1, Roberto Cabeza2; 1Duke University Medical Center, 2Duke University
— Aging is associated with decrements in some forms of cognitive functioning including elementary perceptual speed, memory, and executive
function. These behavioral changes are often accompanied by decreases in
intrinsic (resting-state) functional connectivity within relevant brain networks. The relationship between age-related differences in brain function
and in behavior, however, remains unclear. In this study, the goal was to
determine whether age-related differences in intrinsic functional connectivity contribute directly to cognitive deficits associated with aging. Participants were 72 healthy individuals distributed continuously between 19
and 79 years of age. Analyses of a battery of psychometric tests revealed
two underlying clusters of tests representing: 1) perceptual speed; and
2) memory and executive functioning. Both clusters exhibited significant
age-related decline. We obtained measures of intrinsic functional brain connectivity from an independent component analysis of functional magnetic
resonance imaging data. Functional connectivity declined with age in several components, including a left frontoparietal network previously associated with attentional control. Using a bootstrapping approach, we found
that age-related decline in memory/executive functioning was mediated by
functional connectivity strength in this frontoparietal network. In contrast,
age mediated the relationship between frontoparietal intrinsic connectivity
and perceptual speed. These results support the theory that cortical disconnection underlies healthy aging. However, different models of the relations
among aging, the brain, and cognition may be needed to account for different forms of cognitive performance.

D9
NEURAL MECHANISMS FOR SELECTIVE ATTENTION IN BILINGUAL PRESCHOOLERS FROM LOWER SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS
BACKGROUNDS Eric Pakulak1, Amanda Hampton Wray1, Jimena Santillan1,

Theodore Bell1, Zayra N. Longoria1, Helen Neville1; 1University of Oregon —
The impact of lower socioeconomic status (SES) on the cognitive skills
and brain function of children and adults has been well documented (for
review, see Hackman et al., 2010). Event-related potential (ERP) studies of
selective attention have shown that it is a highly malleable system that is
enhanced in remaining modalities following sensory deprivation, shows
deficits in developmental disorders, and can be improved in both typically and non-typically developing children following training (for review,
see Stevens & Neville, 2010). We have also previously shown that selective attention is vulnerable in monolingual children from lower SES backgrounds (Stevens, Lauinger, & Neville, 2009). Here we extend this work to
Spanish-English bilingual children from lower SES backgrounds, employing a Spanish version of the child-friendly selective attention paradigm
used in previous studies. ERPs were recorded to linguistic and nonlinguistic probe stimuli embedded in two different narrative contexts as they were
either attended or unattended in a dichotic listening paradigm. In contrast
to monolingual children from lower SES backgrounds, bilingual children
displayed a robust early (100 ms) neural modulation to attended stimuli.
Results are consistent with previous evidence suggesting that bilingualism
may confer advantages in aspects of attention early in development (e.g.,
Carson & Meltzoff, 2008) and extend these results to neural measures of

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

131

Poster Session D	
selective attention. These findings also raise the hypothesis that aspects of
Latino parenting culture, in addition to or in combination with bilingualism, may confer resilience to the deleterious effects of SES on the development of vulnerable systems early in development.

D10
SENSITIVITY OF RESTING-STATE NETWORK CONNECTIVITY TO
EFFECTS OF AGING AND DOPAMINE GENOTYPE Franziska M Korb1,

Dorothea Hämmerer1,2, Franka Thurm1, Shu-Chen Li1,2; 1Chair of Lifespan Developmental Neuroscience, Department of Psychology, TU Dresden, Germany,
2
Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development,
Berlin, Germany — Aging is associated with declines in different aspects
of executive, memory and motivational functions. These cognitive impairments have been linked to declines in dopaminergic modulation (e.g. Bäckman et al. 2006, Li et al., 2001, TICS) as well as reduced functional connectivity in the resting-state network (RSN; e.g. Andrews-Hanna et al 2007,
Neuron). In recent studies, the neurotransmitter dopamine has been identified to modulate RSN connectivity. Greater striatal dopamine signaling
due either to genetic predisposition (Gordon et al., 2013, Cerebral Cortex)
or pharmacological intervention (Konova et al., 2013, JAMA Psychiatry)
results in a stronger coupling between RSN components which then is
associated with better cognitive performance. So far, however, studies have
pursued the effects of aging or neuromodulation on RSN functional connectivity separately. Here, we sought to investigate the conjoint effects of
aging and dopamine predisposition on RSN connectivity. To this end, we
compared RSN brain imaging data of younger adults (age 20-30; n = 42)
and older adults (age 60-70, n = 41), using striatal and hippocampal seed
regions. For all the participants, SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms)
that are known to be associated with the efficacy of striatal and hippocampal dopamine transmission were also available. Preliminary results show
reduced RSN connectivity in older compared to younger adults. Furthermore, RSN connectivity is sensitive to dopamine genotypes to varying
degrees in younger and in older adults.

D11
DEVELOPMENT OF NEURAL MECHANISMS FOR SELECTIVE
ATTENTION IN YOUNG CHILDREN FROM LOWER SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS BACKGROUNDS Amanda Hampton Wray1, Pakulak

Eric1, Bell Theodore1, Isbell Elif1, Stevens Courtney2, Neville Helen1; 1University
of Oregon, 2Willamette University — Selective auditory attention is a foundational developmental skill important for academic outcomes (Stevens
& Bavelier, 2012). Event-related brain potential (ERP) studies of selective
attention have shown that it is a highly malleable system that is enhanced
in remaining modalities following sensory deprivation, vulnerable in
developmental disorders, and trainable in both typically and non-typically
developing children (for review, see Stevens & Neville 2010). We have also
previously shown that selective attention is vulnerable in monolingual
children from lower SES backgrounds (Stevens, Lauinger, & Neville, 2009).
However, to date, the development of selective auditory attention across
time in lower SES children has not been investigated. Thus, it is unclear
whether the vulnerability of selective attention in lower SES children represents primarily delay or deviance from typical developmental trajectories. In the current study, ERPs were recorded in children from lower SES
backgrounds participating in Head Start preschools at two time points: at
age four and one year later at age five. At age four, lower SES children
did not display the early (100 ms) neural modulation to attended stimuli
previously observed in higher SES children (Stevens et al., 2009). However,
at age five, the same children displayed this early attention effect. These
findings indicate that, while initially demonstrating deficits in neural modulation to attended stimuli, children participating in Head Start preschools
begin to exhibit a neural response with selective attention more comparable
to higher SES preschool-aged children, supporting a model of developmental delay in attention development among young children from lower SES
backgrounds.

D12
THE DEVELOPMENT OF LOCAL AND GLOBAL VISUO-SPATIAL
PERCEPTION IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER Jacalyn Guy1,2,
Laurent Mottron3, Armando Bertone1,2; 1Perceptual Neuroscience Laboratory
for Autism and Development, 2McGill University, 3Université de Montreal —

132

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) present an atypical
visuo-perceptual profile (Mottron et al., 2006; Bertone et al., 2010) and often
excel at tasks requiring the local analysis of detailed information. Developmental studies examining local and global visuo-spatial processing have
produced mixed findings, often due to the inclusion of a broad age range
and the heterogeneity of participants. It therefore remains unknown when
a bias for detailed information in ASD emerges in development. We investigated the development of local and global visual processing strategies
in a respective 40 and 55 individuals with and without ASD between the
ages of 6-15 years using a hierarchical, compound letter task (Navon, 1977).
Participants completed a selective attention version of the task, where they
responded to either local or global features of the stimuli in two separate
conditions. Analyses of reaction time and accuracy reveal that individuals
with ASD are both significantly slower and less accurate than the typically
developing participants in the global condition of the task, specifically
when the large and small letters are incongruent. Moreover, a trend for a
local advantage is seen with age in the ASD group, suggesting that a local
processing bias may become more evident in adolescence than in mid or
late childhood. These results indicate that the development of a locally-oriented visual processing style in ASD may be experience-dependent.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Development &
aging
D13
GAMBLING FOR SELF, FRIENDS, AND ANTAGONISTS: DIFFERENTIAL CONTRIBUTIONS OF AFFECTIVE AND SOCIAL BRAIN
REGIONS ON ADOLESCENT REWARD PROCESSING Barbara R.

Braams1, Sabine Peters1, Jiska S. Peper1, Berna Gürolu1, Anna C.K. van Duijvenvoorde1, Eveline A. Crone; 1Leiden University, The Netherlands — Typically,
adolescence is associated with an increase in risk-taking behavior. This has
been linked to a heightened adolescent reward-response. Adolescence is
also associated with an increased sensitivity to social contexts. For instance,
in adolescence peer relations become more important and peers may influence risk-taking behavior. Recent neuroscientific studies show that “social
brain” regions, such as the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), and the temporal parietal junction, are particularly responsive to social information.
However, it is not clear whether neural networks related to reward processing during adolescence are also sensitive to the social context. The aim of
this fMRI study was to shed light on the interaction between reward sensitivity and social context across adolescence. In this study, 249 participants
aged 8-26, performed a gambling task in the scanner, in which they could
win or lose money. Participants played for themselves, their best friend,
and a disliked peer. Winning for self resulted in a mid- to late adolescent
specific peak in neural activation in the ventral striatum, whereas winning
for a disliked peer resulted in a mid- to late adolescent specific peak in
the mPFC. Current findings reveal that ventral striatum hypersensitivity
in adolescence is dependent on social context and that the mPFC displays
a similar sensitivity to age and social context as the limbic regions. These
results are important for a better understanding of the neural mechanisms
underlying risk-taking behavior in adolescence.

D14
OXYTOCIN AND AGING: EFFECTS ON SOCIAL DECISION-MAKING AND EMOTION PROCESSING Natalie Ebner1, Hakan Fischer2,

Ronald Cohen1; 1University of Florida, 2Stockholm University — The oxytocin
(OT) system is involved in various aspects of social cognition and prosocial behavior. Specifically, OT has been examined in the context of social
memory, emotion recognition, cooperation, and bonding, and - though
evidence is somewhat mixed - OT appears to benefit aspects of socioemotional functioning. However, most of the extant data on aging and OT
is from animal research and human OT research has focused largely on
young adults. As such, though we know that various socioemotional capacities change with age, we know little about whether age-related changes
in the OT system may underlie age-related differences in socioemotional
functioning. Based on our newly proposed Age-Related Genetic, Neurobiological, Sociobehavioral Model of Oxytocin (AGeNeS-OT model), two
independent projects examined age-related changes in the OT system and
effects of these alterations on social decision-making and emotion process-

2014 Annual Meeting	
ing, considering genetic, neural, and behavioral data in young and older
adults. Study 1 provides evidence of age-differential associations of oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR) polymorphisms with brain response during reading of facial emotions in young and older adults. Study 2 explores age differences in the effect of intranasal OT on trust-related decision-making and
face processing. The broader translational potential of this line of research
in depression, social stress, and anxiety - all of which have high relevance
in aging - will be discussed.

D15
GENDER DIFFERENCES IN EMOTION-COGNITION INTERACTIONS IN EARLY AND MIDDLE CHILDHOOD Sarah Elke1, Aamena

Kapasi2, Diya Shi1, Sandra A. Wiebe1; 1University of Alberta, 2Western University — In early childhood, emotion regulation and inhibitory control are
more closely related in girls than in boys. This finding has been attributed
to sex differences in anterior cingulate and prefrontal cortex development,
important areas for cognitive and emotional regulation. The present study
investigated the moderating effect of gender on the relationship between
emotion regulation and inhibitory control in early and middle childhood
using event related potentials (ERPs). The frontocentral N2, reflecting
response conflict, and the posteriocentral P3, reflecting attentional control
and working memory demands, were examined in a frustration-inducing
child-adapted Flanker task. A sample of 19 4-5 year olds (10 girls) and 24
7-8 year olds (11 girls) indicated the direction a central fish was swimming
on a response pad. This target fish was flanked by fish swimming in the
opposite direction (incongruent), the same direction (congruent) or by starfish (neutral). Emotion regulation was manipulated across three blocks: a
Baseline block where the task was presented normally; a Frustration block
where some trials included a 2- to 10-second temporal lag; and a Recovery
block where the task returned to normal. In the Frustration block only, girls
performed the task more slowly than boys, but with equivalent accuracy.
There were also sex differences in both ERP measures in the Frustration
block: girls had smaller N2 peaks and larger P3 peaks. This suggests that
boys and girls differ in their response to frustration, such that girls slow to
deal with their frustration, decreasing their conflict sensitivity and increasing their working memory load.

D16
AN ERP STUDY OF APPETITIVE STIMULUS PROCESSING IN
ADOLESCENTS Danielle diFilipo1,2, Alison Higgins2, Kevin Constante2, Elvira

Kirilko2, Amy Medina1,2, Jill Grose-Fifer1,2; 1The Graduate Center - CUNY, 2John
Jay College of Criminal Justice — Neurobiological changes in reward and
motivation-related circuitry increase the saliency of social and other appetitve stimuli during adolescence. In this study, we used ERP recording to
determine whether there are differences in the ways adolescents and adults
process appetitive images, especially those containing social information.
We recorded the EEG using 64 scalp electrodes in 12-17 year-olds and
25-35 year-olds while they viewed pleasant pictures from the International
Affective Picture Series. Half of the pictures featured people (social stimuli), while the other half did not (non-social stimuli). In both adolescents
and adults, early components such as the N1 and P1 showed no differences
in amplitude to social versus non-social stimuli. This implies that early,
automatic processing does not change substantially from adolescence into
adulthood, and early processing is similar for both social and non-social
information. However, the late positive potential (LPP) was more positive-going for adolescents for non-social versus social stimuli. In adults,
LPP amplitudes were greater for social than for non-social images. Interestingly, in a later memory test, both adults and adolescents recalled social
pictures more reliably than non-social pictures. Although the LPP data
imply that adolescents processed the non-social stimuli more extensively
than adults, this did not result in better encoding of the non- social material.
Our results imply that there may be age-related differences in social stimulus processing, and they support the idea that social information processing
is still developing during adolescence.

D17
AFFECTIVE STIMULI MODULATE THE ERROR RELATED NEGATIVITY IN ADOLESCENTS Rebecca K. Reed1, Kevin Constante2, Elvira

Kirilko2, Jill Grose-Fifer1,2; 1The Graduate Center, CUNY, 2John Jay College of
Criminal Justice, CUNY — Adolescents frequently make poor choices when

Poster Session D
making emotional decisions. There is growing neurobiological evidence
that suggests that this may be because subcortical areas that mediate emotional responses develop more rapidly than prefrontal cortical control
areas. In this study, we used event related potentials (ERPs) to examine
response monitoring and error detection in adolescents. We hypothesized
that immaturities in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) would result in
adolescents being less able than adults to ignore distracters in an affective
flanker task. We compared amplitude differences in the error-related negativity (ERN), which is thought to be generated in the ACC, in adults (25-35
years) and adolescents (13-17 years) in an emotional face flanker and a traditional letter flanker task. The results showed age-related differences in
the ERN; errors elicited larger ERNs in adults than in adolescents. Also, as
hypothesized, there was an age-group by stimulus interaction, such that in
adolescents, errors elicited disproportionately smaller ERNs in the affective
conditions compared to the non-affective condition. Similarly, adolescents
made more errors than adults for affective targets, but not for letter targets.
These data demonstrate that adolescents are less able to self-regulate in
cognitively “hot” situations and offer further support for current neurobiological models of adolescent brain development.

D18
THE EFFECTS OF DIVIDED ATTENTION AND AGE ON EMOTION
REGULATION John Morris1, Christina Leclerc2, Elizabeth Kensinger1; 1Boston

College, 2State University of New York at Oswego — Cognitive reappraisal
is an emotion regulation strategy demonstrated to rely on cognitive control processes implemented with prefrontal cortex (PFC). However, older
adults, a group with impaired cognitive control, have also been shown to
have success with reappraisal. It is unclear, however, how further taxing
cognitive control with a secondary task affects the neural correlates of successful reappraisal in old age. The current study investigates this by asking
participants to regulate their reactions to positive or negative images while
undergoing fMRI. Participants viewed images from the IAPS database and
were instructed to use cognitive reappraisal to increase or decrease their
emotional response to the images or to view the images without regulation.
For some participants, full attention was devoted to the regulation task.
For other participants, an auditory discrimination task was performed concurrently with regulation. In young adult participants, greater activity was
found during the regulation of negative images than during the regulation
of positive images. However, in older adults, this disparity was not present.
When attention was considered as a factor, older adults with full attention
recruited posterior regions much more so than in divided attention, while
prefrontal regions were preferentially recruited for those with divided
attention. Younger adults showed PFC recruitment regardless of attention,
but with more medial PFC and less lateral PFC during divided attention.
These results suggest neural differences in the way young and old adults
effectively regulate emotions, with valence and attention having different
effects on the neural signatures of reappraisal in the two age groups.

D19
AMYGDALA-PREFRONTAL CIRCUITRY DIFFERENTIALLY PREDICTS RECOVERY AND CONVERSION TO PSYCHOSIS AMONG
ADOLESCENTS AND YOUNG ADULTS AT CLINICAL HIGH RISK
FOR PSYCHOSIS Dylan G Gee1, Carrie Bearden1, Sarah McEwen1, Jean Add-

ington2, Kristin Cadenhead3, Barbara Cornblatt4, Thomas McGlashan5, Diana
Perkins6, Larry Seidman7, Elaine Walker8, Scott Woods5, Tyrone Cannon5;
1
UCLA, 2University of Calgary, 3UCSD, 4Zucker Hillside Hospital, 5Yale University,
6
UNC, 7Harvard University, 8Emory University — With research on psychosis
increasingly focusing on early detection and intervention, integrating biological markers derived through neuroimaging into predictive algorithms
represents a promising avenue to improve risk detection (Fusar-Poli et al.,
2013). Based on amygdala-prefrontal abnormalities in schizophrenia (Fakra
et al., 2008), the present study investigated whether alterations in amygdala-prefrontal circuitry predate the onset of psychosis and predict clinical outcomes. Participants were adolescents and young adults at clinical
high risk (CHR) for psychosis (n=216) and healthy controls (n=129) who
completed an emotional faces fMRI task at baseline and received follow-up
clinical assessments through the North American Longitudinal Prodrome
Study. Findings revealed differential activation and functional connectivity at baseline among CHR participants who recovered symptomatically
(n=38) within six months or who converted to psychosis (n=15). Compared
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

133

Poster Session D	
with the recovery, non-conversion, and healthy control groups, converters
exhibited reduced activation in the amygdala and prefrontal cortex (PFC)
during emotion processing (p<.0001, corrected). Converters showed positive amygdala-PFC connectivity, compared with the expected pattern of
negative connectivity in this regulatory circuit. In contrast, the recovery
group resembled controls and showed increased amygdala and PFC activation, as well as stronger negative amygdala-prefrontal functional connectivity, compared with the non-recovery and conversion groups (p<.0001,
corrected). Thus, the extent to which amygdala-PFC circuitry is abnormal
or typical among individuals at risk for psychosis may predict the severity
of clinical course. Taken together, these results provide novel insight into
the nature of emotion processing deficits in the development of psychosis
and may enhance early identification of risk for psychosis.

D20
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EMOTION REGULATION AND DISRUPTIVE BEHAVIOUR IN INDIVIDUALS WITH NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS Kate Woodcock1, Raj Bhatoa1, Eleanor Callaghan1;

1
Cerebra Centre for Neurodevelopmental Disorders, School of Psychology,
University of Birmingham, UK — Many neurodevelopmental disorders associated with intellectual disability - such as autism spectrum disorders and
several genetically defined disorders - are linked to elevated expression of
behaviours that include signs of heightened emotional arousal. Despite this,
there has been very little systematic study of emotion regulation in these
populations. We aimed to develop a measure of emotion regulation appropriate for use with these atypical populations; and assess the relationship
between emotion regulation and clinically elevated temper outbursts. An
assessment of emotion regulation was developed from an economic game
in which unfair treatment is linked to experience of anger. Neurofunctional;
cognitive and behavioural evidence shows that participants perform better
when they reduce (down-regulate) their own anger. We adapted the game
so that performance would index engagement in the down-regulation of
anger. 40 typical adults and 40 typical children completed the game assessment and previously validated self-report questionnaires on anger regulation. A paired case series approach was taken to examining individuals
with neurodevelopmental disorders. Individuals were selected showing
high levels of temper outbursts; and matched to individuals with the same
neurodevelopmental disorder, of comparable age, who did not show clinically elevated temper outbursts. These participants completed the emotion
regulation game and their caregivers completed structured interviews on
temper outbursts. In the typical samples, associations were demonstrated
between performance on the emotion regulation game and self-reported
anger regulation. In the atypical individuals, clinically elevated temper outbursts were linked to poorer performance on the emotion regulation game.

D21
COGNITIVE CONTROL IN EMOTION PERCEPTION Ilana Pomerantz1,

Spencer K. Lynn1, Justin B. Kopec1, Gabriella Joseph1, Lisa Feldman Barrett1,2;
1
Northeastern University, 2Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General
Hospital — Inferring the emotional state of another person is a frequent
judgment made under uncertainty (a given facial expression can mean
different things in different situations) and risk (there are costs to being
wrong). Like other uncertain, risky decisions, age and gender may influence how effective perceivers are at judging the emotions of others. We
tested 234 visitors at the Boston Museum of Science, age 5-80 years (median
20 years) to examine the effects of age and gender on perceivers’ ability
to optimize categorization of faces depicting fear (n=120) or happiness
(n=114). Participants attempted to earn as many points as they could by
categorizing faces of variable expressive intensity as emotional (i.e., fearful
or happy, depending on group), or not. Points were earned or lost on each
trial for correct or incorrect judgments, and a slight bias to categorize faces
as “not emotional” would maximize points. Overall, men and women in
their 40’s exhibited the highest perceptual sensitivity on the task. However,
for faces depicting fear, boys were significantly worse at adjusting their
response bias to accommodate their low sensitivity. This effect was associated with behavioral over-compensation specifically following missed
detections of fear, and was not apparent for boys judging smiling faces or
among other participants. Our results suggest that emotion perception is
subject to cognitive control issues - affectively salient content (here, fearful facial depictions) disproportionately interferes with boys’ ability to use
feedback and balance the risks inherent in emotion perception.

134

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
D22
NEURAL MECHANISMS FOR STRESS-MEDIATED SHIFT IN
REWARD-PUNISHMENT LEARNING Michael Treadway1, Roee Admon1,

Samuel Douglas1, Gordana Vitaliano1, David Olson1, Diego Pizzagalli1; 1McLean
Hospital and Harvard Medical School — A wealth of data suggests that
stress exposure alters how individuals process and make decisions about
rewards in their environment. In particular, recent evidence suggests that
under stressful conditions, loss-minimization may take precedence over
gain-maximization. To date, however, the neural mechanisms that mediate
this switch are unknown. In the current study, a sample of healthy adults
females completed an instrumental conditioning paradigm both before and
during a social stress manipulation (negative social evaluative feedback).
The social stressor used was a variant of the Montreal Imaging Stress Task,
a well-validated paradigm for inducing psychological stress in an MRI
scanner environment (Dedovic et al., 2005). In our initial sample, stress
exposure significantly attenuated learning about reward-predicting stimuli
while boosting learning about loss-predicting stimuli. Instrumental conditioning about wins and losses was associated with activity within mPFC
and striatum. These findings provide preliminary evidence for cortico-striatal circuitry mediating stress-induced shifts in gain vs. loss maximization.

D23
INSULTS HURT AND THEY KEEP HURTING, ESPECIALLY WHEN
THEY ARE ABOUT YOU! EVIDENCE FROM EEG AND SKIN CONDUCTANCE MEASURES Marijn Struiksma1, Hannah De Mulder1, Nicola

Spotorno2, Jana Basnakova3, Jos van Berkum1; 1Utrecht University, 2University of Pennsylvania, 3Slovak Academy of Sciences — Research on emotion
in language has mainly focused on the processing of emotion words in
isolation (Citron, 2012). Using EEG and skin conductance measures, we
investigated how compliments and insults are processed in a sentence that
either directly addressed the participant or targeted somebody else (e.g.
“[participant’s name]/Jane is ugly/beautiful”). Relative to compliments,
insults elicited a stronger P2 response (150-250ms), regardless of who was
addressed. This suggests that a generic negativity bias is already present
during early perceptual processing, possibly reflecting rapid detection of,
and focus on, the taboo nature of insulting words. In the 350-500ms latency
range the negativity bias was modulated by who was addressed. Relative to compliments, insults elicited a strong Late Positive Potential (LPP)
response, but the effect was strongest when the insults were directed at the
participant. These personal insults also elicited the strongest skin conductance response, suggesting that sympathetic activation is not only driven
by the occurrence of a negative word, but is also sensitive to the sentence
context. Interestingly, multiple repetitions of our stimuli did not modulate the early and late effects, which suggests that both the initial generic
response to insults and the following specific response to personal insults
do not readily adapt. Together, our findings indicate that even in a contrived and highly “impersonal” lab setting, insults affect participants’ physiological and neural responses and, at the neural level, they continue to do
so over repetition.

D24
HOW ANXIETY AND SENTENCE CONTEXT AFFECT THE PROCESSING OF INSULTS AND COMPLIMENTS: INSIGHTS FROM
THE EMOTIONAL STROOP PARADIGM Hannah De Mulder1, Marijn

Struiksma1, Jos van Berkum1; 1UiL OTS - Utrecht University — The emotional
Stroop effect (slower colour-naming of negative than non-negative words
in coloured font; McKenna & Sharma, 1995) is particularly pronounced in
anxious individuals (Williams et al., 1996) and suggests that the emotional
content of words interferes with the allocation of attentional resources. The
current study considers whether complimenting and insulting words are
processed differently when they are placed in a sentence context that either
directly addressed the participant (self-directed context) or targeted somebody else (i.e. “[participant’s name]/Linda is nasty/lovely”. The results
showed that colour-naming response times for insults were longer than for
compliments, thereby demonstrating that a typical emotional Stroop effect

2014 Annual Meeting	
can be obtained in the context of a sentence (regardless of participants’ anxiety level). Furthermore, there was an interaction between anxiety and perspective in that highly anxious individuals responded more slowly to the
colour naming task in the self-directed context, whereas low anxious individuals’ response times were not affected by who the sentence was directed
at. These findings thus show that insults draw attentional resources away
from goal-directed processing and that, at least for highly anxious individuals, the context in which a word is presented (self vs. other directed)
influences the extent to which attentional resources are diverted away from
the task. In risky situations (i.e., self-directed context), processing of word
meaning is thus given priority over colour naming, suggesting that the
emotional Stroop effect does not just represent an automatic response to
the negative valence of a single word, but that context-sensitive computations also come to play.

D25
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF ATTENTIONAL SWITCHING IN
APPROACH AND AVOIDANCE STATES Rebecca D. Calcott1, Elliot T.

Berkman1; 1University of Oregon — Successful goal pursuit often requires
attentional flexibility, which facilitates adaptive behavior change in
response to changing environmental demands. Our previous work added
to a mounting literature showing that approach and avoidance motivational states can influence attentional flexibility. Despite the emerging evidence of affective/motivational influences on attention shifting, the neural
correlates of attentional shifts are generally studied without consideration
of motivational state. Therefore, the goal of the present study was to examine whether the neural correlates of attentional shifts differ depending on
motivational state. Participants completed a composite letter task while
their neural activity was measured using fMRI. In this task, participants
identified a target by attending either to global or local stimulus features.
Trials were classified as either switch trials, in which participants shifted
their attention between global and local features in sequential trials, or
non-switch trials, in which participants maintained their attention at the
same level as the previous trial. Motivation was manipulated using pretested images to induce approach and avoidance states. Behaviorally, there
was no interaction between motivational state (approach vs. avoidance)
and trial type (switch vs. non-switch); however the fMRI analysis showed
a significant interaction between motivation and trial type in bilateral mid/
posterior insula and inferior parietal cortex. These regions showed greater
activity during approach switch trials and avoidance non-switch trials, but
reduced activity during approach non-switch trials and avoidance switch
trials. This interesting pattern of brain activity may suggest that attentional
flexibility can be achieved via different mechanisms, which depend on
one’s current motivational state.

D26
THE INFLUENCE OF EXECUTIVE ATTENTION IN THE DOT-PROBE
TASK Jaiya R. Choles1, Russell E. Costa1, Chrono S. Nu1, Benjamin P. Cohen1,

Lesa K. Ellis1; 1Westminster College — There is strong evidence to suggest
that attentional biases to negative or threatening information occur in both
clinically anxious and high anxiety populations. The Dot-Probe task is often
used to measure such biases behaviorally, typically resulting in faster reaction times (RTs) on trials in which the probe appears spatially congruent
with negative stimulus presentation. Interestingly, studies indicate that
increased negative affectivity results in part due to an inability to redirect
attention away from thoughts, feelings, and stimuli (an executive attention
ability). In addition, measures of Effortful Control (a self-reported measure
of executive attention) have been found to correlate negatively with Negative Affect. To better understand the connection between affect and executive attention, we administered the Adult Temperament Questionnaire
(ATQ), in addition to a modified version of the pictorial Dot-Probe task
to 30 undergraduate students. In line with other studies, RT data suggest
self-reported Negative Affect modulates the congruency effect typically
found in the Dot-Probe task. However, when also including Effortful Control in the analysis, results suggest that individual differences in executive
attention predict congruency-based interference effects found in the DotProbe task to a greater degree than does Negative Affect. Our findings further demonstrate the importance of attention and executive control in the
bias of emotional processing in the Dot-Probe task.

Poster Session D

D27
AUTOMATIC SIMULATION IN PSYCHOSIS-RISK POPULATION

Sarah Hope Lincoln1, Caitlin Carey2, Natalie Kleeman3, Erin Guty4, Christine I.
Hooker1; 1Harvard University, 2Washington University, 3Brown University, 4Princeton University — Simulation, the internal representation of the emotions
or actions of another person, is a social cognitive process that facilitates
empathy, which in turn assists in effective social interactions. Previous
research suggests that the process of simulation recruits somatosensory
and social-emotional regions such as the superior temporal gyrus, temporal pole, medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), amygdala, and insula. Impairment in the process of simulation could affect social cognition and social
functioning, and may explain deficits in these processes in individuals at a
clinical high risk (CHR) for psychosis. In this study we investigated simulation-related neural activity in CHR young adults relative to a control group
(HC). Participants viewed social interaction words with either a positive
(e.g. kiss) or negative (e.g. bite) valence; these conditions were compared
to control conditions including nonsocial somatic words (e.g. hungry) and
nonsocial, non-somatic words (e.g. wagon). We hypothesized that CHR
individuals would show less activation in sensation regions such as the
somatosensory cortex and insula and regions associated with social-emotional processing. Additionally, we hypothesized that less neural activity
when viewing social interaction words would be related to self-report and
interview measures of social functioning. Our results indicate that relative to HC, CHR individuals show less simulation-related neural activity
in the insula and temporal pole when viewing social interaction words.
Additionally, self-reported social dysfunction is negatively correlated with
simulation-related activity in the insula. These findings suggest that CHR
individuals have impairments in the process of simulation and that these
impairments are related to social dysfunction.

D28
NEURAL ACTIVITY TO A ROMANTIC PARTNER’S BELIEFS PREDICTS THEIR PARTNER’S POSITIVE MOOD AND WELL BEING
AFTER EMPATHIC INTERACTIONS David Dodell-Feder1, Matthew Yung1,

Steven Felix1, Christine I. Hooker1; 1Harvard University — Greater engagement
in theory-of-mind (ToM) - the ability to think about other minds - during
a social interaction may lead to greater empathic accuracy, and better
understanding of the other person’s needs. Furthermore, for the recipient, the feeling of being understood may have positive effects on mood
and well-being. Engagement in ToM recruits a network of brain regions
including temporo-parietal junction. To the extent that ToM is an effective
strategy for understanding others during empathic interactions, activity
in the ToM network should predict greater feelings of being understood
by the recipient, as well as increases in the recipient’s positive mood and
well-being. Here, we investigated these proposed relationships with adults
in romantic relationships. Participants were scanned using fMRI while
making judgments about their partner’s beliefs and physical attributes.
Neural activity in regions associated with the ToM network when judging
the partner’s beliefs versus physical attributes was used as a metric of ToM
engagement. After scanning, participants completed a 21-day online daily-questionnaire that asked participants to report on how empathic their
partner was during an interaction. Participants also reported on their own
mood and well-being. As expected, participants had more activity in ToM
regions when making judgments on their partner’s beliefs versus physical attributes. The extent of ToM-related activity predicted the relationship
between their partner’s reports of feeling understood after a “meaningful
discussion” and their level of positive mood and well-being the next day.
Together, the findings highlight the functional significance of using ToM
during empathic interactions with one’s romantic partner.

D29
REWARD ON BOTH SIDES OF THE MIRROR: TESTING THE
REWARDING EFFECTS OF MIMICKING AND BEING MIMICKED
USING EYE-GAZE TRACKING Janina Neufeld1, Virginia Levrini2, Annabel
Barry1, Bhismadev Chakrabarti1; 1Centre for Integrative Neuroscience and
Neurodynamics, School of Psychology and Clinical Language Sciences, University of Reading, Reading, United Kingdom, 2Faculty of Biology, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom — Social psychological studies have
shown that people like those who mimic them, suggesting that mimicry
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

135

Poster Session D	
may alter the reward value of social targets. To directly test the reward
value of mimicry, we investigated the impact of mimicking and being mimicked on preferential looking, using 2 conditioned-learning experiments.
In study 1 conditioning phase, 30 adults made happy, sad, or neutral
expressions: crucially, <1s after they started making the expression, they
saw a video of a person making the same expression (Mimicking face) or
another person making a different expression (AntiMimicking face). In the
test phase, “Mimicking face” and “AntiMimicking face” were presented
side-by-side on a gaze-tracking monitor, and participants showed longer
gaze duration for Mimicking faces than AntiMimicking faces (controlling
for baseline difference in gaze duration between faces) (t=2.99, p=.005).
In study 2 conditioning phase, a separate sample of 37 adults mimicked
expressions of certain faces (Mimicked faces) and performed the opposite
expression when seeing other faces (NoMimicked faces). In the test phase,
Mimicked face and NoMimicked face were presented side-by-side, and
people looked longer at Mimicked faces than NoMimicked faces (t=2.18,
p=.018). This effect is unlikely to be driven by greater response conflict
associated with certain faces, as no effect of spatial congruency on gaze
duration was detected in a separate experiment. These findings provide
direct evidence that both mimicking and being mimicked alter the reward
value of social targets and provides avenues for research into conditions
such as autism, marked by deficits in social reward perception and spontaneous mimicry.

D30
THE INFLUENCE OF MOTIVATION ON EPISODIC MEMORY
ENCODING Maiya R. Geddes1, Colleen Meehl1, Margaret R. Walker1, John

D.E. Gabrieli1; 1McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology — We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
to investigate the effect of motivation from monetary rewards and punishments on episodic memory encoding. Converging evidence suggests that
motivation to avoid punishments and obtain rewards enhances learning
and that reward processing relies on a network of dopaminergic regions
including ventral tegmental area (VTA), and ventral striatum (VS). Previous studies show an interaction between these and memory-related regions
including hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus in response to monetary incentive rewards, however, the influence of monetary punishment
on episodic memory is relatively poorly understood. In the present study,
22 healthy adults studied words under three conditions (reward +$2 ,
punishment -$2 , and neutral $0 ) in an event-related fMRI design and
were financially compensated depending on memory performance the
following day. Recognition accuracy was significantly greater for words
studied under reward and punishment compared to neutral conditions. A
monetary incentive delay task independently localized regions activated
during reward and loss anticipation, including VTA and VS. Reward and
memory-related brain regions showed greater activation during encoding
of high confidence remembered versus forgotten stimuli in the punishment
and reward versus neutral conditions. In addition, there was a high degree
of overlap in the network of brain regions activated when participants were
motivated to obtain rewards and avoid punishments. This study shows
that monetary punishments and rewards enhance memory, and this may
be due to an interaction of overlapping reward/punishment-related and
memory-related brain regions. This work characterizes interacting networks in motivated learning.

D31
HIGHER STATE ANXIETY AND NEGATIVE AFFECT ARE ASSOCIATED WITH LESS COGNITIVE CONTROL DURING DISENGAGEMENT FROM NOVEL NEUTRAL FACES Seungyeon Annie Yoon1,2,

Amberle Cusmano2, Mariann R. Weierich1,2; 1The Graduate Center of the City
University of New York, 2Hunter College of the City University of New York —
Anxiety and negative affect are associated with less recruitment of cognitive control during disengagement from negatively valenced stimuli (e.g.,
Bishop et al., 2004; Ellenbogen et al., 2002). Novelty also independently activates affective brain regions (e.g., Weierich et al., 2010), and the amygdala
response to novelty is heightened in anxiety (e.g., Schwartz et al., 2003). We
investigated the relation between state anxiety and more general negative
affect and cognitive control during disengagement from novel information.
We hypothesized that higher state anxiety and negative affect would be
associated with less activation in cognitive control regions (rostral anterior

136

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
cingulate cortex, rACC; rostral middle frontal gyrus, rMFG) during disengagement from novel faces. During an fMRI scan, 19 participants identified a simple target that appeared to the left or right of a novel or familiar
emotional (angry, happy, or neutral) face. For novel versus familiar neutral
faces only, higher state anxiety and negative affect were associated with
decreased activation in the rostral anterior cingulate (state anxiety: left
rACC, r=-.49, p=.045; right rACC, r=-.54, p=.025; general negative affect:
left rACC, r=-.47, p=.045; right rACC, r=-.58, p=.009). In addition, negative
affect was associated with decreased activation in the left rostral middle
frontal gyrus (r=-.61, p=0.01). Results suggest that higher state anxiety and
negative affect are associated with reduced top-down control during disengagement from uncertain (i.e., non-obviously affective, or neutral) novel
information. In addition, although state anxiety and negative affect overlap considerably, the data suggest an additional effect of negative affect,
beyond state anxiety, on cognitive control.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Person perception
D32
VERBAL VERSUS VISUAL PRESENTATION OF INTENT INFORMATION DIFFERENTIALLY RECRUITS THE RIGHT TEMPORO-PARIETAL JUNCTION Lily Tsoi1, Liane Young1; 1Boston College — Prior

research shows that the right temporo-parietal junction (rTPJ) plays a key
role in mental state reasoning. However, this work has mostly relied on
(1) verbal narratives to present intent information and (2) stimuli featuring social (and moral) interactions. Using functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), we investigated the neural correlates for processing verbal
versus visual intent information in non-social contexts. Fifteen participants
were scanned while (1) reading descriptions of intentional and accidental
non-social actions (e.g., opening an umbrella intentionally/accidentally)
and (2) viewing video clips of actors performing the same intentional and
accidental actions. Our results indicate a significant interaction pattern in
rTPJ: the magnitude of response was similar for intentional and accidental
acts presented in video format, but the magnitude of neural response was
greater for intentional than accidental acts presented verbally. Using multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA), we also investigated whether intent information in non-social scenarios, across presentation formats, is encoded in
the rTPJ. We found that rTPJ does not discriminate between intentional and
accidental acts in its spatial pattern of activity. In sum, analyses of response
magnitude suggest that rTPJ is recruited differentially for intentional
versus accidental acts in non-social contexts depending on presentation
format (i.e., visual versus verbal). MVPA results suggest that the difference
between intentional and accidental acts, at least in non-social contexts, is
not encoded in the spatial pattern of activity in rTPJ.

D33
REAL-TIME SOCIAL INTERACTION MODULATES ACTIVITY IN THE
MENTALIZING NETWORK DURING A NOVEL SOCIAL PREDICTION TASK Katherine Rice1, Kayla Velnoskey1, Elizabeth Redcay1; 1University

of Maryland — Studying the social brain in detached and offline contexts
(e.g., listening to prerecorded stories about characters) may not capture
real-world social processes; recent evidence suggests that contingent, social
interaction differentially engages social brain regions (e.g., Redcay et al.,
2010). Studies on the neural correlates of mentalizing - or thinking about
others’ mental states - have predominately been conducted in offline contexts, despite behavioral differences between online and offline mentalizing. In the current study, 19 adults completed a novel fMRI mentalizing
task in which, for the “Live” condition, participants believed they were
making predictions about a social partner communicating via a live audio
feed, and, for the “Not-live” condition, participants made predictions about
characters in a recorded story. Two separate events were analyzed: 1) Story,
which was an audio segment matched across conditions for speech characteristics and linguistic content (e.g., “there are apples and candy”), and
2) Social Prediction, where participants heard a preference (e.g., “I/Mary
want(s) to be healthy”) and made a choice. Regions of the mentalizing
network (bilateral TPJ, dMPFC, precuneus) were significantly more active
during Social Prediction for a live partner versus a third-party character,
despite equivalent accuracy across conditions. For the Story (i.e., matched
linguistic content), dMPFC activity was higher when participants were listening to the live partner. These findings provide preliminary evidence that

2014 Annual Meeting	
real-time social interactions alter neural processing, and that the extent of
this effect depends upon the interactive context. Further, this novel paradigm has implications for autism, where deficits are most pronounced in
real-world social interaction.

D34
INCREASED FEELINGS OF DOCTOR-PATIENT SIMILARITY PREDICT REDUCED PAIN RATING DURING SIMULATED CLINICAL
INTERACTIONS Elizabeth Reynolds Losin1, Luke J. Chang1, Tor D. Wager1;

1
University of Colorado, Boulder — Individuals from ethnic minorities are
most often treated by doctors of an ethnicity different from their own. This
ethnic discordance has been linked to lower patient satisfaction and is
thought to be mediated in part by reduced feelings of personal belief similarity between ethnically discordant patients and doctors. Here we tested
whether feelings of similarity between doctors and patients (independent
of ethnicity) influenced pain perception during medical care. A mixed-ethnicity group of 80 participants (4 per session) was divided into two groups
based on the similarity of their self-reported political, religious, and gender
beliefs, and randomly assigned to the role of doctor or patient. Each participant took part in two simulated clinical interactions--one with an ingroup
member and one with an outgroup member--in which patients rated pain
from noxious thermal stimulation delivered by the doctor. We found that
patients reported feeling more similar to ingroup doctors than outgroup
doctors, and that the more similar to their doctors the patients felt, the
less pain they reported. These findings suggest that interventions aimed
at increasing patients’ feelings of similarity to their doctors may decrease
patient pain during medical care regardless of ethnic concordance. Such
interventions may help mitigate the negative impact of the high prevalence
of ethnically discordant doctors on minority populations.

D35
EXPECTATIONS AND PREDICTIONS FOR UNDERSTANDING
OBJECT-RELATED ACTION Sasha Ondobaka1, Floris P. de Lange1, Marco

Wittmann1, Chris D. Frith2,3, Harold Bekkering1; 1Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud Univesity Nijmegen, 2Welcome Trust Centre
for Neuroimaging, University College London, 3Interacting Minds Centre, Aarhus
University, Denmark — Recent accounts of understanding goal-directed
action underline the importance of a hierarchical predictive architecture.
However, the neural implementation of such an architecture remains elusive. In the present study, we used functional neuroimaging to quantify
brain activity associated with predicting physical movements, as they were
modulated by conceptual expectations regarding the purpose of the object
involved in the action. Participants observed object-related actions preceded by a cue that generated both conceptual goal expectations and movement goal predictions. In two tasks, observers judged whether conceptual
or movement goals matched or mismatched the cue. At the conceptual
level, expected goals specifically recruited the posterior cingulate cortex,
irrespective of the task and the perceived movement goal. At the movement
level, neural activation of the parieto-frontal circuit, including inferior frontal gyrus and the inferior parietal lobe, reflected unpredicted movement
goals. Crucially, this neural reflection of a movement prediction error was
dependent upon the confirmation of the conceptual expectation about the
purpose of the object. These findings provide neural evidence that prior
conceptual expectations influence processing of physical movement goals
and thereby support the hierarchical predictive account of action observation.

D36
TRACKING NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF FAIRNESS BASED
ON IMPARTIALITY, RECIPROCITY AND NEED Laura Niemi1, Liane

Young1; 1Boston College — Fairness represents a fundamental moral virtue,
and yet fairness might take distinct forms even within the same context.
For example, fair behavior might involve distributing resources to recipients based on reciprocity (i.e., returning favors to specific individuals),
need (i.e., giving to individuals who would benefit the most), or impartiality (i.e., using a rule-based procedure independent of the relationship
between giver and recipient). We examined moral judgments and neural
representations of fairness in its different forms, compared to a control condition in which the specific motivation for resource distribution was left
unspecified. We focused on brain regions for social cognition and theory

Poster Session D
of mind (ToM). We found that dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex
(DMPFC, VMPFC) and precuneus (PC) were recruited robustly for reciprocity and need, compared to impartiality and control. The more personal
nature of the interaction or relationship between giver and recipient in
these two cases of fairness may rely more on ToM. Interestingly, however,
participants judged reciprocity-based fairness as significantly less morally
praiseworthy than need-based fairness; impartiality was seen as intermediate. Consistent with this behavioral discrimination, multi-voxel pattern
analysis (MVPA) revealed spatially distinct patterns of activity within the
DMPFC for reciprocity versus need. These findings suggest that “fairness”
is not associated with a unified behavioral or neural pattern and may best
be understood as taking fundamentally different forms.

D37
THE NEURAL RESOLUTION OF STEREOTYPES TO PERCEIVE
OTHERS ACCURATELY. Eric Hehman1, Jonathan Freeman1; 1Dartmouth
College — Perceivers extract multiple social dimensions from another’s face
(e.g., race, emotion), and these dimensions can become linked due to stereotype knowledge (e.g., Black individuals → angry). Sometimes, however,
these multiple dimensions can conflict (e.g., happy Blacks) and stereotypic
associations must be resolved to perceive such targets accurately. Using
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), the current research examined how the brain resolves these conflicts between facial cues and stereotype knowledge in person perception. Participants (n=23) passively viewed
faces varying in race (e.g., Black, White) and emotion (e.g., angry, happy)
while neural activity was measured using fMRI. Following scanning, participants categorized these same targets by race and emotional expression
while hand movements en route to responses were recorded using realtime hand-tracking. Across all participants, results revealed that the medial
prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex exhibited linearly increasing
responses as race and emotion became stereotypically more incongruent.
Most importantly, participants who had a stronger behavioral tendency
to link race and emotion stereotypically during categorization, as indexed
by subtle hand-movements, demonstrated greater dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (dlPFC) activation to targets incongruent with stereotypes (all p’s
<.05 corrected). Because the dlPFC has been linked with the suppression of
prepotent responses, these results suggest that individuals with stronger
stereotypical links between race and emotion might need to inhibit these
associations to perceive others accurately. This research is the first to link
fMRI with real-time measurement of behavioral tendencies to stereotype,
and helps reveal how conflicting stereotypes at the nexus of multiple social
dimensions are resolved neurally.

D38
HOW AGENTS AND OBJECTS VIOLATE OUR EXPECTATIONS James

Dungan1, Michael Stepanovic1, Liane Young1; 1Boston College — When forming expectations about objects and agents, we may appeal to our knowledge of their past behavior, or additionally for agents, their mental states
(e.g., intentions). We used fMRI to examine the cognitive processes that
support how people form expectations and respond to violations of expectations across these contexts. Twenty participants read stories containing
background information about 1) an object’s behavior, 2) an agent’s behavior, and 3) an agent’s beliefs. After participants made a prediction about a
story’s outcome, an actual outcome was revealed; critically, this outcome
was either expected or unexpected based on the story’s initial background
information. When forming predictions about agents versus objects,
region of interest (ROI) analyses revealed greater activation in mentalizing
regions: bilateral temporo-parietal junction (TPJ), precuneus (PC), and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC). These ROIs also showed increased
activity for unexpected versus expected outcomes, driven by the social
conditions. Furthermore, outcomes that were unexpected versus expected
based on an agent’s past behavior elicited especially robust activity in the
right TPJ, indicating spontaneous mentalizing. Finally, the magnitude of
response in the right TPJ to unexpected versus expected outcomes based on
an agent’s past behavior is correlated with autism-related traits: the greater
the number of autism-related traits individuals report having, the less
activity their right TPJ exhibits in response to unexpected versus expected
outcomes. These findings reveal key differences in how we process violations of expectation across contexts, providing insight into our ability to
navigate and learn about our social world.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

137

Poster Session D	

D39
NEURAL ORGANIZATION OF MENTAL STATE KNOWLEDGE Mark A.

Thornton1, Diana I. Tamir1, Juan Manuel Contreras2, Jason P. Mitchell1; 1Harvard University, 2The Walt Disney Company — The ability to understand the
mental states of other individuals is a key feature of human social cognition. Psychological researchers have posited many dimensions along
which mental states might vary including arousal, valence, agency and
experience, emotion and reason, mental versus bodily, shared (with animals) versus unique (to humans), social versus nonsocial, and warmth and
competence. Although these models each offer considerable explanatory
power in certain domains, they often make different predictions about
which mental states ought to be similar to one another. It is also not clear
whether people use lay versions of all these theories to guide their thinking, even implicitly. The present study used multivoxel pattern analysis of
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data to assess both whether
and where these different ways of organizing mental states are encoded
in the brain. During fMRI scanning, participants viewed pairs of scenarios
and judged which would better evoke a specific mental state in another
person. A searchlight analysis was used to generate neural similarity
matrices between mental states for each voxel in the brain. These similarity
matrices were then compared to matrices based on theoretical models with
the dimensions described above. Although several distinct regions carried
information related to individual models, the model based on agency and
experience provided the best explanation for neural similarity across much
of the social brain network. This suggests that understanding the degree of
agency and depth of experience implicit in the mental states of others may
serve particularly useful purposes in social cognition.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development
& aging
D40
DYNAMIC ADJUSTMENTS OF COGNITIVE CONTROL IN WORKING MEMORY DURING HEALTHY AGING Alexandra Morrison1, Suzanne

Parker, Amishi Jha; 1University of Miami — Prior research shows that during
completion of a working memory task, younger adults perform better
following high-demand trials than low-demand trials. This suggests that
younger adults can dynamically adjust cognitive control according to the
cognitive demand of a trial. Here, we ask whether the pattern of enhanced
performance following high-demand trials is observed in not only younger
adults (mean age = 18.5 years old), but also middle (mean age = 50.17 =
years old) and older adults (mean age = 60.8 years old). Healthy aging
is generally accompanied by diminished performance at high working
memory loads and high levels of interference, and accordingly, we hypothesized that younger and older individuals would differ in performance
immediately following high-load or high-interference trials. Participants
completed a delayed-recognition task in which mnemonic load (one or two
items) and interference level (confusable or not confusable with memoranda) were manipulated. Younger adults outperformed middle and older
adults while the older two age groups performed equivalently. In all three
age groups, current trial performance decreased as the demand characteristics of a trial increased. When current trial performance was assessed as a
function of previous trial load and interference level, all participants were
more accurate following high- vs. low-load trials. Yet, only younger adults
were more accurate following high- vs. low-interference trials. These results
suggest that dynamic adjustments according to load persist into middle
and older adulthood, but adjustments according to interference demands
may be more fragile and compromised during healthy aging.

D41
MODULATION OF LARGE-SCALE BRAIN NETWORKS IN OLDER
ADULTS AFTER EXECUTIVE CONTROL TRAINING Areeba Adnan1,

Gary R Turner1,2, Anthony J.W. Chen3,4,5,6, Tatjana Novakovic-Agopian3,4,6,7,
Mark D’Esposito4,6; 1York University, 2Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre,
3
Veteran’s Administration Medical Centre, 4Veteran’s Administration Northern
California Health Care System, 5University of California, San Francisco, 6University of California, Berkeley, 7California Pacific Medical Centre — Introduction:
Emerging research suggests that cognitive training in older adulthood may

138

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
alter the trajectory of neurocognitive decline. fMRI has been used to elucidate the neural basis of age-related neurocognitive change. These neural
markers can, in turn, serve to guide intervention design and evaluate training outcomes. Here we investigate changes in large-scale brain networks
known to subserve executive control following a targeted executive control training intervention in healthy older adults. Methods: Healthy older
adults were randomized to an executive control training program (N=16)
or a control condition (N=18). The Goal-based Self-Management (GOALS)
training protocol (Novakovic-Agopian et al., 2011) involves training in
attention regulation and distraction suppression strategies. Participants
completed a visual selective working memory task while undergoing
fMRI scanning pre- and post-training. Multivariate neuroimaging analyses
were conducted using Partial Least Squares. Results: Activation in brain
regions closely overlapping with the frontal-parietal control network was
significantly enhanced in the GOALS versus the control group (p<0.001).
These network changes also included enhanced activity in the parahippocampal place area during selective working memory for scenes. These
brain changes co-occurred with behavioural improvements on the visual
attention task in the GOALS group. Conclusions: These results suggest
that executive control training is associated with enhanced goal-directed
modulation of visual association cortices in healthy aging. The brain and
behavioural changes observed here suggest that executive control is malleable into older adulthood and improvements are associated with changes
in functional connectivity within large-scale brain networks.

D42
THE PERSISTENT INFLUENCE OF PEDIATRIC CONCUSSION ON
ATTENTION AND COGNITIVE CONTROL DURING FLANKER PERFORMANCE Robert D Moore1, Lauren B Rain1, Eric S Drollette1, Mark R

Scudder1, Dominika M Pindus2, Charles H Hillman1; 1University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, 2Loughborough University — While increased efforts
have been dedicated towards understanding neurocognitive outcomes of
concussive injuries in adults, fewer efforts have been dedicated towards
understanding outcomes in developing populations. The aim of this study
was to investigate the influence of concussion history on children’s neurocognitive performance. Twenty-eight children age eight to ten (14 controls,
14 with a history of concussion) were matched based on the demographic
factors of age, sex, SES, IQ, pubertal timing, ADHD symptoms and cardiorespiratory fitness. Children completed compatible and incompatible conditions of a flanker task, while neuroelectric and behavioral data were collected. Relative to controls, formerly concussed children exhibited several
behavioral and neuroelectric differences. Specifically, formerly concussed
children responded less accurately, committed more commission errors
and longer error runs, with the greatest group differences occurring for
the incompatible condition. Formerly concussed children also evidenced
increased response variability, with the greatest group difference occurring
for congruent trials irrespective of task condition. Across conditions, formerly concussed children also exhibited longer N2 latency, and trended
towards greater N2 amplitudes. Further, a selective group difference for
N2 amplitude was observed for congruent trials, irrespective of task condition. Formerly concussed children also exhibited decreased P3 amplitude
and trended towards decreased ERN amplitude across conditions, but a
selective group difference for ERN amplitude was observed for the incompatible condition. These results suggest that pediatric concussion may negatively influence the development of attention and cognitive control. These
results will serve to inform a growing public health concern in a poorly
understood population.

D43
ABNORMALITIES IN THE WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY OF AN
EYE-MOVEMENT NETWORK HEALTHY, OLDER ADULTS Dana Wag-

shal1, Judy Pa1, Hilary Heuer1, Iryna Lobach1, Adam Boxer1; 1University of California, San Francisco — Brain aging is accompanied by changes in cognitive functioning and may be a risk factor for neurodegenerative disease. A
better understanding of the mechanisms of age-related cognitive impairment would help to determine which individuals would most benefit from
early therapeutic interventions to prevent dementia and how normal aging
contributes to cognitive decline. The most common age-related changes in
cognition occur in executive function, which has been associated with elevated risk for decline in cognitive and functional performance associated

2014 Annual Meeting	
with the onset of dementia (Blacker et al., 2007; Fine et al., 2008; Royall et
al., 2004; Kramer et al., 2007). A useful tool in measuring executive function
is the antisaccade (AS) task. The AS task is strongly correlated with impairments in executive function (Nieman et al., 2000; Hutton et al., 2004; Boxer
et al., 2006) that occur with normal brain aging (Mirsky et al., 2011; Hellmuth et al., 2012). We investigated the white matter integrity of the cortical
oculomotor network involved in AS task performance by using diffusion
tensor imaging (DTI), which is a method that allows for the measurement
of white matter fiber tracts in vivo based on the diffusivity of water in the
white matter of the brain. Tractography in key regions in the AS eye-movement network were revealed to be important in predicting AS performance
in older adults. These findings suggest that differences in executive control in healthy elders emerge from altered white matter integrity within a
fronto-parietal brain network and could be regions vulnerable for future
decline.

D44
GAIN AND LOSS FEEDBACK PROCESSING IN YOUNGER AND
OLDER ADULTS: A PARTIAL LEAST SQUARES ANALYSIS Holly

Bowen1, Julia Spaniol1, Cheryl Grady2,3; 1Ryerson University, 2Rotman Research
Institute at Baycrest, 3University of Toronto — Aging is associated with
declines in dopaminergic processing and reward-based learning (Li et al.,
2010). However, few studies have examined age differences in reactivity
to gain and loss feedback in the absence of S-R learning demands. The
current study investigated gain and loss feedback processing in younger
and older adults in the context of the Monetary Incentive Delay task (MID;
Knutson et al., 2001; Samanez-Larkin et al., 2007). Sixteen younger adults
(mean age = 25.4 yrs.; 9 female) and 15 older adults (mean age = 69.0 yrs.;
9 female) underwent fMRI while completing a variant of the MID task that
yielded four types of feedback: gain, missed gain, loss, and missed loss.
We assessed feedback related activations using mean-centered Partial Least
Squares (PLS; McIntosh et al., 2004), a multivariate technique optimal for
identifying spatio-temporal whole-brain patterns. The analyses yielded
a significant latent variable (LV) showing a pattern that was more pronounced in older adults than in younger adults, and that included the striatum, insula, amygdala, anterior cingulate, and visual cortex. These regions
were deactivated following missed-gain feedback, and activated following
all other types of feedback. In older adults, the activation was particularly
pronounced following loss feedback. Overall, these findings converge with
previous reports of intact gain and loss feedback processing in learning-free
tasks in older adults (Cox et al., 2008; Samanez-Larkin et al., 2007). Contrary
to the predictions of socioemotional selectivity theory, there is no evidence
of an age-related decrease in loss sensitivity.

D45
SULCAL PATTERN OF THE ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX PREDICTS COGNITIVE CONTROL DURING CHILDHOOD: A LONGITUDINAL STUDY. Gregoire Borst1,2,3, Arnaud Cachia1,2,3, Julie Vidal1,2,3, Gregory

Simon1,2,3, Clara Fisher4, Arlette Pineau1,2,3, Nicolas Poirel1,2,3,5, Jean-François
Mangin4, Olivier Houdé1,2,3,5; 1CNRS U3521, Laboratory for the Psychology of
Child Development and Education, Sorbonne, Paris, France, 2University Paris
Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 3University Caen Basse Normandie, Caen, France, 4Computer-Assisted Neuroimaging Laboratory, Neurospin, I2BM, CEA, France, 5Institut Universitaire de France, France — Difficulties
in the ability to control impulses and to inhibit a prepotent response (cognitive control) are related to the pathophysiology of several psychiatric conditions. In healthy subjects, the cognitive control (CC) efficiency in childhood
is a strong predictor of academic and professional successes later in life. The
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is one of the core structures of the
brain functional network responsible for CC. Although quantitative structural brain characteristics of the dorsal ACC contribute to CC efficiency, the
qualitative structural brain characteristics contributing to the CC development are less-understood. Using anatomical magnetic resonance imaging,
we investigated whether the sulcal pattern of the ACC, a stable qualitative
characteristic of the brain determined in utero, predicts the development of
CC. In this study, the same children performed Stroop tasks at age 5 and 9.
We found that the ACC sulcal pattern predicted CC efficiency both at age 5
and 9: ACC sulcal pattern at age 5 explained 27% of the Stroop interference
score variability at age 5 and 25% at age 9. The ACC sulcal patterns appear
to affect specifically the development of CC efficiency given that the ACC

Poster Session D
sulcal patterns had no effect on the development of the ability to maintain
and manipulate information in verbal working memory. Thus we evidence
that the sulcal pattern of the ACC - a qualitative structural characteristic of
the brain determined in utero that is not affected by maturation and learning after birth - predicts the development of the CC efficiency.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Goal
maintenance & switching
D46
ON YOUR MARK, GET SET& : NEURAL CORRELATES OF CUE-RELATED RESPONSE PREPARATION Savannah Cookson1, Heather Rob-

erts1, Greg Szalkowski1, Stephanie Spratt1, Erin McPherson1, Richard Hazeltine2, Eric Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2University of Iowa
— Humans use cues to partially program motor movements prior to the
presentation of critical stimuli (e.g., Rosenbaum, 1980; Miller, 1982). These
cues take advantage of Gestalt-like grouping principles that result in compatible stimulus-response overlap (Adam et al, 2003). The present research
investigates how informative cues affect brain processing. Specifically, to
what extent is activity modulated for stimulus and response cues versus
neutral cues in control- and processing-related regions? Participants made
manual responses to the identity of face or place stimuli in a variation of
the response cuing paradigm while fMRI BOLD signal was recorded. Prior
to the stimulus, a letter cue indicating the upcoming stimulus type (face
or place) or response hand (left or right) or a neutral cue was presented.
Stimulus-response mappings segregated stimulus types by response hand
(i.e., faces were associated with responses from one hand, and places with
responses from the other), which resulted in a complete overlap of stimulus type and response hand. We proposed three hypotheses: 1) control-related activity (e.g., prefrontal, parietal) would increase for cued vs. uncued
trials; 2) activity in face and place processing regions and left and right
premotor regions would activate for their respective cues, although all cues
were letters; and 3) stimulus processing regions would also be activated by
response cues, and vice versa. The results largely confirm these hypotheses. These findings suggest that, when presented with a cue, participants
activate a task set consisting of groupings of stimuli and their associated
responses, which then guides control of downstream processing.

D47
TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION AND ACQUISITION OF A COMPLEX TASK; EFFECT OF STIMULATION TIMING
DURING TRAINING. Melissa Scheldrup1, Jessica Vance1, Sarah Glazier1,

Yasmin Darmani1, Brian Falcone1, Ryan McKendrick1, R. Andy McKinley2, Raja
Parasuraman1, Pamela Greenwood1; 1George Mason University, 2Air Force
Research Laboratory — Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)
facilitates learning and retention of cognitive and motor tasks (Jacobson,
Koslowsky, Lavidor, 2012). We previously found that components of a
complex training task, the Space Fortress task (SF, Mane & Donchin, 1989),
shows significant learning in only 1 hour if tDCS is applied during training. However, benefits vary with site of stimulation, with the strongest
benefits resulting from stimulation to regions of the right hemisphere that
are part of ventral and dorsal attention networks (Scheldrup et al., 2013
submitted). As a follow-up study to examine effects of tDCS during later
stages of acquisition, we are currently examining the effects of tDCS to right
inferior frontal (F3 in 10-20 system) during a 3-day training period with a
follow-up retention assessed 1 week after training. During the three consecutive days of SF training, participants received stimulation either “Early”
(active on Day 1, sham on Days 2, 3), “Late” (sham on Days 1, 2, active
on Day 3), “Both” (active on Days 1,3, sham on Day 2) or “Sham” (sham
on Days 1,2, 3). Participants returned one week after training to test for
performance retention. Data will be presented regarding group differences
in performance measures (ANOVAs) as well as rate of learning (Growth
Curve Analysis). This is the first long-term study of the facilitatory effects
of tDCS on a complex task.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

139

Poster Session D	

D48
EEG EVIDENCE OF SEQUENTIAL DYNAMICS DURING HIERARCHICAL COGNITIVE CONTROL Patricia Shih1, Erika Nyhus1,2, Sean Mas-

ters1, Lucy Huijun Duan1, David Badre1; 1Brown University, 2Bowdoin College —
Many rules that we use to guide our everyday actions have an underlying
hierarchical structure. In these cases, multiple latent decisions will intervene between stimulus and response. While functional MRI has provided
evidence of hierarchical organization for rule processing in the prefrontal
cortex, much less is known about the temporal dynamics of these complex
rules. Specifically, it remains uncertain whether the processing of hierarchical rules occurs in series, with decisions at each level of a given rule
performed sequentially, or whether these rules are processed in parallel
such that the decisions at each level are reached at roughly the same time.
To investigate this question, we recorded neural activity using a 64-channel
EEG system while participants performed a task containing nested rules
with parametrically varied levels of control demand. Event-related potential and time-frequency analysis provided initial evidence of serial processing. However, the latent state transitions were difficult to assess using these
standard approaches. Thus, we examined the spatiotemporal patterns of
EEG activity during rule execution using hidden Markov modeling with
Gaussian mixtures. The results indicate that the execution of hierarchical
rules appears to unfold serially and involves abrupt sequential transitions
to lower order decision states. Further, it was found that the number of
brain states for a given hierarchical rule scales with the number of levels in
the complex rule. Thus, we currently conclude that the processing of hierarchical rules may be associated with a cascade of latent transient states,
which is inconsistent with a fully parallel processing model.

D49
THE ENGAGEMENT OF COGNITIVE CONTROL REFLECTS A PREDICTIVE MODEL OF TASK DEMANDS Michael Waskom1, Michael Frank1,

Anthony Wagner1; 1Stanford University — Cognitive control allows humans
to align stimulus-response processing with internal goals and is thus central to intelligent, purposeful behavior. Although it is generally understood
that brain regions comprising a distributed frontoparietal network are
more active when humans must exert control over cognitive processing,
the computational parameters driving these responses remain unspecified.
The present experiment evaluated the sensitivity of control processes to
parametric task demands as formalized in a probabilistic model. Subjects
performed a context-dependent perceptual decision task in which they
were cued to report either the direction of coherent motion or the dominant color of a random dot stimulus. Over the course of the experiment,
we parametrically manipulated the relative frequency of motion and color
trials without indicating to the subjects which context was more likely. We
then implemented a Bayesian learning model to obtain an optimal estimate of these probabilities on each trial. This model allowed us to formally
test whether control processes were sensitive to the local structure of task
demands. Both reaction times and the amplitude of task-evoked frontoparietal activation were modulated by context surprisal, an information theoretic measure of prediction error in response to the rule cue on each trial.
Our findings thus suggest that behavior is tuned by a predictive model that
learns over high-level representations of task context to optimize behavior
in shifting environments. This offers a computationally rigorous interpretation of widely observed responses to control manipulations in neural and
behavioral investigations of human cognition.

D50
BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL CORRELATES OF ATTENTIONAL CONTROL DURING LEARNING Yuan Chang Leong1, Reka Daniel1, Angela Rad-

ulescu1, Yael Niv1; 1Princeton University — Reinforcement learning models
are often applied to study human learning and decision-making. However,
simple RL algorithms do not fare well in real world situations where the
environment is complex and multi-dimensional. Yet, people are able to
learn efficiently in such settings. We propose that learning in multi-dimensional environments is facilitated by selective attention to some aspects
of the environment while ignoring other aspects. To test our hypothesis,
we had 18 participants perform a series of decision-making tasks with
multi-dimensional stimuli and probabilistic rewards. In each task, only one
dimension was relevant for predicting reward. Participants were not told
which was the relevant dimension and had to figure it out by trial-and-er-

140

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
ror learning. We decoded participants’ focus of attention on each trial using
eye-tracking and multi-voxel pattern analysis of fMRI data. Trial-by-trial
model-based analysis of participants’ choices indicated that a reinforcement-learning model in which choice and learning were constrained by
the decoded focus of attention described behavior best. We then used the
model to generate regressors for attentional control that we correlated
with fMRI data. Activity in dorsolateral prefrontal (dlPFC) correlated with
switching attention across dimensions while activity in the anterior portion
of the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) correlated with sustaining attention
over time. Both the dlPFC and mPFC are often implicated in cognitive control processes. Taken together, our results suggest that human learning processes are constrained by an attention filter that is dynamically controlled
by frontal areas involved in executive function.

D51
NEUROCOGNITIVE FINGERPRINTS OF COGNITIVE CONTROL IN
DYSLEXIA Edita Poljac1, Vera van ‘t Hoff1, Inti A. Brazil1; 1Radboud University

Nijmegen, The Netherlands — Developmental dyslexia involves difficulties
with acquisition of profound reading skills despite adequate intelligence
and educational opportunity. Recent findings, however, clearly indicate
that dyslexia is also associated with impairments in goal-directed cognitive regulation “top-down modulation” of behavior. Specifically, it has
been shown that adolescents with dyslexia have problems with switching
between rather simple cognitive tasks. The current study was designed to
further investigate the possibility of deviations in top-down cognitive control of behavior in dyslexia. To this aim, students with and without dyslexia
were asked to repeatedly choose between two cognitive tasks. In this voluntary task switching procedure, the choice was to respond either to the
location or to the shape of a presented stimulus, which was preceded by
either a long or a short preparatory interval. We measured their response
times and accuracy, while recording the preparatory and stimulus-related
brain activity with electroencephalography (EEG). Whereas no significant
group differences were observed in the behavioral outcome measures, EEG
markers related to cognitive control revealed marked group differences in
top-down processing. Specifically, a weaker preparatory contingent negative variation (CNV) “slowly developing frontal negativity” implied a
less efficient task preparation in students with dyslexia. Interestingly, the
subsequent stimulus-related posterior P3 component reflected postponed
task processes in these individuals. These findings suggest that behaviorally latent differences in cognitive control in young adults with dyslexia
become apparent when looking at their neurocognitive fingerprints. Our
findings furthermore corroborate recent literature advocating the advantages of such an approach to better understand clinical constructs and
inform treatment.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory
D52
RESPONSE INTERFERENCE DURING WORKING MEMORY-BASED
ACTION CONTROL: A NEW INTERFERENCE PARADIGM FOR NEUROIMAGING Andrew C. Garcia1, Mark W. Geisler1, Ezequiel Morsella1,2; 1San

Francisco State University, 2University of California, San Francisco — Response
interference can be caused by the presence of external visual distractors that
are goal-incompatible (e.g., as in the flanker task; Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974)
or by representations held in working memory (WM) that are incompatible with action goals (Hubbard et al., 2013). Building on this research, we
developed a paradigm in which participants (n = 10), after learning to press
certain buttons when presented with certain letters, are presented with
two action-related letters (the memoranda) but must withhold responding
(4 s) until cued to emit the response associated with one of the two letters. In the Congruent condition, the action corresponds to the cue (e.g.,
memoranda = AB, cue = B, response = B); in the Incongruent condition, the
action corresponds to the other item of the memoranda (e.g., memoranda =
AB, cue = B, response = A). Another condition (Spatial Cueing) presented
a non-letter cue (a dot) associated with the spatial location of a target; in
the Incongruent condition, participants responded to the item that was not
cued spatially. Response times (RTs) were longer for Spatial Cueing than
Letter Cueing, F (1, 9) = 6.32, p = .03; and RTs were longer in the Incongru-

2014 Annual Meeting	
ent than Congruent conditions, F (1, 9) = 22.41, p = .001. We also examined
the subjective aspects (trial-by-trial “urges to err”) and neural aspects (electroencephalography) of performance. Our results are discussed alongside
findings showing increased fronto-parietal coherence within the theta band
(4-7 Hz) during goal-directed WM (Sauseng et al., 2005).

D53
A COMPARISON OF TEMPORAL ORDER MEMORY AND STANDARDIZED NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL TESTS OF EXECUTIVE FUNCTION AND MEMORY IN PREMANIFEST AND MANIFEST HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE Lindsay J. Rotblatt1, Savanna M. Tierney1, Eva Pirogovsky2,

Diane R. Nicoll1, Adrienne E. Collazo1, Jody Corey-Bloom2, Paul E. Gilbert1,3;
1
San Diego State University, 2University of California San Diego, 3San Diego
State University - University of California San Diego Joint Doctoral Program in
Clinical Psychology — Recent studies indicate that temporal order memory
for sequences of stimuli may be impaired in Huntington’s disease (HD),
possibly due to frontostrial loop dysfunction. The present study examined
performance on a temporal order memory test (TOMT) compared to standardized neuropsychological measures of executive function and memory.
Individuals with manifest HD (n=20), premanifest gene carriers for HD
(Pre-HD; n=18), and demographically similar controls (n=25) completed a
visuospatial TOMT as well as tests of executive function (letter/category
fluency, color word interference test) and the Hopkins Verbal Learning
Test. HD patients were significantly impaired (p<.05) on all tests relative
to the control and Pre-HD groups. The Pre-HD group was significantly
impaired (p<.05) relative to the controls on the TOMT but did not differ on
any of the standardized tests. To facilitate comparisons between the tests,
raw scores were converted into scaled scores and effect sizes for group differences on each test were calculated using Cohen’s d. The effect size for
differences between the HD and control groups was largest for the TOMT
(d=2.67) compared to the standardized tests (d=1.64-2.26). The effect size
for differences between the Pre-HD and control groups was large for the
TOMT (d=1.42), but small to medium (d=.07-.57) for the standardized tests.
The data provide preliminary evidence that temporal order memory may
be particularly impaired during the premanifest and manifest stages of
HD relative to other cognitive domains. Therefore, larger scale studies are
needed to examine the incremental value of the TOMT compared to other
measures of cognitive function.

D54
STIMULUS DISCRIMINABILITY AND PREDICTIVENESS MODULATE ALPHA OSCILLATIONS IN A PERCEPTUALLY DEMANDING
MEMORY TASK Malte Wöstmann1,2, Björn Herrmann1, Anna Wilsch1, Jonas

Obleser1; 1Max Planck Research Group “Auditory Cognition”, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2International
Max Planck Research School on Neuroscience of Communication, Leipzig, Germany — Alpha (~10 Hz) oscillatory changes are a candidate neural signature
to quantify task demands in younger and older listeners. Here, we tested
the hypothesis that alpha power in an effortful listening task depends on
both, acoustic stimulus detail as well as the stimulus’ predictiveness of subsequent information. Electroencephalograms (EEGs) were recorded while
human participants (younger: N=20, 20-30 years; older: N=20, 60-70 years)
listened to two to-be-compared numerals (S1, S2) masked by a distracting
talker. Task demand was manipulated along two dimensions: Primarily,
the perceptual discriminability of numerals and masker was modulated by
the degree of acoustic detail presented (temporal fine structure). Secondly,
the degree to which the S1 numeral was predictive of the S2 numeral was
varied. Task performance improved with more acoustic detail and (to a
lesser degree) with increasing predictiveness. Most importantly, broadly
distributed alpha power depended parametrically on acoustic detail in
the stimulation and on predictiveness. That is, alpha power decreased
with more acoustic detail (more strongly for older participants) and also
decreased when stronger predictions could be formed (similarly in both
age groups). The results speak for alpha oscillations as a versatile indicator
of complex task demands. Parametrically decreasing task demands allows
for facilitated processing of information, which, on a neural level, manifests
in according alpha decreases. With respect to age, results suggest that older
adults are particularly dependent on sensory detail, whereas the formation
of predictions to compensate for sensory uncertainty is equally important
for both age groups.

Poster Session D

D55
MENTAL ROTATION: THE ROLE OF GENDER OR EXPERTISE? Jenny

Kathinka Krüger1, Elisabeth Reschke1, Boris Suchan1; 1Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, Dept. of Neuropsychology, Ruhr University Bochum — It has
been shown in various studies that men outperform women in mental
rotation. This study aimed to answer the question whether this sex specific
advantage may be modulated by expertise based on experiences from daily
work. Therefore, using a Mental Rotation Test (MRT) we investigated male
and female aviation security assistants of different airports in Germany.
Based on the M R T by Peters et al. (1995) a computer based version was
developed. Stimuli and instruction were based on the original test. In the
MRT participants have to decide which two of the four shown 3-D items
are rotated forms of a target stimulus. Normative date have been generated
based on this computerized on a sample of 1000 subjects. Results yielded
evidence for no gender specific mental rotation advantage in the group of
security assistants. In contrast, the control subject sample showed this clear
and significant gender effect. Results suggest that everyday life experience
can modulate the well-known gender effect in mental rotation. Specific
factors that contribute to the shaping of mental rotation abilities like that
shown in the present work have to be further elucidated in future work.

D56
THE EFFECT OF HIGH-FAT ANIMAL-BASED DIET VERSUS LOWFAT, PLANT-BASED DIET ON COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN MICE

Robert Torrence1,2, Sheryl Reminger2, Joshua Carlson1, David Towers2, Michelle
Vander Hyde1; 1Northern Michigan University, 2University of Illinois at Springfield
— Obesity is related to health problems such as insulin resistance, glucose intolerance, hypertension and cognitive decline. Research has shown
that a diet high in saturated fatty acids can induce cognitive dysfunction.
Although cognitive function has been enhanced in animal models through
environmental manipulation research has not examined if diet-induced
cognitive dysfunction can be reversed through diet alone. The purpose of
this study was to induce cognitive dysfunction in mice through diet, and
then attempt to reverse the symptoms through diet alone. This study had
two hypotheses: (1) after two months of a diet high in animal-derived saturated fatty acids, cognitive function would significantly decrease, and (2)
the cognitive dysfunction induced by diet would be reversed through altering to a low-fat, plant-based diet. This study used 27 C57BL/6 mice divided
up into three groups: control high-fat diet, control low-fat diet, and an
experimental group. An eight-arm radial maze was used to assess working
memory. The two control groups remained on their specified diet throughout the study. However, the experimental group ate a high-fat diet for two
months and then their diet was switched to a low-fat diet for three months.
Working memory was assessed on all groups at the two-month and fivemonth time points. The results indicated that the two control groups had
relatively the same amount of working memory errors in both phases of
testing, while the experimental group significantly improved.

D57
THE DIFFERENTIAL RELATION OF SEX ON FITNESS AND WORKING MEMORY IN PRE-PUBERTAL CHILDREN Eric S. Drollette1, Mark

R. Scudder1, R. Davis Moore1, Lauren B. Raine1, Matthew B. Pontifex2, Charles
H. Hillman1; 1University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2Michigan State University
— Previous investigations have indicated that fitness enhances working
memory among preadolescent children. However, few studies have systematically explored fitness-related differences among key demographic
characteristics, such as sex, which have been shown in previous research to
influence working memory performance. The present investigation examined the differential relation of sex to cardiorespiratory fitness on working
memory in preadolescent children (8-10 years old). Data were collected
during three separate studies (n=114 [53 female], n=103 [51 female], n=101
[45 female]), using separate and unique tasks that tap different aspects of
working memory (i.e., operation span task, n-back task, Sternberg task).
Participants also completed a cardiorespiratory fitness test to assess maximal aerobic capacity (i.e., VO2max). Hierarchical regression analyses
were conducted separately on males and females. Results from all three
studies revealed a positive relation of fitness on working memory that was
selective for males; a relationship not observed for females. Further, these
results were only evident for task conditions necessitating greater working memory demands. The findings are consonant with previous literature
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

141

Poster Session D	
and reveal new evidence that fitness may selectively modulate working
memory, specifically for developing male children. This investigation
also provides unique insight into how interventions aimed at improving
fitness may influence cognitive development differentially among males
and females and further demonstrates the need for individualized physical
activity programs.

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
D58
HOW CORTICAL RESPONSES TO VOWEL CATEGORIES REORGANIZE ACROSS THE EARLY READING YEARS: A LONGITUDINAL
AUDITORY ERP INVESTIGATION OF MANDARIN LEXICAL TONE.

Chang Gu1, Micheal Sandbank1, Han Wu2, Hua Shu2, Bruce McCandliss1; 1Vanderbilt University, 2Beijing Normal University — Categorical perception (CP)
effects for speech contrasts that only occur in one particular language
suggest learning experiences “tune” the response properties of the auditory system. This two-year longitudinal ERP study investigates changes
in pre-attentive auditory processing that underlies CP of Mandarin lexical tones during the years children learn to read fluently. Using a stimulus
continuum spanning from one lexical tone category exemplar to another,
we identified a “between-” and a “within-category” tone deviant that
were both were acoustically equidistant from a standard stimulus. 8-yearold Mandarin speakers participated in both an initial ERP oddball paradigm and returned for a two-year follow up. Mismatch negativity (MMN)
responses demonstrated CP effects for both conditions at age 8. At age 10,
however, between-category MMN responses showed reduced latencies
and durations, and a shift toward a more adult-like topography. In contrast, the P3a component showed no evidence of CP in 8-year-olds. By age
10, these same participants demonstrated robust CP effects in their P3a
responses. Clearly, the pre-attentive auditory processes underlying CP of
Mandarin lexical tones have only partially developed by age 8. The ensuing
two years, coincidental with the rise of fluent reading, provides a window
into profound reorganization of the neural correlates of vowel category
perception that include changes to both preconscious responses as well as
P3a responses related to orienting to sound change. Finally, the degree of
MMN topography shifting toward adult-like predicts the amplitude of the
P3a CP response of a child, providing a potential functional link between
these components.

D59
CHARACTERIZING THE PROCESSING OF SPECTRAL, TEMPORAL,
AND PHONOLOGICAL AUDITORY INFORMATION IN DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA Bogdana Ulytska1,2, Claudia Steinbrink3, Thomas Lach-

mann3, Christian J. Fiebach1,2; 1Department of Psychology Goethe University
Frankfurt, Germany, 2IDeA Center Frankfurt am Main, 3TU Kaiserslautern —
While phonological processing deficits are established as a core symptom
of developmental dyslexia, it is still unclear whether these deficits are a primary cause of dyslexia or arise from more general underlying auditory processing deficits. We studied vowel length perception using the mismatch
negativity (MMN), to investigate whether dyslexics’ auditory processing
deficits are rooted in processing temporal, spectral, or spectro-temporal
(i.e., phonological) aspects of speech. In German, vowel length is characterized by spectral as well as temporal information. In the phonological condition, two natural vowels of different length were combined. Standards
and deviants thus differed in both temporal and spectral characteristics,
whereas the temporal and spectral conditions were constructed so as to
vary only on one of these two dimensions, by combining natural with artificially modified vowels. Importantly, this paradigm examines phonological
vs. auditory processing with stimuli of identical complexity in all conditions. Fifteen dyslexic children (M = 9.28 years) and fifteen age- and gradematched controls (M = 9.33 years) took part in the study. In both groups,
reliable MMNs were found for the phonological and temporal condition, in
the former even a two-peaked one, while spectral differences produced less
consistent MMN effects, indicating that spectral information is perceptually
more difficult. Additionally we observed that spectral is processed before
temporal information. Differences between vowels weight the importance

142

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
of spectral vs. temporal information during vowel perception, and our data
provide initial evidence that this fine balance between the processing of
spectral vs. temporal information may be altered in children with dyslexia.

D60
REDUCED LOW-FREQUENCY SAMPLING OF SPEECH IN DYSLEXIC READERS Nicola Molinaro1, Mikel Lizarazu1, Mathieu Bourguignon2,

Marie Lallier1, Manuel Carreiras1,3; 1BCBL, Basque centre on Cognition, Brain
and Language, San Sebastian/Donostia, Spain, 2Aalto University School of
Science, Aalto, Finland, 3Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao,
Spain — Difficulties in literacy development (dyslexia) have been related to
poor speech processing skills: reading abilities are, in fact, highly correlated
with phonological awareness. However, it is not clear if such behaviourally
observable deficits are due to basic difficulties in speech perception or
to the metalinguistic nature of the employed paradigms involving conscious decisions. Available neurophysiological data do not provide clear
evidence, since few studies focused on natural speech perception. In the
present MEG study we evaluated the neural entrainment between natural speech and brain oscillations at multiple frequencies. Dyslexic participants (N=10; mean age: 31 ± 5.3) and controls (N=10; mean age: 32 ± 5.3)
listened to sentences for comprehension. We computed the spectral coherence between the speech signal and the MEG recordings collected either
when participants were listening to sentences or during resting state. We
observed significantly higher coherence values during listening both in
the 0.5-2 Hz and 5-7 Hz frequency bands. Group differences however only
emerged at 0.5-1 Hz. Source reconstruction (Dynamic Imaging of Coherent
Sources) revealed significantly reduced coherence values in the right auditory cortex and the left inferior frontal gyrus (pars opercularis) for dyslexic
participants: Only activity in the latter region correlated with both reading
measures and phonological awareness ratings. We thus support the claim
that natural speech sampling (at low frequencies) is impaired in dyslexic
readers; in addition, we propose that the relationship linking such impairment and phonological disorders in dyslexia is mainly subtended by activity in the left inferior frontal cortex.

D61
DYNAMICS OF THE ANATOMICAL CHANGES THAT OCCUR IN THE
BRAINS OF SCHOOLCHILDREN AS THEY LEARN TO READ Gregory

Simon1, Nicolas Poirel1,2, Virginie Beaucousin3, Arlette Pineau1, Olivier Houdé1,2;
1
LaPsyDÉ, Unité CNRS 3521, Université Paris Descartes, Université de Caen,
PRES Sorbonne Paris Cité, 2Institut Universitaire de France (IUF), Paris, 3EA
2027, Laboratoire de Psychopathologie et Neuropsychologie, Universié Paris
8 — Although the functional brain network involved in reading for adults
and children is now well documented, a critical lack of knowledge still
exists about the structural development of these brain areas. To provide a
better overview of the structural dynamics of the brain that sustain reading
acquisition, we acquired anatomical MRI brain images from 55 children
that were divided into two groups: one prior to the formal learning of reading (n=33, 5-6 years old) and the second a few years after formal learning
(n=22, 9-10 years old). For the second group, reading performances were
collected based on the French reading test “Alouette-R”. Voxel-based morphometry analysis of gray matter showed that only the right insula volume
was different between the two groups (when corrected for sex, hand preference and brain volume). Moreover, in the reading group the volumes of
the left fusiform gyrus (corresponding to the well-known visual word form
area, VWFA), the anterior part of the left inferior occipital gyrus and the
left thalamus were significantly modulated by reading performance. Taken
together, the present results reveal crucial information regarding reading
development, showing that gray matter of the VWFA is modulated by the
reading performances of the children, independently of their age. Moreover, in the reading group, the volume of the VWFA is the one that correlated with the larger amount of other reading brain ROIs, suggesting that
the VWFA is fully connected with the traditional left-hemispheric language
brain network and that these connexions are essential to read efficiently.

2014 Annual Meeting	

D62
A CRUCIAL ROLE FOR PHONOLOGICAL INHIBITION IN AUDITORY
REFERENTIAL WORD LEARNING: EVIDENCE FROM AN ARTIFICIAL LEXICON PARADIGM James Magnuson1,2, Stephen Frost2, Nicole

Landi1,2, Peter Molfese2, Daniel Sharoh2, Jay Rueckl1,2, Jonathan Preston2, W.
Einar Mencl2, Kenneth Pugh1,2; 1University of Connecticut, 2Haskins Laboratories — We report a study from a large-scale effort to identify component
abilities supporting robust language and reading. Participants (n=21, college-aged) completed assessments of reading (range = 71,130, M=112), language, and cognition (performance IQ range = 85,139, M=110). They then
learned novel spoken names for pictures (unusual fish or minerals) to a
criterion of 90% correct (~3 hours). The following day, they retrained (6
trials per word), and then learned a second artificial lexicon from a different
semantic class (e.g., minerals if Day 1 had been fish). Lexicons included 24
words; half had onset competitors, half had rhymes; half were in dense
neighborhoods (5 onset or rhyme competitors), half in sparse (1 competitor). Accuracy, response latency, and eye movements were recorded. Performance IQ and measures of language/reading ability were significantly
correlated with Trials-to-Criterion for both lexicons. In multiple regressions, language/reading measures accounted for significant variance in
learning beyond that accounted for by performance IQ. Follow-up analyses indicated that reading measures were most strongly associated with
learning the most difficult items: dense onset neighborhoods. Computational modeling (interactive activation) suggests these results, along with
previous results from our lab, are best explained by phonological inhibition
variation (not phonetic resolution or lexical inhibition or feedback). Learning to read a language like English may strengthen phonological inhibition,
or focus it at a segmental (rather than syllabic) level - or better phonological inhibition in spoken language processing may promote better reading.
In either case, phonological inhibition explains individual differences in a
variety of tasks and measures.

D63
DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF SLEEP IN ADULTS AND CHILDREN
LEARNING A AN ARTIFICIAL LANGUAGE Tali Bitan1, Michael Nevat1,

Qamar Daher1, Karin Levenberg1; 1University of Haifa — Learning a second
language may rely more on procedural learning in children compared to
adults. Adults’ performance on procedural learning tasks improves after
the end of training, depending on sleep, while children do not benefit from
sleep. For declarative learning tasks sleep may prevent deterioration of performance. We examine differences between adults and children in the consolidation of a new linguistic rule after the end of training. 34 Adults and
36 children (9-10yrs) received one session of training on new words and
their plural inflections, which varied in frequency. Their performance was
tested immediately after training as well as after 12 and 24 hours. In each
age group half of the participants were trained in the morning and the other
half were trained in the evening. Our results show that children’s performance improved during the 12 hours period immediately after the end of
training, regardless of sleep, while adults did not show any improvement.
However, for adults sleep provided protection against the decay inflicted
by time awake for the high frequency inflection. Moreover, for the generalization of the acquired knowledge to new words only adults show a sleep
dependent increase in the reliance on phonological cues after the end of
training. Our results are consistent with the notion that children are less
susceptible to interference during wakefulness. Our results also suggest
that when learning new linguistic skills children rely more on procedural
learning mechanism compared to adults.

LANGUAGE: Lexicon
D64
IS THE OPTIMAL VIEWING POSITION (OVP) ASYMMETRY FOR
FOVEAL STIMULI SIMILAR TO RIGHT VISUAL FIELD ADVANTAGE
FOR NON-FOVEAL STIMULI? AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF HEMISPHERIC ASYMMETRY Wen-Hsuan Chan1, Thomas P. Urbach1, Marta

Kutas1,2; 1University of California, Cognitive Science, San Diego, 2University of
California, Neurosciences, San Diego — Visual word recognition is slower
and less accurate when fixating further from a position left-of-center within

Poster Session D
a word (the optimal viewing position, OVP), and more so when fixating a
word’s end than its beginning. OVP asymmetry (observed for foveal stimuli) has been attributed to the same factors that lead to the right visual field
advantage for non-foveal words -- left hemisphere language dominance.
We have found that the OVP asymmetry is not word-specific. Here we ask
whether a similar mechanism leads to the observed asymmetries for foveal
(OVP) and non-foveal (RVF word advantage) stimuli. We used event-related brain potentials (ERPs) to non-wordlike stimuli that spanned fixation
or were non-foveally lateralized to one or the other visual field. The latency
of the occipital P100 for all lateralized stimuli was delayed in the hemisphere ipsilateral to the side of stimulus presentation. The occipital N170
exhibited similar ipsi vs contralateral latency delay, and smaller amplitudes ipsilaterally. These amplitude reductions were larger with non-foveal
than foveal presentation, with a more pronounced difference for left than
right visual field presentation. The P100 and N170 latency delays imply a
unilateral hemispheric projection for both foveal and non-foveal locations
in the visual field at a relatively early visual processing stage. By contrast,
the hemispheric asymmetry in N170 amplitude differs for foveal versus
non-foveal vision; since N170 is linked to letter identity processing, the
suggested hemispheric differences in processing of letters might contribute
to OVP asymmetry.

D65
EYE-TRACKING AND EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL EFFECTS OF
TRANSPOSED LETTERS DURING COMPOUND WORD COMPREHENSION: DO MORPHEMES MATTER? Mallory C. Stites1, Kara D.

Federmeier1, Kiel Christianson1; 1University of Illinois — The current study
investigates the online processing consequences of encountering compound words with transposed letters (TLs), to determine if TLs that cross
morpheme boundaries are more disruptive to reading than those within a
single morpheme. Previous eye-tracking work has demonstrated that reading text with TLs produces reading time costs relative to correctly spelled
words (Rayner, White, Johnson, & Liversedge, 2006), but behavioral evidence is mixed as to whether across-morpheme TLs are more disruptive to
processing than within-morpheme TLs (Christianson, Johnson, & Rayner,
2005) or not (Rueckel & Rimzhim, 2011). To address this disparity, two
separate experiments were conducted, one employing eye-tracking during
natural reading, and the other using event-related potentials (ERPs) during
word-by-word sentence reading. In both experiments, subjects read sentences containing correctly spelled compound words (cupcake), or compounds with TLs either across morpheme boundaries (cucpake) or within
one morpheme (cupacke). Results showed that between- and within-morpheme TLs produced equal processing costs in both measures. In eye-tracking, reading times were longer for all TL words relative to correctly-spelled
words, with no difference between the two TL conditions. In the ERPs, TL
words elicited a late posterior positivity (from 600-900 ms) that again did
not differ between the two TL conditions. Findings across both methods
converge to suggest that within- and between-morpheme TLs are equally
disruptive to reading compound words in a sentence context. This study
provides evidence against the idea that compound words are obligatorily
recognized via decomposition into their constituents, which would predict
greater processing costs from across-morpheme TLs.

D66
SAME NETWORK BUT DIFFERENT CONNECTIVITY IN L1 AND L2
READING: EVIDENCE FROM CHINESE LEARNERS OF ENGLISH

Fan Cao1, Say Young Kim2; 1Department of Communicative Sciences and Disorders, Michigan State University, 2Division of Psychology, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore — It has been well documented that L1 and L2
reading share very similar brain network. In the current study, we examined Chinese (L1) word rhyming judgment and English (L2) pseudo-words
rhyming judgment in a group of late Chinese-English bilingual adults. We
found that the two tasked activated very similar brain network. However,
in psychophysiological interactions analysis, we found the activity of three
visuo-orthogrpahic regions is more strongly related with left postcentral
gyrus when reading English pseudowords while they are more strongly
related with right precentral gyrus when reading Chinese characters. We
also found that there was a significant correlation between English proficiency and connection between right middle occipital gyrus and left
postcentral gyrus in reading English pseudowords, suggesting higher pro-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

143

Poster Session D	
ficiency is related with greater connection between these two regions. It
may be due to a sound-out strategy in the English pseudoword rhyming
task, because the left postcentral gyrus is involved in sensory perception.
We also found that higher accuracy in the English pseudoword task was
correlated with greater connection between right middle occipital gyrus
and left supramarginal gyrus, and that faster reaction time in the English
pseudoword task was correlated with greater connection between the right
middle occipital gyrus and left superior temporal gyrus. The correlations
with accuracy and reaction time in the Chinese task were not significant. It
suggests that the orthographic-phonological mapping region in left supramarginal gyrus and the phonological representation region in left superior
temporal gyrus are more connected with the visuo-orthographic area in
English pseudoword rhyming.

D67
N170 EFFECTS DURING MASKED VISUAL WORD PROCESSING EVIDENCE FOR AUTOMATICITY He Pu1, Katherine J. Midgley1,2, Marianna

Eddy1,3, Phillip J. Holcomb1,2; 1Tufts University, 2San Diego State University,
U.S. Army NSRDEC — Although the N170 ERP component is most wellknown for its sensitivity to face processing, research has also shown left-lateralized N170 effects to visual language stimuli. Such early effects have
been argued to reflect the initial stages of word recognition, as larger N170s
are found for words compared to symbols and consonants (Compton et al.,
1991; Maurer et al., 2005). The current study extends the previous literature
by demonstrating the automaticity of the visual word N170 through the use
of masking. Seventy-two Native English speakers engaged in a no/no-go
semantic categorization task containing forward and backward masked 50
millisecond presentations of high/low frequency words, pseudowords,
strings of consonants, and strings of false fonts. Results showed significantly larger N170 amplitudes to words than to false fonts in occipito-temporal scalp regions and significantly larger N170 amplitudes to words than
to consonant strings in occipital scalp regions, indicating that words are
processed differently than false fonts and consonant strings. Unlike some
previous studies, these effects were not left-lateralized. The presence of an
N170 in a masked paradigm where participants were unaware of the critical stimuli suggests the N170 reflects not only early, but importantly, automatic processes during word reading.
3

D68
TRACKING THE TIME-COURSE OF COMPETITION IN LANGUAGE
PRODUCTION: EVIDENCE FOR A POST-RETRIEVAL MECHANISM OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION AND A NEW COMPUTATIONAL
MODEL Niels Janssen1, Juan Andres Hernández1, Maartje van der Meij1, Hora-

cio Barber1; 1Universidad de La Laguna, Spain — Producing a word is often
complicated by the fact that there are other words that share meaning with
the intended word. The competition between words that arises in such a
situation is a well-known phenomenon in the word production literature.
To account for this phenomenon, models in the behavioral literature standardly assume that competition is resolved early, during the retrieval of
words from memory (e.g., Roelofs, 1992). Here we present a new computational neural-network model of word production, in which competition
resolution is associated with a mechanism of conflict detection that arises
late, after the retrieval of words from memory (e.g., Badre & Wagner, 2007;
Botvinick et al., 2001). We tested the predictions of this model using electroencephalography (EEG). In the experiment, participants named pictures
using the semantic blocking task, a task often used to study competition
(e.g., Kroll & Stewart, 1994). To avoid the high probability of type I errors
typically associated with EEG analyses, we relied on novel mixed effect
regression techniques. We found that competition was associated with a
frontally distributed effect that arose in a late time window, between 500
and 750 ms post-picture onset. Given that the average naming latency in
the experiment was around 650 ms, we interpret these data as consistent
with the assumptions of our neural-network model of cognitive control,
and inconsistent with models from the behavioral literature. These data
suggest that competition resolution during word production relies on a
late, post-retrieval detection mechanism.

144

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

D69
MODELLING LEXICAL DECISION IN NORMAL AND PATIENTS
WITH ACQUIRED DYSLEXIA AND SEMANTIC DEMENTIA Ya-Ning

Chang1, Matthew Lambon Ralph2, Steve Furber3, Stephen Welbourne2; 1Brain
and Language Laboratory, Academia Sinica, Taiwan, 2Neuroscience and Aphasia Research Unit (NARU), University of Manchester, UK, 3School of Computer
Science, University of Manchester, UK — Lexical decision (LD) has been
widely used for studying cognitive processes involved in visual word recognition. Words and nonwords can differ in several aspects. It is likely that
different strategies or information can be used for lexical decision (e.g.,
Grainger & Jacobs, 1996). Recent evidence from behavioural, neuroimaging and patient studies shows that visual, orthographic, phonological
and semantic processing all involved in lexical decision albeit to different
extents (Evans, Lambon Ralph, & Woollams, 2012; Meyer, Schvanev, &
Ruddy, 1974; Woollams, Silani, Okada, Patterson, & Price, 2011). However,
the issues as to how the information is generated and combined during the
decision tasks remain unclear. To explore this computationally, we developed a fully implemented recurrent model of visual word recognition based
on the parallel distributed processing framework. The model was able to
perform the lexical decision task by integrating measures of polarity across
various processing layers in the model. More importantly, when a specific
type of information was inhibited in the model, the damaged model was
able to capture the general behavioural patterns as seen in patients with
pure alexia, phonological dyslexia and semantic dementia in lexical decision. The decision performance largely depended on the difficulty of the
decision task corresponding to different nonword foils. These results suggest that the integrated information across layers within the visual word
recognition system can be flexibly used to support lexical decision.

D70
HOW PHONOLOGICAL NEIGHBORHOOD DENSITY AFFECTS
VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION Haydee Carrasco-Ortiz1,2, Katherine J.

Midgley2,3, Jonathan Grainger4,5, Phillip J. Holcomb2,3; 1Universidad Autonoma
de Queretaro, 2Tufts University, 3San Diego State University, 4Aix-Marseille University, 5Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique — The present study
investigated the neural correlates of phonological neighborhood density
(PND) in written word recognition. Previous behavioral research has
showed that the influence of PND on visual word recognition is modulated by the number of orthographic neighbors of words. To further explore
the neural and temporal dynamics of these phonological and orthographic
neighborhood effects on visual word recognition, we orthogonally manipulated orthographic and phonological similarity of words using measures
of orthographic and phonological Levenshtein Distance 20 (OLD20 and
PLD20, respectively). Electrophysiological results showed opposite PND
effects as a function of orthographic neighborhood density (OND). Larger
N400 amplitudes were elicited by words with high PND compared with low
PND when OND was high, and smaller N400 amplitudes were observed
with high PND compared with low PND words when OND was low. These
findings can be accounted for by the notion of cross-code consistency proposed by Grainger et al. 2005, according to which, the level of compatibility
across orthographic and phonological representations generated by a word
target, including those that are phonologically and orthographically similar
to the target, will affect the process of visual word recognition.

LANGUAGE: Other
D71
EXPOSITORY TEXT COMPREHENSION & EXECUTIVE FUNCTION:
AN FMRI STUDY OF ADOLESCENT READERS Stephen Bailey1, Kather-

ine Swett1, Angela Sefcik1, Scott Burns1, Laurie Cutting1; 1Vanderbilt University
— Executive Function (EF) is a critical component of successful reading
comprehension, and yet the specific neurobiological relationship between
these higher order cognitive skills and reading comprehension is poorly
understood. Behavioral studies indicate that, compared to other text types,
expository text comprehension specifically places greater demand on EF,
particularly working memory, planning/organization, and inference processes (Eason, 2012). Expository text is consequently a unique environment
in which to study the interaction between EF and reading comprehension;

2014 Annual Meeting	
however, no imaging studies to date have examined the neural correlates
of expository text comprehension. In our study, we observed 40 adolescents
(ages 10-14) with normal word efficiency scores (standard score between
85-115), while they comprehended single words and expository text in the
fMRI. First, we sought to identify the neural underpinnings of expository
text comprehension using a General Linear Model (GLM) analysis. These
results suggest that, in addition to traditional left-lateralized language
regions, adolescent readers rely on bilateral angular gyrus, posterior cingulate cortex, and temporal poles, as well as left-lateralized medial prefrontal
cortex - all higher order processing regions previously implicated in both
narrative comprehension and EF studies - when reading expository texts.
Additionally, by running a covariate analysis on two non-linguistic measures of general EF ability, we found that higher working memory ability
results in less activity in medial prefrontal cortex, while higher planning/
organizational scores correlate with less activity in the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. This suggests that higher EF scores results in greater efficiency (less activation) in frontal lobe EF regions during adolescent reading
comprehension.

D72
SELECTIVE AND INVARIANT NEURAL RESPONSES TO SPOKEN
AND WRITTEN NARRATIVES Mor Regev1, Christopher Honey1, Erez

Simony1, Uri Hasson1; 1Princeton University — Linguistic content can be conveyed both in speech and in writing. But how similar is the neural processing when the same real-life information is presented in spoken and written
form? Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we recorded neural
responses from human subjects who either listened to a 7 min spoken narrative or read a time-locked presentation of its transcript. Next, within each
brain area, we directly compared the response time courses elicited by the
written and spoken narrative. Early visual areas responded selectively to
the written version, and early auditory areas to the spoken version of the
narrative. In addition, many higher-order parietal and frontal areas demonstrated strong selectivity, responding far more reliably to either the spoken
or written form of the narrative. By contrast, the response time courses
along the superior temporal gyrus and inferior frontal gyrus were remarkably similar for spoken and written narratives, indicating strong modality-invariance of linguistic processing in these circuits. These results suggest
that our ability to extract the same information from spoken and written
forms arises from a mixture of selective neural processes in early (perceptual) and high-order (control) areas, and modality-invariant responses in
linguistic and extra-linguistic areas.

D73
NEURAL AND BEHAVIORAL CORRELATES OF SPEECH MOTOR
SEQUENCE LEARNING Jennifer A. Segawa1, Jason A. Tourville1, Deryk

S. Beal1,2, Frank H. Guenther1,3; 1Boston University, 2University of Alberta,
3
Massachusetts General Hospital — Speech requires a series of rapid and
precisely coordinated tongue, jaw, lip, and laryngeal movements. Learning
and optimizing motor programs for frequently produced utterances is a
key component of this process, but the underlying neural mechanisms are
largely unknown. Here, we studied the behavioral and neural correlates of
learning new speech motor sequences. After two days of repeated practice,
participants produced novel speech sequences containing phonotactically
illegal consonant clusters (e.g. GVAZF) faster and more accurately, indicative of motor learning. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we
compared brain activity during production of novel and learned illegal
sequences. The production of novel sequences resulted in greater activity
in brain regions linked to general motor sequence learning, including the
basal ganglia and pre-supplementary motor area. Novel sequence production also resulted in greater activity in regions associated with learning and
maintaining speech motor programs, including lateral premotor cortex,
frontal operculum, and posterior superior temporal gyrus. Moreover,
across participants, greater behavioral improvement correlated with more
efficient processing in frontal operculum and greater structural integrity
under posterior superior temporal gyrus. Together, these findings suggest that speech motor sequence learning relies on not only brain regions
involved generally in motor sequence learning but also those associated
with feedback-based speech motor learning. The results also suggest that
individual learning success is modulated by the integrity of structural con-

Poster Session D
nectivity between these motor and sensory regions of the brain. These data
provide new insight into how the uniquely human trait of speech motor
sequence learning is represented in the brain.

D74
SPONTANEOUS INTERPERSONAL SYNCHRONIZATION IN DYSLEXIA Alexander P. Demos1,3, Stephanie N. Del Tufo1,2, Kerry L. Marsh1, Roger

Chaffin1, Rachel M. Theodore1,2; 1University of Connecticut, 2Haskins Laboratories, 3McGill University — The primary etiology of dyslexia has long been
considered to be a deficit of phonological awareness (Bradley & Bryant,
1983). Recent evidence, however, points to a more general auditory deficit
as the locus of impairment (Banai & Ahissar, 2004). Specifically, impaired
phonological processing in dyslexia may reflect a neural architecture that
is overly plastic and that, as a consequence, fails to stabilize appropriately
for both linguistic and nonlinguistic representations. There is evidence
suggesting that children with dyslexia show impaired rhythmic discrimination (Holliman, Wood, & Sheehy, 2008; Overy, Nicolson, Fawcett, &
Clarke, 2003), but these findings are at apparent odds with studies showing
heightened musical abilities in adults with dyslexia. We examined auditory
processing in adults of varied reading ability by asking them to generate
rhythmic sounds with a maraca. We used standardized assessments to
separate participants into three groups: dyslexic pairs, non-dyslexic pairs,
and mixed pairs. Each pair participated in two conditions, holding a steady
pace and synchronizing with each other. A wireless motion tracker measured hand movements, which correlated directly with maraca sounds.
We measured synchronization between members of a pair using cross-correlation. There was a direct, inverse relationship between reading ability
and synchronization. Those with the lowest phonological scores showed
the most synchronization in the spontaneous condition, and no diminished
capacity to intentionally synchronize with each other. These findings are
consistent with the hypothesis that processing deficits in adults with dyslexia are a product of unstable auditory representations.

D75
SPATIAL DISTANCE INFLUENCES THE NEURAL RESPONSE TO
DIFFERENT SEMANTIC RELATIONS Melissa Troyer1, Ernesto Guerra2,3,

Ben D. Amsel1, Thomas P. Urbach1, Katherine A. DeLong1, Pia Knoeferle2,
Marta Kutas1; 1University of California, San Diego, 2Bielefield University, 3Max
Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics — Recent behavioral findings suggest
that visual processing of spatial distance affects processing of conceptual
similarity. For instance, words presented closer together were rated as more
similar than those presented farther apart (Casasanto, 2008). Similarly,
eye-tracking data showed that spatial distance affected first-pass reading
times of sentences about similarity during incremental abstract language
comprehension (Guerra & Knoeferle, 2012). However, the nature of such
perceptual influences on conceptual processing remains poorly understood. Characterizing the timing of these processes would help to constrain
potential mechanisms. Accordingly, we capitalized on the temporal precision of event-related brain potentials (ERPs) to determine how and when
spatial distance influences the subsequent processing of a synonymous,
antonymous, or unrelated word pair. Participants viewed word pairs from
each of these three conditions and decided whether or not the two were or
were not antonyms. Critically, each word pair was preceded by two cards
that moved either closer together or farther apart from a common starting position. At issue was whether card distance would distinctively affect
conceptual processing for synonyms and antonyms (e.g., N400 amplitude).
Card distance affected the amplitude of a relatively early, visually-evoked
component (P2) known to be modulated by attention to (as well as predictability of) visual word form features, and not the N400. Specifically, P2
(150-250 ms) amplitude effects differed for synonyms and antonyms, but
only when the cards moved closer together. We suggest that attending to
spatial distance can affect early attentional responses to words, with distinct effects depending on the semantic relationships between them.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

145

Poster Session D	

2014 Annual Meeting

THINKING: Development & aging

LANGUAGE: Semantic

D76
COGNITIVE ABILITY AND INFLAMMATION ARE ASSOCIATED WITH
BRAIN SHRINKAGE IN HEALTHY ADULTS Ninni Persson1,2,3, Paolo Ghis-

D78
EFFECT OF CONSONANT TYPE ON SHAPE ASSOCIATION Zachary

5

3,4

3,4

3,4

3,4

letta , Andrew, R Bender , Yiqin Yang , Peng Yuan , Cheryl Dahle , Naftali
Raz3,4; 1Department of Psychology, Stockholm University, Sweden, 2Stockholm
Brain Institute, Karolinska Institute, Sweden, 3Institute of Gerontology, Wayne
State University, Detroit, US, 4Department of Psychology, Wayne State University, Detroit, US, 5Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, University of
Geneva, Switzerland Distance Learning University, Sierre, Switzerland — Fluid
cognitive abilities and pathophysiological factors (e.g., inflammation) may
affect the course of brain aging. We examined the associations between
volume changes in the lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC) with the adjacent
white matter (PFw), hippocampus (HC), parahippocampal gyrus (PHG),
and primary visual cortex (VC), and performance on a test of fluid intelligence (gf, Cattell Culture Fair Test, Form 3B) as well as genetic and physiological markers of inflammation. The participants were 147 healthy adults
(age 19-79, M = 53.58, SD = 15.11 years at baseline; N = 89 at follow-up)
and were assessed twice, approximately two years apart (average delay 25
months, SD = 2.19). Latent difference score models revealed the following.
Larger volumes of VC at baseline were associated with higher concurrent gf
performance, after controlling for age, sex, education and multiple vascular
risk factors. Higher gf at baseline predicted reduced shrinkage in LPFC,
but not PFw, HC or VC. The genetic polymorphisms known to increase
levels of pro-inflammatory biomarkers, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR C677T), and interleukin-1Î² (IL-1Î² C-511T), were associated
with increased shrinkage in PHG. Higher baseline plasma homocysteine
levels predicted increased VC shrinkage. No other ROIs were affected by
the genetic and blood markers of inflammation. We conclude that the rate
of age-related regional brain shrinkage may depend on cognitive reserve
and exposure to pro-inflammatory factors, which are potentially amenable
to therapeutic intervention.

LANGUAGE: Other
D77
SWITCHING INTO A NON-DOMINANT LANGUAGE IS HARDER:
AN ERP STUDY OF SIMULTANEOUS BILINGUALS Chia-Hsuan Liao1,

Shiao-Hui Chan1; 1National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan — Language switching is a pervasive conversational feature in a bilingual society.
Theoretical models suggested that bilinguals’ two languages have different
activation levels, which could affect online language processing (e.g., Dijkstran & van Heuven, 2002). Previous studies, however, mainly focused on
participants’ performance of switching between first and a later learned
language, leaving the performance of simultaneous bilinguals, people who
acquire both languages from birth, rarely touched (Moreno et al., 2008). In
addition, existing studies (e.g., Wang, 2008) tended to investigate switching between decontextualized stimuli (i.e., words, digits), which was not as
natural as sentence ones. To fill in the gaps, the current ERP study examined how simultaneous bilinguals process language switching in sentence
contexts. Participants were 21 native Mandarin-Taiwanese bilinguals, proficient in both languages but more dominant in Mandarin (the official language in Taiwan) as assessed by pre-tests. Four sentential conditions were
manipulated: non-switched Mandarin (MM), non-switched Taiwanese
(TT), switched from Mandarin to Taiwanese (MT) and switched from Taiwanese to Mandarin (TM). The results revealed that, switching into a less
dominant language (MT vs. MM) elicited an N400, while switching into a
more dominant one (TM vs. TT) did not, suggesting that the former process
may encounter difficulties in lexical access or lexical integration due to the
lower activation level of the less dominant language. Our finding was in
line with previous studies that switching into a later learned language (usually a less dominant one) was more difficult. We suggested that language
dominance should be considered in conducting bilingual studies.

146

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Grulke1, Ferrinne Spector1; 1Edgewood College — Young children and adults
consistently match some nonsense words (e.g., kiki) to jagged shapes and
other words (e.g., koko) to rounded shapes (e.g., Spector & Maurer, 2013;
Maurer, Pathman & Mondloch, 2006), providing evidence for non-arbitrary
sound-shape mapping. Such correspondences are typically attributed to
the roundness of the vowel sound. In the present study, we investigated the
influence of consonant sound on sound-shape matching in adults. During
each trial, participants heard a spoken word and were given a two-alternative forced choice between a jagged shape and a rounded shape. Thirty-two nonsense words with reduplicated syllables that contained either
plosive consonants (i.e. a consonant that is made by blocking airflow and
then releasing it) or non-plosive consonants (i.e. a consonant that is made
by channeling airflow through a narrow vocal tract) were used. Half of the
words were presented with rounded vowel sounds (e.g., koko) and half
with non-rounded vowel sounds (e.g., kiki). Crucially, the nonsense words
were presented in a standardized video format, ensuring that every participant viewed the same stimuli. Preliminary results for a subset of the
sounds spoken by an experimenter suggest that consonants m, b, p, n, f,
d, and g are associated with rounded shapes while consonants t, v, z, and
k are associated with jagged shapes. The results provide novel evidence
for naturally biased correspondences between consonant sound and shape
that builds on a growing body of literature suggesting that naturally-biased
sound symbolic associations may help influence early language learning.

D79
THE EFFECT OF LEXICAL INFORMATION ON LOGICAL INTERPRETATION OF SENTENCES: EVIDENCE FROM ADJECTIVE CONJUNCTION Eva B. Poortman1; 1Utrecht University — Linguistic theories generally

assume a relationship between syntactic form and logical meaning of
sentences which is independent of lexical information of content words.
Recent studies suggest that lexical information actually does affect logical
interpretation. The current study supports this by studying sentences with
adjective conjunction e.g. “The animals are big and gray”, which according
to formal semantics always receive a Boolean interpretation (all animals are
both big and gray). We show that weaker interpretations are also attested,
e.g. for “The animals are big and small”. Specifically we aimed to show that
lexical meanings of conjoined adjectives consistently affect logical interpretation. Subjects were presented with sentences of the form “The A’s are
X and Y” (A = plural noun; X, Y = adjectives) and images depicting four
entities - two identical pairs, each with a value of two domains, like size
(X) and color (Y). For example, pair 1 were big (X1), yellow (Y1) giraffes
while pair 2 were small (X2), gray (Y2) mice. Test sentences contained either
across-domain adjectives (The animals are big and gray) or within-domain
adjectives - resulting in lexical incompatibility (The animals are big and
small). Results of a truthvalue-judgment task reveal a strong effect of lexical
compatibility: sentences with within-domain adjectives are highly acceptable for the image, while those with across-domain adjectives are not. This
indicates that when lexical properties of adjectives contradict a boolean
interpretation, a weaker interpretation is accepted - suggesting the need for
a theory of conjunction which takes into account lexical knowledge.

D80
SECOND-LANGUAGE VOCABULARY TRAINING STRATEGIES AND
THEIR IMPACT ON LEARNING OUTCOMES AND BRAIN FUNCTION Kiera O’Neil1, Max Hauser1, Vivian Eng1, Cheryl Frenck-Mestre2, Aaron J.

Newman1; 1Dalhousie, 2Université Aix-Marseille — The goal of the current study
was to assess the efficacy of two second-language (L2) vocabulary training
strategies on learning outcomes and brain activation. Words in a language
novel to participants (Spanish) were taught using LANGA (Copernicus
Studios, Halifax, NS), a set of computer games using automated speech recognition. A vocabulary of 84 words (none of which were English cognates)
were taught over 9 half-hour sessions. Half the words were taught via
paired association (i.e. a picture paired with an individual spoken Spanish
word) and half were taught contextually (i.e. visual representation paired
with 3-word spoken Spanish sentences), with word assignment balanced

2014 Annual Meeting	
across participants. Participants were assessed on Spanish vocabulary
knowledge before and after training using both a picture naming task and
a picture-word match/mismatch task. ERPs (event-related potentials) were
recorded during the latter task. As the N400 is an index of lexical access,
we predicted a N400 ERP mismatch-match difference after, but not before
training. After training, subjects were able to name significantly more items
than before training. Mismatched picture-word pairs elicited an N400 effect
after, but not before training. Initial analyses suggested that the N400 was
greater for words taught contextually than for those taught by paired association. This research demonstrates the efficacy of automated speech recognition in teaching vocabulary in a new language, and suggests that contextual teaching strategies appear to foster better second language retention.

D81
DIFFERENTIAL MOTOR CORTEX INVOLVEMENT IN FIRST AND
SECOND LANGUAGE SEMANTIC PROCESSING: EVIDENCE
FROM MU-RHYTHM EEG OSCILLATION DYNAMICS Nikola Vukovic1,

Yury Shtyrov2,3; 1Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics (DTAL),
University of Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Center of Functionally Integrative
Neuroscience (CFIN), Aarhus University, 3Centre for Languages & Literature,
Lund University, Sweden — Understanding neurocognitive mechanisms
supporting the use of multiple languages is a key question in language
science. Recent neuroimaging studies in monolinguals indicated that core
language areas in human neocortex together with sensorimotor structures
form a highly interactive dynamic system underpinning native language
comprehension. While the experience of a native speaker promotes the
establishment of strong action-perception links in the language comprehension network, this may not necessarily be the case for L2 where, as it
has been argued, the most a typical L2 speaker may get is a link between an
L2 wordform and its translation equivalent. Therefore, we asked whether
the motor cortex, whose role in bilingualism remains unexplored, shows
differential responses depending on the language of the stimuli and their
action semantics. We used EEG to dynamically measure changes in motor
activity, indexed by event-related desynchronisation (ERD) of the cortical
mu-rhythm, in response to L1 (German) and L2 (English) action words in
a passive reading task. Analysis of motor-related EEG oscillations at the
sensor level revealed an early (around 200 ms) and left-lateralised coupling
between action and semantics during both L1 and L2 processing. Crucially,
source-level activation in the motor areas showed that mu-rhythm ERD,
while present for both languages, is significantly stronger for L1 words.
This is the first neurophysiological evidence of rapid motor-cortex involvement during L2 single word reading. Our results both strengthen embodied cognition evidence obtained previously in monolinguals and, at the
same time, reveal important quantitative differences between L1 and L2
sensorimotor brain activity.

D82
NEURAL MARKERS OF GRAMMAR LEARNING Jennifer Minas1, Amy

Finn1, Calvin Goetz1, Tyler Perrachione2, John Gabrieli1; 1Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, 2Boston University — While much work has characterized the
neural correlates of learning phonetic and tonal aspects of language, few
studies have been able to explore the neural correlates of learning a novel
grammar. To explore which regions of the brain are most responsive to
growing grammatical expertise, we scanned individuals prior to and after
learning a fully productive miniature artificial language (MAL). The MAL
was learned in an immersion-type setting. Over the course of 4 days, participants observed a total of 360 narrated scenes on a computer and repeated
the narrations while trying to learn the language. The MAL was made up of
30 nouns, 4 verbs, and 2 determiners, subject-object-verb (SOV) word order,
regular determiner-word pairings, and subject-verb agreement. On each
day, participants were tested for knowledge of all aspects of the language.
Prior to and after learning, participants were scanned while processing sentences in the new MAL, their native language (English) and a language
they didn’t know nor had any exposure (Mandarin). As compared with
the known language (English), learning of the MAL (post scan > pre scan)
was associated with greater recruitment of both frontal (left Inferior Frontal
Gyrus; IFG) and posterior (left Superior Temporal/Parietal Area) language
regions. As compared with the unknown language (Mandarin), learning of
the MAL (post > pre) was likewise associated with greater recruitment of

Poster Session D
frontal language regions (left IFG), with fewer differences observed in posterior regions. Data suggest that grammatical learning (early-on) is associated with greater (not more focal) recruitment of classic language regions.

D83
THE ROLE OF THE LEFT ANTERIOR TEMPORAL LOBE IN LANGUAGE PROCESSING: THE INTERACTION BETWEEN COMBINATION EFFECTS AND CONCEPT SPECIFICITY EFFECTS Linmin
Zhang1, Liina Pylkkänen1; 1New York University — The left anterior temporal
lobe (LATL) has been robustly implicated for two language-relevant processes: composing basic combinatorial phrases and specifying concepts.
Here we used magnetoencephalography (MEG) to investigate the following hypothesis: if these processes share a common underlying mechanism,
then the two effects should localize similarly in time and space and could
conceivably add up if elicited within the same design. To test this, we used
modification structures of the pattern “noun modifier + noun headword”
(tomato soup) and varied the specificity of the modifier and the headword
(tomato/vegetable soup/dish). These combinatory stimuli were further
compared with single words of high and low specificity, preceded by consonant strings that could not compose with them (qptg dish). The results
showed that (i) more specific modifiers led to a larger LATL composition
effect on the headword; (ii) the main effect of headword specificity was less
robust than that of modifier specificity on activity elicited by the headword;
(iii) the pattern obtained for single words of high and low specificity conformed with the results of previous neuropsychological and hemodynamic
studies, i.e., more LATL activity was elicited by more specific headwords.
These results are consistent with the hypothesis that composition and specificity effects in the LATL share a common mechanism, but also suggest
that quantitatively, conceptual specificity may have a larger effect on combinatory responses than on responses to single words, given that our single
word specificity effect was much weaker than our modifier specificity effect
on activity elicited by the headword.

D84
EVIDENCE FOR A COMMON SEMANTIC REPRESENTATION FOR
PICTURES AND WORDS Manoj Kumar1,2, Kara D. Federmeier1,2, Li Fei-Fei3,

Diane M. Beck1,2; 1Univeristy of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Beckman Institute
for Advanced Science and Technology, 3Stanford University — A long-standing core question that has remained unanswered in cognitive science is:
Do different modalities (pictures, words, sounds, smells, tastes and touch)
access a common store of semantic information? Although different modalities have been shown to activate a shared network of brain regions, this
does not imply a common representation, as the neurons in these regions
could process the different modalities in completely different ways. A truer
measure of a “common code” across modalities would be a strong similarity of the neural activity evoked by the different modalities. Using multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA) we examined the similarity of neural activity across pictures and words. Specifically, we asked if scenes (e.g. a picture
of a beach) and related phrases (e.g. “sandy beach”) evoke similar patterns
of neural activity. In an fMRI experiment, subjects passively viewed blocks
of either phrases describing scenes or pictures of scenes, from four different categories: beaches, cities, highways, and mountains. To determine
whether the phrases and pictures share a common code, we trained a classifier on one stimulus type (e.g. phrase stimuli) and then tested it on the
other stimulus type (e.g. picture stimuli). A whole brain MVPA searchlight
revealed multiple brain regions in the occipitotemporal, posterior parietal
and frontal cortices that showed transfer from pictures to phrases and from
phrases to pictures. This similarity of neural activity patterns across the
two input types provides strong evidence of a common semantic code for
pictures and words in the brain.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

147

Poster Session D	

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Development &
aging
D85
REACTIVATION-INDUCED UPDATING THAT ENHANCES AND DISTORTS MEMORY IS REDUCED IN AGING Peggy L. St. Jacques1, Daniel

Montgomery1, Daniel L. Schacter1; 1Harvard University — Reactivation can
update memory by enhancing existing representations and by incorporating relevant new information, but can also contribute to memory distortions. In a previous study in young adults we found that the quality of
memory reactivation modulated these subsequent memory effects. In the
current study we investigated age-related changes in reactivation-related
updating contributing to subsequent true and false memories for realworld events experienced during a museum tour. Young and older adult
participants encoded events they experienced during an audio-guided
museum tour. Participants returned to the lab 48 hours later and reactivated memories for the museum tour cued by photos from stops they visited; on some trials reactivated memories were followed by a novel lure
photo from an alternate museum tour. A recognition memory test occurred
48 hours later in which participants were shown target and lure photos that
were previously presented (i.e. reactivation) or not previously presented
(i.e. baseline). Because older adults exhibit reductions in recollection processes and contextual recall, which contribute to the quality of reactivation,
we predicted that older adults would show a decrease in reactivation-related effects on subsequent memories. Consistent with our prediction, there
was an age-related decrease in subsequent true and false memories in the
reactivation condition compared to baseline. These data reveal that aging
alters reactivation-related updating that supports the dynamic and flexible
nature of memory.

D86
COMMON BUT IMPACTFUL GENETIC POLYMORPHISMS IN
COMT & BDNF ARE ASSOCIATED STRONGLY WITH READING
AND RELATED SKILLS AND ASSOCIATED PATTERNS OF NEURAL
ACTIVITY Nicole Landi1, Sergey Kornilov1, Peter Molfese2, Kaja Jasinska2,

Maria Lee3, W.Einar Mencl2, Kenneth Pugh2, Elena Grigorenko3; 1University
of Connecticut, 2Haskins Laboratories, 3Yale Child Study Center — In both
children and adults there is large variability in reading skill, with approximately 5-10% of individuals characterized as having reading disability.
These individuals struggle to learn to read despite adequate intelligence
and opportunity. Although it is well established that a substantial portion
of this variability is attributed to the genetic differences between individuals, specifics of the connections between reading and the genome are not
well understood. I will present fMRI, SMRI, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and combinatorial genetic polymorphisms (haplotype analyses) as well as behavioral (phenotypic) data which suggest that variation
in the COMT and BDNF genes, including the COMT Val/Met polymorphism at rs4680, (previously associated with variation in higher-order cognition) and multiple SNPs in BDNF (previously associated with learning
and memory) are associated with reading and language skills, at the level
of both brain and behavior. I will argue that these polymorphisms, known
for their broad effects on cognition, may modulate reading skill and related
abilities including spelling and oral language. Moreover, recent findings
with the analyses of haplotypes in COMT and BDNF suggest that phonological awareness, oral language and some aspects of higher-order cognitive abilities are strongly linked to combinations of genotypic profiles in
COMT and BDNF.

D87
THE EFFECT OF AGING ON SLEEP-DEPENDENT CONSOLIDATION OF POSITIVE EMOTIONAL MEMORIES Bethany J Jones1, Bengi

Baran1, Kurt S Schultz1, Rebecca M C Spencer1; 1University of Massachusetts,
Amherst — A large body of research indicates that sleep benefits memory
consolidation, with evidence suggesting a particularly strong effect for
representations with emotional salience. However, as most studies have
obtained this outcome with negatively-valenced material, the effect of sleep
on positive memories is less clear. Aging is associated with a decline in
sleep-dependent consolidation for some types of learning. Whether age

148

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
influences the effect of sleep on consolidation of emotional memories, however, remains unknown. The goal of this study was to determine the effect
of aging on sleep-dependent consolidation of positive emotional memories.
To this aim, young (18-30 yrs) and older (50-80 yrs) adults viewed positive
and neutral pictures either in the morning (Wake groups) or the evening
(Sleep groups). Twelve hours later, participants underwent a recognition
task in which they viewed the previously seen pictures (targets) as well
as new images and indicated whether they remembered each one. Polysomnography recordings were collected for the Sleep groups. Young adults
remembered significantly more positive target pictures than neutral target
pictures (p<0.001), with no effect of sleep on memory for either positive
or neutral pictures. In older adults, the Sleep group remembered significantly more target images than the Wake group (p=0.047), with no effect
of emotional valence. We expect memory performance in older adults to be
positively related to time spent in rapid eye movement sleep. These results
may indicate that positive memories are more salient for older individuals
than young adults, thus compelling processing during sleep in the former.

D88
EVENT RELATED POTENTIAL INVESTIGATIONS OF ACTIVE &
PASSIVE MEMORY RETRIEVAL DURING EARLY CHILDHOOD

Alison Robey1, Tracy Riggins1; 1University of Maryland, College Park — Previous studies have reported memory effects (i.e., differential responses
to old versus new stimuli) using event-related potentials (ERPs) during
early childhood. However the majority of these studies have used passive
viewing paradigms, meaning children view pictures during ERP recording and memory responses are obtained post-recording. The goal of the
present work was to determine if ERP memory effects during item and
source memory tasks varied under passive versus active (i.e., responding for each trial during recording) retrieval conditions. During encoding,
4- to 5-year-old children were familiarized to items in multiple contexts.
During retrieval children were shown pictures of both items they previously encountered and new items, while their brain activity was recorded.
Children in the active retrieval condition gave verbal memory responses
during recording; children in the passive condition viewed the images and
preformed the retrieval task after recoding. Behavioral performance and
ERP memory effects were similar between groups and for both the Negative Component (Nc) and Positive Slow Wave (PSW). Main effects of Group
were found, with greater amplitude in the Active, compared to the Passive Group; however, no Group x Condition interactions were found suggesting that active and passive retrieval rely on a similar neural network.
These results are important because they suggest memory effects can be
detected during both passive and active retrieval conditions in early childhood. Moreover, given that the majority of data lost due to artifact was in
the active group, it also suggests that passive retrieval paradigms may be
advantageous during this developmental period.

D89
RESTING-STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY AND SLEEP IN
YOUNGER AND OLDER ADULTS Janna Mantua1, Bengi Baran1, Rebecca

M.C. Spencer1; 1University of Massachusetts, Amherst — Sleep is an active
process beneficial for learning and memory. Functional MRI (fMRI) studies
suggest hippocampal activation and connectivity with nearby and distant
regions is crucial for efficient memory recall and may also be altered by
sleep. Resting state fMRI shows age-related changes in brain activation and
connectivity, a possible mechanism for degraded memory performance in
older adults. This study sought to investigate both age-related changes in
functional connectivity and changes in sleep quality. Eleven younger adults
(YA:18-30 years) and 7 older adults (OA:55-70 years) underwent resting-state fMRI. A standard neuropsychological battery was administered
prior to testing. Subjects underwent polysomnography for measurements
of sleep quality and composition. As expected, performance of older adults
was greatly reduced for tests of episodic memory. Older subjects also had
significantly worse sleep efficiency (time sleeping/time in bed) than young
adults (F=4.03;p=0.05). Consistent with previous studies, resting-state
fMRI showed a positive correlation, representing coactivation, between
the hippocampus and bilateral ventral cingulate cortices in both groups
(YA: T=6.04;p-FDR=0.01; OA: T=5.39;p-FDR=0.01). Both groups showed
a negative correlation between the hippocampus and the superior frontal
gyrus (YA:T=-3.15;p-FDR=0.04; OA:T=-4.33;p-FDR=0.04) and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (YA: T=-4.33;p-FDR=0.009; OA:T=-6.45;p-FDR=0.01),

2014 Annual Meeting	
reflecting hippocampal activation coupled with frontal deactivation.
Conversely, only the older adult group showed connectivity between the
hippocampus and the posterior cingulate cortex/precuneus (T=4.43;pFDR=0.01). These results show different patterns of functional connectivity
and sleep quality between younger and older adults. We predict alterations
in connectivity are mediated by changes in slow wave activity during sleep,
which is crucial for long-term memory.

D90
ADULT AGE DIFFERENCES IN ERP CLUSTER-BASED PERMUTATIONS DURING IMPLICIT LEARNING IN THE TRIPLETS LEARNING
TASK Seth Kiser1, Rebecca Fuller1, Darlene Howard2, James H. Howard Jr.1,2,3;
1

The Catholic University of America, Department of Psychology, 2Georgetown
University, Department of Psychology, 3Georgetown University, Department of
Neurology — Implicit sequence learning involves learning the likely order
of events making it possible to process future events more effectively. For
example, in the Triplets Learning Task (TLT) subjects observe two “cues”
and respond to a third “target” by key-press on each of a series of trials.
Unbeknownst to them, the first cue predicts the target on 80% of the trials
(high probability targets) and another location on 20% of the trials (low
probability targets). Learning is reflected in faster and more accurate
responding to high than low probability targets. In the present study,
event-related potentials (ERP) were captured for younger and older adults
during learning in the TLT and analyzed separately using non-parametric cluster-based permutations for each of three learning sessions. Results
identified significant clusters for younger and older adults representing
ERP differences to event probabilities during the first session of learning,
but no significant clusters were identified in subsequent sessions of the TLT
for either group. Thus, the ERP findings are dissociated from behavioral
results, which reveal a monotonic increase in learning across sessions for
both groups. In addition, clusters in older adults are qualitatively different
in topography and temporal distribution from clusters in younger adults.
In particular, compared to younger adults, older adults exhibit greatly
reduced posterior ERP differences to event probabilities, as well as different time-windows for clusters. These findings are consistent with previous
evidence that the neural basis of implicit learning may differ with age.

D91
DYNAMIC REORGANIZATION IN THE ADULT BRAIN: A COMBINED
TMS, FMRI AND DTI STUDY David Murphy1, Simon W Davis1, Nichole R

Lighthall1, Sarah H Lisanby1, Bruce Luber1, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke University — Although healthy aging is associated with substantial anatomical
and physiological brain decline, studies using functional neuroimaging
techniques such as fMRI have found that the aging brain does not endure
these changes passively. We propose that the aging brain actively attempts
to counteract these deleterious processes through a process of functional
reorganization. However, it is difficult to study this reorganization without a dynamic, causal manipulation of the neural detriments. We investigated this dynamic reorganization using a novel combination of imaging
measures which allowed us to dynamically introduce a need for functional
reorganization. We measured neural activity associated with subsequent
memory both before and after inhibitory or excitatory rTMS to left middle
frontal gyrus (MFG). After inhibitory rTMS, older adults showed no group
deficits in memory performance. This null effect was explained by the
neural response to rTMS. After inhibitory rTMS, subjects demonstrated
increases in right hippocampus relative to a baseline memory run, and
the degree of activity in this region predicted faster memory retrieval. In
contrast, after excitatory rTMS, encoding-related activity increased in left
MFG and left hippocampus and was also associated with faster memory.
Furthermore, individual differences in the functional connectivity during
successful memory trials between these regions was positively related to
white matter connectivity through the uncinate fasciculus, a major white
matter tract connecting frontal and MTL regions. These results suggest that
older adults utilize flexible frontotemporal architecture in order to maintain cognitive performance, and that this flexibility is supported by white
matter architecture.

Poster Session D

D92
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE FAMILY HISTORY IS ASSOCIATED WITH
DIFFERENTIAL ERP ACTIVITY DURING FACE-NAME RECOGNITION Jessica Dodd1,2, Meghan Mitchell1,2, Steven Shirk1,2, Donald McLaren1,2,

Brandon Ally3, Alireza Atri1,2; 1Bedford VAMC, 2Massachusetts General Hospital,
3
Vanderbilt University — High-density event-related potential (ERP) EEG
data has shown promise as a potential biomarker of memory function
and processing changes in aging and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Previous
work in PSEN1 mutation carriers, a dominant genetic risk factor for AD,
has shown altered ERP signals during recognition tasks. In this study we
sought to examine potential differences in EEG activity during a face-name
paired-associate recognition task between participants with (FHxAD+) and
without (FHxAD-) a family history of Alzheimer’s disease. Twenty-eight
participants aged 19-69 (14 with a family history of AD and 14 age-and-education-matched controls without a family history of AD) studied 72 facename pairs, of which 36 were presented four times (4R) and 36 were only
presented once (1R). Participants then made old/new judgments for 80
face-name pairs, of which 40 were old (20 were 1R and 20 were 4R) and 40
were novel (N). ERP activity during the correct identification of a face was
then analyzed. FHxAD- individuals had significantly more frontal activity within the frontal pole during retrieval between 800-900 ms for N vs.
1R than the FHxAD+ individuals (p<0.05). This finding supports results
from the literature to suggest that ERP activity profiles during performance
of memory tasks, in this case face-name recognition, may hold promise as
potential non-invasive endophenotypic markers of AD risk or trait in clinically cognitively normal adults.

D93
AGE DIFFERENCES IN MEMORY BASED DECISIONS: THE ROLE
OF ASSOCIATIVE AND STRATEGIC COMPONENTS Anika Josef1, Mata

Rui1, Shing Yee Lee1, Pachur Thorsten1, Hertwig Ralph1; 1Max Planck Institute
for Human Development — Memory ability is essential for successful decision
making in everyday life. In such situations, associative binding of information but also the strategic retrieval of complex memories are crucial processes in determining decision success. Yet, age-related cognitive decline
due to disruption of medial-temporal, hippocampal, and frontal regions
may especially compromise associative memory ability but also cognitive
control mechanisms necessary for effective decision making. In a set of
studies, we investigated the role of memory demand on age-differences in
decisions from memory. More concretely, we asked young and older adults
to make decisions in two decision situations with varying memory demand.
In two studies, age-differences in decision performance increased with the
memory demand, with older adults performing significantly worse relative
to younger adults. In addition, increased memory demand forced participants, in particular older adults, to select simpler decision strategies that
use fewer pieces of information. But how do age-related changes in the
ability to strategically execute decision strategies in memory contribute to
this effect? We conducted a third study in which we asked young and older
adults to execute previously instructed decision strategies varying in their
memory demand. The results show that, in comparison to young adults,
older adults show more pronounced deficits in strategic monitoring and
selection of information. We conclude that older individuals are forced to
select simpler decision strategies in decision situations with high memory
demand due to both deficits in associative as well as strategy execution
components.

D94
REMEMBERING FACES AND NAMES: AGE-RELATED ERP
EFFECTS Meghan Mitchell1, Steven Shirk1, Donald McLaren1, Jessica Dodd1,

Ali Ezzati2, Alireza Atri1; 1Bedford VA Medical Center & Harvard Medical School,
2
Albert Einstein School of Medicine — Previous research has established the
validity and reliability of the face-name paired-associate memory paradigm
to yield differential patterns of task-related BOLD fMRI activity in bilateral
medial temporal lobe structures across the age and Alzheimer’s disease
spectrum. In this study we aimed to examine in cognitively normal old and
young adults potential differences in frontal and parietal time-sensitive
event-related potential (ERP) activity during performance of a face-name
recognition task. Thirty-three participants (16 young adults aged 18-39 and
17 older adults aged 55-69) studied 72 face-name pairs, of which 36 were
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

149

Poster Session D	
presented four times (4R) and 36 were only presented once (1R). Participants made old/new judgments for 80 face-name pairs, of which 40 were
old (20 1R and 20 4R) and 40 were novel. ERP activity during the correct
identification of a face was then analyzed using analysis of variance methods applied to a priori regions of interest (ROI). Planned contrasts showed
a significant difference between age groups in early frontal ROI activation
(300-500 ms) for N vs. 1R (p<.05). A significant difference between the two
age groups was also observed in parietal ROI activation (500-800 ms) for 4R
vs. 1R (p<.05). Findings complement robust spatial resolution fMRI signals
of activity in the medial temporal lobes with temporal resolution frontal
and parietal ERP signals that show classic old/new effects; these results
suggest that multimodal assessment of associative memory processes using
a combination of task-related fMRI and ERP data may provide complementary information regarding the dynamics of memory function and cognitive
aging.

D95
THE EFFECTS OF EMOTION AND HEALTHY AGING ON STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY Jaclyn Ford1, Elizabeth

Kensinger1; 1Boston College — Prior research has shown that emotion can
alter functional connectivity during retrieval, and that these alterations may
differ as a function of age. These age-related changes may reflect differences
in the cognitive mechanisms supporting emotional memory retrieval. However, it is unclear how these changes relate to documented degradations of
white matter tracts. The current study addressed this question by examining the effect of aging (treated as a continuous variable) on functional
connectivity during retrieval of emotional information and structural connectivity (measured using fractional anisotropy, FA). As prior studies have
suggested that prefrontal regions may guide emotional memory search
and regulate emotions via functional connections with the amygdala, the
current analysis focused on functional and structural connectivity between
the left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC) and the left amygdala. Prior
to scanning, participants encoded positive, negative, and neutral images
paired with neutral titles. After a thirty minute delay, while undergoing
fMRI, participants viewed the neutral titles and indicated whether the title
had been presented with an image during study. An emotion-by-FA interaction revealed that FA predicted functional connectivity during retrieval
of negative memories, but not positive or neutral. Specifically, individuals
with higher structural integrity exhibited a stronger negative connectivity
between the vlPFC and amygdala. Furthermore, an age-by-emotion-by-FA
interaction revealed that this relationship was more pronounced for older
adults. These findings are consistent with theories that older adults may
engage regulatory strategies during the retrieval of negative memories if
they have the structural pathways to allow them to do so.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
D96
DAMAGE TO THE MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX IS ASSOCIATED
WITH ABNORMAL MUSIC-EVOKED AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORIES Amy M. Belfi1, Daniel Tranel1; 1University of Iowa — Music is strongly

intertwined with memories - for example, hearing a song from your wedding can transport you back in time, triggering the sights, sounds, and feelings of that night. Neuroimaging research has identified the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) as a region involved in music-evoked autobiographical
memories (Janata, 2009). The mPFC tracks musical structure, is involved
in emotional processes, and supports autobiographical memory retrieval.
Therefore, this region may be crucial in associating music, emotion, and
autobiographical memory. Here, we used a neuropsychological approach
to test the necessity of the mPFC. Patients with damage to the mPFC and
comparison participants listened to 30 popular songs from the years when
the participants were between 15-30 years old. For a comparison, participants viewed 30 faces of individuals who were famous during the same
years as the songs that were selected. After each stimulus, participants
described memories that were evoked. Memory descriptions were coded
to quantify the amount of episodic and semantic details in each (Levine et
al., 2002). In normal and brain-damaged comparison participants, musicevoked memories were more vivid - specifically, music-evoked memories
had a higher ratio of episodic/total details than face-evoked memories.
In patients with mPFC damage, music-evoked memories were not more

150

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
vivid than face-evoked memories; also, these patients had significantly less
vivid music-evoked memories. These findings extend previous functional
imaging work and indicate that the mPFC is necessary for normal musicevoked autobiographical memories. This is consistent with the theory that
the mPFC is a key region for binding music, emotion, and autobiographical
memories

D97
CHARACTERIZING AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL AND SPATIAL MEMORY
IN A CASE OF TOPOGRAPHICAL DISORIENTATION Jessica Robin1,2,

Josée Rivest3,4, Morris Moscovitch1,2,3; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman
Research Institute, Baycrest Hospital, 3Psychology Department, Baycrest
Hospital, 4Glendon College, York University — Topographical disorientation
describes the inability to find one’s way in a familiar environment. This
is frequently seen in cases of dementia or diffuse brain damage, but can
also occur as a result of focal lesions (Hashimoto, Tanaka, & Nakano, 2010).
In the present study, we studied the relationship between topographical
disorientation and memory in a man (LH) who, after suffering a traumatic
brain injury, began exhibiting severe topographical disorientation. LH is
only able to navigate with the help of a dynamic map on his smartphone.
We tested his spatial and autobiographical memory abilities based on personally-known landmarks of varying familiarity. We found that although
LH retained knowledge of the directional relationships between familiar
landmarks, he was impaired at visually recognizing those same landmarks.
When asked to describe these landmarks from memory, LH was only able
to produce general descriptions lacking in specific perceptual details. Consistently, LH was able to retrieve and describe autobiographical episodic
memories based on landmark cues, but these too were lacking in detail.
Furthermore, unlike in controls (Robin & Moscovitch, 2013) his memories
did not appear to benefit from increased spatial contextual familiarity.
These results suggest that the ability to recognize and remember detailed
spatial scenes may be dissociable from map-like directional knowledge, but
may be related to the ability to recall autobiographical memories.

D98
CAN EYE MOVEMENTS BIAS MEMORY RECALL? Andrea L Wantz1,

Fred W Mast1, Janek S Lobmaier1; 1University of Bern, Switzerland — A large
body of research suggests that when we retrieve visual information from
memory, we look back to the location where we encoded these objects. It
has been proposed that the oculomotor trace we act out during encoding
is stored in long-term memory, along other contents of the episodic representation. If memory recall triggers the eyes to revisit the location where
the stimulus was encoded, is there also an effect in the reverse direction?
Can eye movements trigger memory recall? In Experiment 1 participants
encoded two faces at two different locations on the computer screen. Then,
the average face (morph) of these two faces appeared in either of the two
encoding locations and participants had to indicate whether it resembles
more the first or second face. In Experiment 2 the morph appeared in a
new location, but participants had to repeat one of the oculomotor traces
that was used during encoding. Participants’ morph perception was influenced both by the location and the eye-movement it was presented with.
Our results suggest that eye-movements can bias memory recall, but only
in a short-lasting and rather fragile way.

D99
VOLUMETRIC ANALYSIS OF MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE SUBFIELDS IN THE ATYPICAL FORM OF ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE,
LOGOPENIC VARIANT OF PRIMARY PROGRESSIVE APHASIA.
Khaing Win1,3, John Pluta2, Paul Yushkevich2, David Wolk1, Murray Grossman1,3;
1
Neuroscience Graduate Group, University of Pennsylvania, 2Penn Image Computing and Science Lab, University of Pennsylvania, 3Penn Frontotemporal Degeneration Center, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania — Medial temporal
lobe (MTL) is one of the earliest brain structures affected in Alzheimer’s
disease (AD). To date, no study has examined the degree to which MTL
subfields are compromised in the logopenic variant of primary progressive
aphasia (lvPPA), characterized by poor repetition and limited naming, and
often associated with AD pathology. Here, we examined the differential
involvement of MTL subfields in lvPPA patients (n=11) in comparison to
the cognitively normal elderly controls (n=33) and amnestic mild cognitive
impairment (aMCI) patients (n=31), generally enriched in patients with

2014 Annual Meeting	
prodromal AD and MTL involvement. All subjects underwent high resolution (0.4x0.4mm in-plane, 2.6mm slice thickness) T2-weighted MRI, allowing visualization of the dark band separating cornu ammonis (CA1) from
dentate gyrus (DG). A multi-atlas algorithm was applied to automatically
label CA1, DG, entorhinal cortex, BA35 and BA36. Groups were matched in
gender, education, and intracranial volume, but not for age. Both aMCI and
lvPPA patients were matched in Mini-Mental State Examination. Analysis
of covariance (covarying for age), and post-hoc tests showed distinct patterns of atrophy: greater atrophy in bilateral CA1 and subiculum, and right
BA35 in lvPPA compared to controls; greater atrophy in bilateral CA1 and
DG, and left BA35 in aMCI compared to controls; and greater atrophy of
bilateral subiculum in lvPPA compared to aMCI. Thus, despite the relative
sparing of memory in lvPPA, significant MTL involvement was found; the
distinct distribution of MTL atrophy in lvPPA relative to aMCI may contribute to the different cognitive profiles of these patient groups.

D100
THE DURATION EFFECT IN FORCED-CHOICE RECOGNITION OF
SCENES Fahad Ahmad1, William Hockley1, Morris Moscovitch2; 1Wilfrid Lau-

rier University, 2University of Toronto — Konkle et al. (2010) examined recognition of a large number of studied photographs of scenes in a forcedchoice test. The difference in recognition performance between novel (i.e.
old scene and new scene of difference category) and exemplar test (i.e.
old scene and new scene of same category) conditions increased with the
number of exemplar scenes presented at study. However, observers were
capable of distinguishing between scene exemplars with a modest impairment as number of scene exemplars increased. Ahmad, Hockley and Moscovitch (2013) examined whether duration of presentation of scene at study
would reduce recognition performance in exemplar compared to novel test
conditions. In their first experiment, half of scenes in study list were presented one at a time for one second whereas other half presented for four
seconds. A total of 128 scenes comprising 8 exemplar scenes from one of 16
categories were presented at study. Ahmad et al. (2013) found a significant
reduction in performance in scene recognition with shorter duration, but
no difference in recognition between novel and test conditions in both short
and long duration conditions. In their second experiment with a short duration of 500 ms, there was a reduction in recognition performance, however
there was no difference in recognition between novel and exemplar conditions for both duration conditions. We argue that global and some local
perceptual processing at study for even a short presentation duration as in
500 ms is sufficient to maintain enough details in memory to distinguish
old scenes and exemplar scenes.

D101
PARAHIPPOCAMPAL INVOLVEMENT IN SOURCE ENCODING:
DOES SEX MAKE A DIFFERENCE? Eva Stening1, Jonas Persson1, Kristin

Nordin1, Johan Wikström2, Hedvig Söderlund1; 1Uppsala University, 2Uppsala
University Hospital — In previous research, a female advantage has been
found in object location tasks, assessing item and spatial source memory.
The parahippocampus is believed to have a specific role in source memory,
with the anterior part being involved in item processing and the posterior part in processing of contextual information. However, findings are
not ubiquitous, and the aim of the current study was to assess whether
potential sex differences in performance may be reflected in a difference
in parahippocampal engagement, possibly clarifying parahippocampal
involvement in source memory. Men and women studied objects placed in
one of four possible locations on a screen while scanned with fMRI. During
post-scan recognition, they made old/new judgments and, if old, in which
location the object had been presented (i.e. source). No sex difference was
observed in performance for either item or source. Women showed anterior
and posterior bilateral parahippocampal activation during the encoding of
subsequently remembered items and their location compared to forgotten
items, and right anterior parahippocampal activity for subsequent source
memory compared to item memory. No parahippocampal activity was
observed in men overall. Although men and women did not differ in performance, they differed in parahippocampal activity, suggesting there are
different ways to successfully encode spatial source, not necessarily engaging the parahippocampal gyrus.

Poster Session D

D102
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN SOURCE MEMORY RETRIEVAL:
DOES ANTICIPATION MATTER? Jiangyi Xia1, Giulia Galli1, Leun J. Otten1;
1

University College London — The ability to remember events from a particular time and place typically declines with age. This deficit may in part
be explained by changes in the way control processes are used during the
retrieval of source information. Here, we investigated how aging affects
neural activity leading up to a source memory probe, and how such activity relates to memory performance. Electrical brain activity was recorded
during a source memory task in which healthy younger and older participants memorized visual word pairs. In each pair, an object word (e.g.
pigeon) was preceded by a location word (e.g. garden) that served as the
to-be-retrieved source information. At test, only object words were presented, intermixed with new words. Test items were preceded by a neutral
warning cue. The task was to decide whether an object had been presented
earlier and, if so, what location had been paired with the object. A sustained
negative-going event-related potential deflection preceded object words
whose associated location could be remembered. This effect was especially pronounced in older individuals, and its size correlated positively
with the number of source hits in this group. These findings indicate that
aging affects the use of control processes during the anticipation of a source
memory probe. Older individuals appear to engage preparatory activity
before a test probe to a larger extent, especially when their performance
is relatively poor. When the ability to recall source information is compromised, engaging anticipatory mechanisms just before having to recall may
help retrieval.

D103
EXPLORING THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF TRUE AND FALSE
MEMORY FOR CONCEPTUAL PICTURES Christina E. Johnson1, Indira

C. Turney1, Nancy A. Dennis1; 1The Pennsylvania State University — False
memories elicited from thematic contexts have been posited to rely on conceptual gist, or memory for the meaning or theme of an event absent of specific details. The current study sought to investigate the neural basis of this
theory, examining both true and false memories for conceptual information
using fMRI. Participants viewed thematic scenes (i.e. Christmas, bathroom,
camping) and were tested on their memory for the content of the scene,
including targets that were related and unrelated to its theme, new related
items, and new unrelated items. Analyses focused on both similarities
and differences in neural recruitment supporting true and false memories
related to the scene’s theme. True memories were associated with increases
in neural activity in the typical retrieval network, including left prefrontal, parietal, occipital, and parahippocampal regions. False memories were
associated with increases in neural activity in a more limited network
including left middle prefrontal cortex and middle and inferior temporal
gyrus. Taken together, results suggest that while true retrieval is mediated
by retrieval of visual details and general reconstructive processes, false
retrieval relies on semantic or categorical processing, potentially associated with the scene’s theme. A direct comparison between the two types of
memories supported this conclusion, finding greater activity in early occipital cortex for true compared to false memories and middle temporal gyrus
for false compared to true memories. Results will be discussed within the
framework of false memories more generally, as well as in relation to the
Fuzzy Trace Theory.

D104
TRUE MEMORY BUT NOT FALSE MEMORY FOR SHAPE ACTIVATES THE LATERAL OCCIPITAL COMPLEX Jessica M. Karanian1, Scott

D. Slotnick1; 1Boston College — Previous work suggests that true memory
produces greater activity than false memory in earlier sensory cortical
regions, while both true memory and false memory produce activity in
later cortical regions (such as language processing cortex). Of importance,
this pattern of activity was observed during retrieval of non-detailed visual
information. As such, false memories in previous studies may have lacked
sufficient detail to activate earlier visual processing regions. The present
fMRI study was conducted to assess whether detailed false memory for
shape would activate the lateral occipital complex (LOC), a region involved
in processing this feature. At encoding, participants were presented with
colored abstract shapes that were either intact or scrambled. At retrieval,
colored disks were presented and participants indicated whether the corCognitive Neuroscience Society

151

Poster Session D	
responding shape was previously “intact” or “scrambled”. LOC was localized by contrasting intact shapes versus scrambled shapes at encoding.
True memory for shape was isolated by contrasting accurate memory for
intact shapes versus inaccurate memory for intact shapes (i.e., “intact”/
intact > “scrambled”/intact; hits > misses). False memory for shape was
isolated by contrasting inaccurate memory for scrambled shapes versus
accurate memory for scrambled shapes (i.e., “intact”/scrambled > “scrambled”/scrambled). Consistent with previous findings, preliminary analysis
suggests true memory but not false memory for shape produced activity
in LOC, while both true memory and false memory produced activity in
higher-level cortical regions (including language processing cortex and the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex). The present results suggest that false memories do not activate earlier sensory cortical regions, even under conditions
of detailed retrieval.

D105
STRIATAL INTEGRITY INFLUENCES RULE-DRIVEN, BUT NOT
RELATIONAL MEMORY IN OLDER ADULTS Patrick Watson1, Hillary

Schwarb1, Chris Shander1, Jim Monti1, Gillian Cooke1, Arthur Kramer1, Neal
Cohen1; 1Beckman Institute of Science and Technology, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign — Recent research has begun to tie hippocampal
memory processing to more distributed memory networks including the
PFC (Simons & Spiers 2003, Zeithamova, Dominich, & Preston, 2012), and
has linked age-related memory declines to changes in hippocampal volumes (Raz 2005) and frontal function (West, 1996). However, patient and
animal studies have shown consistent dissociations between hippocampal
“relational” and striatal “habit” strategies, suggesting that these two brain
regions additionally produce competing memory representations (Hartley
et al. 2003, Lee, Duman, & Pittenger 2008). We investigated this competition
within a novel context-dependent associative learning task. In this task,
participants studied face-location associations within two distinct contexts.
Within each context, each face appeared in a unique location determined by
an underlying contextual rule structure (e.g., male faces on the left, females
on the right). Behavioral and eye-tracking measures demonstrated that
older adults and college-aged participants were able to successfully encode
the multiple context-dependent associations, but that older adults were less
likely to identify and flexibly apply the appropriate contextual rule, resulting in lower overall performance. Further, older adults’ striatal volume, but
not hippocampal volume, was related to measures of “rule stickiness” (i.e.,
tendency to apply the same contextual rule repeatedly). These data suggest
hippocampal involvement in memory for specific associations, and striatal
involvement in the application of contextual rules.

D106
HIPPOCAMPAL INVOLVEMENT IN RETRIEVAL OF ASSOCIATIVE
AND SOURCE MEMORY Cheryl Abellanoza1, Heekyeong Park1; 1University

of Texas at Arlington — Previous research has investigated the neural correlates of associative memory and source memory. However, most studies have examined them separately or focused on encoding; therefore, it
has not been established if neural correlates overlap for retrieval of associative and source memory. The present fMRI study (n=19) investigated
neural correlates of associative and source memory during retrieval. Participants were presented picture pairs and instructed to engage in one of
two semantic tasks. During test, participants were asked to make associative memory judgments by determining if picture pairs were “intact” (both
pictures presented in the same study pair), “rearranged” (both pictures
presented during study but paired differently), or “new”. Participants also
made source recognition judgments by identifying the task for studied
pairs. Associative memory regardless of source judgment recruited activity in the left inferior frontal gyrus and left occipito-parietal regions. However, neural activity for associative memory differed by source judgment.
Retrieval of associative memory with correct source context was identified
in the left inferior frontal cortex, left parietal cortex, and left anterior hippocampus, while retrieval of associative memory without correct source
context was found only in left inferior frontal and lateral parietal cortical
regions. The results demonstrate that the anterior hippocampus involves
in veridical recognition of associative memory accompanied by accurate
contextual source information. These findings suggest that retrieval of associative memory with accurate source context recruits an additive activity in
the hippocampus.

152

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

D107
BEHAVIOURAL AND NEURAL CORRELATES OF AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY AND FUTURE THINKING IN DEPRESSION Donna

Rose Addis1, Sylvia Hach1, Lynette J Tippett1; 1The University of Auckland, New
Zealand — Depression is associated with a decrease in the specificity of past
and future events. When engaged in autobiographical memory (AM) or
future thinking (FT) tasks, depressed individuals generate more generic
events compared to non-depressed individuals. The CaRFAX model proposes that reduced event specificity results from a combination of rumination, functional avoidance and executive dysfunction. We tested the contribution of these elements to the specificity of AM and FT in depression
and explored whether there are differences in the neural correlates of AM
and FT. Participants completed measures of rumination, avoidance and
executive function (working memory, inhibition, set-shifting and strategy
use). While undergoing fMRI, the AM and FT tasks were also completed.
Depressed participants were more ruminative and avoidant than controls,
and generated fewer specific events during the AM and FT task. However,
there were no group differences in executive function. Regressions revealed
that measures of strategy use (e.g., CVLT semantic clustering and category
fluency) were associated with specificity over and above depression severity, rumination and avoidance. fMRI analyses showed that both groups
engaged regions typically associated with AM and FT. However, reduced
activity and connectivity in key regions such as the hippocampus were
present for depressed participants. This was accompanied by increased
activation of frontal regions and greater functional connectivity between
the right hippocampus and frontal areas, which may reflect greater executive demands and/or compensatory activation. These results suggest that
strategic abilities and neural changes both play an important role in the
generation of specific AM and FT in depression.

D108
MEMORY SCRAMBLE: THE IMAGINATION INFLATION EFFECT FOR
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY CONJUNCTION ERRORS Aleea

Devitt1, Daniel L. Schacter2, Donna Rose Addis1; 1The University of Auckland,
Harvard University — Autobiographical Memory (AM) conjunction errors
are a type of false memory that can arise following the incorrect recombination of details from different veridical memories. AM conjunction errors
increase following imagination of conjunction events. This imagination
inflation effect could be driven by source confusion due to an increase in
phenomenological quality and/or processing fluency. To elucidate the contributions of these processes to the imagination inflation effect for AM conjunction errors, both an imagination and a non-imagination exposure condition were employed in this study. Conjunction lures were constructed by
recombining person, place and object details taken from veridical AMs, and
were divided between imagination and association conditions. In the imagination condition, participants imagined a novel past event involving the
details, while in the exposure condition participants ranked details based
on subjective pleasantness. On a subsequent source monitoring test, conjunction errors occurred when conjunction lures were incorrectly judged as
depicting real memories. Imagined conjunction lures were falsely accepted
as indicative of a real memory more often than exposure conjunction lures,
indicating that fluency alone cannot fully account for this inflation effect.
Conjunction errors were rated as intermediate between real events and
correctly identified imagined events on a number of phenomenological
characteristics, suggesting that source confusion could have occurred due
to phenomenological similarity between conjunction events and authentic
memories. These results may have practical implications for applied situations in which memory authenticity is of high importance, such as in
eyewitness testimony.
2

D109
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EMOTIONAL SOURCE MEMORY
RETRIEVAL OF PERSONAL BELIEFS: AN EVENT-RELATED FMRI
STUDY Vijeth Iyengar1, Carla Pais-Vieira2, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Center for Cogni-

tive Neuroscience, Duke University, 2University of Aveiro — While studies have
identified regions crucial for remembering emotional materials, the majority of these studies have used stimuli that evoke emotion automatically. To
date, few studies have examined the neural mechanisms underlying emotional memory in cases where emotion is self-generated. To explore this

2014 Annual Meeting	
question, we conducted an fMRI study in which participants were scanned
during alternating runs of encoding and retrieval. At encoding, participants
were presented with unfamiliar face-belief (e.g. “Thinks homeless people
should not receive federal assistance”) pairs and judged beliefs on a scale
ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree. At retrieval, participants
viewed previously encoded face-belief pairs (intact) and pairs with faces
presented with beliefs from other faces (recombined) and made an intact/
recombined judgment with confidence. Behaviorally, source memory was
better for pairs initially associated with strongly agree/disagree judgments
relative to pairs associated with moderate agree/disagree judgments.
Retrieval success activity was found in the medial temporal lobes including
the parahippocampal gyrus, along with the posterior cingulate, and angular gyrus, while greater amygdala activity was found for high (strongly
agree/disagree) vs. moderate arousal pairs. In addition, the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) was active for successfully retrieved items initially
associated with agree judgments. These findings are consistent with the
amygdala’s and mPFC in emotional memory and self-referential processing respectively, and highlight the importance of investigating self-generated emotional influences on memory in addition to affective processes
driven primarily by inherent stimulus properties.

D110
SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES BETWEEN EPISODIC AND
SEMANTIC MEMORY: AN FMRI STUDY Wei-Chun Wang1, Nadia Brash-

ier1, Erik Wing1, Elizabeth Marsh1, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke University —
Declarative memory is typically understood to consist of separate episodic
and semantic systems. Episodic memory (EM) encompasses the recovery of
previously experienced events, while semantic memory (SM) corresponds
to the retrieval of general knowledge (Tulving, 1972). The hallmark of SM
is activity in left anterior temporal regions, while EM is often marked by
medial temporal, posterior cingulate, and posterior parietal activations.
The present study directly compares the two retrieval modes using identical verbal stimuli. Participants incidentally encoded factual statements
outside the scanner. Pilot data confirm that these statements were either
well-known (e.g., The fastest animal on Earth is the cheetah) or obscure
(e.g., The smallest fish species is the paedocypris). In the scanned retrieval
session, participants alternated between rating oldness (EM task) and
truthfulness (SM task) for old and new statements. Episodic retrieval success (hits > correct rejections) corresponded with a canonical network of
regions, including the posterior cingulate, lateral parietal areas, and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. In contrast, semantic retrieval success (known
> unknown statements) was associated with activity in left temporal and
dorsomedial frontal regions. The conjunction of these contrasts revealed
common frontoparietal, anterior cingulate, and medial temporal regions
supporting both episodic and semantic retrieval. These data suggest that
EM and SM are spatially distinct processes, but that there is also considerable overlap in their neural correlates.

D111
IS RECONSOLIDATION MEDIATED BY TOP-DOWN OR BOTTOM-UP
NEURAL PROCESSES? FMRI EVIDENCE. Katharine Newman-Smith1,

Lynn Nadel1, Rebecca Gomez1, Paige Scalf1; 1University of Arizona, Tucson —
Consolidated memory traces can be reactivated--returned to a labile state,
and subsequently modified - a process known as reconsolidation. Using a
modified object-learning paradigm (Hupbach et al., 2007), we demonstrate
distinct neural signatures and connectivity mediating this effect. Participants learn 20 ordinary objects (Set 1). Two days later, participants are
scanned during 1) Set 1 reactivation and 2) administration of a novel list of
20 objects (Set 2). After another two days, a recognition test is administered
to determine the extent to which Set 2 learning affects the Set 1 memory.
Hupbach et al. demonstrated unidirectional memory modification in which
some Set 2 items intruded into the Set 1 memory. Here, during Set 1 reactivation, participants exhibiting minor Set 1 modifications showed greater
BOLD signal in the DLPFC and increased functional connectivity between
bilateral hippocampus and the restrosplenial cortex, possibly reflecting
an attended, explicit re-engagement of the Set 1 memory. Those showing strong memory-modifications displayed greater BOLD signal during
Set 1 reactivation in the bilateral occipital poles and increased functional
connectivity between the bilateral hippocampus, bilateral LOC, and basal
ganglia, reflecting both top-down and bottom-up activation of these Set
1 object representations. During Set 2 administration, neural activity was

Poster Session D
greater in the same regions engaged during the reactivation phase in the
two-seconds prior to the presentation of Set 2 items later intruded into Set 1
memory. When these sensory neural processes are recruited before administration of a particular Set 2 item, this item’s likelihood of intruding into
Set 1 increases.

D112
THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBES SUPPORT BINDING ACROSS
LONG-TERM AND SHORT-TERM MEMORY: EVIDENCE FROM
AMNESIA Liz Race1, Margaret Cadden1, Mieke Verfaellie1; 1VA Boston Health-

care System and Boston University School of Medicine — Although shortterm memory (STM) and long-term memory (LTM) have traditionally been
considered cognitively distinct, it is known that STM can improve when
to-be-remembered information appears in contexts that make contact with
existing LTM representations. For example, verbal STM is enhanced when
to-be-remembered information is presented in familiar visuospatial contexts that have existing representations in LTM (Darling et al., 2012). This
visuospatial bootstrapping effect suggests a more interactive relationship
between LTM and STM. An important outstanding question is whether
integrating across STM and LTM critically depends on binding functions
supported by the medial temporal lobes (MTL). To investigate this question, we tested whether digit span performance in amnesic patients with
MTL damage improves when digits are presented in a familiar visuospatial
context (a telephone keypad array) compared to an unfamiliar visuospatial
context (a random keypad array). In contrast to controls, whose digit span
improved in the familiar visuospatial context, amnesic patients’ digit span
performance did not differ in the familiar vs. unfamiliar contexts, indicating
an inability to leverage visuospatial LTM to benefit verbal STM. We then
confirmed that this bootstrapping impairment in amnesia occurred despite
intact LTM representations of a telephone keypad by demonstrating that
both groups demonstrate equivalent reaction time facilitation when typing
visually-presented numbers into a familiar keypad compared to an unfamiliar keypad. These results demonstrate that MTL processes play a critical
role in integrating across LTM and STM.

D113
HIPPOCAMPAL INTEGRITY INFLUENCES RELATIONAL, BUT NOT
RULE-DRIVEN MEMORY IN OLDER ADULTS Hillary Schwarb1, Patrick

D. Watson1, Chris Shander1, Jim M. Monti1, Gillian E. Cooke1, Arthur F. Kramer1,
Neal J. Cohen1; 1Beckman Institute of Science and Technology, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — While the hippocampus is critical for declarative (relational) memory (e.g., Cohen & Eichenbaum, 1993; 2001), recent
research implicates its involvement in a larger network of memory structures including the PFC (e.g. Zeithamova, Dominich, & Preston, 2012) and
striatum (e.g., Hartley et al. 2003). As we age, both hippocampal volume
(e.g., Raz, 2005) and frontal function (e.g., West, 1996) decline making
older adults an ideal population for understanding MTL-PFC involvement
in context guided relational memory. To investigate this relationship, we
developed a novel, context-dependent association-learning task in which
face-location associations are learned in two distinct contexts. Within each
context, each face is studied in a unique room and face location is determined by an underlying rule structure that differs between the two contexts (e.g., males on left, females on right). This task afforded us the opportunity to investigate both unique and shared contributions of MTL and
PFC to associative-memory and rule-learning. Behavioral and eye-tracking
data show that older adults learned the contextual rule structure, but were
unable to flexibly apply these rules to aid performance; and rule-learning
and hippocampal volume were unrelated. However, older adults were
frequently able to place faces in previously studied locations, and hippocampal volume was related to improved associative-memory performance
especially when the faces were placed in contextually inappropriate studied locations.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

153

Poster Session D	

METHODS: Neuroimaging
D114
REDUCED WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY IN INFANTS AT RISK FOR
DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA Barbara Peysakhovich1, Nicolas Langer1,2,

Jennifer Zuk1, Marie Drottar1, Danielle D. Sliva1, Sara Smith1, Bryce Becker1, P.
Ellen Grant1,2,3, Nadine Gaab1,2,4; 1Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, 2Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 3Massachussetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA, 4Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, MA — Developmental dyslexia (DD) is characterized by deficits in reading and reading-related
skills such as spelling, decoding and fluent word recognition. Familial
occurrences and twin studies strongly support a genetic basis for DD. Studies in children/adults with DD revealed white matter abnormalities, particularly in left posterior language areas, that seem to underlie these reading
difficulties. However, no studies to date have examined how early on the
developmental trajectory these structural white matter alterations emerge.
The present study investigated white matter structure of the bilateral arcuate fasciculus (AF) in 14 infants with (FHD+) and 18 without (FHD-) a
familial risk of DD. Diffusion scans were acquired during the infants’ natural sleep and the Mullen Scales of Early Learning was also administered.
Tractography for the bilateral AF was manually reconstructed in TrackVis
using a two-ROI approach. Furthermore, automated fiber quantification
was used to reconstruct the left and right AF and to further calculate fractional anisotropy (FA) at 100 equidistant nodes along the tracts, allowing
for a more precise localization of group differences along each tract. The
analyses revealed significantly lower FA values in the central portion of
the left AF for FHD+ compared to FHD- infants. Moreover, the expressive language subtest of the Mullen positively correlated with mean FA
values in the left AF across both groups. These results suggest that white
matter abnormalities observed in children/adults with a diagnosis of DD
or kindergartners at risk for DD may already be present at birth or develop
within the first few months of life.

D115
NEUROPSYCHIATRIC BIOMARKERS HIDDEN IN GLOBAL
SIGNAL: FOCUS ON SCHIZOPHRENIA AND BIPOLAR ILLNESS

Genevieve Yang1,2, John D. Murray3, Grega Repovs4, Michael W. Cole5, Aleksandar Savic1,2,6, Matt Glasser5, John H. Krystal1,2,7, Xiao-Jing Wang3, Godfrey
D. Pearlson1,8, David C. Glahn1,8, Alan Anticevic1,2,7; 1Yale University School
of Medicine, 2Abraham Ribicoff Research Facilities, Connecticut Mental Health
Center, 3New York University, 4University of Ljubljana, 5Washington University in
St. Louis, 6University Psychiatric Hospital Vrapce, University of Zagreb, 7NIAAA
Center for the Translational Neuroscience of Alcoholism, 8Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center, Institute of Living, Hartford Hospital — Schizophrenia
is a severe mental illness associated with extensive neural abnormalities,
ranging from synaptic alterations to higher level disruptions in functional
connectivity observed in resting state fMRI studies. We therefore hypothesized that cortical computations in this illness may be broadly disrupted,
in a manner measurable at the global brain signal (GS) level and specific
to schizophrenia as opposed to other mental disorders. To pursue this
hypothesis, we obtained resting state fMRI studies on two independent
groups of patients suffering from chronic schizophrenia (N=90 & N=71)
and on a group of bipolar patients (N=73), along with healthy comparison subjects (HCS) matched to each clinical group (N=220). We found evidence that GS in schizophrenia patients is significantly increased in power
and variance compared to HCS; this effect was positively correlated with
patient symptoms and was not seen in bipolar patients. Furthermore, voxel-wise variance was also broadly increased in schizophrenia patients and
not in HCS or in bipolar patients. Results suggest that GS, which is often
discarded in functional connectivity fMRI studies as a meaningless nuisance variable, can on the contrary carry distinct, meaningful information
across psychiatric conditions. We additionally show that GS removal can
obscure important differences between patient and healthy populations.
To examine potential neurological mechanisms of these findings, we utilized a parsimonious, biophysically-based computational model of shared
and non-shared signal propagation throughout multiple parcellated brain
regions. On basis of our empirical findings, we explore the model’s potential to generate rationally-designed hypotheses about clinical populations
with broadly distributed signal abnormalities.

154

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

D116
DIFFERENTIAL ACTIVATION OF THE DEFAULT MODE NETWORK
IN JET LAGGED INDIVIDUALS Kristina Hernandez1, Amanda Hender-

son1, Joana Coutinho2, Liliana Maia2, Adriana Sampaio2, Derek Gosman1, April
Krowel1, Lauren Young1, Kristin Perrone-McGovern1, Stephanie Simon-Dack1,
Oscar Gonzales2; 1Ball State University, 2Universidade do Minho — Longterm exposure to transmeridian flights has been shown to impact cognitive functioning, however the short-term cognitive deficits of jet lag have
not been clearly identified. The Default Mode Network (DMN) was examined to investigate the impact of short term jet lag on the brain’s resting
activity. Participants consisted of two groups, a group of individuals who
were recently on a transmeridian flight and a control group. A BOLD fMRI
sequence was performed in a Philips Achieva 3T. The preprocessing of the
fMRI data was performed using Data Processing Assistant for Resting-State
fMRI (DPRASF) and then spatial Independent Component Analysis was
performed in GIFT software to extract the Default Mode Network (DMN)
maps. For each subject the DMN component was identified by selecting the
one with the highest spatial correlation to the default network template.
Statistical analysis was performed to test for differences in the DMN activation between groups. We found that participants from the jet lag group
presented decreased activation in the anterior nodes of the DMN, more specifically in bilateral medial prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex
involved in different self-referential processes such as introspection (Gusnard et al, 2001). These results were corrected for multiples comparisons
using FDR. No DMN areas of increased activation for the jet lag group were
found. Decreases in the DMN for the jet lag group may be suggestive of an
impact on the brain´s resting state activity.

D117
INTEGRATION OF FMRI AND MEG FOR OPTIMIZED SPATIAL SENSITIVITY TO NEURAL ACTIVITY Sean McWhinney1, Timothy Bardouille2,

Ryan D’Arcy1,2,3, Aaron Newman1,2; 1Dalhousie University, 2IWK Health Centre,
3
Simon Fraser University and Surrey Memorial Hospital — Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and magnetoencephalography (MEG) are
two widely used neuroimaging techniques which operate on different
mechanisms to measure brain activity, and possess unique spatial sensitivity profiles. Studies that examine activity in both deeper structures,
to which MEG shows reduced sensitivity, and structures near air-tissue
interfaces, in which fMRI signal can be distorted or lost, may benefit from
integration of the two imaging techniques. The present study optimized
sensitivity to neural activity by integrating fMRI and MEG data sets, using
a novel method of weighting the inputs from the two modalities by a datadriven, voxel-by-voxel measure of quality. The method of integration was
demonstrated using data from a visual object recognition task. MEG data
were localized using beamforming to produce maps of activity comparable
to fMRI activation maps. Data quality (contrast-to-noise ratio) was calculated at each voxel for each modality and was used to weight the contribution of that modality to the multimodal activation map. The resulting
maps reflected both activations that were observed in one but not the other
modality (e.g., hippocampus only in fMRI), and critically showed increased
sensitivity to activation that was common to both modalities. This increased
sensitivity resulted in detection of activations that were present, but below
threshold, in both single-modality statistical maps. This demonstrates an
improvement over both simple averaging of maps from two modalities,
which leads to reduced sensitivity, and over fMRI-constrained MEG source
localization, which negates any unique sensitivity of MEG.

D118
PRECUNEUS ACTIVATION IN LOW EMOTIONAL DOMINANCE
RELATED TO EXTROVERSION Amanda J Khan1, Alyson Negreira1, David

Gansler1, Matthew Jerram1; 1Suffolk University — Introduction: Emotions
have been conceptualized on a three dimensional model consisting of
valence, arousal, and dominance. Previous studies have reported activation in the precuneus in response to shifting dominance. Extroversion
has been associated with assertiveness and increased activity, which are
conceptually linked to dominance. The current study aims to examine the
relationship between extroversion and functional activation during low
dominance. Methods: FMRI data were acquired for fourteen healthy adult
males viewing IAPS images in an event related design. Normative IAPS

2014 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session D

ratings were used to create the two conditions: passive viewing of neutral
valence, neutral dominance and top down processing of neutral valence,
neutral dominance where the participant was instructed to make themselves feel less dominant. FreeSurfer was used to contrast the conditions
and the resulting statistical map was regressed with NEO-FFI extroversion
scale scores. Results: Analyses showed significant inverse correlations (p
< .05) of activation in the left and right precuneus between top down processing and extroversion scores. Discussion: As predicted, the precuneus
showed significantly reduced activation in more extroverted individuals.
Precuneus is associated with self-reflection, consciousness, and theory of
mind (Buckner et al., 2008; Jeannerod, 2007). Also, precuneus is associated
with person-perspective taking and experience of agency (Cavanna and
Trimble, 2006). Recently, Jerram et al., (2013) found support for the association of precuneus activation during top-down processing of active dominance. The precuneus in extroverts may be less reactive as these individuals
may generally experience relatively more emotional dominance, even in
low dominance situations.

tified as the correlation between the i-th BOLD signal and its prediction.
The impulse response duration of the model was determined via Information Criteria in Matlab. Sub-network interactions were then computed
using graph analytical techniques. The directed information flow in the
functional network was examined. Using this approach, we successfully
replicated the previously observed modular organization of the brain, and
identified multiple large-scale networks, including the sensory-motor, perceptual, executive and default networks. The results may provide unique
insight into the movement of information within and between these largescale brain systems.

D119
CONTRIBUTION OF THE “MOTOR LOOP” TO COGNITION IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE: AN FMRI STUDY Anna R. Schönberger1,2, Klara

Russo1; 1Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario, 2University of California, San
Diego, San Diego, California — The extended mirror system in humans,
consisting of motor execution and perception areas in the frontal, parietal,
and temporal lobes, appears responsible for the execution and perception
of meaningful action and is hypothesized to be linked to simulation of
emotional actions of others. Areas of the extended MS are activated during
one’s own execution of an action, as well as during perception of the same
action by other agents. Additionally, these same neurons will fire towards
the execution and perception of different actions that convey similar intentions. The current study examined the role of the human mirror system in
the emotional perception of action. We wished to determine whether sung
musical intervals perceived with a top-down focus on emotional expression versus pitch distance would lead to a greater amount of MS activation.
EEG measurement of alpha and beta mu waves was used to examine MS
responsiveness, as fluctuations in mu wave power are thought to reflect
downstream regulation of the motor cortex from frontal and parietal MNS
areas. An independent components analysis revealed a cluster of components in the left superior temporal gyrus (STG) that exhibited greater
desynchronization in the alpha mu wave during emotional vs. structural
perception of song. The STG is a part of the extended MS that is involved
in visual and auditory observation of biological movement in humans. This
finding suggests that the STG is involved to a greater extent in emotion-focused than non-emotion-focused action processing.

Hagelweide1,4, Esther A. Pelzer1,2, Gereon R. Fink1,3, Ricarda I. Schubotz1,2,4;
University Hospital Cologne, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Neurological
Research, Cologne, Germany, 3Research Centre Jülich, Germany, 4University
of Muenster, Germany — Cognitive deficits in Parkinson’s disease (PD)
are commonly attributed to frontal lobe dysfunction, due to dopamine
deficiency in the frontostriatal loops. Although recent studies point to a
close interplay between motor and cognitive abilities in PD, the contribution of the so-called “motor loop” (i.e., supplementary motor area (SMA),
putamen) to cognition remains to be elucidated. Traditionally, the SMA is
assigned a role in memory-driven rather than in stimulus-driven motor
control, whereas the opposite holds for the lateral premotor cortex (PMC).
Imaging-studies reveal reduced SMA-activity in PD-patients performing
motor tasks which further decreases “off” medication. When external cues
are provided, the patients’ motor-skills improve. The latter is associated
with increased PMC-activation suggesting compensatory processes. In our
study we investigated whether similar mechanisms exist for cognitive processes. We accordingly tested 16 male PD-patients “on” and “off” dopaminergic medication and 16 age-matched male healthy controls with the serial
prediction task (SPT0) in an fMRI-study. A parametric modulation was
implemented that caused shifts from stimulus- to memory-based prediction
(SPT+). Patients revealed an impaired performance compared to controls
combined with a decreased activity in the motor loop (SMA&putamen).
Patients “off” compared to “on” medication exhibited no differences in
performance but revealed increased PMC-activity for SPT+ > SPT0. Furthermore, PMC-activity correlated with patients’ performance “off” medication, compatible with the view of a putative compensatory role. In summary, in patients suffering from PD we showed a contribution of the motor
loop to cognition and compensatory mechanisms via the premotor system
similar to those known from motor tasks.
1

D120
DIRECTED INTERACTIVITY OF LARGE-SCALE BRAIN NETWORKS: INTRODUCING A NEW METHOD FOR ESTIMATING
RESTING-STATE EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY MRI Nan Xu1, R. Nathan

Spreng1, Peter C. Doerschuk1; 1Cornell University — Resting-state functional
MRI is widely used to non-invasively study brain networks and network
dynamics. Recently, graph theory analytic measures have been used to
assess the functional associations between regions of interest (ROIs) and
determine pairwise connectivity by computing the correlation between
BOLD signal time series data. However informative, this approach cannot
capture the causality and the direction of information flow. The goal of this
work is to characterize the pairwise relationship among brain regions, as
well as their directionality, to determine information flow in the brain. In
a discovery and replication sample (both n’s = 66, age range 25-30 years
old), we assessed resting-state functional MRI BOLD signals from 264 ROIs
previously identified as putative functional areas. We estimated a causal
linear time-invariant time-evolution model, which included the possibility
of temporal delay, to predict the signal at the i-th ROI from the signal at
the j-th ROI. Information flow from the j-th to the i-th ROI was then quan-

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition
D121
EEG MU WAVE DESYNCHRONIZATION DURING EMOTION JUDGMENTS OF HUMAN ACTION Lucy McGarry1, Jaime A. Pineda2, Frank A.

D122
NEURAL PROCESSING OF PHONETIC AND TALKER INFORMATION IN A TONE LANGUAGE: AN FMRI STUDY Caicai Zhang1, Kenneth

R. Pugh2,3,4, W. Einar Mencl2,3, Peter J. Molfese2, Stephen J. Frost2, James S.
Magnuson2,4, Gang Peng1, William S-Y. Wang1; 1The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, 2Haskins Laboratories, 3Yale University, 4University of Connecticut —
A fundamental question in speech perception is how phonetic and talker
information are retrieved from speech signals. Importantly, phonetic and
talker processing appear to be interdependent, which is evidenced by the
observations that listeners adapt to talker-specific vocal characteristics in
order to correctly map speech signals to words (talker information influencing phonetic processing) and that native speakers outperform nonnative
speakers in talker identification (phonetic information influencing talker
processing). Neurobiologically, studies in non-tone languages like English
have shown that left posterior STG/STS, which is activated in speech recognition, also exhibits sensitivity to vocal tract length that differentiates talker
identity/size; fundamental frequency (F0), which correlates with talker differences but is not phonetically contrastive, only activates areas adjacent to
primary auditory cortex. In this fMRI study, we investigate phonetic and
talker processing in Cantonese, a tone language where F0 distinguishes lexical meanings. We examined neural responses to stimuli that change in tone
category or in talker identity/gender, while eighteen listeners performed
speech discrimination (same/different tone judgment) and talker discrimination (same/different talker judgment) tasks. Right parahippocampal
gyrus and thalamus were activated to stimuli with talker changes in the
talker discrimination task, which we speculate to be related to on-line learning of talker-specific characteristics. Importantly, STG activated bilaterally
in response to stimuli with tone changes in the talker discrimination task

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

155

Poster Session D	
and to stimuli with talker changes in the speech discrimination task. This
finding further supports the role of STG in interdependent/integrated phonetic and talker processing irrespective of specific language parameters.

D124
DISTRIBUTED REPRESENTATIONS OF PHONETIC FEATURES
DURING SPEECH PERCEPTION: INVESTIGATING THE ROLES OF
THE MOTOR AND AUDITORY CORTICES Jessica Arsenault1,2, Bradley

Buchsbaum1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute, 2University of Toronto — While
studies of speech perception using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) have often found elevated activity in the motor system (e.g. Broca’s area and premotor cortex), we still know little about what information is encoded in the activity of both the auditory and premotor/motor
cortices. Multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA) can provide a more informative description of brain activation patterns than the standard univariate
approach to imaging data. This study explored the activity patterns associated with the auditory perception of syllables that share varying levels
of feature similarity and acoustic confusability. Rather than simply identifying activation of the motor cortex during speech perception, the goal
was to identify how the similarity of consonants as assessed by acoustic
confusability (e.g. /m/ is confusable with /n/ but not /k/) is mirrored by
the similarity among patterns of brain activation in the motor and auditory cortices, respectively. Sixteen consonant-vowel syllables were aurally
presented one at a time to participants in the fMRI scanner. Using both
a whole-brain searchlight and an ROI-based mulitvoxel pattern classifier,
MVPA was performed on categories of three different features - place of
articulation, manner of articulation, and voicing. Results suggest a distributed pattern of activation throughout auditory cortex for syllabic stimuli
compared to baseline. In contrast, phonetic feature categories could not be
reliably classified in motor or premotor cortex. These results lend support
to the claim that auditory cortex is the primary locus of the representational
code underlying acoustic-phonetic information relevant for the perception
of consonants.

D125
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY NETWORKS ASSOCIATED WITH
GLOBAL AND LOCAL AUDITORY MMN Lizzy Blundon1, Lawrence Ward1;
1

University of British Columbia — We used high-density EEG, independent
component analysis (ICA), and phase locking value to study functional
connectivity in the brain networks associated with the auditory MMN.
Stimuli included two different five-tone patterns: “flat runs” consisted of
five identical 50-ms tones at 100 ms ISI; in “change runs” the final tone, the
local deviant, was different in pitch from the preceding four. Either run
type could serve as an oddball, or global deviant, amongst a collection of
the other type. Subjects pressed a button when they detected the oddball
run type (global deviant). The change run always produced a robust local
MMN from 180-250ms after the onset of the last tone (compared to the last
tone in the flat run), regardless of whether it was a global standard or a
global oddball/deviant. Global deviants of either type produced a frontal
negativity and posterior positivity from 300-600ms after the onset of the last
tone. IC sources over all stimuli were localized to bilateral auditory cortices,
bilateral inferior frontal gyri, right middle frontal gyrus (MFG) BA 9, bilateral MFG BA 6, and anterior cingulate. Phase locking analysis during the
MMN period revealed greater fronto-temporal functional connectivity for
the deviant stimulus compared to the standard, between right hemisphere
sources only in the local deviant condition, and bilaterally in the global
deviant condition. These results confirm the importance of fronto-temporal connectivity in auditory change detection, and demonstrate differential
inter- and cross-hemisphere communication involved in detecting local or
global changes in the auditory environment.

D126
THE LIMITS OF INTELLIGIBILITY: ELECTROCORTICOGRAPHIC
RESPONSES TO TIME-COMPRESSED SPEECH Ido Davidesco1,2,

Christopher J Honey1, Thomas Thesen2, Lucia Melloni2,3,4, Werner Doyle2, Orrin
Devinsky2, Oded Ghitza5, Charles E Schroeder3,6, David Poeppel2, Uri Hasson1;
1
Princeton University, 2New York University, 3Columbia University, 4Max-Planck
Institute for Brain Research, 5Boston University, 6Nathan S. Kline Institute for
Psychiatric Research — Human listeners understand speech over a wide
range of rates. It is not established how this tolerance to temporal vari-

156

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
ability is achieved at the neural level and why spoken language becomes
unintelligible above certain rates. We addressed these questions using electrocorticography (ECoG) recordings in 7 epileptic patients. The patients
rated the intelligibility of sentences presented at speeded-up rates (33%,
66%), at the original rate (100%), and at a slowed-down rate (150% of the
original sentence duration). Sentences were repeated twice at each speech
rate. We examined whether the neural responses elicited by slowed-down
and speeded-up sentences could be linearly compressed or stretched to
match the neural responses to the original speech rate. Neural responses
over the superior temporal gyrus showed significant speech tracking for
all speech rates, in the low frequency band-passed voltage (1-7Hz) and in
the broadband gamma power modulations (70-150Hz). Temporal scaling
was observed only for intelligible speech rates (66% and 150%) but was
absent for the rate (33%) at which intelligibility was behaviorally sharply
reduced. We propose that auditory processing can rescale according to the
rate of incoming speech only within the restricted range that underpins
intelligibility.

D127
ALTERED WHITE MATTER MICROSTRUCTURE IN FRONTAL
REGIONS AND IN AUDITORY RADIATIONS UNDERLIES LISTENING DIFFICULTIES IN CHILDREN SUSPECTED OF AUDITORY PROCESSING DISORDER: A DTI STUDY Rola Farah1, Vincent J. Schmithorst2,

Scott K. Holland1, Robert W. Keith3; 1Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical
Center, 2Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh, 3University of Cincinnati — Objective
- Identification of biomarkers is a priority for children presenting with listening difficulties (LiD) suspected of auditory processing disorder (APD).
Behavioral studies have documented impaired cognitive and/or attention
abilities in children referred to APD assessment rather than a pure sensory
processing deficit. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether
children with LiD/ APD demonstrate white matter (WM) abnormalities
using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) Methods - Twelve children with LiD/
suspected APD, manifesting an atypical left ear advantage (LEA) in dichotic listening and twelve age-and gender-matched typically developing
children underwent DTI. Using voxel-based analysis, fractional anisotropy
(FA), mean diffusivity (MD), axial and radial diffusivity (AD, RD) maps
were contrasted between the groups Results - Children with LiD/ APD
showed decreased FA (accounted for by Increased RD and decreased AD)
in frontal multifocal white matter regions centered in prefrontal cortex
bilaterally and left anterior cingulate white matter. In addition, LiD was
associated with increased MD in the posterior limb of the internal capsule (sublenticular part of the internal capsule) and was accounted for by
increase in both RD and AD. Conclusions - Our results suggest that LiD/
APD represent a disorder of altered structural connectivity of the brain,
revealed by frontal distributed atypical white matter microstructure. Furthermore, results suggest delayed myelination in frontal multifocal white
matter tracts and in the region of auditory radiations (auditory input is
transmitted between the thalamus and the auditory cortex). Together, our
findings reveal that both sensory and supramodal deficits may underlie the
differences between the groups.

D128
TOP-DOWN GUIDED LEARNING: EVIDENCE FROM SIMULTANEOUS BRAINSTEM AND CORTICAL AUDIOTRY-EVOKED POTENTIALS Erika Skoe1,2, Jennifer Krizman2, Emily Spitzer2, Nina Kraus2; 1Univeristy

of Connecticut, 2Northwesern University — The auditory system is sensitive
to regularities, such as frequently-occurring sounds and sound combinations, in the environment. Evidence of this can be seen in how neurons
adapt their response to the statistical properties of the soundscape. It has
been theorized that the ability to respond to statistical regularities emerges
as a higher-order property in the auditory cortex that trickles down to subcortical structures (Nelken, Ulanovsky, 2007). However, empirical evidence
for this theory using animal models has been mixed (Antunes, Malmierca,
2011; Bauerle et al., 2011). Here, we add to the discussion surrounding this
theory using a human model that supports a top-down theory of statistical
learning. To capture how different brain areas interact in the process of
learning stimulus statistics, far-field activity from the auditory brainstem
and cortex was simultaneously recorded while young adults listened to
recurring patterns embedded within novel sound streams. After 15 minutes, participants were tested on how well the sound patterns were learned.

2014 Annual Meeting	
Our findings revealed a mismatch in how cortical and subcortical structures index statistical information. For the cortical response, changes from
baseline were observed, even in the condition where the statistical structure
was difficult to learn. In contrast, for the brainstem response, we found a
change from baseline only for the condition where the stimulus statistics
were reliably learned. We theorize that cortical and subcortical structures
provide distinctive contributions to early and late stages of auditory-based
statistical learning, with cortical sensitivity preceding subcortical sensitivity in a cascade of neural events that coordinates learning.

D129
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL (ERP) CORRELATES OF INTERVAL
AND SUB-SECOND TIMING Brenden Tervo-Clemmens1, Mallory Grosso1,

Matthew Matell1; 1Villanova University, Pennsylvania — Traditionally, time
perception has been divided into sub-second (perceptual) and seconds to
minutes (interval) ranges. We investigated whether distinct event-related
potential (ERP) correlates represent the two ranges. Using an auditory oddball task, the mismatched negativity component (MMN) was measured for
increments and decrements in duration. All stimuli (standard/deviant)
were 300 ms in duration. Four experimental blocks were created by varying
the length of the interstimulus interval (ISI) of the standard stimuli (250ms,
500ms, 1s, 2s). During each block, an oddball was created by reducing the
ISI of the standard stimuli by 50%. The amplitude of MMN was calculated
by subtracting the ERP of the standard from the deviant presented in the
same block. We found a larger frontal representation of MMN for longer
durations. The result provides evidence for a distinct cognitive timing circuit involved in the seconds to minutes range.

D130
SLOW ACOUSTIC FLUCTUATIONS ENTRAIN LOW-FREQUENCY
NEURAL OSCILLATIONS AND DETERMINE PSYCHOACOUSTIC
PERFORMANCE Molly Henry1, Björn Herrmann1, Jonas Obleser1; 1Max

Planck Research Group “Auditory Cognition”, Max Planck Institute for Human
Cognitive and Brain Sciences — Neural oscillations can be “entrained”
by environmental rhythms across a wide range of time scales. Recently,
entrainment of neural oscillations by acoustic fluctuations corresponding
to the syllable or prosodic envelopes of natural speech has been suggested
to support speech perception. In our recent human electroencephalography
(EEG) work, we characterized entrainment of low-frequency neural oscillations in the classical delta (1-4 Hz) and theta (4-8 Hz) frequency bands,
and assessed the psychophysical consequences using a gap-detection task.
Stimuli were narrow-band noises, to which we applied frequency modulation (FM, 3.1 Hz) or simultaneous frequency (3.1 Hz) and amplitude
modulation (AM, 5.075 Hz). Gaps were placed systematically with respect
to the phase of the modulations, falling equally often into the rising or
the falling phase of AM, and falling uniformly with respect to FM phase.
Spectral analyses of the EEG signal confirmed that neural oscillations were
entrained by the acoustic frequency and amplitude fluctuations. For simple
FM entrainment, gap-detection hit rates depended on the entrained 3.1-Hz
neural phase, and were highest for the “optimal” phase of the oscillation.
For simultaneous FM-AM entrainment, our data indicated a joint optimal
phase of the two entrained neural oscillations where gap detection performance was best. Moreover, the effects of 3.1-Hz neural phase on overall performance were modulated by 5.075-Hz neural phase. The results support
current conceptualizations of entrainment as a supporting mechanism for
speech perception, and further characterize the perceptual consequences of
entrainment of potentially interacting neural frequency bands by complex
environmental rhythms.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Other
D131
AN EMBODIED MECHANISM UNDERLYING STUDENT UNDERSTANDING OF PHYSICS: MOTOR RESONANCE AFTER SENSORIMOTOR TRAINING PREDICTS UNDERSTANDING Carly Kontra1,

Sian Beilock1; 1University of Chicago — Data collected in our lab suggest
that sensorimotor experience with torque and angular momentum facilitates comprehension of physics exam questions. Here we ask why physical
experience enhances understanding of these concepts. Guided by theories

Poster Session D
of embodied cognition, whereby offline cognition (occurring in the absence
of relevant environmental input) is grounded in sensorimotor processes,
we propose that students’ understanding of torque and angular momentum is supported by activation of sensorimotor brain systems that were
previously involved in physically producing and experiencing forces.
We use fMRI to test our hypothesized embodied learning mechanism.
In a pre-posttest design, participants made relative judgments about the
magnitude of forces in a Torque Judgment Task (TJT). During a training
module, we manipulated participants’ experience with a pair of bicycle
wheels on an axle (some received motor experience with the wheels and
others only visual experience). Participants completed the TJT-posttest in
the scanner and a follow-up quiz 24 hours later. A series of brain regions
involved in action planning and production showed more activity during
the TJT-posttest after motor experience relative to visual. These regions,
known to be sensitive to previous motor experience, included bilateral premotor cortex, bilateral primary motor cortex, and left superior parietal lobe.
Across training groups (motor/visual), activation in the region extending
from left primary motor into somatosensory cortex significantly predicted
quiz performance. Sensorimotor experience (relative to visual) leads to
increased activation of motor systems important for representing dynamic
physical concepts. This activation, in turn, relates to students’ understanding of torque and angular momentum.

D132
UNDERSTANDING CHANGES-OF-MIND IN DECISION MAKING
THROUGH VISUALLY-GUIDED ACTION AND ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY Jeff Moher1, Maro Machizawa1, Joo-Hyun Song1; 1Brown Univer-

sity — People often change their mind even after an initial decision has been
reached, continuing to evaluate evidence as a motor plan is being generated
to execute the initial decision. We used a visually-guided action approach
to examine these changes of mind in decision-making. Specifically, we
examined whether observers adjust their decision thresholds based on
anticipated energy and time costs associated with changing their mind.
Participants saw dynamic random dot displays presented on a distal screen
and judged the direction of dot motion, indicating their response by reaching towards one of two response boxes presented on either side of fixation
while three-dimensional hand position was continuously recorded. We
varied the energy and time costs associated with changes of mind by varying the distance between response boxes. Changes-of-mind were defined
as trials where movement trajectories were initially directed towards one
response box before ultimately ending up at the opposite response box.
We observed that when response boxes were far apart, increasing time and
energy costs, changes-of-mind were less frequent and response initiation
latency was longer. This outcome suggests that participants were changing
the decision processes based on anticipated motor-related time and energy
costs. As changes of mind may reflect internal awareness of an error being
made in the initial decision, cognitive neural substrates of error monitoring
might be associated with the occurrence of a change-of-mind. In line with
this prediction, we found that changes-of-mind produced an error-related
negativity (ERN) component, suggesting that they recruit similar neurophysiological mechanisms as error responses.

D133
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF GOAL-DIRECTED BEHAVIOR: OUTCOME-BASED RESPONSE SELECTION IS ACCOMPANIED BY
INCREASED FUNCTIONAL COUPLING OF THE ANGULAR GYRUS

Katharina Zwosta1, Hannes Ruge1, Wolfensteller Uta1; 1Technische Universitüt
Dresden, Germany — Goal-directed behavior requires building and using
associations between a certain action, a certain situation and the resulting
outcome, thereby enabling flexible response selection in different situations
according to the current goal. In this fMRI study we aimed at identifying
the neural mechanisms that support this outcome-based response selection
and disentangling this process from the mere experience of action-contingent outcomes. We compared an outcome-based condition where subjects
were explicitly instructed to produce a specific outcome to an otherwise
identical stimulus-based condition where stimulus-response mappings
were instructed and added a control condition with random outcomes. We
found increased activation in the right angular gyrus if outcomes were contingent on a response in a certain situation compared to a control condition
where outcomes were unpredictable. The actual integration of outcomes

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

157

Poster Session D	
into response selection was accompanied by increased functional coupling
of the angular gyrus with subcortical (hippocampus, caudate head), prefrontal (lateral orbitofrontal cortex, rostrolateral prefrontal cortex) and
cerebellar areas, which we suggest represent different explicit and implicit
processes of goal-directed action control. Together, these results suggest
that explicit goal-directed behavior is accompanied by increased functional
connectivity between angular gyrus, involved in computing action-outcome contingencies, and areas related to different aspects of goal-directed
behavior.

D134
IDENTIFYING AN EEG SPECTRAL RESPONSE TO PREFERRED
MUSIC Mari-Anne Rosario1, Hiroko Nakano1, Constanza de Dios2; 1Saint

Mary’s College of California, Moraga, CA, USA, 2University of South Florida,
Tampa, FL, USA — This study reports a spectral analysis of the electroencephalograhic (EEG) activity associated with processes of listening to preferred music. Participants listened to instrumental musical excerpts of preferred music pieces (jazz, classical music, tango), of music from alternate
genres (jazz, classical music, tango, foxtrot), and silence while EEGs were
measured. Spectral analysis was performed on the EEG data by calculating
the relative change in spectral power between the music and silence conditions for each participant. A two-way repeated measure ANOVA with
factors Music (Preferred vs. Alternate) and Electrodes (30) yielded a main
effect of Music for the gamma and beta bands, indicating that preferred
music elicited higher spectral power compared to alternate music in these
bands. The same results were found for analyses using separate groups for
jazz, classical music, and tango enthusiasts, suggesting that the effect is
music genre independent. In a behavioral measurement, participants gave
higher enjoyment scores to each of their preferred music pieces compared
to each alternate musical piece. The increased power in the high frequency
bands that occurred while listening to preferred music is in accordance
with the theories that the beta band reflects cognitive arousal, and gamma
the integration of perceptually meaningful stimuli.

D135
ADAPTIVE SOMATOSENSORY PLASTICITY CROSSES THE HANDFACE BORDER BUT DOES NOT SPREAD WITHIN THE HAND
AREA. Dollyane Muret1, Hubert R. Dinse2, Alessandro Farnè1, Karen Reilly1;

1
Lyon Neuroscience Research Center, ImpAct Team, INSERM U1028, CNRS
UMR5292, Lyon, France, 2Institute for Neuroinformatics, Neural Plasticity Laboratory, Ruhr-University Bochum, 44780 Bochum, Germany — Today people
commonly speak about harnessing the plastic capacity of the adult brain
to improve function. Despite the potential impact of this type of adaptive plasticity very little is known about its mechanisms and limits. Plastic changes can be induced in the somatosensory system using repetitive
somatosensory stimulation (RSS) protocols that synchronously stimulate
several cutaneous receptive fields on a fingertip. These changes correlate
with adaptive somatosensory changes at this fingertip. We recently showed
that RSS-induced perceptual improvements at the right (stimulated) index
fingertip transfer to both sides of the upper-lip area, but not to the left index
fingertip (Muret et al, 2012 SfN Abstract number 883.09). Here we report
data from several studies testing whether adaptive perceptual changes also
transfer to other fingertips. A two-point discrimination (2PD) task was used
to assess spatial discrimination thresholds on the left and right sides of the
face and left and right fingertips before and after three hours of RSS of the
right index fingertip. As in our first study, we found that RSS significantly
decreased 2PD thresholds at the right index fingertip and at both sides of
the upper-lip area. But no perceptual changes were found at any other
fingertips. These results suggest that RSS-induced adaptive plasticity can
cross the hand/face boundary but is somehow prevented from crossing
interdigit boundaries, maybe due to lateral inhibitory connections between
finger representations. Further studies are needed to understand the mechanisms that permit adaptive changes to cross the hand-face border but prevent transfer within the hand region.

D136
PREDISPOSITION TOWARDS UNHEALTHY FOODS LINKED WITH
INCREASED GREY MATTER IN THE CEREBELLUM Olga Tkachenko1,

Mareen Weber1,2, Hannah Gogel1, William “Scott” Killgore1,2; 1Social, Cognitive & Affective Neuroscience Laboratory, McLean Hospital, 2Harvard Medical

158

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
School — The role of the cerebellum is often confined to sensory-motor
function. However, growing literature suggests its implication in higher
cognitive and emotional processes, particularly executive control and the
salience network. Furthermore, several areas have been linked with addiction mechanisms and nicotine dependence. Yet relatively little has been
done to examine cerebellum structure with regard to salience. Thirty-seven
healthy right-handed adults (20 males) between the ages of 18 and 45
(M=30.3, SD=8.8) underwent structural neuroimaging at 3T and completed
a Food Recognition Task. Participants viewed a series of images in the scanner of healthy and unhealthy foods. Afterwards, subjects were asked to discern whether or not they had previously viewed each image. Participants
also indicated how hungry they were at the moment using a 7-point scale.
A voxel-based morphometric (VBM) multiple regression analysis was
conducted to explore grey matter correlates of a predisposition to better
remember unhealthy foods rather than healthy foods (Unhealthy Food Recognition Accuracy - Healthy Food Recognition Accuracy). Age and gender
were used as covariates, along with total food recognition accuracy, subjective hunger, body mass index, and IQ. Higher accuracy in the recognition of
unhealthy foods compared with healthy foods was positively linked with
increased grey matter volume in the cerebellum, particularly Crus I. Whole
brain exploratory analyses indicated that grey matter volume within the
Crus I was positively correlated with greater recall of unhealthy foods (1572
voxels, p=0.04, FWE corrected). In line with the literature, present results
posit that the cerebellum may be implicated in salience detection.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
D137
DECEIVING THE BRAIN: VISUAL ILLUSIONS REVEAL THE NEURAL
MECHANISMS OF RESCALING PERCEIVED SIZE Sylvia Kreutzer1,

Ralph Weidner1, Gereon R. Fink1,2; 1Research Institute Juelich, 2University Hospital Cologne — Visual illusions illustrate the influence of context on size
perception. Functional imaging studies have shown that this contextual
information is already integrated at the level of the primary visual cortex
(V1). However, receptive fields in V1 are too small to sufficiently integrate
context based on feed-forward input and V1 must be modulated by re-entrant processes from higher visual areas. In the current study, two illusions,
the size adaptation effect and the Ebbinghaus illusion, were combined in
a factorial design to identify possible common mechanisms involved in
processing illusions. In those illusions, circle size is either overestimated,
after a previously shown smaller adaptation circle, or underestimated following either a larger adaptation circle (size adaptation) or surrounding
larger circles (Ebbinghaus illusion). The temporal separation of illusion
inducing stimuli and targets allowed the comparison of the BOLD signal of
identical physical displays. Illusions were successfully induced in all participants. Functional imaging revealed that both illusions triggered activation in visual areas bilaterally, presumably encoding changes in perceived
size, and in left inferior frontal gyrus, an area which has been linked to
magnitude processing. Evidence for a common size-scaling mechanism
came from a significant interaction of both illusions. Associated regions
included left visual cortex, right supramarginal gyrus and right superior
parietal cortex. These regions most likely constitute bottlenecks where illusion related processing competes for common resources with the occipital
areas contributing to illusion generation and the parietal areas processing
task-relevant size information.

D138
ELECTRICAL STIMULATION OF HUMAN FACE-SELECTIVE AREAS
REVEALS DIFFERENTIAL ROLES OF THE RIGHT AND LEFT FUSIFORM GYRUS IN CONSCIOUS FACE PERCEPTION Vinitha Rangara-

jan1, Dora Hermes1, Brett L. Foster1, Kevin Weiner2, Corentin Jacques2, Kalanit Grill-Spector2, Josef Parvizi1; 1Department of Neurology and Neurological
Sciences, Stanford University, 2Department of Psychology, Stanford University
— Neuroimaging and electrophysiological studies have confirmed bilateral face-selective responses in the fusiform gyrus (FG) across species, and
neuropsychological studies have documented prosopagnosia as a consequence of lesions to the human fusiform gyrus (FG). As brain imaging studies provide only correlative evidence, and lesions in human subjects often
cause extensive damage beyond the FG, we designed the current study to

2014 Annual Meeting	
explore the link between electrophysiological responses to faces and the
causal effects of transient lesioning of the left and right FG in face perception. We used a combination of electrocorticography (ECoG) and electrical
brain stimulation (EBS) in 9 subjects implanted with intracranial electrodes
in either the left (5 participants, 30 FG electrodes) or right (4 participants,
13 FG electrodes) hemispheres. We identified electrodes with face-selective ECoG responses in the FG, and recorded subjective perceptual reports
during transient EBS of these sites. In line with existing literature, we found
face-selective ECoG responses in both left and right FG sites. However,
when the same FG locations were stimulated, we observed a striking difference between hemispheres. Only EBS of the right FG sites caused reported
changes in the conscious perception of faces while stimulation of strongly
face-selective regions in the left FG produced only non-face related visual
changes such as flashing lights or phosphenes. This study provides rare
insight into the correlative versus causal nature of ECoG and EBS studies,
respectively. It also demonstrates that face-selectivity does not predict stimulation effects and examines the differential roles of the right and left FG in
conscious face perception.

D139
PROCESSING FACES AND BODIES: IS THE WHOLE THE SUM OF
ITS PARTS? Elisabeth Schriewer1, Denise A. Soria Bauser1, Boris Suchan1;

1
Ruhr University Bochum, Germany — Perception of faces and bodies is commonly associated with configural processing. Previous research suggests
a critical role of fusiform and occipital face areas (FFA and OFA) in face
processing as well as extrastriate and fusiform body areas (EBA and FBA)
in body processing. The present study aims to examine whether intact
and scrambled faces and bodies (without heads) elicit distinct activation
patterns in the underlying network involved in visual processing of these
stimuli. A matching-to-sample task was used to present faces, bodies (without heads) and houses as well as scrambled faces, bodies and houses. Data
were analyzed using a factorial design (factor 1: faces / bodies, factor 2:
intact / not intact). Results showed a significant main effect for factor 1
with specific activation in the right EBA and OFA. Percent signal change
was extracted from these regions yielding evidence for comparable activation for intact and scrambled stimuli. Results also suggest comparable activation patterns for intact and scrambled faces and bodies. These findings
provide further evidence for a configural processing of human bodies and
faces. Additionally, a repetition suppression effect could be demonstrated
for all stimuli, showing that intact as well as scrambled images both depend
on similar adaptation or expectation mechanisms. Our results support the
assumption that similar but not identical mechanisms are used for the processing of human faces and bodies.

D140
IMPLICIT LEARNING OF SPEED-CONTINGENT TARGET LOCATION

Byung-Woo Hwang1, Haesung Kim1, Hye Jin Kim1, Min-Shik Kim1; 1Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea — Previous human implicit learning studies investigated
implicit associations between two consecutive stimuli or between stimulus
and following response. The present study investigated whether a representation of response speed distribution could be formed and if a contingency between response speed and location of following stimulus could
be learned implicitly. Participants performed a dual task; they quickly
responded to a target “O” in the first task and determined the orientation
of a new target “T” in the second. This dual task was repeated 50 times
in each block with a total of 24 blocks. For each participant, his/her RT
distribution of the first task in the previous block was divided into four
ranges (very fast, fast, slow, very slow). In the second task of the following
block, each of the four possible target locations was assigned one of the
four RT ranges and the location of the target was determined based on the
first task RT. For instance, if the participant responded to “O” at a very fast
speed, the new target “T” appeared in the upper-right corner. The results
showed that participants learned the contingency between RT to “O” and
the location of “T” without conscious awareness; they searched “T” more
efficiently as the experiment progressed. When the target appeared in a
random location, this efficient search disappeared. These suggest that participants might form the representation of their RT distribution and use the
relative speed of their own response as a predictive cue to guide spatial
attention to upcoming target locations.

Poster Session D

D141
EARLY AND LATE BRAIN MECHANISMS UNDERLYING PREDICTION ERROR DETECTION Rahim Malekshahi1, Zenon Mathews2, Amalia

Papanikolaou3, Niels Birbaumer4, Paul F.M.J. Verschur5, Andrea Caria6; 1Institut
für medizinische Psychologie und Verhaltensneurobiologie. Graduate School
of Neural & Behavioural Sciences, International Max Planck Research School
Universität Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 2SPECS, Universitat Pompeu Fabra,
Barcelona, Spain, 3Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics. Graduate
School of Neural & Behavioural Sciences, International Max Planck Research
School, Tübingen, Germany, 4Institut für medizinische Psychologie und Verhaltensneurobiologie, Universität Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. Ospedale San
Camillo, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Venezia Lido, Italy,
5
SPECS, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 6Institut für medizinische
Psychologie und Verhaltensneurobiologie, Universität Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany. Ospedale San Camillo, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Venezia Lido, Italy — In the framework of visual cognition and
predictive coding models, we tested the hypotheses that visual prediction
influences detection of stimuli violating expectation, and that early and late
(conscious) behavioral and brain responses to deviant stimuli are related
to processing of different aspects of prediction error. To this aim combined
recordings of saccadic eye movements and fMRI data were performed on
twelve participants performing a visual detection task. Participants were
required to detect moving stimuli that were suddenly displaced with
respect to their current trajectory (deviant stimuli). Displacement varied
in amplitude and orientation. Psychophysical reverse correlation analysis
evidenced different perceptual levels of prediction error processing. Analysis of conscious responses revealed reduced detection of visual inputs for
stimuli with small deviation from expected behavior with respect to large
deviant stimuli as indicated by increased eccentricity of the psychophysical
kernel. fMRI data analysis showed that higher-level late conscious processing, mainly associated with cortical activity in fronto-parietal areas as well
as subcortical regions such as caudate nucleus and thalamus, seems to be
required to detect prediction error and to assess the degree of violation of
expectations. Lower-level early processing, associated with dorsal activity
in the right angular gyrus, also enables detection of violation of prediction but it does not permit discrimination among large and small deviating
stimuli as indicated by almost null eccentricity of psychophysical kernel.
These findings highlight at least two primary brain mechanisms, an early
and a late stage, subserving detection of visual inputs deviating from perceptual expectations.

D142
EFFECT OF DISTRACTORS ON THE ATTENTIONAL BLINK

Michael
Niedeggen1, Anja Kuehnel1, Michael Lars1, Winther Gesche1; 1FU Berlin, Dept. of
Experimental Psychology and Neuropsychology — The detectability of a visual
target (T) embedded in a rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) stream can
be significantly reduced if its onset is preceded by visual distractors sharing
the features of the target. Behavioral and electrophysiological data indicate
a cumulative suppression process: Increasing the number of distractors
affects the detection rate, and triggers a frontal ERP negativity starting at
about 250ms (Niedeggen et al., 2012, JOCN 24(6)). The frontal suppression
process did not affect the visual processing of the upcoming target, but
appears to prevent its updating the working memory. In this study, we
examined whether the behavioural and ERP signature of the suppression
effect can also be identified in the Attentional Blink (AB). RSVP streams of
black letters (40/trial) were presented at 10 Hz to our participants (n=15).
A single white letter served as T1, and was to be identified. A letter “X” following T1 served as T2, and its presentation was to be detected. The occasional presentation of the letter “X” preceding the onset of T1 served as distractor. Confirming the AB, T2 detection was significantly reduced at early
T1/T2-lags (100 - 400ms). If more than two distractors preceded T1, the
AB was significantly enhanced. The ERP response to distractors indicated a
cumulative effect: A frontal negativity at about 300ms was generated if the
number of distractors was increased within the RSVP stream. The results
indicate that conscious access to the second target in the AB paradigm also
depends on the visual characteristics of the pre-T1-stimuli.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

159

Poster Session D	

THINKING: Decision making
D143
SATISFICING DECISION-MAKING UNDER TIME PRESSURE Hanna

Oh1, Pingping Zhu, Kim Rafie, Marc Sommer, Silvia Ferrari, Jeffrey M. Beck1,
Tobias Egner1; 1Duke University — The study of rational decision-making has
traditionally focused on small-world scenarios, where decision-makers are
assumed to have perfect knowledge of all possible choices, their respective
probabilities and values, and ample time and computational resources to
optimally integrate this information. In real life, we are instead faced with
large-world scenarios, where some of the relevant information is unknown
or highly uncertain, and decision-making is bounded by limited time
and mental resources. Humans are thought to overcome such limitations
through satisficing , fast but good-enough heuristic decision-making that
prioritizes some sources of information while ignoring others. However,
the manner in which satisficing is triggered and accomplished remains
poorly understood. Here, we developed a novel protocol to induce and
track such shifts in decision-making strategies by modifying the weather
prediction task . On each trial, participants chose between two stimuli that
represented combinations of 4 different binary cues with varying reward
probabilities. We manipulated the amount of decision time available, and
employed logistic regression to determine the weights that participants
assigned to each cue in making their decisions. We show that under low
time pressure, participants performed like naïve Bayesians , correctly
weighting and integrating all cues to arrive at near-optimal decisions. With
increasing time pressure, however, subjects gradually shifted their decision
strategies by taking only a subset of the most predictive cues into account to
arrive at fast yet good-enough decisions. These results, documenting adaptive re-weighting of cue values to compensate for limited decision time, are
supportive of bounded rationality models of human decision-mak

D144
EXECUTIVE CONTROL- AND REWARD-RELATED NEURAL PROCESSES UNDERLYING VOLUNTARY DECEPTION Xiaoqing Hu1, Narun

Pornpattananangkul1, Robin Nusslock1; 1Department of Psychology, Northwestern University — Recent neuroimaging studies have started to examine the
neurocognitive processes underlying voluntary deception, choices involving dishonesty made in experimental situations where participants are completely free to make their own moral decisions. However, the neuro-temporal dynamics of such moral decision-making remains poorly understood.
Employing event-related potentials (ERPs), we measured executive control and reward-related processes during an incentivized coin-guess task
in which participants could voluntarily engage in dishonest behavior by
over-reporting their wins to maximize earnings. We report three primary
findings: 1) having the opportunity to deceive engaged executive processes
such as conflict monitoring and conflict resolution, as evidenced by a higher
frontocentral N2 and a smaller parietal P3; 2) processing the outcome of
coin-flips implicated motivated outcome evaluative processes, indicated
by a larger medial feedback-negativity (MFN) for incorrect (i.e. loss) than
for correct (i.e. gain) guesses; and 3) such outcome-valence sensitive neural
signals can not only predict one’s overall voluntary deception but also
one’s moral behavioral adjustment on a trial-by-trial basis (i.e. heightened
likelihood of participants’ deception on subsequent trials given a previous
trial’s loss). The present findings inform our understanding of the executive
control and reward-related processes associated with voluntary dishonest
decision makings, and provide the first evidence of neural processes moderating behavioral adjustment in moral decision making.

D145
EMOTIONAL FACES REGULATE BEHAVIORAL RESPONSE,
PARAMETERS IN REINFORCEMENT LEARNING, AND EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS DURING REWARD-BASED DECISION
MAKING Hung-Hsiang Liu1,2, Chia-Tzu Li1, Ming H. Hsieh2, Yung-Fong Hsu1,3,4,

Wen-Sung Lai1,3,4; 1Department of Psychology, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department of Psychiatry, National Taiwan University Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan, 3Graduate Institute of Brain and Mind Sciences, National Taiwan
University, Taiwan, 4Neurobiology and Cognitive Science Center, National
Taiwan University, Taiwan — Emotional experience pervades our daily life
and usually has significant impact on our decision making. However, its

160

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
underlying mechanism remains much unclear. Taking advantage of facial
expression database and our newly developed feedback-based dynamic-rewarding task, we aim at investigating how emotional faces (i.e. angry,
happy, & neutral faces) regulate decision-making process from behavioral,
model-fitting, and event-related potentials (ERPs) approaches in this study.
Each subject was randomly assigned into one of the following 3 groups: the
angry, happy, and neutral groups. Subjects in each group were required
to briefly and randomly expose to either one of the 3 predetermined emotional faces or a neutral face before making decisions on a trial-by-trial basis
in the dynamic-rewarding task. Individual trial-by-trial choice data were
further fit with a standard reinforcement learning model using Bayesian
estimation. Individual ERPs were recorded and analyzed to reveal temporal resolution of brain activity. Our preliminary data revealed that the neutral group gained more rewards than the other two groups. Our model-fitting result indicated that the neutral group also had the lowest learning rate
but the highest perseveration, suggesting small reward prediction errors.
For ERPs, the analysis of feedback-related negativity (FRN) revealed a similar pattern as our model-fitting data. We also found that the neutral group
formed more un-biased expectation about the reward through the analysis
of FRN expectancy effect (Violated FRN - Expected FRN). Collectively, our
findings suggest that both positive and negative emotional states would
interfere reward sensitivity, and interrupt the process of reward-expectation through over-weighting negative feedbacks.

D146
MODULATION OF RISK TAKING BEHAVIOR UNDER AMBIGUITY
BY SEROTONIN TRANSPORTER POLYMORPHISM Noa Eilat1, Idan

Aderka1, Ofri Koren1, Rachel Tomer1; 1Psychology Department, University of
Haifa, Israel — In situations that offer opportunity for rewards but also
involve some risk of punishment, the willingness to take risks differs considerably among individuals. However, in ambiguous situations, characterized by an uncertainty regarding the probabilities of the outcome of
one’s choices, most individuals display a risk averse response style. Previous studies suggest that, with repeated trials, this risk averse behavior
tends to change over time and subjects become more willing to increase
risk as the task progresses, but whether or not such change in risk averse
behavior is a universal characteristic is not known. In the present study
we tested the hypothesis that genetically mediated differences in serotonergic function may modulate the increase in risky choices under ambiguity. Young healthy adults, divided according to the 5-HTTLPR genotype (“Long”, “Short”) performed the Balloon Analogue Risk-taking Test
(BART). Although the two groups did not differ significantly in overall
level of risk taking, as expected, variations in the 5-HTTLPR genotype predicted different patterns of risk taking over time: Whereas long allele carriers displayed the expected increase in risk taking as the task progressed,
individuals carrying the short variant genotype did not, but rather showed
a steady rate of risk taking behavior throughout the task. These results
suggest that increased attention to negative consequences, which has been
reported to characterize short allele carriers, interferes with their ability to
develop tolerance for the ambiguity inherent to this task, thus resulting in
sustained risk aversion.

D147
THE IMPACT OF SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS ON REWARD LEARNING IN THE MEDIAL-FRONTAL CORTEX Ashley Howse1, Marcel Pelo-

quin1, Shannon Doherty2, Cameron Hassall1, Olave Krigolson1; 1Dalhousie
University, 2King’s College London — While there is strong evidence that a
system within the human medial-frontal cortex plays a prominent role in
learning, there is still a lot to learn about the factors that impact the functional efficacy of the medial-frontal learning system. For instance, it is still
unclear how external factors such as socioeconomic status (SES) impact
neural learning systems. Research suggests that socioeconomic status can
impact cognitive achievement, educational attainment, physical and mental
health, as well as the functional capabilities of the underlying neural systems, possibly by disrupting normal development (e.g., Kishiyama et al.,
2011). Here, we used event-related brain potentials (ERPs) to demonstrate
that childhood SES impacts reward processing within the medial-frontal
system. Participants completed a learnable gambling task while electroencephalographic data was recorded. In line with previous work, we found
that reward and loss feedback elicited a feedback error-related negativity
(fERN; Miltner et al., 1997). Further, and importantly, we found that the

2014 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session D

amplitude of the fERN correlated with our computed measure of SES.
While correlation does not equal causation, we suggest that coming from
a low SES background reduces the functional efficacy of the medial-frontal
reward processing system - and thus reduces the amplitude of the fERN.
In sum, our results suggest that coming from a low SES background may
impair the functional efficacy of the neural systems that underlie human
learning.

THINKING: Development & aging

D148
SURE WINS AND SURE LOSSES: OPPONENT PERCEPTION
ACTIVATES REWARD PROCESSING WITHIN MEDIAL-FRONTAL
CORTEX Ralph S. Redden1, Meg E. South1, Chelsey C. Michaud1, Ashley D.

menko3, Roi Cohen Kadosh1; 1University of Oxford, 2Fairley House School,
London, 3University of Cambridge — Learning difficulties due to atypical
development can negatively affect one’s academic achievement, and socioeconomic status. Unfortunately, existing interventions are mostly costly
and time-consuming, with little evidence of success. Here, we examined
whether transcranial random noise stimulation (tRNS), a novel, painless,
inexpensive, and non-invasive brain stimulation technique, coupled with
cognitive training could enhance numerical learning and competence in
children with mathematical learning difficulties. Twelve children aged 8.510.5 trained on a 20-minutes maths video game for 9 sessions at school.
Our game is unique, as children move their bodies physically from sideto-side to map numbers on a virtual number line. Moreover, it is adaptive
to children’s performance, and has engaging features such as interactive
graphics and immediate feedbacks to optimise learning. All children wore
a wireless tRNS cap during training (6 sham). Participants in the real stimulation group received 0.75mA tRNS to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
a key area implicated in mathematical learning. We balanced participants
across both groups according to their mathematical achievement at pretest. Our findings revealed that, compared to sham, tRNS further improved
performance after the first 5 training sessions, and facilitated an overall
steeper learning during training. Importantly, we found positive transfers;
better performance during training led to greater improvements in a standardised, diagnostic maths assessment (r=.79, p<.004), and higher mathematical age gains according to the national curriculum (r=.75, p<.002).
Ultimately, our findings offer a novel method to effectively modulate neuroplasticity during cognitive training to enhance learning and cognition in
children with atypical development, with real-life translational impact.

Howse1, Cameron D. Hassall1, Olav E. Krigolson1; 1Dalhousie University — A
series of recent studies (Krigolson & Holroyd, 2006, 2007a, 2007; Krigolson et al., 2008) suggest that a reinforcement learning system within medial-frontal cortex may underlie motor learning. Here, we sought to further
that work by examining how expertise modulated reward evaluation by
the medial-frontal system. More specifically, we were interested in whether
learned knowledge of an opponent’s skill level would impact reward processing (i.e. amplitude of the neural response to the presentation of the
opponent). In the present study we had participants play rock, paper, scissors against a series of virtual “opponents” while electroencephalographic
(EEG) data was recorded. In the key manipulation, participants played
three opponents - one who was skilled highly (won 70% of games), skilled
poorly (won 15% of games), and skilled moderately (won 33% of games). A
post experiment analysis of the EEG data revealed that a reward positivity
was elicited when participant wins were contrasted with losses (Holroyd
et al., 2008). Further, and importantly, after participants had learned their
opponents’ ability (i.e., had a detectable knowledge of win - loss ratios
versus the opponent), viewing “bad” opponents faces relative to “good”
opponents faces also yielded a reward positivity. This supports our theory
that individuals process opponents differently based on their history of
wins and losses against them. These outcomes also support the theory that
reward positivity is not only evoked by outcomes, but also modulated by
stimuli that predict outcomes, as indicated by a differentiation in medial-frontal activity at the earliest indication of potential reward.

D149
FDA CIGARETTE WARNING LABELS REDUCE CRAVING AND
ELICIT FRONTOLIMBIC ACTIVATION IN ADOLESCENT SMOKERS

Kathy Do1, Adriana Galván1; 1University of California, Los Angeles — Tobacco
dependence is the leading preventable cause of disease and death, with
over 80% of adult smokers becoming addicted by age 18. Efforts to reduce
teenage smoking in the U.S. have been relatively unsuccessful. Other
countries have successfully implemented prominent graphic warnings on
cigarette packaging to reduce smoking. In 2010, the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) stated that graphic labels containing warnings about
different harms of smoking would appear on tobacco products. Although
litigation claims have delayed its implementation, determining the behavioral and neurobiological response to graphic warning labels in adolescents
is a critical question. This study investigated the neurobiology of cue reactivity to the proposed FDA warning labels in adolescent (13-18 years; n =
39) and adult (25-30 years, n = 41) smokers and nonsmokers. While undergoing fMRI, subjects rated their cigarette craving following presentations
of warning labels paired with either neutral or emotionally graphic FDA
labels. Compared to neutral labels, graphic labels reduced in-the-moment
craving and post-scan urges in smokers (an effect that was stronger in adolescent smokers), and also elicited differential recruitment in the amygdala,
insula, and DLPFC between adolescents and adults. Adolescent smokers
exhibited greater amygdala and DLPFC activity to the graphic cues than
adults; both adolescent and adult smokers exhibited greater insula activation to graphic versus neutral labels, which was associated with greater
nicotine dependence. These findings suggest that the FDA labels are more
effective in adolescent versus adult smokers and that frontolimbic circuitry
exhibits more robust activation in adolescents versus adult smokers.

D150
MODULATING NEUROPLASTICITY IN THE ATYPICALLY DEVELOPING BRAIN TO ENHANCE MATHEMATICAL LEARNING AND
COGNITION Chung Yen Looi1, Jenny Lim2, Mihaela Duta1, Alexander Avra-

D151
CONSUMER CHOICE IN OLDER ADULTS: WHAT HAPPENS WHEN
MEMORY MATTERS? Nichole Lighthall1, Kyle Rand1, Eileen Lu1, Homa

Boms1, Eric Huang1, Scott Huettel1, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke University —
Decision making is a complex cognitive process that relies on several, more
basic domains of information processing. In particular, short-term memory
is likely to play a significant role in everyday economic decisions as people
often learn new information about competing products that they later
retrieve during purchasing decisions. Aging is associated with changes
in consumer decision making, and age differences in economic decision
making may be partly explained by deficits in memory (Henninger et al.,
2010; Yoon et al., 2009) and learning from outcomes of recent choices (Mata
et al., 2011). The current study sought to determine the neural correlates
of a simple choice task in which value information for pairs of competing products were presented at different delays. The study examined age
differences in this functional network during choice processing. Healthy
younger and older adults completed the consumer choice task during
functional MRI data collection. In both age groups, accurate choices were
associated with recruitment of fronto-parietal networks, visual processing
regions, and regions responding to the magnitude of product values (e.g.,
intraparietal sulcus). Across age groups, faster correct responses were associated with greater functional recruitment from bilateral hippocampus,
amygdala and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. However age differences
were observed such that, at choice, older adults showed less activation in
regions associated with product-value encoding, but greater activation in
the ventromedial prefrontal cortex at longer delays. These findings suggest
a functional posterior-anterior shift in aging for choices involving retrieval
of recently learned value information, particularly at longer delays.

D152
DEVELOPMENTAL TRAJECTORY OF FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
OF THE DEFAULT NETWORK Elizabeth DuPre1, Hilary A. Marusak2, Ian H.

Gotlib3, Moriah E. Thomason2, R. Nathan Spreng1; 1Cornell University, 2Wayne
State University, 3Stanford University — Over development, substantial
changes occur in the structural and functional architecture of the human
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

161

Poster Session D	
brain. In this study, we examined the trajectory of developmental changes
in the default network using resting-state functional connectivity MRI
(RSFC) in a cross-sectional sample of 130 children/adolescents (58 boys; age
range=7-16y; M=12.4y, SD=2.2y). First, we identified posterior and anterior
components of the default network using group independent components
analysis. Participants’ images were then correlated with age and this matrix
was decomposed using partial least squares. The results yielded a shared
pattern of RSFC as well as an age-related RSFC interaction for the posterior and anterior default network. The development of both the posterior
and anterior default network were associated with increases in connectivity in medial prefrontal cortex, mid-cingulate, precuneus, and right inferior
frontal gyrus, and with decreasing connectivity in superior parietal lobule,
visual cortex, and other regions. In analyzing the age-related interaction,
increases in connectivity in the posterior default network were found in
lateral prefrontal and parietal cortex, and decreases in connectivity were
obtained in the medial temporal lobes and thalamus; the opposite pattern
of connectivity was observed in the anterior default network. Overall, these
results indicate that patterns of RSFC follow three broad trends. First, connectivity within the default network increases with age. Second, there are
differential changes that include decreases in local RSFC and increases in
long-range RSFC. Finally, there are age-related changes in the connectivity
of the default network with other brain systems, including the frontoparietal control network.

162

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E
ATTENTION: Auditory
E1
RIGHT HEMISPHERE DOMINANCE FOR AUDITORY SELECTIVE
ATTENTION REVEALED BY LATERALIZED PARIETOTEMPORAL
OSCILLATORY PHASE SYNCHRONIZATION Samantha Huang1, Wei-

Tang Chang1, John Belliveau1,2, Matti Hämääinen1,2, Jyrki Ahveninen1; 1Harvard Medical School - Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging,
2
Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology — Previous studies
and observations in human neurological patients suggest that visual spatial attention is dominated by the right parietal cortex, having a bilateral
representation of space, whereas the left parietal cortex represents only
the right spatial hemifield. Here, we studied whether analogous lateralization applies to auditory spatial attention as well. Combined magnetoencephalography, EEG, and fMRI were utilized to investigate hemispheric
lateralization of auditospatial attention by comparing the differences in
cross-hemispheric functional coupling between parietal and auditory areas
during a dichotic-listening task. Subjects were asked to shift attention to
the cued ear where a task-relevant target was likely to follow. Our results
showed significantly stronger oscillatory phase locking between the right
intraparietal sulcus (IPS) and left auditory cortex (AC) neurons activated
by attended right-ear sounds than between the left IPS and right AC neurons activated by attended left-ear sounds. In other words, the connectivity to sensory neurons representing the ipsilateral auditory spatial field
appeared to be stronger in the right than left parietal cortex, consistent with
right-hemisphere dominance of auditory spatial attention. The present
phase-locking differences concentrated at 7-13 Hz, and peaked in Heschl’s
gyrus and posterior non-primary ACs (planum temporale, posterior superior temporal gyrus). Our data, thus, also adds support to theories positing that phase-coupling at theta and alpha frequency ranges is specifically
crucial for attention. Finally, while the distribution of AC effects supports
a view that posterior non-primary areas are more strongly modulated by
spatial attention than anterior areas, attentional influences are also evident
in primary “core” AC areas.

E2
SENSORY GATING IN HEARING LOSS Lauren Durkee1, Hannah Glick1,

Julia Campbell1, Jessica Peterson1, Anu Sharma1; 1University of Colorado at
Boulder — Sensory gating is considered an index of the brain’s ability to
filter out irrelevant stimuli and focus on information that is pertinent. Sensory gating is measured using an auditory paired-click paradigm where a
reduction in amplitude of the P1 component between the first and second
click serves as a clinical biomarker of gating deficits, and is used in the
diagnosis of schizophrenia. Our recent research has shown that adults with
hearing loss show an increase in amplitude of obligatory CAEP components relative to normal, which may be associated with a gating deficit.
More recently, disruptions in gating have been observed in individuals
with tinnitus although it remains unclear whether these gating deficits
are attributable directly to tinnitus or to hearing loss concomitant with
tinnitus. Moreover, gating research to-date has focused primarily on the
P1 component while largely ignoring later components of the obligatory
CAEP waveform. The goal of this study was to examine the role of all
obligatory CAEP components (P1, N1, P2) in adults with normal hearing
and in hearing loss in a sensory gating paradigm. A 128-channel electrode
net was used to obtain EEG responses to an auditory paired-click stimulus.
Results revealed that obligatory CAEP components including the N1 and
P2 showed significant gating ratios. This evidence suggests that changes in
N1 and P2 amplitude may provide a sensitive index of sensory gating in
patients with hearing loss. Research supported by NIH NIDCD R01 06257

E3
EFFECTS OF ATTENTION ON TONOTOPY IN SCHIZOPHRENIA

Thomas Ragole1, Erin Slason1, Peter Teale1, Martin Reite1, Donald Rojas1; 1University of Colorado School of Medicine — A disorganization of tonotopy in the
auditory cortex has been described in schizophrenia. Subjects with schizo-

phrenia show little to no spatial organization of responses to different tone
frequencies in the auditory cortex. Previous studies have shown that attending to auditory stimuli alters tonotopic distributions in healthy controls.
This study examines if attention to tone affects auditory cortex tonotopy in
schizophrenia. The tonotopic organization for 400Hz and 4,000Hz sound in
19 patients with schizophrenia and 11 comparison subjects was determined
using MEG by examining the M100 auditory-evoked magnetic field dipole
in primary auditory cortex. The tonotopic organization for the same frequencies was determined while the subjects attended to pitch or laterality.
The equivalent current dipole locations were then mapped and compared.
In subjects with schizophrenia, attention to tone frequency or laterality had
no effect on tonotopic organization in auditory cortex. The distribution of
auditory evoked magnetic field dipoles is unchanged from control in this
group. Further, we replicate previous results of dynamic enhancement of
distance between auditory evoked dipoles in the comparison subjects when
attending to different frequencies. The lack of tonotopic organization of the
auditory cortex in patients with schizophrenia, even while attending to
auditory stimuli, suggests that the architecture underlying tonotopy in the
auditory cortex is not responsive to top-down, task relevant reorganization
in the same manner as in healthy subjects. This alteration in organization of
the auditory cortex may in turn influence higher order cognitive processes
by altering the perception of incoming auditory stimuli.

E4
POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE TONES CAN ATTRACT ATTENTION IN
AN EARLY STAGE OF AUDITORY PROCESSING: ENHANCED N1
AMPLITUDE FOR TASK-IRRELEVANT EVALUATIVE TONES Timea

Folyi1, Dirk Wentura1; 1Saarland University — In visual modality, a growing
body of evidence shows that evaluative (positive and negative) stimuli are
processed more efficiently compared with neutral ones. A suggested mechanism of this preferential processing is that an involuntary shift of selective
attention facilitates the encoding of evaluative stimuli. However, little is
known about how positive and negative stimuli are processed in auditory
domain. We report two experiments using event-related potential (ERP)
method based on the hypothesis that evaluative tones attract selective
attention at an early (i.e., perceptual) stage of auditory processing. If so, we
can expect attention-related effects on the ERPs of initial sound processing,
e.g., an amplitude enhancement of the auditory N1 ERP. In order to overcome possible perceptual confounds, we induced valences experimentally
in a learning phase by assigning positive, negative, and neutral valence to
tone frequency in a balanced design. In a subsequent test phase, ERPs were
recorded while these tones were presented in a task-irrelevant channel. In
a second experiment, attentional demand in the task-relevant channel was
increased. Results of the first experiment showed N1 amplitude enhancement for evaluative tones compared with neutral ones indicating enhanced
attention to these tones. This effect did not show selectivity for positive
or negative valence suggesting that the general relevance of evaluative
tones governs attentional processes. In the second experiment, attentional
enhancement for evaluative tones was strongly reduced. This pattern of
results suggests that evaluative tones can be processed preferentially but
this effect is sensitive to the level of control over one’s voluntary attention.

E5
DYNAMIC CHANGES IN ATTENTION TO FAMILIAR AND NOVEL
STIMULI IN NEWBORN INFANTS Cathryn S. Cortesa1, Dennis L.

Molfese1; 1University of Nebraska-Lincoln — This study aimed to determine
whether infants are able to discriminate familiar from novel stimuli, and to
model trial-by-trial changes in event-related potential (ERP) amplitude as
an index of attention. ERPs were recorded from infants, tested at 1-2 days
old, using a high-density 128 electrode array. Newborns were familiarized
with 40 presentations of a monosyllabic speech sound. Subsequently, they
listened to the familiar and a novel sound, presented with equal probability. A temporal principal component analysis (PCA) and analysis of variance (ANOVA) were used to identify a temporal window in the average
ERP response sensitive to stimulus condition. One component, peaking at
628 ms post stimulus onset significantly discriminated familiar from novel,
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

163

Poster Session E	
in interaction with hemisphere. The condition effect was significant in both
hemispheres, which indicated differential lateralized processing of speech
sounds at birth, with a polarity reversal at the midline. Multilevel models
estimated trial-by-trial changes in ERP amplitude for the peak component
of interest. Results indicated a dynamic time course of familiarization, with
the largest amplitude differences between stimulus conditions at the start
of the test. The effect of familiarization persisted throughout the test, but
was reduced over time. Dynamic changes in component amplitude were
significant only in interaction with hemisphere and stimulus condition, and
thus were not due solely to fatigue or reduced attention. By tracking meaningful trial-by-trial changes in ERP amplitude within a single test, we can
track the dynamic plasticity of infant cognition and attention, and better
understand how novel stimuli are processed from birth.

E6
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF DORSAL AND VENTRAL FRONTOPARIETAL SEED REGIONS DURING AUDITORY ORIENTING

Stephanie Rossi1, Samantha Huang1, Sharon C. Furtak1,2, John W. Belliveau1,3,
Jyrki Ahveninen1; 1Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts, USA, 2California State University, Sacramento, CA, USA, 3Harvard-MIT
Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
USA — Few previous studies have investigated functional connectivity
across brain regions during auditory attention shifting in humans. Here,
we employed psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analyses of auditory
functional MRI data, to compare functional connectivity patterns of distinct frontoparietal cortex seed regions during cued (or “voluntary”) auditory attention versus novelty-driven (or “involuntary”) orienting. There
were many similarities across PPI patterns with the different posterior
parietal seed regions between these two attention conditions. However,
the anterior supramarginal gyrus (aSMG) and frontal eye field (FEF) seeds
demonstrated stronger PPI with auditory cortices, and more widespread
connectivity to other frontoparietal regions, during cued attention than
novelty-triggered orienting. In contrast, the more inferior/posterior angular gyrus (AG) seed regions, as well as the precuneus and the left anterior
insula (AI) seeds, demonstrated broader PPI patterns beyond auditory cortices during novelty-triggered orienting than cued attention shifting. Consistent with previous observations regarding lateralization of attentional
control, the PPI patterns associated with cued attention shifting tended
to be more widespread for the right parietal seeds, whereas the broadest
novelty-triggered orienting PPI patterns emerged for the left-hemisphere
seeds. The present results provide indices of anatomically distinct functional connectivity patterns related to voluntary and involuntary orienting
of auditory attention, with certain right superior frontoparietal seeds (FEF,
aSMG) being most clearly associated with goal-driven attentional modulation of auditory cortex.

ATTENTION: Spatial
E7
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN ALPHA LATERALIZATION DURING
TOP-DOWN CONTROL OF VISUAL SPATIAL ATTENTION Xiangfei

Hong1,2, Junfeng Sun1, Jesse Bengson2, George Mangun2, Shanbao Tong1;
1
School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China, 2Center for Mind and Brain, University of California-Davis, Davis, California — Previous studies have demonstrated age-related deficits in visual
spatial attention. However, how normal aging changes the electrophysiological correlates of visual spatial attention remains unclear. In this study,
we collected scalp EEG from healthy younger and older adults in a spatial-cueing attention paradigm. We found that the older adults showed
a prominent deficit in posterior alpha (8-13 Hz) power lateralization in
response to an attention-directing cue. Furthermore, for both younger and
older adults, we observed a cue-induced increase of alpha-specific functional connectivity between frontal recording sites and bilateral posterior
sites. Interestingly, this long-range connectivity became lateralized within
different time periods between the two groups. Younger adults showed
stronger functional connectivity between medial frontal cortex and posterior cortex contralateral to the attended visual field during the late period
of the cue-target interval (CTI) (800-1200 ms post-cue), but older adults

164

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
showed this lateralized connectivity over a broader time window than
younger adults, with significant effects in both the 400-800 ms and 8001200 ms CTIs. Taken together, our results suggest that during top-down
spatial attention: (i) older adults have a prominent deficit in modulating
posterior alpha power during the pre-target anticipatory state; (ii) the
cue-induced lateralization of frontoposterior functional connectivity was
preserved during aging, and probably even more robust for older adults.
Based on these findings, we infer that younger and older adults engage
partially different neural mechanisms during top-down control of visual
spatial attention, possibly as the results of compensatory changes in brain
attention systems with aging.

E8
THE EFFECT OF NARRATIVE CONTENT OF SUSPENSEFUL FILMS
ON NEURAL CORRELATES OF ATTENTIONAL TUNING Matthew

Bezdek1,2, Richard Gerrig2, William Wenzel2, Jaemin Shin3, Kathleen Pirog Revill3,
Asha Kumar1, Eric Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2Stony Brook
University, 3Center for Advanced Brain Imaging, Atlanta, GA — People often
report being transported to narrative worlds, in a way that makes them
feel detached from the real external world. In fact, behavioral evidence suggests that attention to extra-narrative stimuli during “hot spots” (i.e., time
points when potential negative outcomes are most salient) is suppressed
during natural viewing of suspenseful film scenes (Bezdek, 2012). The current study investigates the brain mechanisms for this effect. We measured
blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) activation as participants passively
viewed centrally presented suspenseful film excerpts while an irrelevant
checkerboard pattern flashed in the periphery. Peripheral visual processing
areas along the calcarine sulcus (identified with a separate visual localizer
task) demonstrated decreased activity at suspenseful hot spots compared
to less suspenseful “cold” spots. Whole-brain analyses revealed narrative
increases in suspense were also associated with increases in BOLD signal
in some brain areas (e.g., right lateral prefrontal cortex) and decreases in
others (e.g., default-mode network nodes in medial prefrontal and posterior cingulate cortex). These results provide evidence of narrative-induced
attentional tuning effects using complex realistic stimuli.

E9
INTACT REFLEXIVE BUT DEFICIENT VOLUNTARY SOCIAL ORIENTING IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS Megan Kirchgessner1,
Neeti Mehta1, Stuart Red2, Anne Sereno2; 1Rice University, 2University of Texas
Health Science Center — Impairment in social interactions is a primary
characteristic of people with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). Although
these individuals tend to orient less to naturalistic social cues than do typically developing (TD) individuals, laboratory experiments testing social
orienting in ASDs have been inconclusive, possibly because of a failure
to fully isolate reflexive (stimulus-driven) and voluntary (goal-directed)
orienting processes. The purpose of the present study was to separately
examine potential reflexive and/or voluntary social orienting differences
in individuals with ASDs relative to TD controls. Subjects (ages 7-14) with
and without high-functioning ASDs completed three gaze cueing tasks
on an iPad in which they briefly saw a face with averted gaze followed
by a target after a variable delay. Two tasks were 100% predictive with
either all congruent (target appears in gaze direction) or all incongruent
(target appears opposite from gaze direction) trials, respectively. Another
task was non-predictive with half congruent and incongruent trials intermixed randomly. Response times (RTs) to the target were used to calculate
reflexive (incongruent condition RT - congruent condition RT) and voluntary (non-predictive condition RT - predictive condition RT) gaze cueing
effects. Results indicate that subjects with ASDs demonstrate intact reflexive gaze following. However, their voluntary cueing effects differed significantly from those of the TD controls, suggesting problems in using social
cues in a goal-directed fashion. These results indicate preserved reflexive
social orienting and deficient voluntary social orienting in individuals with
ASDs. Such findings may be critical for understanding social dysfunctions
in ASDs and for developing future interventions.

2014 Annual Meeting	

E10
CONCURRENT FNIRS-ERP REVEALS ATTENTIONAL PREPARATORY HBO ACTIVITY CORRELATES WITH N2PC DURING COVERT
VISUOSPATIAL ATTENTION Jing Huang1, Fang Wang1, Hao Li1, Yan Song1;
1

State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal
University, Beijing 100875, China — By combining a spatial cuing paradigm with a visual search task, we used concurrent fNIRS-ERP recording
to investigate whether the cued-elicited anticipatory modulation in fNIRS
signals is linked to the ERP components assumed to reflect the subsequent
attentional selection in the visual search. We manipulated on a block-byblock basis advance information about whether a target would appear on
the cued side or a distractor would simultaneously appear on the opposite
side to the target. Our data showed that expecting a target could lead to
preparatory activation of the visual cortex with a larger increase of HbO
response over the hemisphere contralateral to the upcoming target, which
could predict the subsequent target-evoked ERP N2pc component. While
anticipation concerning a competing distractor presence resulted in a large
and prolonged preparatory HbO signals not only in the visual cortex contralateral to the target, but also in the visual cortex contralateral to the distractor, suggesting that salient distractor may be actively suppressed by
preparatory top-down attentional control before the actual presentation
of stimuli. However, the pre-suppressed distractor still captured a part
of attention in the subsequent visual search as revealed by the decreased
N2pc, which was predicted by the increment of preparatory HbO signals
contralateral to the distractor. These findings indicate that specific components of preparatory visual attention may be devoted to enhancements
of target processing and minimizing the impact of distractor respectively,
which would both act on subsequent allocation of attention in the search
display.

E11
TASK INSTRUCTIONS DETERMINE THE VISUO-SPATIAL AND VERBAL-SPATIAL NATURE OF NUMBER-SPACE ASSOCIATIONS Carrie

Georges1, Christine Schiltz1, Danielle Hoffmann1; 1University of Luxembourg —
Evidence for number-space associations comes from the spatial-numerical
association of response-codes (SNARC) effect, consisting in faster reaction
times (RTs) to small/large digits with the left/right hand respectively.
Classically, they are thought to result from numerical coding along a leftto-right-oriented mental number line (visuo-spatial account; Dehaene et al.,
1993). Recently, an association between the verbal concepts “small”/”left”
and “large”/”righ” has been suggested as an alternative explanation (verbal-spatial account; Gevers et al., 2010). Since the predominance of these
accounts remains debated, we aimed to determine whether task instructions influence their extent of explaining the SNARC effect. A magnitude
comparison task where the verbal labels “left”/”right” were displayed on
the left/right response side alternatively allowed us to directly contrast the
two accounts by comparing verbal SNARC slopes (based on differences in
RTs to the labels “left” and “right”) with classical spatial SNARC slopes
(based on differences in RTs to the left and right response side). In the verbal
condition, participants (41 students, 20 female, mean age=21.6) responded
to the assigned labels irrespective of their side of appearance, whereas the
spatial condition required responding to the left or right response side irrespective of the displayed label. Under verbal instructions, only the verbal
slope was significantly negative (verbal slope=-67.54, spatial slope=-4.82).
Conversely, no significant difference was observed between verbal and
spatial slopes under spatial instructions - both slopes being significantly
negative (verbal slope=-15.12, spatial slope=-29.39). Taken together, number-space associations arise from verbal coding regardless of task instructions, while spatial coding only occurs under spatial instructions.

E12
CHANGE DETECTION-BASED INVESTIGATIONS OF MECHANISMS
FOR ATTENDING TO SINGLE AND MULTIPLE VISUAL LOCATIONS
IN COMPLEX VISUAL SCENES J. Daniel Bireley1, Maya L. Rosen1, David

C. Somers1; 1Boston University — Previous research has debated whether
or not visual spatial attention is limited to a single “potlight” (e.g., Posner
et al., 1980; Jans et al., 2010) or whether it can be deployed in multiple
spotlights to distinct locations (Awh & Pashler, 2000; McMains & Somers,
2004, 2005; Cave et al., 2010). We employed a one-shot change detection

Poster Session E
paradigm using outdoor scenes to investigate the mechanisms that support attention to single or multiple locations. Expt. 1: Eriksen & St. James
(1986) proposed that a single spotlight of attention could act as a “zoom
lens” to encompass multiple locations. Here, we contrasted multiple-location change detection performance with two forms of spatial cueing: “zoom
lens” vs. “split spotlight”. Subject performance (N=31) was significantly
greater for split spotlight cueing than for zoom lens cueing (d: 1.26 vs 0.61).
Expt. 2: Posner’s (Posner et al., 1980) well-known spatial cueing study indicated that humans could only direct attention to a single location. Here, we
developed a spatial cueing paradigm for a change detection task to investigate the efficiency of dividing attention to two locations versus a single
(valid) location. We observed (N=25) that while d was greater for the single
cued condition (d at 150ms probe duration: 1.69 vs 1.37), capacity (Cowan’s K) was greater for the multiple-cued condition (.91 vs .51). Summary:
Both experiments demonstrate higher capacity for change detection when
employing split spotlight attention than when employing single spotlight
or zoom lens attention. This work was supported by the National Institutes
of Health (NIH R01EY022229).

E13
AGING-RELATED CHANGES IN COVERT SPATIAL ATTENTION
DURING VISUAL SEARCH TASK Meirong Sun1, Encong Wang2, Jing

Huang1, Xixi Zhao2, Li Sun2, Yan Song1; 1State Key Laboratory of Cognitive
Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China,
2
Peking University Institute of Mental Health, Key Laboratory of Ministry of Health
(Peking University), Beijing 100191, China — Humans deploy covert attention routinely in many everyday situations, such as searching for objects,
driving, crossing the street and playing sports. Covert attention allows us
to monitor the environment and guides our eye movements to locations
of the visual field where salient and/or relevant information is. However, few studies have attempted to delineate the development of covert
attention strategies and mechanisms in children. In the present study, we
investigated the covert attention development by comparing event-related potentials (ERPs) between adults (27 subjects, 20-28 years old) and
primary school children (17 subjects, 9-12 years old) in classical pop-out
visual search task. A spatial pre-cue, prior to the actual presentation of the
search array, was absent (Experiment 1) or present to subjects (Experiment
2) with the information about the visual side in which the upcoming target
would appear. The results showed that, compared to the children group,
the adult group responded faster with higher accuracies and lower variance of reaction times in both experiments. Then, our ERP data showed
that, no matter whether the spatial pre-cue was present or not, the N2pc (a
marker of attention target selection) emerged later and was much smaller in
children group than in the adult group, suggesting that children need more
time to allocate spatial attention onto the target even when advance knowledge about target location is provided. Our results indicate the covert spatial attention is still undergoing significant development during primary
school stage and contribute to the understanding of the development of
covert spatial attention.

E14
CATCH TRIALS CATCH SPATIAL ATTENTION WHEN TARGET
ABSENCE IS RELEVANT Cassie Ford1, Joseph Hopfinger1; 1University of

North Carolina at Chapel Hill — Previous studies of contingent attentional
capture have suggested that items trigger a reflexive orienting of spatial
attention only when the cue stimuli are congruent with task-relevant features of the target stimuli. Here, we tested a novel type of contingency that
goes beyond features of the stimuli; specifically, whether a non-predictive
and non-congruent cue will capture attention when subjects are required
to make a “no-target-was-present” button-press response on catch trials. In
2 behavioral experiments, we show that even when a cue stimulus shares
no critical features with the target stimulus, a reflexive capture of attention
is triggered to the spatial location of this cue, but only when a behavioral
response to catch trials is required. These results provide new evidence that
the ability of a stimulus to capture attention goes beyond the contingency of
congruency between cue and target features. When the cue display, regardless of any location or feature, becomes a behaviorally relevant temporal
marker of the trial sequence, attention is captured to the spatial location of
the cue. When the exact same trial sequence occurs but without the requirement of response to the catch trials, no capture occurs. In an ERP experiment, we find faster RTs and enhanced P1 and N2pc ERP components for
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

165

Poster Session E	
validly-cued targets, and an Ipsilateral Invalid Negativity (IIN), associated
with disengagement, for invalidly-cued targets. Compared to participants
who were not required to respond to the catch trials, participants who
responded to these trials show enhanced sensory components and a later
and longer P3 component.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
E15
HOW ENCODING PROCESSES INFLUENCE EMOTIONAL MEMORY
CONFIDENCE AND VIVIDNESS John Ksander1, Katherine Steinmetz2,

Elizabeth Kensinger1; 1Boston College, 2Wofford College — Memories vary
in their subjective confidence and vividness. This study examines how
processes engaged at encoding may relate to these memory qualities, and
whether the delay after which memory is assessed may impact this relation.
Because emotional memories are often associated with higher confidence
and vividness, this study also examines the effect of emotion on the relation between encoding processes and memory confidence and vividness.
Twenty-four participants studied positively, negatively, and neutrally
valent items during an fMRI scan. All participants performed two recognition tasks with a modified Memory Characteristics Questionnaire, one
immediately after scanning and another 24 hours later. Parametric analyses
of the fMRI data were conducted and, at the group level, results examined
the effects of emotion, delay, and their interaction on the relation to confidence and vividness. Analyses revealed a main effect of emotion in the
amygdala, but unexpectedly, increasing activity tracking with confidence
and vividness ratings for neutral items more than emotional items. The
analyses also revealed a main effect of emotion in the hippocampus, but
this pattern differed for confidence and vividness. Analysis of confidence
ratings showed neutral items tracked more strongly with hippocampal
activity than emotional items. Conversely, hippocampal activity tracked
with vividness for negative items more than positive items. These results
reveal that item valence crucially affects neural processes underlying participants’ memory confidence and vividness ratings. The results also confirm that confidence and vividness are not redundant constructs, as there is
a distinction between the neural processes involved in these two subjective
memory ratings.

E16
GOING ‘ABOVE AND BEYOND’: PRO-SOCIAL BEHAVIOUR IN
GROUPS HIGH AND LOW IN AUTISTIC TRAITS Leila Jameel1, Karishma

Vyas1, Giulia Bellesi1, Victoria Roberts1, Shelley Channon1; 1University College
London — Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental condition characterised by difficulties in both social and non-social domains.
In recent years researchers have begun to move towards a continuum
approach, and measuring autistic traits present in the general population
has proved useful in elucidating their effect on various cognitive domains.
However, relatively little work has focused on how impairments associated
with high levels of autistic traits translate into difficulties in everyday social
behaviour. This study investigated pro-social behaviour in students scoring high and low on a self-report measure of autistic traits, using a novel
scenario task: “Above and Beyond”. Each scenario involved balancing the
needs of a main character against the participants’ own interests. Participants with high levels of autistic traits generated verbal responses that
were less pro-social in nature than those with low levels of autistic traits,
and performance did not improve when task demands were reduced. The
groups also differed in satisfaction experienced when helping others. The
implications of reduced pro-social behaviour in everyday life for those with
high levels of autistic traits are considered. The potential clinical applications of tasks with greater ecologically validity are also discussed.

E17
NEGATIVE EMOTION MODULATES PREFRONTAL CORTEX ACTIVITY DURING A WORKING MEMORY TASK: A NIRS STUDY Sachiyo

Ozawa1, Goh Matsuda2, Kazuo Hiraki3; 1The University of Tokyo, JST, CREST,
The University of Tokyo, JST, CREST, 3The University of Tokyo, JST, CREST —
This study investigated the neural processing underlying the cognitive con2

166

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
trol of emotions induced by the presentation of task-irrelevant emotional
pictures before a working memory task. Previous studies have suggested
that the cognitive control of emotion involves the prefrontal regions. Therefore, we measured the hemodynamic responses that occurred in the prefrontal region with a 16-channel near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) system.
In our experiment, participants observed two negative or two neutral pictures in succession immediately before a 1-back or 3-back task. Pictures
were selected from the International Affective Picture System. We measured the changes in the concentration of oxygenated hemoglobin (oxyHb)
during picture presentation and during the n-back task. Consequently, the
emotional valence of the picture affected the oxyHb changes in the ventromedial and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex during the n-back task; the
oxyHb changes during the task were significantly greater following negative stimulation than after neutral stimulation. There were no effects of
emotion on oxyHb changes during picture presentation or on n-back task
performance. Previous studies with similar experimental designs have
revealed that cognitive processing during a working memory task can
inhibit negative emotions. Therefore, the effects of emotion during the
n-back task observed in this study likely reflected the inhibition of negative
emotion by cognitive processing. Although further studies are necessary to
confirm this interpretation, our findings suggest that NIRS can be used to
investigate neural processing during emotional control.

E18
REGULATION OF CRAVING IN OBESE CANDIDATES FOR BARIATRIC SURGERY Rebecca Boswell1, Godfrey Pearlson1,2, Michael Stevens2,

Beth Anderson2, Janet Ng2, Kasey O’Neil2, Andrea Stone2, Pavlos Papasavas2,
Darren Tishler2, Pawel Skudlarski2, Haley Yarosh1, Hedy Kober1; 1Yale University, 2Hartford Hospital Interdisciplinary Center on Obesity Research — Cognitive regulation of craving attenuates neural responses to drug-related
cues and helps predict successful treatment outcomes in substance use disorders. In contrast, no previous work has investigated obese individuals’
regulation of craving in response to food cues. As part of a larger, ongoing,
longitudinal study, we administered the Regulation of Craving (ROC) task
to pathologically obese individuals prior to bariatric surgery (N = 14; BMI
= 45.73 ± 4.37) using functional magnetic resonance imaging on a Siemens
Skyra wide-bore 3T scanner. On each trial, participants were presented
with photographs of high-calorie foods and instructed to adopt various
cognitive strategies: (1) NOW: “think of the positive sensory qualities of the
food”, (2) LATER: “think of the long-term negative consequences of consuming the food”, or (3) LOOK: “respond naturally”. Then, they rated their
craving. Imaging data were collected using a novel multi-band acquisition
sequence (MB=8, TR= 475ms, 3x3x3 voxels). Consistent with prior findings in addiction, regulatory success (LATER > NOW) was associated with
increased recruitment of prefrontal executive control regions, and reduced
striatal activation. However, striatal activation during regulatory success
was positively correlated with BMI (r = .57, p = .001). These results suggest
that obese individuals may exhibit heightened reward-related neural activation to high calorie foods, which increases with BMI. Nevertheless, when
instructed to do so, obese individuals were able to regulate craving as a
group. Our findings have important clinical and public health implications
and applications, including the potential to predict treatment outcomes for
bariatric surgery.

E19
IS IT A MATTER OF EMPATHY? PERFORMANCE MONITORING
DURING ACTIVE AND OBSERVATIONAL LEARNING IN MAJOR
DEPRESSION Patrizia Thoma1, Christine Norra2, Georg Juckel2, Boris

Suchan2, Christian Bellebaum2; 1Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany,
2
Ruhr-University Bochum, LWL University Hospital, Bochum, Germany — Previous literature established a link between Major Depressive Disorder
(MDD) and altered reward processing as well as between empathy and
(observational) reward learning. The aim of the present study was to assess
the effects of MDD on the electrophysiological correlates of active and
observational reward processing and to relate them to trait cognitive and
affective empathy. In our analyses of event-related potentials, we focused
on the feedback-related negativity (FRN) and the P300. Eighteen patients
with MDD and 16 healthy controls performed an active and an observational probabilistic reward-learning task and were assessed with regard
to self-reported cognitive and affective trait empathy. Relative to healthy

2014 Annual Meeting	
controls, patients with MDD showed generally attenuated FRN amplitudes, irrespective of feedback valence and learning type (active vs. observational), but comparable P300 amplitudes. In the patient group, but not in
controls, higher trait perspective taking scores were significantly correlated
with lower FRN amplitudes for punishment and reward in the active condition and for reward during observational learning. The pattern of results
suggests impaired reward prediction and a negative effect of higher trait
empathy on feedback-based learning in patients with MDD. This may have
implications for the question which patients might benefit from individual
and group therapy treatment settings.

E20
ATTENTIONAL PRIORITIZATION OF THREAT MAY BE DRIVEN BY
PERCEPTUAL CHANGES Emma Wu Dowd1, David M. Monroe1, Kevin S.

LaBar1, Stephen R. Mitroff1; 1Duke University — Attentional prioritization of
threat, a heightened assessment of potentially dangerous stimuli, occurs in
both normal and anxious populations. The amygdala is hypothesized to
mediate this facilitation of attention via direct connections to sensory cortices, suggesting that changes in perceptual processing might underlie this
attentional effect. To test whether attentional prioritization of threat occurs
via perceptual processes, we combined previously established effects of
fear generalization (see Dunsmoor & LaBar, 2013) with a visual search task.
Delay conditioning was used to create a threatening stimulus; one color
was paired with electrical shock (conditioned stimulus, CS+) and another
color was explicitly unpaired (non-conditioned stimulus, CS–). The CS+
was always the intermediate value in a 5-point blue-green gradient, while
the CS– was either the blue or green endpoint. After conditioning, participants completed a visual search task that presented targets and distractors inside colored circles, one of which could be one of the five blue-green
colors. Participants then identified the CS+ along the blue-green gradient.
Fear conditioning was successful; skin conductance responses were greater
for the CS+ versus the CS–. Reaction times indicated that attention was
preferentially deployed towards threat-associated colors. Consistent with
fear generalization shifts, this attentional effect generalized across the bluegreen gradient, peaking not at the CS+ but rather at an unreinforced color
further away from the CS–. Participants were also more likely to incorrectly
identify that unreinforced color as the CS+. These ‘peak shift’ effects suggest that attentional prioritization of threat may be driven by changes in
perception.

E21
HERE COMES TROUBLE: EXPECTATION OF THREATENING STIMULI ENHANCES PERCEPTION Tamara J. Sussman1, Anna Weinberg1,

Akos Szekely1, Greg H. Proudfit1, Aprajita Mohanty1; 1Stony Brook University —
Emotional stimuli exist in a visually complex environment and their detection is critical for survival. Existing research has focused on bottom-up
stimulus-related characteristics in the prioritized perception of threatening stimuli. However, top-down factors like expectations and goals play a
key role in perception. According to the predictive coding hypothesis, the
brain anticipates the forthcoming sensory environment, generating a template against which observed sensory evidence is matched. Here we test
the hypothesis that the expectation of an emotional stimulus, rather than a
physical encounter with it, may be a key factor in improved threat detection. After viewing fear (F) and neutral (N) cues, 19 participants detected
perceptually degraded fearful and neutral faces presented at their pre-determined perceptual threshold in a two-alternative forced-choice perceptual discrimination task. Signal detection measures of behavior and evoked
response potentials (ERPs) of brain activity were recorded. Threat-related
cues enhanced perceptual sensitivity (d-prime;t =4.50,p< .001) and led
to faster detection of upcoming stimuli(F(3, 60)=105.68,p< .001). The late
positive potential (LPP), an ERP component associated with enhanced perceptual processing of emotional stimuli, was larger for F compared to N
cues(F(1,18)=5.85,p<.05). Furthermore, a larger LPP for F cues predicted
greater face processing during face viewing (indexed by larger vertex positive potentials;F(2,16)=3.89, p<.05) and greater identification accuracy for
fear faces (indexed by accuracy;r=.47,p<.05). These findings represent a
conceptual advance in the field, establishing the importance of top-down
factors in the perceptual prioritization of emotional stimuli, and support
predictive coding as a neural mechanism that enhances speed and accuracy
of threat perception.

Poster Session E

E22
EYE-MOVEMENTS AND EMOTIONAL MEMORY: GENDER DIFFERENCES IN THE EFFECTS OF EMOTION ANTICIPATION ON ATTENTIONAL PROCESSES DURING ENCODING Anne Hermes1, Aoxiang Xu2,

Patricia Bauer2; 1Duke University, 2Emory University — Enhanced memory for
emotional information is widely studied, and many cognitive processes
interact during encoding to contribute to this phenomenon. For example,
attentional processes are implicated - research suggests that attention narrows to negative information and broadens in response to positive information. Other research has found that when individuals, particularly females,
anticipate an emotional event, neural activity before the event is predictive
of subsequent memory, implying that emotion anticipation also alters stimulus processing in mnemonically important ways. Unknown are the effects
of emotion anticipation on attentional processes during encoding and their
gender differences. To investigate this interaction, in the present research,
42 adults (23 female) viewed emotional images while their eye movements
were recorded. Anticipation of emotion was manipulated between subjects,
with half of participants receiving a cue indicating the emotional valence of
each upcoming image. Participants completed a recognition task one week
later as a measure of subsequent memory. Emotion anticipation weakened the effects of emotion on encoding processes in females, but lead to
heightened attention to emotional information as an encoding mechanism
in males. Specifically, for females, focusing eye-gaze on emotionally salient
information during encoding was related to enhanced memory for negative items and worse memory for positive items. However, the anticipation of emotion diminished these effects. Males’ memory for neutral items
was related to focusing eye-gaze on salient information, but when anticipating emotion, focusing on negative information was related to enhanced
memory. Implications of the findings for theories of emotion effects on
attention and memory will be discussed.

E23
PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOUR IN GROUPS HIGH AND LOW IN PSYCHOPATHIC TRAITS Karishma Vyas1, Leila Jameel1, Shelley Channon1;

1
University College London — Psychopathy is a personality disorder characterised by significant impairments in emotional empathy, with preserved
cognitive empathy. Although a substantial body of work has examined
cognitive and emotional functioning in psychopathy, this has typically
been carried out using abstract laboratory tasks. Moreover, there is limited
work investigating how impairments associated with psychopathy influence prosocial behaviour in everyday social interactions. In order to investigate this, the present study examined how university students high and
low in self-reported psychopathic personality traits performed on a novel
measure of everyday social behaviour. Participants were presented with
a series of social scenarios ending with an awkward request posed by a
main character. Participants had to provide verbal responses and also rate
the awkwardness of the situation. Verbal responses were categorised into
social strategies, signifying the extent of compliance with the main characters’ requests. As predicted, the high psychopathic trait group employed
fewer prosocial strategies than the low psychopathic trait group and rated
the situations as less awkward. The findings are discussed in relation to
the postulated dissociation between intact cognitive empathy and compromised emotional empathy. The potential long-term implications of the findings for increasing prosocial behaviour in individuals with psychopathic
traits are considered.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional
responding
E24
INTEROCEPTION AND EMOTIONAL AWARENESS Evelyn Ramirez1,2,

Jin Fan1; 1Queens College at the City University of New York, 2CUNY Graduate Center — Interoception, the awareness of internal changes in one’s
own body, has long been implicated in the experience of emotion. Various
theories of emotion argue that conscious awareness of emotion (emotional
awareness), is greatly dependent on one’s interoceptive ability. However,
there is little empirical evidence assessing the extent to which interoception influences awareness of one’s own emotions, as well as the emotions
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

167

Poster Session E	
of others. The current study aimed to examine the relationship between
these two constructs by measuring interoceptive and emotional awareness
abilities in healthy participants. The Interoceptive Awareness Scale (IAS),
and Breathing Detection Task (BDT) were employed as self-report, and
behavioral measures of interoception, respectively. Emotional awareness
was quantified using the Levels of Emotional Awareness Scale (LEAS) and
the Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20). Correlational analyses of data for
32 participants (14 males, 18 females; mean age = 23.5, SD = 1.6) revealed
a significant positive relationship between breathing detection accuracy
on the BDT, and the ability to identify and describe emotional experiences
within the self and others based on the LEAS (r = .40, p = .02). Consistent
with our behavioral findings, self-report measures of interoception on the
IAS also positively correlated with one’s level of emotional awareness (r
= .31, p = .04). These results support the notion that there is a relationship
between bodily awareness and the subjective experience of emotion, this
link may have important implications for clinical populations with deficits
in emotional awareness.

E25
THE IMPACT OF THE BLACK AND WHITE STYLIZATION OF VIDEO
ADVERTISEMENTS ON EMOTIONAL IMPRESSION Yuri G Pavlov1;

1
Ural Federal University — When creating TV ads designers often use discoloration technic to improve the products promotion efficiency. The principal aim of this study was the research of psychophysiological correlates of
emotions that occurs during watching video advertisements in chromatic
(in color) and in Ð°chromatic (in black and white) versions. The participants
were sixteen adults (8 males). Four video advertisements of the perfumery
products were used as stimulus. All videos were performed in two versions. The first experimental group watched video advertisement number
1 & 3 in achromatic version, 2 & 4 in chromatic version. Conversely, the
second group has seen 2 & 4 in achromatic version and 1 & 3 in chromatic
version. EEG data, skin conductance responses (SCR), heart rate and pulse
wave amplitude by photoplethysmogram were collected. Subjective values
of advertisements measured by questionnaire. The analysis didn’t reveal
any significant differences between experimental groups’ results. This
means that chromaticity of clips did not influenced on the subjective evaluations, as well as on physiological indicators. At the same time we found
that the data were changing in depending on the videos’ content and sex of
the participants. ANOVA RM found the significant main effect of number
of video for the scale «general impression» as well as for the theta power
in F3 and alpha power in P4. Women more positively evaluated all videos
and had significant greater overall EEG power values in time of perception
of each stimulus. SCR amplitude was changing in depending of the target
audience (gender) of advertisements.

E26
THE EFFECT OF SOCIAL INFLUENCE ON EMOTIONAL REACTIVITY

Rebecca Martin1, Yvette Villanueva1, Peter Franz1, Kevin Ochsner1; 1Columbia
University — Famous experiments like the Asch line paradigm have examined how group behavior can profoundly shape an individual’s beliefs and
perceptions. Few studies however, have examined how group attitudes can
impact an individual’s emotional state. In the current study, we examined
the effects of social influence on emotional reactivity. Participants rated
positive, negative, and neutral images on a 1 to 7 scale to indicate how
bad or good the image made them feel. Following their rating, participants
either received feedback and were shown what they believed to be a group
rating from a sample of approximately 100 peers, or they received no feedback at all. After a rest period, participants then rated the images again,
this time without peer feedback. We assessed social influence by comparing
the degree to which participant ratings changed as a function of the peer
ratings. We found a robust conformity effect, i.e. participants significantly
changed their responses to conform to the peer ratings. Interestingly, there
was a positivity bias such that participants’ ratings changed the most when
peer ratings were more positive. There was no significant change in ratings when participants received no peer feedback, nor when their ratings
matched the peer ratings. Future directions include using fMRI to assess
the neural underpinnings of social conformity, and how it might attenuate
or enhance neural circuitry associated with emotional reactivity.

168

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

E27
THE EMOTIONAL REGULATION AND ALTRUISTIC BEHAVIORS IN
HEALTHCARE THERAPISTS WITH DIFFERENT TRAINING PROFILES Jasin Wong1, Chien-Te Wu1; 1School of Occupational Therapy, College of

Medicine, National Taiwan University — Empathy-altruism hypothesis posits
that altruistic behaviors are primarily motivated by empathy; however, the
relationship between empathy and altruistic behaviors seems to be more
complicated in healthcare contexts. Several controversial findings suggest
that empathy levels of healthcare practitioners declines as the duration of
clinical practice increases, which seems to be ironically due to emotional
distress caused by long-term empathy. Furthermore, how does the empathy declination influence their altruistic behaviors remains unclear. In the
current study, we aim to address this issue by investigating the influence of
different professional training profiles upon people’s empathetic and altruistic behaviors. We included four groups of participants: trained occupational therapists (OT, N=30), trained non-healthcare professionals (N=30),
untrained OT student (N=30), and untrained non-healthcare-related college freshmen (N=30). In Exp1, we used a modified Emotional Stroop paradigm to implicitly evaluate how do active empathizing processes modulate
participants’ responses to emotional conflicts within different emotional
contexts (medical vs. non-medical). In Exp2, we used a computerized
Zurich Prosocial Game and a donation paradigm to implicitly evaluate participants’ prosocial behaviors. Our results suggest that, compared to other
groups, trained OT showed significantly reduced emotional interference
from medical related negative contexts while maintaining high levels of
altruistic behaviors. The observed emotional regulation patterns in trained
therapists may be an adjustment mechanism that prevents them from emotional distress caused by “required” long-term empathetic states. Therefore, the empathy-altruism hypothesis may not be sufficient to explain the
altruistic behavior of people who works in an emotionally negative environment for a long period.

E28
DOES CEREBELLUM CONTRIBUTE UNCONSCIOUS EMOTIONAL
PROCESSING? A PILOT FMRI STUDY. Kyota Inagaki1, Keiichi Onoda1,

Shuhei Yamaguchi1; 1Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Shimane
University — The cerebellum has an important role in the control and coordination of movement. In recent years, clinical and neuroimaging studies
have provided compelling evidence for a cerebellar role in the processing of
emotion. However it is not clear that the cerebellum is also related to neural
processes underlying unconscious emotion. The object of this study is to
investigate whether the cerebellum is involved in unconscious emotional
processing. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to
identify neural activity patterns within the cerebellum in 20 healthy human
volunteers (mean age 26.0 +/- 2.2 years old, 10 females) as they categorized
images that elicited one of the two primary emotions: happiness and anger.
Each participant was presented at a time either of angry, happy, neutral,
or neutral faces with transiently masking affective (angry/happy) pictures.
Participants instructed to make an angry/happy judgment for each face.
There was no participant who can percept the masking emotional faces.
The fMRI results showed that the cerebellum elicited stronger activation for
conscious happy faces compared to the other types of stimuli. No regions of
the cerebellum showed stronger activation for unconscious affective faces
than the others. These results suggest that the cerebellum is involved in
conscious but not unconscious emotional processing.

E29
NEURAL CORRELATES OF AFFECTIVE PROCESSING IN MALE
COLLEGE STUDENTS WITH HIGH AND LOW PSYCHOPATHIC
TRAITS Amy Medina1,2, Kevin Constante2, Danielle diFilipo1,2, Elvira Kirilko2, Jill
Grose-Fifer1,2; 1The Graduate Center, CUNY, 2John Jay College of Criminal Justice, CUNY — Affective deficits are a core feature of psychopathy; however,
few studies have examined the neural correlates of psychopathic traits in
college students. We used the Psychopathic Personality Inventory-Revised
(PPI-R) to categorize college-aged males into two groups with either high
or low psychopathic traits. We recorded ERPs while they viewed complex
unpleasant, pleasant, and neutral IAPS images, and we assessed differences
in attentional processing by comparing LPP amplitudes between groups

2014 Annual Meeting	
and across conditions. The early part of the LPP reflects initial attentional
capture, whereas later portions index more elaborate, deliberative processing. As we predicted, compared to those with low PPI-R scores, individuals with high PPI-R scores had reduced LPP amplitudes in response to
emotional stimuli. This relationship was evident in the later portion of the
LPP. However, in the early window, both groups showed similar increases
in LPP amplitudes for emotional images compared to neutral. Our results
suggest that although college students with relatively high levels of psychopathic traits show initial attentional capture by affective stimuli, they
fail to engage in more extended, higher-order processing of this kind of
information. Taken together, these findings may help to address the current debate about whether affective deficits in psychopathy are primarily
attentional in nature.

E30
AN EXPLORATORY STUDY OF SOCIAL REJECTION AND PATHOLOGICAL AGGRESSION Karla Fettich1, Jason Chein1, Lauren Uyeji1, Mitch-

ell Berman2, Michael McCloskey1; 1Temple University, 2Mississippi State University — Social rejection is associated with increased hostility and aggression,
and decreased prosocial behaviors. While there are many studies demonstrating negative effects of social rejection in general, very little is known
regarding the neural mechanisms underlying social rejection in individuals with pathological levels of aggression. Intermittent explosive disorder
(IED) is characterized by aggressive impulses that the individual is unable
to control, often resulting in assaults or destruction of property. The present
study assessed the neural correlates of rejection sensitivity using a social
exclusion paradigm (Cyberball) in adults with IED, in which a virtual ball
was tossed between the participant and two fictitious players. We hypothesized that, compared to healthy controls (N=15), individuals with IED
(N=15) would: 1) report greater sensitivity to rejection, as measured by
the Rejection Sensitivity Questionnaire (RSQ), 2) report stronger feelings
of social rejection and display increased neural activation (as measured
by BOLD signal) in regions including the anterior and posterior cingulate
cortex (PCC, ACC), insula, and amygdala. While in the scanner participants completed 4 games of Cyberball (2 exclusion games). Group contrast
results indicate that the IED group reported greater rejection sensitivity
than healthy controls, and displayed increased activation (as measured by
BOLD signal) in the PCC. Furthermore, within the IED group, the exclusion
condition also activated regions in the ventromedial and medial superior
PFC, regions implicated in emotion regulation. These findings suggest that
individuals with IED respond differently to social rejection and help inform
prevention and treatment strategies to reduce aggression related to social
rejection.

E31
PROBABILISTIC REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IN ADOLESCENTS
WITH BIPOLAR DISORDERS Tate Halverson1, Snezana Urosevic1, Monica

Luciana1; 1University of Minnesota -- Twin Cities — Reward sensitivity (RS)
is implicated as a risk factor for the first-time onset of bipolar disorders
(BP; Alloy et al., 2012a) and conversion from less to more severe bipolar
diagnoses (Alloy et al., 2012b). There is a paucity of studies assessing RS in
BP during adolescence, a developmental period with normative increases
in RS (Urosevic et al., 2012). A probabilistic learning (PL) task (Frank et al.,
2004) yields indices of sensitivity to recent reinforcement feedback during
the learning phase and of cumulative learning of reinforcement value
during the testing phase. Empirical studies and computational models suggest generalization of reinforcement learning in the PL task may rely on
striatal dopamine functioning (e.g., Frank et al., 2004), a key system implicated in BP (e.g., Depue & Iacono, 1989). Thus, PL is a valuable tool, but to
date untapped, for assessing RS in BP. Adolescents, ages 13 - 19 (M = 15.93,
SD = 1.59), were recruited into either BP (n = 21) or healthy control (n =
27) groups. Diagnostic interviews confirmed each group’s inclusion criteria. Participants completed the PL task along with cognitive assessments
and self-report measures of RS. There were significant associations between
self-report RS measures and PL indices. During the learning phase of the PL
task, there were significant group differences in sensitivity to recent feedback. During the PL’s testing phase, there were significant group by gender
effects on indices of cumulative learning. The results are relevant but do not
neatly conform to RS models of BP.

Poster Session E

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Person perception
E32
IMPAIRED CORTICAL DISCRIMINATION OF SOCIALLY CONDITIONED FACES IN SOCIAL ANXIETY Lea M. Ahrens1, Andreas Mühl-

berger2, Matthias J. Wieser1; 1University of Würzburg, Germany, 2University of
Regensburg, Germany — Though aversive social learning experiences may
play a major role in the onset of social anxiety disorder (SAD), recent studies which applied disorder nonspecific unconditioned stimuli (US) failed
to prove enhanced general conditionability in social phobics compared to
healthy controls. Thus, this study used socially relevant US to develop an
etiologically highly valid model capable of explaining the development and
maintenance of SAD. 24 high socially anxious (HSA) and 23 low socially
anxious (LSA) subjects were conditioned to three different faces (CS) flickering at a frequency of 15 Hz which were paired with auditory presented
insults, compliments or neutral comments (US). The face-evoked electrocortical response was measured via steady-state visually evoked potentials
(ssVEPs) and subjective measures of valence and arousal were obtained.
Results revealed a significant interaction during conditioning with LSA
showing highest cortical activity to faces paired with insults and lowest
activity to faces paired with compliments, while HSA did not display any
distinctions in the ssVEP amplitude, but generalized their conditioned
electrocortical response to all faces. However, no group differences were
discovered in the ratings. The finding that HSA learned to discriminate
between the three conditions on the subjective level, but did not react with
different cortical activation indicates an impaired ability to differentiate
between relevant and irrelevant social stimuli and might be a perpetuating
factor of social anxiety disorder.

E33
FACES ALTER CONTEXT: STEADY-STATE VISUALLY EVOKED
POTENTIALS DURING CONTEXT CONDITIONING FOR HIGH AND
LOW SOCIALLY ANXIOUS INDIVIDUALS Anna K. Kastner1, Paul Pauli1,

Andreas Mühlberger2, Matthias J. Wieser1; 1University of Würzburg, Germany,
2
University of Regensburg, Germany — Social stimuli are found to capture
attention and to be preferentially processed, possibly modified in threatening contexts. Context conditioning, which leads to an increased state of anxiety due to the unpredictability of unconditioned stimuli (US), could provide such a context. Two pictures of different office rooms, presented for a
longer duration, served as contexts. In one office room an unpleasant noise
was presented unpredictably (CTX+) while the noise was never presented
in the second context (CTX-). In the test phase a social agent with happy,
neutral or angry expression was presented in both contexts. Context and
agents were presented in flickering mode. Cortical activation in response
to context and agents was assessed separately by steady-state visually
evoked potentials (ssVEP) using frequency tagging. The influence of social
anxiety was taken into account. Results showed enhanced ssVEP amplitudes for CTX+ compared to CTX- in an occipital cluster during acquisition. This was also true for the test phase but only for subjects aware of
the context-US-contingency. Similarly, only aware subjects showed higher
amplitudes for CTX+ when a distractor was present. High socially anxious
(HSA) but not low socially anxious (LSA) individuals showed higher ssVEP
activation for both contexts when an angry face was present compared to
other expressions. Results suggest that context conditioning was successfully implemented with facilitated cortical processing of fear-associated
contexts. Moreover, processing of context seems to vary between HSA and
LSA such that social anxiety leads to enhanced processing of the environment when a potentially threatening stimulus is present.

E34
THE EFFECTS OF MEDIA VIOLENCE ON THE NEURAL CORRELATES
OF EMOTIONAL FACIAL PROCESSING: AN ERP INVESTIGATION
Laura Stockdale1, Robert Palumbo1, Matt Kmiecik1, Rebecca L. Silton1, Robert
G. Morrison1; 1Loyola University Chicago — Decades of research on the effects
of media violence have shown a clear association between exposures to
media violence, increased aggression, and decreased prosocial behavior and empathy. For example, participants who played a violent video
game for 20 minutes more quickly and accurately identified angry faces as

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

169

Poster Session E	
opposed to happy faces. Researchers have shown that facial processing and
behavioral regulation are important cognitive processes underlying empathetic behavior and aggression, however no known research has examined
the influence of media violence on the neural correlates of face processing
and behavioral regulation. Sixty undergraduate students were randomly
assigned to watch a 10-minute movie clip which was either dominantly
violent or nonviolent. Movies were previously shown to be equally engaging and arousing and in our study both conditions resulted in an equal
increase in negative affect. After watching the film, participants completed
a stop-signal task using equally arousing fearful and happy faces while
their brain waves were recorded using EEG. Participants were asked to
identify if faces were male or female with no explicit mention of emotion.
Preliminary results suggest that exposure to the violent film resulted in a
delayed N170 ERP. This effect was strongest in right posterior electrodes,
usually associated with the N170 to faces. Delays in N170 latency have
frequently been associated with a shift from natural holistic processing of
faces to a more feature based approach. We believe this is the first study
to show that exposure to media violence can modulate the mechanisms
underlying emotional face processing.

E35
PERCEIVING CROWD ATTENTION: ENSEMBLE PERCEPTION OF A
CROWD’S GAZE Timothy Sweeny1, David Whitney2; 1University of Denver,

2
University of California, Berkeley — Each time we encounter a person, we
gather a wealth of socio-visual cues useful for understanding behaviors and
intentions. This sensitivity, in turn, can rapidly and automatically guide our
own behavior. Intriguingly, social information is most effective in directing
behavior when it is perceived in crowds. For example, the shared gaze of
a crowd is more likely to direct attention than an individual’s gaze. Is this
curious sensitivity to social information in crowds ingrained in our visual
processing, or is a crowd’s behavior only understood after an inferential
process or cognitive deliberation? Here, we provide the first evidence that
the visual system uses a direct mechanism - ensemble coding - to efficiently
encode the “gist” of a crowd’s attention. When people viewed a group of
faces, they pooled information from multiple individuals to perceive the
crowd’s collective gaze, all at once. This integration was rapid, occurring
in as little as 200 msec. Ensemble perception of the crowd was diminished when faces were inverted, suggesting an origin in high-level stages
of visual processing, with gaze perceived as an emergent combination of
information from multiple faces and eyes. These findings reveal a direct
mechanism for assessing crowd gaze, which could underlie our ability to
perceive group intentions, orchestrate joint attention, and guide behavior.
More generally, our results show that in order to understand even the most
basic visual processes, it is vital to consider the social pressures and group
behaviors with which we evolved, and vice versa.

E36
TRUST DEPENDS ON CHANGES IN OTHER’S PUPIL SIZE VIA
PUPIL SYNCHRONIZATION Mariska Kret1, Agneta Fischer1, Carsten de

Dreu1; 1University of Amsterdam — Humans cooperate with, and extend
trust to both familiar and unfamiliar others, thus enabling ancestral groups
and contemporary institutions to function and prosper. Yet to avoid
betrayal and exploitation, humans must be prepared to withhold cooperation and trust, and punish those who betray. Whether recurrent or oneshot, humans need to assess whether partners are worthy of one’s trust, or
instead likely to exploit one’s cooperative effort. For that purpose, humans
attend to each other’s eyes, mimic facial expressions, follow gaze and there
are indications that they synchronize pupil-size. The communication of
such delicate eye-signals must have become adaptive among individuals
who trusted and not abused each other. Seeing a partners’ pupils dilate
signals safety, permitting cooperation and trust; perceiving small pupils,
in contrast, inhibits a pro-social approach. A possible mechanism is that
the own pupils that synchronize with the partners’, provide immediate
neural feedback that the interaction environment is benign. To test the supposed relation between pupil-synchronization and trust, we designed three
experiments in which participants played trust-games with virtual trustees
whose pupils contracted, remained static or dilated. We observed that contracting pupils undermined trust. Participants’ pupils synchronized with
trustees’ dilating pupils, especially when from an in-group member and
expressing happiness. Participants’ pupil-size decreased following trustees’ contracting pupils, especially when anger was expressed by the out-

170

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
group. The more participants synchronized with dilating pupils, the more
they trusted. We just finished fMRI data collection to test our hypothesis
that the ventral striatum is involved in the link between pupil-synchronization and trust.

E37
GENDER AND CARE-GIVING TENDENCIES DRIVE SELECTIVE
SENSITIVITY IN THE FUSIFORM FACE AREA TO DIFFERENT AGED
FACES Rodrigo A. Cardenas1, Carlos O. Garrido1, Caitlin R. Bowman1, Regi-

nald B. Adams, Jr.1; 1The Pennsylvania State University — Recent work suggests that the collective care of human infants has substantially shaped
human psychology, especially empathic and altruistic behavior. Here, we
examined whether a core structure in the neural representation of faces,
the face fusiform area (FFA), responds selectively to age cues and whether
this response depends on known sex-differences in interest-in-infants. We
used an fMRI block-design to present to 23 participants (13 women) with
infant, younger adult, older adult faces, and objects. Participants also completed behavioral measures of interest-in-infants, which replicated sex-differences in interest-in-infants (with women showing more interest than
men). Next, we localized the FFA using a standard contrast of young adult
faces compared to non-face objects. A 2 (participant’s sex) x 3 (face’s age)
x 2 (left or right FFA) ANOVA revealed a two-way interaction, F (2,42)
= 4.025, p = .025, such that women showed similar FFA activation across
faces, whereas men showed lower FFA activation to both infant and older
adults compared to young adult faces. Thus, the FFA responded to age cues
in a direction consistent with our measure of interest-in-infants. Further,
interest-in-infants was significantly correlated with left-FFA activation for
infant faces (r = .6, p = .004). Surprisingly, interest-in-infants was also correlated with younger (r = .61, p = .003) and older adult (r=.59, p = .005)
faces. This result suggests that the interest-in-infants measure taps into a
more general care-giving construct. Overall, these results reveal sex-differences in FFA responses in what appears to be due to individual differences
in care-giving tendencies.

E38
DEFAULT NETWORK ACTIVITY DURING FREE VIEWING OF
SEMI-NATURALISTIC SOCIAL INTERACTIONS DIFFERS IN
AUTISM Lisa Byrge1, J. Michael Tyszka2, Julien Dubois2, Ralph Adolphs2,

Daniel P. Kennedy1,2; 1Indiana University, Bloomington, 2California Institute of
Technology — Autism is characterized in part by atypical social behaviors,
yet attempts to understand their neural bases through neuroimaging studies have been largely restricted to using static and often artificial stimuli.
Functional neuroimaging during free viewing of semi-naturalistic stimuli
is emerging as an important complement (Hasson et al., 2004), whereby
measures of neural response similarity across individuals (i.e., inter-subject synchronization of BOLD-fMRI responses) can reveal typical or atypical response profiles. Only two previous studies have used this approach
with individuals with autism (Hasson et al., 2009; Salmi et al., 2013); yet,
none so far have examined the temporal patterns of evoked activity at the
level of brain networks despite known resting-state network abnormalities in autism. Here, we scanned 19 high-functioning adults with autism
and 21 matched controls while they watched an episode of the television
sitcom The Office (NBC Universal), which prominently features interpersonal interactions. Using a network-based cortical parcellation (Yeo et al.,
2011) to derive timeseries for 17 unique networks, we found that all three
sub-networks comprising the default network (each of which exhibited
distinct timecourses) responded abnormally in the autism group, an effect
that was reliable across both halves of the video (all p <0.01 and Cohen’s
d effect sizes=0.44-0.62). In all cases, reduced inter-subject synchronization
was observed in the autism group. These findings add to the growing body
of work demonstrating abnormalities in the default network in autism, but
highlight the relative specificity of default network dysfunction in autism
during unconstrained viewing of social interactions.

E39
A MAP FOR SOCIAL NAVIGATION IN THE HUMAN BRAIN Rita Tav-

ares1, Christian Williams1, Yael Grossman1, Avi Mendelsohn1, Daniela Schiller1;
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, NY — Where do I stand? On a given
social encounter we can become more or less intimate with others and gain
or lose power over them. Over time, we learn to position ourselves within
1

2014 Annual Meeting	
a social structure by using others as reference points. How does the human
brain encode these social coordinates? We hypothesized that the neural
mechanisms underlying navigation in physical space are also employed to
navigate social space and that these neural correlates could be found in
the hippocampus. To test this hypothesis, we devised a naturalistic paradigm of social encounters, built on the principles of role-playing games.
During the task, participants interact with several characters while undergoing functional MRI. Each interaction is translated to numerical values
representing power and intimacy. These social coordinates are then used to
draw a vector between each of those characters and the participant’s point
of view. The angle and distance of the vector are employed as predictors
for BOLD signal analysis. Our vector model consistently correlated with
activation of the hippocampus. This suggests both that we can extract the
neural correlates of social navigation using a geometrical model, and that
encoding of spatial and social navigation might happen in overlapping
areas of the brain.

E40
CONGRUITY OF VALENCED APPEARANCE-BEHAVIOR CUES
IMPACTS MEDIAL PREFRONTAL ACTIVITY Brittany Cassidy1, Angela

Gutchess1; 1Brandeis University — Previous work has revealed several brain
regions, notably medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), are recruited while
forming impressions from others’ behaviors. The interplay of appearanceand behavior-based cues for impression formation has been understudied
because much of the previous work utilizes face-behavior pairs in which
faces are equated across conditions on several characteristics (e.g., trustworthiness). This allows for the possibility that the congruity of facial characteristics and behaviors could impact the engagement of neural regions,
including mPFC. We investigated this possibility using fMRI. Eighteen
young adults viewed trustworthy- and untrustworthy-looking faces alone
for two seconds, and then the face was paired with a positive, negative,
or neutral behavior for four seconds. Participants then indicated their
likelihood of approaching each individual. We calculated the strength of
responses toward the face-behavior pairs based on the mean approach likelihood for each participant. Both congruent (e.g., trustworthy face/positive behavior) and incongruent (e.g., trustworthy face/negative behavior)
face-behavior pairs were judged more extremely than appearance-based
(e.g., trustworthy face with neutral behavior) pairs. mPFC engagement
complemented this finding, with increased activity for congruent and
incongruent face-behavior pairs compared to appearance-based ones.
Behaviorally, congruent pairs were judged more extremely than incongruent ones for untrustworthy- but not trustworthy-looking faces. mPFC
activity reflected this interaction, which was driven by enhanced activity
when participants viewed negative versus positive behaviors. This suggests that the presentation of valenced social material influences mPFC
activity during impression formation, and further highlights the salience
of negative information when viewing congruent and incongruent appearance- and behavior-based social cues.

E41
GRAY MATTER VOLUME IN THE AMYGDALA IS ASSOCIATED WITH
FACIAL ASSESSMENTS OF TRUSTWORTHINESS Lily Preer1, Mareen

Weber1, Olga Tkachenko1, Shreya Divatia1, Lauren A. Demers1, Elizabeth
Olson1, William D.S. Killgore1; 1Social, Cognitive, & Affective Neuroscience Laboratory, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School — Structural abnormalities
in the amygdala may interfere with processing of perceptions of threat. Evidence has shown that amygdala damage is associated with impaired recognition of fearful faces and decreased accuracy in determinations of facial
trustworthiness. Some evidence suggests that greater amygdala volume is
related to increased anxiety and fearfulness. The present study tested the
hypothesis that amygdala volume would be inversely correlated with accuracy in assessing trustworthiness in faces. nnFifty-seven healthy individuals ages 18-45 (M=30.2, SD=30.2) completed a computerized facial assessment of trustworthiness task. In this task, participants were presented with
a series of 100 pairs of computer-generated facial expressions varying along
a continuum of rated trustworthiness and selected which face in the pair
was more trustworthy. Participants also underwent structural magnetic
resonance imaging at 3.0 Tesla. Voxel-based morphometric random effects
multiple regression whole-brain analyses were used to assess whether gray
matter volume was related to trustworthiness accuracy (p<.001, non-stationary cluster extent corrected, cluster threshold k e” 87). Reduced gray

Poster Session E
matter volume in the left amygdala was related to better performance on
the trustworthiness task (89 voxels, T=4.33, MNI coordinates: x=-14, y=2,
z=-24). nnFindings support prior research on the role of amygdala structure
in facial determinations of trustworthiness, but expand on this by showing
that smaller gray matter volume is related to greater accuracy in determining trustworthiness. We speculate that larger gray matter volume in the
amygdala may increase emotional interference, reducing the accuracy of
determinations of trustworthiness.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development
& aging
E42
THE ACUTE EFFECTS OF EXERCISE ON LARGE-SCALE NETWORKS OF THE HUMAN AGING BRAIN: INSIGHTS INTO THE
PROTECTIVE ROLE OF EXERCISE Timothy B. Weng1, Gary L. Pierce1,

Warren Darling1, Vincent Magnotta1, Michelle W. Voss1; 1The University of Iowa
— Regular exercise protects against age-related declines in the brain and
cognitive function. However, the mechanisms by which exercise improves
brain function in aged humans remains poorly understood. Investigating
the acute effects of exercise may reveal insights about the parameters that
determine accumulated outcomes of long-term exercise interventions. By
employing a novel acute exercise paradigm with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in a group of healthy younger (N=12) and older
(N=8) adults, this study sought to examine the acute effects of exercise on
large-scale functional brain networks acquired during a resting state. We
hypothesized that moderate-intensity exercise would increase functional
synchrony of two networks that are disrupted with normal aging, the
Default-Mode Network (DMN) and the Fronto-Executive Network (FEN).
For each participant, resting-state fMRI data were collected before and
after 30 minutes of both moderate and very light intensity cycling. Exercise
sessions were counter-balanced for order of intensity. Results indicate that
baseline age-related differences in functional synchrony of the DMN and
the FEN were attenuated by a single bout of moderate-intensity exercise.
After exercise, functional synchrony in these networks increased disproportionately more in older than in younger adults (all p<0.05). These results
are the first documentation of acute exercise effects on functional brain networks in humans and are consistent with animal studies that demonstrate
immediate effects of exercise on the brain. Follow-up studies will further
characterize the mechanisms by which exercise induces acute changes in
functional synchrony in older adults and whether they predict long-term
changes in the same individuals.

E43
INTRINSIC CONNECTIVITY IN ADOLESCENTS AND ADULTS PREDICTS DIFFERENCES IN IMPULSIVITY AND RISK-TAKING Saman-

tha Abram1, Krista Wisner1, Rachael Grazioplene1, Colin DeYoung1, Angus
MacDonald, III1; 1University of Minnesota, Twin Cities — Discrete neural networks, or intrinsic connectivity networks (ICNs), are theorized to reflect
the inherent functional architecture of the brain at rest. Additionally, ICNs
have been shown to correspond with task-related neural activity, with
recent findings suggesting that the strength of certain cognitive and affective ICNs may predict performance on decision-making measures. Within-network strength and between-network efficiency has been to shown to
improve from adolescence into adulthood. This study examines the development of decision-making neural networks from adolescence into adulthood, first comparing connectivity strength in adolescents and adults of
relevant ICNs, and then applying these findings to assess group differences
in impulsive decision-making. 70 adolescents (ages 15-19) and 300 adults
(ages 20-40) completed a resting-state scan and BIS/BAS scales, which measure the behavioral approach and inhibition systems. Group-level Independent Component Analysis was performed on resting-state data to extract 60
ICNs. Dice coefficients were used to compare ICNs across samples, producing a correlation heat map matrix with 18% of correlations above 0.70, 53%
above 0.50, and 97% above 0.30. The reproducibility of ICNs across samples
provides grounds for probing the utility and function of specific ICNs, specifically those related to decision-making processes. These findings support
the presence of a consistent set of networks across developmental stages.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

171

Poster Session E	
This project will also examine adolescent versus adult differences in connectivity strength of decision-making ICNs, and how these discrepancies
relate to performance on measures of risk-taking.

E44
EXPLORING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SMALL VESSEL DISEASE AND VASCULAR COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT USING FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW Ayan Dey1,3,

Vessela Stamenova3, Gary Turner1,2, Sandra Black1,3,4, Brian Levine1,3; 1University of Toronto, 2York University, 3Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest
Hospital, 4LC Campbell Cognitive Neurology Research Unit at Sunnybrook
Hospital — Cerebral small vessel disease (SVD) is a pathological condition
of the brain’s microvasculature which increases with age and is exacerbated by vascular risk factors. It is identified by findings of white matter
lesions and subcortical infarcts on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
SVD is the prime contributor to subcortical vascular cognitive impairment
(scVCI) which is typically characterized by executive and behavioural
dysfunction; its presentation however is often insidious with an unclear
relation between neuroimaging findings and cognitive decline contributing to dementia. Findings from conventional MRI show that individuals
with nearly identical WML burden present with a wide variation in cognitive performance ranging from asymptomatic to dementia. This suggests
that other factors that determine symptom expression exist and may be
revealed through investigation of SVD effects on functional brain activity.
Here we present a systematic review of all studies to date (n=38) that have
explored the relationship between SVD and cognitive impairment using
functional neuroimaging. Converging hemodynamic and electrophysiological evidence from functional neuroimaging studies complement structural imaging in supporting the hypothesis that impairments observed in
patients with scVCI result from disruption of frontosubcortical circuits and
ischemic damage to cholinergic tracts. Moreover we present a model relating behavioural disturbances observed in scVCI to decoupling of the frontoparietal control network and the default mode network. Future investigations should use the aforementioned markers as surrogate indicators of
neural network change associated with recovery and rehabilitation. Such
investigations should employ a multimodal approach, use targeted neuropsychological measures of cognition and take advantage of multivariate
statistical analysis.

E45
EXERCISE IN OLDER ADULTS IMPROVES EXECUTIVE FUNCTION,
NOT MEMORY Ilana B. Clark1, Jennifer J. Heisz1; 1McMaster University —

Worldwide, countries are bracing for a rapid increase in the aging population and the consequent surge in neurodegenerative diseases, such as
Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias. Alzheimer’s disease is the most
common form of dementia, causing severe memory loss and interfering with
daily life. There is urgent need for interventions to mitigate age-related cognitive decline. Evidence points to the cognitive benefits of physical exercise
and a strong link between exercise and executive function. However, less
is known on how exercise affects memory. We examined the relationship
between physical fitness and memory processing in physically active older
adults of varying levels of physical fitness. We predicted their maximal
oxygen consumption (VO2max) using a Step Test or 6-minute walk, and
assessed their cognitive performance on a range of tasks including tests of
memory (delayed match-to-sample, face-name learning), processing speed
(simple reaction time), and executive function (Stroop, Go-No-Go, Intentional forgetting). We observed a positive relationship between physical
fitness and performance on executive function and processing speed tasks.
However, level of physical fitness was unrelated to memory performance.
This demonstrates that physical fitness in older adults promotes executive
function, but not memory, suggesting that benefits on brain function are
selective. It is possible that exercise-induced neurophysiological changes
may target specific brain structures that support executive function, while
there may be other mechanisms supportive of memory that are not directly
related to physical fitness. Future research is needed to understand how
exercise can improve memory when explaining the link between physical
activity and Alzheimer’s disease.

172

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

E46
CHANGES IN RESPONSE BIAS: EVIDENCE FROM OLDER
ADULTS AND PATIENTS WITH ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Sean Flan-

nery1,2, Rebecca G. Deason1,2,3, Prabhakar S. Mithal1, Erin P. Hussey1,4, Eileen
T. Crehan1, Brandon A. Ally1,3, Andrew E. Budson1; 1VA Boston Healthcare
System;, 2Boston University School of Medicine, 3Texas State University, 4Vanderbilt University — Patients with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) typically show a
liberal response bias (greater tendency to response “old”) on memory tests.
This tendency may be due, in part, to their inability to successfully monitor
their responses and implement criterion changes. In the current study, we
manipulated the underlying ratio of old and new items in a recognition
memory test to determine whether patients with mild AD could shift their
response bias appropriately. During 3 sessions, healthy controls and AD
patients studied words and then were tested with varying percentages of
old items (50%, 30%, 70%). Additionally, we wanted to determine whether
healthy controls and AD patients were able to successfully monitor their
patterns of responses. To assess this insight, we asked participants how
many old/new items they had seen at the halfway point and at the end
of each recognition test phase. The results show that when the underlying
ratio of old and new items was varied, both older controls and AD patients
manipulated their response bias accordingly. All participants showed a
more conservative response bias in the 30% condition and a more liberal
bias in the 70% condition although this shift was more pronounced for
healthy controls. When asked to provide information about the number of
old/new items, healthy controls reported seeing significantly more new
items than old items whereas AD patients showed the opposite pattern.
These findings provide evidence that despite their tendency towards a liberal response bias, patients with mild AD do retain some insight into their
response patterns.

E47
RELATIONSHIP OF HEMOGLOBIN A1C WITH COGNITIVE FUNCTIONING OVER TIME WITH NON-DIABETIC ADULTS Katherine Kane1,

Laura Grande1,2, William Milberg1,3, Regina McGlinchey1,3, Elizabeth Leritz1,3;
1
Boston VA Healthcare System, 2Boston University School of Medicine, 3Harvard Medical School — Elevated hemoglobin A1c (HA1c) is a prevalent cardiovascular risk factor and is also a known risk factor for cognitive decline.
However, little is known how HA1c levels affect cognition longitudinally
in non-diabetic, neurologically healthy, mid-to-late life adults with mild to
moderate cerebrovascular risk. The sample included 63 community-dwelling adults (M age = 68.21 years (range = 43-85), M education = 14.81 years,
65.1% Female), with an average follow-up of 3.37 years. Participants diagnosed with diabetes at Time 1 were excluded. HA1c levels were collected at
Time 1 (T1) and Time 2 (T2) and the change was calculated as (T2-T1/T1).
Using Mayo Clinic standards, 54% had normal HA1c levels, 41.3% were
pre-diabetic, and 4.8% had high HA1c levels. All participants underwent
a comprehensive neuropsychological test battery from which composite
scores were calculated for the broad domains of memory and executive
function. Mean HA1c levels at T1 were 5.67 and at T2 were 5.81. HA1c
levels were associated with executive function at T1 (r = -.32, p < .05) and
T2 (r = -.33, p < .05). After controlling for age, the change in HA1c between
T1 and T2 explained 20.7% of the variance in executive function at T2, suggesting that as HA1c levels increase over time, executive function worsens.
Overall, these data suggest that increased dysregulation of glucose levels
over time negatively impacts executive function. One implication of these
data is that even mild to moderate elevations in HA1c levels can affect executive functioning over an almost four-year period.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring &
inhibitory control
E48
BEHAVIORAL PREDICTORS OF THE NEURAL INCONGRUENCY
EFFECTS IN THE SIMON TASK Brandee Feola1, Sharona M. Atkins3,
Michael F. Bunting2,4, Michael R. Dougherty2,3,4, Donald J. Bolger1,3,4; 1Department of Human Development & Quantitative Methodology, University of Maryland, 2Department of Psychology, University of Maryland, 3Neuroscience &

2014 Annual Meeting	
Cognitive Science Program, University of Maryland, 4Center for Advanced
Study of Language, University of Maryland — The current study examined the
behavioral predictors of the neural activation during the Simon Task. Participants completed a battery of cognitive tasks including the Simon Task,
Raven’s Progressive Matrices, and the Attentional Network Test (ANT).
Neural activation during the Simon Task was collected using functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI). The Simon Task (Simon & Small,
1969) requires the individuals to respond in the direction the arrow while
ignoring the location of the arrow. The Simon effect suggests individuals
are slower when the location of the arrow and the direction of the arrow
are conflicting. The Raven’s Progressive Matrices (Raven, 1936) is a pattern
completion task used as a proxy for the Intelligent Quotient (IQ). The ANT
(Fan et al., 2003) is an assessment of the alertness, orienting, and executive components of attention. To examine the predictors of the Simon Task,
activation during conflict trials was examined in relation to performance
on the Raven’s Progressive Matrices and the ANT. Results suggest neural
activation during the conflict trials of the Simon Task depends on the individual’s IQ. More specifically, there was a negative relationship between
performance on the Raven’s Progressive Matrices and activation in the network involved in conflict resolution including in the caudate, insula, and
cerebellum. When controlling for IQ, neural activation during the conflict
trials of the Simon Task in frontal-medial and caudate areas were negatively related to the executive component of the ANT. The results suggest
IQ impacts the neural networks supporting conflict resolution.

E49
BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF SELF-CONTROL The-

resa Teslovich1, Alisa Powers1, Chelsea Helion1, Catherine S. Insel2, Jennifer
A. Silvers2, Kevin N. Ochsner2, Walter Mischel2, B.J. Casey1; 1Sackler Institute
for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Cornell Medical College, 2Columbia University — The ability to resist temptation for the sake of larger, delayed
gains (i.e., delay of gratification) is a critical component of self-control.
Longitudinal studies have linked those who choose to wait for the larger,
delayed reward (high-delayers) with higher academic achievement, lower
body mass index and less substance abuse than low-delayers. Frontostriatal
circuitry has been implicated in self-control in adults, but the neural substrates of self-control in children remains unclear given significant changes
in frontostriatal circuitry during this period. The current study tested 20
children, aged 6-12 years on the delay of gratification task and on a go/
no-go imaging task that included appetitive and neutral stimuli. Behaviorally, no difference was observed between high (N=10) and low (N=10)
delay groups in overall false alarm rate. However, low-delayers were faster
than high-delayers, particularly when detecting appetitive cues. These
behavioral findings were paired with enhanced recruitment of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the anterior cingulate in high-delayers relative
to low-delayers when correctly suppressing a response. These preliminary
results are consistent with our recent 40-year longitudinal follow-up study
and suggest that self-control, as measured by the delay of gratification task,
may be associated more with sensitivity to appetitive cues in the environment rather than simply due to impulsivity. Together, these studies may
help inform which core components of delay of gratification could be targeted with novel interventions (e.g., top down control strategies or diminishing salience of appetitive cues) to achieve maximal change in behavior,
and potentially when during childhood to target these components.

E50
ANTICIPATING CONFLICT: NEURAL CORRELATES OF A BAYESIAN BELIEF AND ITS MOTOR CONSEQUENCE Sien Hu1, Jaime Ide1,

Sheng Zhang1, Angela Yu2, Chiang-shan Li1; 1Yale University, 2University of California, San Diego — Many imaging studies described the neural bases of
behavioral adaptation. However, the relationship between the neural bases
of top-down control and subsequent responses is not clear. The current
study addressed this gap of research. One-hundred-and-sixty-one participants performed a stop signal task during functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI). We used a Bayesian probabilistic model to quantify the
expectation of conflict based on recent exposure to conflict. We computed
the expected likelihood of the stop signal, or p(Stop), for each trial, and
used the correlation between p(Stop) and reaction time (RT) as an index for
sequential effect for each individual participant. We then used p(Stop) and
RT as parametric modulators in two general linear models for fMRI signals
of go trials, each aligned to the fixation onset or go signal onset. Across par-

Poster Session E
ticipants, positive modulations of p(Stop) and RT revealed overlapping but
also distinct activations. The pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA) and
right inferior parietal lobule (IPL) responded positively to p(Stop) modulation - the anticipation of conflict, and bilateral insula responded positively
to RT modulation. Importantly, the single trial amplitude of go trials significantly and negatively correlated between pre-SMA/IPL and bilateral
insula for participants who showed, but not those who did not, a significant sequential effect. Furthermore, Granger causality analysis showed a
directional influence from pre-SMA/IPL to insula differentially in the two
groups. These results thus identified and established a causal relationship
between the neural activities in association with conflict anticipation and
with prolonged RT as a result of such anticipation.

E51
CARDIORESPIRATORY FITNESS AND CONTEXT PROCESSING IN
PREADOLESCENT CHILDREN Lauren Raine1, Brian Saliba1, Mark Scud-

der1, Arthur Kramer2, Charles Hillman1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana- Champaign, Il, USA, 2The Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology,
University of Illinois at Urbana- Champaign, Il, USA — There is a growing trend
of inactivity among children, which may not only result in poorer physical health, but also poorer cognitive health. Previous research has shown
that lower aerobic fitness relates to decreased cognitive function for tasks
requiring perception, memory, and action. PURPOSE: To investigate the
relationship between aerobic fitness and proactive and reactive cognitive
control using a continuous performance task (CPT). Proactive control relies
on anticipation and prevention of interference prior to the occurrence of a
cognitively demanding event, whereas reactive control relies on the detection and resolution of interference after initiation of the cognitive event.
METHODS: Forty-eight 9-10 year old children (n=24 higher fit; HF and
n=24 lower fit; LF) performed an AX-CPT requiring them to respond to
target cue-probe pairs (AX) or non-target pairs (AY, BX, BY) under two
different trial duration conditions (a long [5000 ms] and a short [1200 ms]
delay between the cue and probe), which modulated working memory
demands. RESULTS: Across trials, HF children had greater accuracy than
LF children. For target trials, the long duration resulted in lower accuracy
than the short duration. For non-target trials, an interaction of duration
and trial type was observed, indicating that the long duration resulted in
decreased BX and BY accuracy relative to the short duration. Further, AY
trials had significantly greater accuracy during the long duration compared
to short duration. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that fitness may
modulate cognitive control strategies during tasks requiring context updating and maintenance, key components of working memory.

E52
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN “HOT” AND “COOL” PRESCHOOL
EXECUTIVE FUNCTION: THE BENEFIT OF FEEDBACK Ashley St.
John1, Srishti Nayak1, Stacey Doan1, Amanda Tarullo1; 1Boston University —
Executive function (EF) refers to higher order cognitive and self-regulatory processes (e.g. inhibiting an impulse) and is critical to academic and
socioemotional functioning (Carlson, 2005). We assessed whether having a
reward at stake (“hot” EF) helped or hindered preschool children’s EF performance. We also examined predictors of individual differences of both
“cool” (purely cognitive) and hot versions of a rule-switching task (Dimensional Card Change Sort; DCCS). 25 children aged 4.0-4.5 completed two
versions of the DCCS, sorting objects by shape (pre-switch) then by color
(post-switch). In the cool version there was no feedback and in the hot version they received or lost stickers based on their response. From the NIH
Toolbox, children completed the Flanker (inhibitory control and attention)
and Child List Sort (working memory) and the mothers completed the
DCCS and Flanker. Children had higher accuracy post-switch on the hot
DCCS than the cold DCCS (t=-3.21, p<.01), showing that children benefited
from feedback. Most children were at ceiling for hot post-switch accuracy.
Maternal DCCS and Flanker were highly correlated (r=.69, p<.001) and
were combined. Child Flanker (Î²=.661, p<.01) and maternal EF (Î²=.353,
p=.099) explained 45.5% of the variance in child cold DCCS post-switch
accuracy (R2=.455, F(2,12)=6.849, p=.01). Conversely, only child cold DCCS
accuracy predicted hot DCCS accuracy (R2=.271, F(1,13)=6.201, p<.05).
Results show that preschool children consistently benefit from feedback on
the hot DCCS. Performance on the cool DCCS (without feedback) is more
variable and is predicted by maternal EF and children’s Flanker scores,
highlighting the importance of inhibitory control.
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

173

Poster Session E	

E53
DEEP BRAIN STIMULATION FOR TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY:
CHANGES IN COGNITION AND FUNCTION ASSOCIATED WITH
CHANGES IN RELATIVE BRAIN ACTIVITY Dylan M. Nielson1, Per B.

Sederberg1, W. Jerry Mysiw1, Michael V. Knopp1, Jennifer Bogner1, John D.
Corrigan1, Ali R. Rezai1; 1The Ohio State University — Over 1.7 million Americans sustain a traumatic brain injury (TBI) per year. Approximately 20%
of these individuals sustain a moderate to severe TBI, commonly resulting in lifelong disability. Deep brain stimulation (DBS) has shown promising results for a number of psychiatric and neurological disorders such as
obsessive compulsive disorder and movement disorders. Here we report
findings from an open label trial of DBS treatment in 4 subjects with severe
disability who sustained a TBI more than 10 years prior. We demonstrate
a relationship between changes in function and cognition following DBS
and changes in relative brain metabolic activity. Following surgery and
stimulation titration, participants received stimulation alone for 6 weeks,
followed by 6 weeks of stimulation combined with rehabilitation therapy,
and a 9 month follow up period. Brain positron emission tomography
(PET) scans with 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose and a battery of cognitive and
functional measures were collected over the course of the study. Statistical analysis was conducted with linear mixed effects regression to account
for subject-level variance in the relationship between repeated PET measures and behavioral assessment. Performance on measures of function and
cognition correlated with relative brain activity across subjects in several
frontal regions, many of which also had significant decreases in relative
pet activity over the course of the study. Combined, this indicates that the
effects of DBS on cognition and adaptive function in TBI may be related to
a decrease in relative activity in frontal regions.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory
E54
INVESTIGATING NEURAL ACTIVITY IN VISUAL WORKING
MEMORY: EVIDENCE FOR AN AGE-RELATED DELAY IN EFFICIENT
FILTERING Tina Schwarzkopp1, Ulrich Mayr2, Kerstin Jost1; 1RWTH Aachen

University, 2University of Oregon — The capacity of working memory (WM)
varies across individuals and declines with age. Recent research addresses
the issue of the functional reason behind the reduction of capacity. Jost,
Bryck, Vogel and Mayr (2011) replicated earlier findings suggesting that
the ability to prevent irrelevant information from being stored is the factor
behind the individual differences within an age group. However, this factor
did not seem to be responsible for the age-related decline. The time courses
of filtering in event-related potentials revealed that older adults do not
have a general impairment in efficient filtering, but instead start to filter out
irrelevant information later. In their study target items were selected on the
basis of color. The aim of the present study was to examine whether with
an easier selection criterion age effects still appear in terms of delayed filtering. Young and old adults performed a change-detection task with filtering
demands, where they had to filter out irrelevant information on the basis
of location. The contralateral delay activity served as an online measure of
how much irrelevant information was actually stored in visual WM and
additionally reflected the time course of filtering. We found differences in
filtering between younger and older adults in form of a delay in efficient
filtering in older adults, even when target selection is easy. In conclusion,
we suggest that the delay in filtering in older adults is a critical factor of age
effects in visual WM, regardless of the difficulty in selecting targets among
distracters.

E55
DISTRIBUTED CODING OF RULES FOR WORKING MEMORY
MANIPULATION IN FRONTOPARIETAL CORTEX Chris Dodds1, Celia

Morgan1,2; 1University of Exeter, UK, 2University College London, UK — Neuroimaging studies have consistently demonstrated that frontoparietal cortex
is activated more strongly during the manipulation, relative to the simple
maintenance of information in working memory (WM). However, it is
unclear precisely what information is represented in these regions during

174

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
task performance. In the present study, we tested the hypothesis that the
currently implemented rule is encoded in the distributed pattern of activation across frontal and parietal regions activated during WM manipulation. Twenty healthy volunteers performed a WM task in the MRI scanner
requiring, on each trial, maintenance of a string of four letters over a short
delay, reordering of the letter string according to one of two rules, and a
subsequent forced choice decision to a probe. Subjects were scanned over
ten blocks in an event-related design in which rule order was randomised
within blocks. Multivoxel pattern analysis was carried out using an N-minus-one (leave-one-block-out) cross-validation procedure, implemented
in the Princeton MVPA toolbox. Results showed that the identity of the
currently implemented rule could be decoded from the voxelwise pattern
of activation across left frontal and parietal regions that were activated
during WM manipulation. Normalisation of voxel responses to each condition within ROIs ensured that rule coding could not be accounted for
by univariate differences. These results show that encoding of task rules
in distributed patterns of neuronal responses across frontoparietal cortex
extends to situations in which the rules apply to the manipulation of information held in WM.

E56
AN ATTENTIONAL SET-SHIFTING TASK FOR HUMANS AND OTHER
ANIMALS WITH SIMPLE BAYESIAN INFERENCE E. Alexander Chase1,

David S. Tait1, Eric M. Bowman1, Verity J. Brown1; 1University of St Andrews —
Attentional set-shifting tasks are reliable and valid measures of executive
control and flexibility, and they are available for multiple species including
humans, monkeys, rats, mice, and fish. With species-appropriate methods,
set-shifting offers an elegant method for translational research. Typically,
set-shifting tasks present subjects with a choice between two complex
stimuli where only one aspect, such as colour, predicts reward while other
aspects, like size and shape, are irrelevant. By presenting a series of novel
discriminations where the same aspect predicts reward, we can encourage
the formation of “attentional set”. Then, by presenting a discrimination
that relies on a previously irrelevant stimulus dimension, we can measure
the shifting of attention. Impairments in set-shifting are common to many
human disorders, but it is often difficult to determine their precise cognitive mechanisms: the task easily identifies subjects who struggle to focus or
shift, but not what is distracting them. Increasing the sensitivity of set-shifting tasks may improve diagnosis and treatment research by elucidating the
psychological and neurological bases of different impairments. We have
developed a new attentional set-shifting task that uses Bayesian inference
to estimate the likelihood of various strategies subjects may employ during
each stage. Healthy adult participants learn this task readily; typically completing every stage in less than ten minutes. Trials to criterion performance
is similar to previously published data from other tasks, but individual performance can now be analysed on a trial-by-trial basis to reveal how and
why errors occur.

E57
MODELING THE NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF NORMATIVE
WORKING MEMORY ABILITY THROUGH FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING AND CLINICAL NEUROPSYCHOLOGY Tonisha Kearney-Ra-

mos1, Jennifer S Fausett1, Jennifer L Gess1, Ashley Reno2, Jennifer Peraza3,
Clint Kilts1, G Andrew James1; 1University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences,
2
University of Virginia School of Medicine, 3University of New Mexico School of
Medicine — Objective: The central role of working memory (WM) in cognition has led to research exploring WM dysfunction in psychiatric and
neurologic disorders. The n-back task is arguably the most widely-used
paradigm for studying the neural basis of WM, yet its neuropsychometric
properties have received little empirical investigation. We merge clinical
neuropsychology and fMRI to explore the construct validity of a verbal
variant of the n-back task (LNB) and to identify the task-evoked networks
involved in WM, thus characterizing the neural correlates of normative
WM function. Methods: LNB construct validity was investigated using
bootstrapped correlations between LNB performance and neuropsychological measures of WM to establish convergent validity, and measures
of divergent cognitive constructs (i.e. attention) to determine discriminant
validity. Independent component analysis (ICA) identified brain networks
active during the LNB in 35 healthy participants. General Linear Modeling
was used to correlate each component activity timecourse with task condi-

2014 Annual Meeting	
tions to determine WM-specific recruitment. Results: Correlations revealed
convergence between LNB and WM-related tasks (bootstrapped |ρ|≥0.39)
and divergence from non-WM tasks (bootstrapped |ρ|≤0.33). ICA identified 35 networks, with 18 demonstrating task-specific engagement. Of
these, the bilateral frontoparietal, bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortices,
bilateral superior parietal lobules including precuneus, and frontoinsular networks were preferentially recruited by 2-back compared to 0-back
control or rest conditions, indicating WM involvement. Conclusion: These
results support the use of the LNB as a measure of WM and confirm its use
in probing network-level neural correlates of normative WM processing,
and in the future, characterizing individual differences in WM brain-behavior relationships.

E58
SUPRAMODAL ALPHA- AND BETA-BAND SIGNATURES OF
NUMEROSITY INFORMATION IN HUMAN WORKING MEMORY

Bernhard Spitzer1, Sebastian Fleck1, Felix Blankenburg1,2; 1Dahlem Institute for
Neuroimaging of Emotion, Freie Universität Berlin, Habelschwerdter Allee 45,
14195 Berlin, Germany, 2Center for Adaptive Rationality, Max Planck Institute
for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany — “Numerosity” can be assessed by analogue estimation, similar to a continuous magnitude, or by discrete quantification of the individual items in a set. While
the extent to which these two processes rely on common neural mechanisms remains debated, recent studies of sensory working memory (WM)
have identified an oscillatory signature of continuous magnitude information, in terms of quantitative modulations of prefrontal upper beta activity
(20-30 Hz). Here, we examined how such parametric oscillatory WM activity may also reflect the abstract assessment of discrete items’ numerosity.
We recorded EEG while participants (n=24) processed the number of stimulus pulses presented either visually, auditory, or tactile, under else identical experimental conditions. Behavioral response profiles showed varying
degrees of analogue estimation and of discretized quantification in the different modalities. During sustained processing in WM, the amplitude of
posterior alpha oscillations (8-13 Hz) reflected the increased memory load
associated with maintaining larger sets of discrete items. In contrast, earlier
numerosity-dependent modulations of right-prefrontal upper beta specifically reflected the extent to which numerosity was assessed by analogue
estimation, both between and within presentation modalities. Together,
the analogue approximation - but not the discretized representation - of
numerosity information exhibited a parametric oscillatory signature akin
to a continuous sensory magnitude. The results indicate dissociable oscillatory mechanisms of abstract numerosity integration, at a supramodal processing stage in human WM.

E59
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN IMPLICIT SEQUENCE LEARNING,
SPEECH IN NOISE PERCEPTION, AND WORKING MEMORY Alexan-

dria Muise-Hennessey1, Sean McWhinney1, Aaron J. Newman1; 1Dalhousie University — Sequential memory plays an important role in spoken language
processing. The ability to implicitly learn sequences is correlated with sentence perception in degraded listening conditions (Conway, C. M., Bauernschmidt, A., Huang, S. S., & Pisoni, D. B. (2010). Cognition, 114, 356–71). We
investigated whether the relationship between implicit sequential pattern
learning (as in a Markovian finite-state artificial grammar) and sentence
perception in noise (AzBio) are mediated by cognitive functions such as
memory, attention, and executive function. Replicating previous work, we
found that implicit sequence learning performance was correlated with
speech perception in noise. As well, operation span (a working memory
measure) was strongly correlated with speech-in-noise perception but not
with implicit sequence learning, suggesting that the relationship between
sequence learning and speech-in-noise perception is not mediated by working memory. Additional studies are underway to characterize the relationship between speech-in-noise perception and implicit sequence learning as
a function of the signal-to-noise ratio of the speech.

E60
SWITCHING BETWEEN FILTER SETTINGS REDUCES THE EFFICIENT UTILIZATION OF VISUAL WORKING MEMORY Kerstin Jost1,

Ulrich Mayr2; 1RWTH Aachen University, Germany, 2University of Oregon — The
capacity limitation of working memory requires that only relevant material

Poster Session E
gains access to the workspace while irrelevant material is prevented from
being stored. Thus, the ability to filter out irrelevant information seems to
be an important factor of how efficiently the limited storage space is used.
While there has been some work suggesting that individual and developmental differences affect both filtering ability and working-memory capacity, we know much less about context factors. Here, we examine to what
degree the need to flexibly change filter settings affects filtering efficiency.
Participants were presented with visual objects in two different colors and
a cue presented in advance indicated which objects had to be stored. The
contralateral delay activity of the EEG measured in the retention interval
was used to assess filtering efficiency. The data showed that when filter
settings switched and, hence, need to be adjusted, more irrelevant material passes the gate to working memory. This switching-induced filtering
deficit suggests that attentional control processes determine how efficiently
the limited workspace can be used. Furthermore, these results indicate
that in switching situations, conflict can affect not only response-selection
demands, but also the content of working memory.

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
E61
SHEDDING NEW LIGHT ON READING IN SPANISH-ENGLISH AND
ENGLISH-FRENCH BILINGUAL SCHOOL CHILDREN: AN FNIRS
INVESTIGATION. Kaja Jasinska1, Melody Berens2, Ioulia Kovelman3, Lau-

ra-Ann Petitto4; 1Haskins Laboratories, 2U.S. Department of Defense, 3University of Michigan, 4Gallaudet University — How does a bilingual child’s
two languages impact the brain’s neural circuitry for reading? Can we
observe a “neural signature” (Kovelman, Baker, & Petitto, 2008) in the
brains of bilingual children as they read, especially when each language
in the bilingual pair has a different relationship between its sound patterning and the printed text? We tested the hypothesis that specific linguistic
features of each language’s sound to letter patterning predictably recruit
specific neural regions that support reading. Bilinguals whose “other” languages differed were studied (English-Spanish, English-French) to determine whether the orthography of Spanish or French differentially impact
reading in English. Spanish is “shallow,” exhibiting regular sound-to-letter print correspondence. French is also shallow, but has more irregular
sound-to-letter print correspondence. English is “deep,” with both regular
and irregular correspondence. METHOD. 24 children (7 English-Spanish
bilinguals, 6 English-French bilinguals, 11 English monolingual controls;
ages 6-10) read aloud words that exploited shallow-deep orthographic differences (regular, irregular, nonsense words) while undergoing functional
Near Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS) neuroimaging (quiet, tolerates movement, permits natural reading aloud). RESULTS. Monolingual and EnglishFrench bilingual children showed greater left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG)
recruitment for irregular versus regular words. English-Spanish bilingual
children showed greater left superior temporal gyrus (STG) recruitment
for regular versus irregular words. CONCLUSIONS: Group differences
in the neural recruitment for reading in English were predicted from the
shallow-deep orthographic patterning in a bilingual’s other language. The
findings shed new light on how language experience can change reading
and the brain in the bilingual child.

E62
ANATOMICAL CORRELATES OF SOCIAL EVALUATIVE LANGUAGE
IN CHILDREN WITH WILLIAMS SYNDROME Jessica Phuong1, Pamela

Moses1, Judy Reilly1, Timothy T. Brown2, Matthew Erhart2, Eric Halgren2, Ursula
Bellugi3; 1San Diego State University, 2University of California San Diego, 3Salk
Institute — Williams Syndrome (WS) is a genetic disorder that results in
intellectual disability, delayed language development, and enhanced sociability. Previous studies examining linguistic performance in children with
WS found deficits in morphosyntax compared to typically developing (TD)
children. However, children with WS used greater proportions of social
evaluative language, including affective states, intensifiers, sound effects,
accentuated prosody, queries to the listener, and audience hookers than
did TD children. Abnormalities in structural brain development have also
been found in children with WS. Yet, the relationship between gray matter
structure and social evaluative language is unknown. In the current study,
6 children with WS (9 to 14 years) and 16 TD children (7 to 13 years) were

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

175

Poster Session E	
asked to respond to structured interview questions about their family and
activities. Interviews were scored for rate of morphosyntax, and proportion of social evaluative language use. Correlations between language measures and MRI-based measures of cortical thickness and surface area were
examined. Results showed that children with WS performed more poorly
on morphosyntax measures compared to TD children, while use of their
social evaluative language was comparable. In children with WS, social
evaluative language correlated with cortical regions previously implicated
in components of social behavior in WS, while this was not the case in
TD children. Further, these regions did not correlate with morphosyntax
in children with WS. These findings suggest that anatomical correlates of
the structural aspects of language are distinct from the use of language for
social purposes in children with WS.

E63
FRONTAL ASLANT FIBER TRACT IN THE DEVELOPING BRAIN:
A DIFFUSION TENSOR IMAGING (DTI) STUDY. Iris Broce1, Gonzalo

Iribarne1, Dustin Moraczewski1, Mark Sheffield1, Byron Bernal2, Nolan Altman2,
Anthony Steven Dick1; 1Florida International University, 2Miami Children’s Hospital — The specific goal of the study is to characterize a potentially important
fiber pathway associated with the production of language in the developing brain. This fiber tract is called the frontal aslant tract (FAT) and has been
suggested to make connections between the superior frontal gyrus (SFG),
posterior supplementary motor area (SMA), pre-SMA, and inferior frontal
gyrus (IFG; Thiebaut De Schotten et. al., 2012). Diffusion-weighted images
were collected in 20 children (10 females; age range = 5-8 years, M age =
6.7 years, SD = 1.04 years). We manually identified the FAT using a two
regions of interest (ROI) approach (Catani et al., 2012). The diffusion tensor
in each voxel was determined using a weighted least-square method. The
following metrics were computed: fractional anisotropy (FA) and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC). Our preliminary results suggest that the
FAT can be reliably identified in the preschool and early school age brain.
The mean FA was slightly higher in the left FAT (.61) compared with the
right FAT (.57). However, the reliability of the left-right differences will
need to be assessed in the whole sample. The mean ADC value was 0.52 x
10(-3) mm(2)/s in the left FAT and 0.54 x 10(-3) mm(2)/s in the right. These
results provide evidence for connections between the SMA/pre-SMA and
IFG, even in children. They also have important implications for the cortical organization of the “motor stream” of language and speech processing,
suggesting that the FAT may potentially play an important role in speech
production.

E64
WORD FORM PROCESSING IN 3-, 6- AND 9-MONTH-OLD
INFANTS Claudia Teickner1, Angelika Becker1, Ulrike Schild2, Claudia Fried-

rich2; 1University of Hamburg, 2University of Tübingen — There is evidence
for co-activation of detailed and less detailed word form representations in
adult speech recognition. Here we investigated the development of those
representational systems in the first year of life. We recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) while infants listened to single syllables (primes)
followed by complete German words (targets). Common disyllabic words,
frequently used in caregiver-infant interactions, were chosen from an early
words screening inventory (German version of the McArthur Communicative Development Inventories). We tested 30 infants from German speaking parents at the age of three, six and nine months. We presented them
with primes and targets in three different conditions. In an identity condition, primes match the onsets of the target words (e.g., ma - Mama). In
a variation condition, primes deviate from targets in their initial place of
articulation (PLACE; e.g., na - Mama). In a control condition, phonemes of
primes and targets differ completely (e.g., vo - Mama). ERPs suggest that
three-month-olds notice minimal prime-target variation. This might reflect
either that word form representations have not been established yet, or that
the very first representations are detailed for PLACE. Six-month-olds do
not differentiate between the identity condition and the control condition,
suggesting dominance of representations that are not detailed for PLACE.
Nine-months-olds show evidence for both detailed and less detailed representations. Our results point to a serial development of detailed and less
detailed representational systems.

176

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

E65
THE ROLE OF THE PUTAMEN AND PREMOTOR CORTEX IN BILINGUAL SPEECH PRODUCTION Jonathan A. Berken1,2, Jen-Kai Chen1,

Vincent L. Gracco2, Shari Baum2, Kate E. Watkins3, Denise Klein1,2; 1Montreal
Neurological Institute, 2McGill University, 3University of Oxford — It has been
shown that the structure of the bilingual brain is shaped by language-learning experience. Here, we use voxel-based morphometry (VBM) to investigate anatomical brain differences between French-English simultaneous
bilinguals, who acquired both languages from birth, and French-English
sequential bilinguals, who learned their second language (L2) after the age
of 5 years. Prior to scanning, speech samples were obtained in French and
English and analyzed for proficiency. Simultaneous and sequential bilinguals were highly proficient in both languages, although sequential bilinguals had a less native-like accent in their L2 than in their first language.
In a comparison of simultaneous and sequential bilinguals, simultaneous
bilinguals showed greater grey matter density (GMD) bilaterally in the dorsolateral prefrontal and insular cortex, and in the left putamen. In contrast,
sequential bilinguals demonstrated greater GMD bilaterally in the premotor cortex. Whole-brain regression analysis of the sequential bilinguals
revealed a positive correlation between the degree of native-like accent in
L2 and GMD in the left putamen and left premotor cortex. That is, the more
native-like the accent in sequential bilinguals, the greater the GMD was in
the left putamen and left premotor cortex. Our findings suggest that early
vs. late bilingualism has different structural effects in brain regions that
subserve speech production.

E66
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSE TO REPEATED SPEECH
STIMULI IN 9 MONTH OLDS AT RISK FOR AUTISM SPECTRUM
DISORDERS Anne Seery1, Helen Tager-Flusberg1, Charles Nelson2,3; 1Boston

University, 2Harvard Medical School, 3Boston Children’s Hospital — Autism
spectrum disorder (ASD) involves social/communicative impairments in
addition to restricted or stereotyped interests and behaviors. Individuals
with ASD often exhibit language impairment, potentially partially stemming from both atypical processing of linguistic stimuli and atypical attention to social stimuli. Behavioral symptoms of ASD do not manifest until
after 12 months of age; however, atypical patterns of sensory processing,
allocation of attention, and social interest are present earlier during the
first year. Here, we focused on how infants at high risk for ASD (HRA)
process linguistic stimuli (specifically, stimulus repetition) and how that
relates to their later language ability. Two groups of 9-month-old infants
were examined: HRA (n=40; each had an older sibling with ASD; estimated
20% recurrence), and low risk controls (LRC; n=45). We recorded high-density EEG while infants listened to consonant-vowel stimuli presented using
an oddball paradigm. We examined the P150 in response to repetitions of
the standard stimulus and to presentation of a deviant. While there was no
difference between groups in their response to the deviant, HRA infants
had larger amplitude P150 to the repeated standards over frontal electrodes
than LRC infants (F(1,83)=4.17, p=.044) and showed less of a difference
between the standards and deviant (F(1,83)=5.07, p=.027). Interestingly,
these atypical patterns were related to better expressive language ability
in toddlerhood in the HRA group (correlation coefficients between .35 and
.57; p’s<.05). We discuss the possibility that this may be related to heterogeneity within the HRA group in their attention patterns towards socially
relevant linguistic stimuli.

LANGUAGE: Lexicon
E67
ERP EVIDENCE FOR THE BIDIRECTIONAL MAPPING CONSISTENCY BETWEEN ORTHOGRAPHY AND PHONOLOGY IN CHINESE CHARACTER RECOGNITION Wei-Fan Chen1, Pei-Chun Chao2,

Yu-Lin Tzeng2, Ya-Ning Chang1, Chun-Hsien Hsu1, Chia-Ying Lee1,2; 1Institute
of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, Taiwan, 2Institute of Neuroscience, National
Yang-Ming University, Taiwan — The bi-modal interactive-activation model
(BIAM) assumes that, both visual and spoken word recognitions would be
influenced by the bi-directional mapping consistencies between orthography (O) and phonology (P) (P-to-O and O-to-P consistency). However, in

2014 Annual Meeting	
studies of English and French, the P-O consistency was robust in spoken
word recognition, but less reliable in reading tasks. In Chinese, a greater
impact of orthographic effect during spoken word recognition is expected
due to the pervasive homophony in Chinese. Indeed, our previous ERP
studies have demonstrated two types of orthographic effects (homophone
density and P-to-O consistency) in Chinese spoken word recognition. This
study aims to examine these two types of orthographic effects in visual
modality, with the orthogonal manipulation of Chinese O-to-P consistency
(high versus low phonetic consistency). The ERPs data showed that two
types of orthographic effects in reading Chinese. Characters with high
homophone density elicited greater negativity from 300 to 400msec than
those with low homophone density did. In addition, characters with low
P-to-O consistency elicited greater negativity from 300 to 600msec than
those with high P-to-O consistency did. Most important, these two types
of orthographic effects were mainly found in character with low phonetic
consistency. These findings support the bi-directional interaction between
the phonology and orthography in reading Chinese.

E68
SPATIOTEMPORAL PATTERNS OF NEURAL ACTIVITY UNDERLYING
MORPHOLOGICAL PROCESSING IN A MINIMALLY INFLECTED
LANGUAGE: AN ELECTRO- AND MAGNETO-ENCEPHALOGRAPHIC
STUDY IN MANDARIN Yun-Hsuan Huang1,2, Elisabeth Fonteneau1,2, Caro-

line M. Whiting1,2, Qing Cai3, William D. Marslen-Wilson1,2; 1University of Cambridge, 2MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, U.K., 3East China
Normal University, China — Combinatorial structures involving morphological inflection are a salient property of human languages. Evidence from
English, Arabic, Polish and Russian locates the core neural mechanism supporting such structures in linked left perisylvian regions (left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) and temporal regions). This study investigates whether the
processing of inflections in Mandarin, a language in which inflections are
scarcely used, engages similar neural substrates. Native speakers listened
to bimorphemic word types differing in their morphological properties,
as determined by the second morpheme: compounds (hu xi”o breathe”),
derived words (jing hua”to purify”), and aspectually inflected verbs (chang
zhe “singing”). Combined electro- and magneto-encephalographic recording and Representational Similarity Analysis searchlight analyses (Su et al.,
2012) were used to capture the fine-grained spatio-temporal information
pattern of the transient neural activity during morphological computation
for each word type. Measuring from second morpheme onset, compound
and inflected words elicited an early short burst in right frontal and temporal areas around 150 msec and bilateral temporal activity from 300 - 500
msec, with no patterns specific to derived forms. Critically, linked patterns
in LIFG (BA 44, 45) and left anterior temporal regions from 220 - 400 msec
were only seen for inflected words. Despite the apparently minor role of
inflectional morphemes in Mandarin, left perisylvian activity can still be
observed, similar to the distinctive spatio-temporal pattern seen for more
richly inflected languages. These parallels across typologically distant language families suggest a potentially universal role for the LIFG in interpreting the grammatical information conveyed by inflectional morphemes.

E69
HEMISPHERIC PROCESSING DIFFERENCES IN MASKED REPETITION PRIMING Trevor A. Brothers1,2, Tamara Y. Swaab1,2, Matthew J.

Traxler1,2; 1UC Davis, 2Center for Mind and Brain — While it is clear that the
left hemisphere plays an important role in language comprehension, it is
less certain to what extent the early stages of visual word processing are
uniquely left-lateralized. In this study, participants read words presented
to the left or right visual hemifield as event-related potentials (ERPs) were
recorded from the scalp. Each word was preceded by a congruent or incongruent masked repetition prime, which could be presented in either the
same or opposite hemifield. In both the crossed and uncrossed priming
conditions, we observed robust repetition priming on the N250 and N400,
similar to masked ERP priming effects seen for centrally presented words.
Critically, these priming effects were observed only for left-hemisphere
primes. When prime words were presented to the right hemisphere (left
visual-hemifield), there was no effect of prime congruency. This same
hemispheric asymmetry was observed using both short (20ms) and long
(100ms) prime-target inter-stimulus intervals. These results provide evidence for a functional lateralization of early orthographic processing, and

Poster Session E
suggest a unique role for the left hemisphere in rapidly extracting form-invariant, visual representations without conscious awareness. Implications
for the temporal dynamics of visual word processing will be discussed.

E70
NEUROCORRELATES OF THE ORTHOGRAPHIC LEXICON AND
BUFFER IN CHINESE WRITING Hsiang-Yu Chen1,2, Sinead H.Y. Chen1,2,

Daisy L. Hung1,2, Ovid J.L. Tzeng2,3, Denise H. Wu1,2; 1Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, National Central University, Taiwan, 2Laboratories for Cognitive Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, 3Academia Sinica,
Taiwan — Previous literature on writing has demonstrated a double dissociation of the underlying functional and neuronal mechanisms between
the orthographic lexicon and the graphemic buffer in alphabetic languages.
Specifically, the frequency of to-be-writtten stimuli correlated with the
processing of the orthographic lexicon situated in the left fusiform gyrus
and left inferior frontal junction, while the letter length of the to-be-written
stimuli correlated with the processing of the graphemic buffer situated in
the left superior frontal sulcus and left superior parietal lobule. In the present study, we aimed to identify the neural correlates of the orthographic
lexicon and buffer in wrting Chinese characters via functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). Twenty participants were required to perform
a mental writing task and a recognition task on Chinese characters whose
frequency and stroke numbers were manipulated. It was found that characters with low frequency were associated with higher activation in the left
fusiform gyrus than characters with high frequency across the mental writing and character recognition tasks, which suggested this region to be the
locus of the orthographic lexicon that represents the knowledge of character forms. It was also found that character stroke numbers correlated with
the activation in the left middle frontal gyrus and left angular gyrus only in
the mental writing task, which suggested this region to be the locus of the
orthographic buffer that represents the knowledge of stroke sequences in
written production. These results revealed the functional and anatomical
dissociation between the orthographic lexicon and buffer in writing Chinese characters.

E71
MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS OF EARLY ORTHOGRAPHIC PROCESSING IN VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION Samarth Varma1, Caroline Whit-

ing1,2, Isma Zulfiqar1, William Marslen-Wilson1,2; 1University of Cambridge, 2MRC
Cognition & Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge — It has been hypothesized that
reading, a fairly recent activity in human evolution, recycles visual object
recognition processes such as identification of lines, contours and shapes
which combine to detect letters, bigrams, morphemes and words. Neuroimaging studies and lesion data provide evidence for a posterior-to-anterior hierarchy of occipitotemporal neurons that are sensitive to such
increasingly complex visual word fragments. In this study, we employ a
Searchlight-based multivariate pattern analysis method called Representational Similarity Analysis (RSA) with combined magneto- and electroencephalography (MEG-EEG) to pick apart early stages of orthographic
processing. RSA relies on comparing spatiotemporal response patterns,
revealing not just the information content in space, but also its flow across
the brain in time. We analysed a set of visually presented words and used
Searchlight RSA to test models of early orthographic processing (length,
bigram/trigram frequency). In agreement with previous studies, RSA successfully delineates regions in the ventral stream that are sensitive to such
visual word form properties, showing bilateral occipital regions involved
in processing of length, and left posterior fusiform gyrus involved in processing of orthographic structure. Additionally, we are also able delineate
the timing during which these processes emerge, beginning at 100 ms in
primary visual cortex. In particular, these results suggest the existence of
abstract representations of letters and bigrams, consistent with the hypothesis that functionally specialized neurons are organized hierarchically in
the order of their increasing receptive fields.

E72
TRACKING THE NEURAL DYNAMICS OF MORPHOLOGICAL
PROCESSING USING COMBINED MEG-EEG: A MULTIVARIATE
APPROACH Caroline M. Whiting1,2, Samarth Varma1, William D. Marslen-Wil-

son1,2; 1University of Cambridge, 2MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit —
Behavioural and neuroimaging evidence has revealed a stage of automatic
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

177

Poster Session E	
segmentation in the recognition of morphologically complex words (e.g.
decomposing “farmer” into {farm} + {-er}). This raises key questions about
the spatiotemporal properties of the processes that map visual inputs onto
lexical form and meaning, measured here by combined magnetoencephalography (MEG) and electroencephalography (EEG). We address these
issues using multivariate pattern analysis to investigate how regions
within the language network code for different properties of visual words
(orthographic, morphological, lexical). In this study, we focus on the representational content of frontal and temporal regions to determine directly
the spatiotemporal distribution of neural response patterns that reflect sensitivity to morphological structure (stem plus suffix). Multivariate analyses
were performed in source space using representational similarity analysis
(RSA) in bilateral fronto-temporal regions, examining the information carried by patterns of neural activity in a given region across time. The stimulus sets contrasted words containing a potential inflectional or derivational
suffix (e.g. “jumped”, “farmer”, “corner”) with simple words containing
no internal structure (e.g. “giraffe”). Results showed that responses within
left middle and superior temporal and left inferior frontal regions distinguished between words containing morphological structure and morphologically simple words over time-frames ranging from 250 to 500 ms from
stimulus onset. Critically, these responses were not modulated by word
meaning. These findings using a novel multivariate MEG-EEG approach
support claims for early, automatic morphological processing, revealing
spatiotemporal response patterns that are selective for morphologically
complex visual forms in left hemisphere fronto-temporal regions.

E73
THETA AND BETA OSCILLATIONS AS SIGNATURES OF NOVEL
WORD CONSOLIDATION Iske Bakker1,2, Atsuko Takashima1,2, Gabriele

Janzen1,2, Janet van Hell2,3, James M McQueen1,2,4; 1Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands,
2
Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands,
3
Pennsylvania State University, 4Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands — This study was designed to shed more light
on the cognitive functions associated with specific frequency bands in
language and memory, by investigating oscillatory activity in response to
newly acquired words. In particular, we aimed to identify oscillatory signatures of lexicalisation, that is, integration of novel words into the mental
lexicon. On two consecutive days, participants memorised two sets of 30
novel and 30 existing words with definitions. EEG responses to novel and
existing words learned on day 1 (remote) or day 2 (recent), and to untrained
words, were measured during a semantic decision task. In the theta band,
untrained novel words elicited weaker synchronisation than existing
words. This difference was smaller for recent novel words, and absent for
remote novel words. Desynchronisation in the lower beta band was stronger for existing than novel words in the untrained and recent conditions,
but identical for remote novel and existing words. In the higher beta band
however, a difference between novel and existing words emerged only in
the untrained condition, whereas neither remote nor recent novel words
differed from existing words. These results support the Complementary
Learning Systems account (McClelland et al., 1995; Davis & Gaskell, 2009),
which claims that off-line consolidation of novel memory representations
underlies lexicalisation. We conclude that this gradual consolidation process is reflected most clearly in the theta and lower beta bands. Theta
synchronisation and lower beta desynchronisation appear to play a role
in retrieval of lexicalised memories, whereas upper beta reflects episodic
memory processes.

LANGUAGE: Other
E74
MAKING SENSE OF THE SENSELESS: ABNORMAL BRAIN CONNECTIVITY IN PATIENTS WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA DURING SENTENCE PROCESSING Kirsten Weber1,2,3, Ellen Lau4, Candida Ustine1,3, Arim

Choi Perrachione3, Nate Delaney-Busch3, Gina Kuperberg1,2,3; 1Massachusetts
General Hospital, 2Harvard Medical School, 3Tufts University, 4University of
Maryland — Patients with schizophrenia show impairments in combining
semantic and syntactic information to build and use context during sentence
comprehension; rather, processing can be inappropriately driven by simple

178

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
lexico-semantic relationships between individual words (Kuperberg, 2010).
We also know from previous studies that frontal-temporal connectivity is
altered in schizophrenia during simple lexico-semantic tasks (Friston and
Frith, 1995; Li et al., 2010). In this study, we ask whether abnormal neural
communication across components of the language network in schizophrenia is associated with an imbalance between semantic-syntactic unification
and lexico-semantic processing. During fMRI scanning, 18 patients with
schizophrenia and 20 demographically-matched controls read either sentences or random lists of words. A seed for the functional connectivity analysis was defined in left posterior temporal gyrus. We computed generalized psychophysiological interactions (gPPI, McLaren et al., 2012) from this
seed for the sentences as well as the word lists. In reading sentences (versus
baseline), patients with schizophrenia, relative to controls, showed significantly reduced connectivity from the seed to areas in the left inferior frontal
gyrus. In reading word lists (directly contrasted with sentences), however,
patients, relative to controls, actually showed enhanced connectivity with
right temporal regions. These findings suggest that abnormal functional
connectivity across the language network may underlie the impairments in
building overall coherence in schizophrenia.

E75
RORSCHACH ASSESSMENT IN APHASIA PATIENTS Terri Dilmore1,

Sarah Wallace1, Alex Kranjec1; 1Duquesne University — The Rorschach is a
widely used projective test designed to assess individual personality
and emotional organization. Less is known about its neuropsychological
value, particularly in populations with speech and language impairments.
Beyond personality assessment, several features of the Rorschach suggest
that it may be useful for investigating questions of interest to language
researchers. Traditionally, treating and assessing aphasia has required
patients to match a closed set of concrete words to pictures. In contrast, the
Rorschach is open-ended and uses ambiguous visual stimuli, yet the frequency of verbal responses to particular inkblots is still well normed. While
we are interested in investigating the value of the Rorschach as a platform
for individuals with aphasia to describe their current mental state, the present study also explores relations between language, perception, and emotional organization. We used published Rorschach norms and individual
language assessment data to interpret the responses of 3 aphasic patients.
Across participants, a mean of 20 responses over 10 blots was provided.
For two of the participants, results suggest that card turning, which was
significantly higher in comparison to norms, may have aided their attempts
to assign meaning to the blots. Across all participants, relating the blot to
a personal experience appeared to guide responding. Detailed analyses
using the Rorschach Performance Assessment System suggest differences
in responding between aphasic and normed healthy adults, and between
individual aphasic participants with distinct comprehension and production impairments.

E76
INTERHEMISPHERIC COMMUNICATION INFLUENCES READING BEHAVIOR Lise Van der Haegen1, Qing Cai1,2, Michael Stevens1, Marc

Brysbaert1; 1Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2East China Normal University,
Shanghai, China — We can read words at an amazing speed, with the left
hemisphere taking the burden of the processing in most readers (i.e. over
95% of right-handers and about 75% of left-handers). Yet, it is a long-standing question whether word reading in central vision is possible without
information transfer between the left and the right hemisphere (LH/RH).
To investigate this, we first recruited a sample of healthy left-handers
with LH or RH language dominance by means of an fMRI silent word
generation (speech) and lexical decision (reading) task. Then, both groups
were compared on (1) word naming latencies while fixating at all possible letter positions and (2) eye movement data during text reading. The
results revealed that individuals with LH speech dominance named centrally presented words on average 3.64 ms more slowly per letter fixated
more towards the word end. In contrast, RH dominants did not show an
effect of fixation position. In text reading, the eyes of LH dominants landed
more to the left than the eyes of RH dominants, making more information
directly available to the dominant hemisphere because of the contralateral
projection of visual information. These data show that the traditional view
of bilateral cortical representations in central vision is incorrect. In contrast,
interhemispheric communication is needed in central vision and eye move-

2014 Annual Meeting	
ments are adjusted to optimize information uptake. The findings are in line
with the increase of white matter in the splenium of the corpus callosum
when people learn to read.

E77
EFFECTS OF PRACTICE ON TONAL DISCRIMINATION FOR CHINESE AS A SECOND LANGUAGE LEARNER -- AN EXAMPLE OF
MAGNETIC MISMATCH FIELD Rose Ru-Whui Lee1,2, Kevin Chun-Hsien

Hsu2, Chung-I Erica Su2, Sheng-Kai Lin2, Denise Hsien Wu3, Ovid Jyh-Lang
Tzeng2; 1National Taiwan Normal University, Taiwan, 2Academia Sinica, Taiwan,
3
National Central University, Taiwan — This investigation examined the tonal
discrimination ability for beginning CSL (Chinese as a second language)
learners after 3 times practices of multimedia digital instruction via the
magnetic correspondent of mismatch negativity (MMNm). The MMNm are
originally elicited in auditory cortex of brain by response to any discriminable change in some repetitive aspect of the ongoing auditory stimulation
, including tonal discrimination, in the absence of attention. We adopted
the multi-deviant oddball paradigm and used the syllable “yi” pronounced
in the low-dipping tone (T3) as the standard. The deviant stimuli were the
same syllable pronounced in either the high-level tone (T1) or the high-rising tone (T2). Additionally, the MMNm activity between acoustically dissimilar contrast (T3/T1) and acoustically similar contrast (T3/T2) were
measured in the course of pre-test and post-test. In the results, T3/T1 contrast generally elicited larger MMNm with shorter latency than the T3/T2
contrast did. The planned comparisons also indicated that the left hemisphere MMNm of T3/T1 contrast, but not T3/T2 contrast, was significantly
increased in the post-test. The result shows the learning effect on sensitivity for tonal discrimination in left hemisphere, which is in consistence
with the lateralization of left hemisphere for language processing mechanism. It suggests that even after a little amount of practices in general (not
tone-specific instruction), tonal discrimination ability could be improved
due to accommodation by learner’s internal and automatic mechanism of
language processing.

E78
OMITTED STIMULUS POTENTIAL IN JAPANESE-ENGLISH BILINGUALS: AN ERP STUDY Michelle Ma1, Yuriko Oshima-Takane1, Lara Pierce1,

Hiroko Nakano2, Fred Genesee1; 1McGill University, 2Saint Mary’s College of California — Previous studies in our lab have revealed that the presentation of
null objects in English sentences (grammatically illegal) elicits an event-related potential (ERP) component, known as the omitted stimulus potential (OSP), in adult English monolinguals. However, an OSP is not elicited
when Japanese monolinguals listen to Japanese null objects, as the omission
of object arguments is permitted in Japanese. The present study capitalized
on this to investigate whether Japanese-English bilinguals show transfer of
grammatical null objects in Japanese when processing English ungrammatical null object sentences. Fifteen adult Japanese-dominant Japanese-English bilinguals underwent two sessions of EEG recording, one session in
Japanese and one in English. Participants heard a series of context sentences
(e.g., “the apples on the tree are ripe now”), followed by response sentences
containing a transitive verb and either a correct pronoun (e.g., “we should
pick them”) or a null object (e.g., “we should pick Ø”). EEG responses were
analyzed to determine whether bilinguals were sensitive to violations of
English ungrammatical sentences with omitted objects. Results showed
that bilinguals’ ERP waveforms in both English and Japanese sessions were
similar to those of Japanese monolinguals. Specifically, no OSP component
was observed, indicating transfer of Japanese null objects to English. However, grammatical judgement ratings in a separate behavioural task were
similar to the ratings by respective monolinguals. These findings suggest
that although Japanese-dominant bilinguals make native-like judgements
about the ungrammaticality of English null object sentences, their dominant language, Japanese, is the language of implicit processing of English
ungrammatical null object sentences.

E79
SELECTIVE BRAIN-TO-BRAIN COUPLING AT A NATURALISTIC
“COCKTAIL PARTY” SCENE Bohan Dai1, Guang Shi1, Jing Jiang1, Chun-

ming Lu1; 1State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University,Beijing 100875,China — Human listeners can easily
separate out a speaker of interest from other speakers in a noisy, crowded

Poster Session E
environment. Moreover, the neural activity of a listener can selectively tract
the temporal structure of the attended speech stream, resulting in tuning
into a single voice. This effect raised an interesting question about how the
neural activity of a listener relate to that of the attended speaker who produces the speech stream in such a “Cocktail Party” scene. This question was
investigated in this study by using fNIRS-based hypercanning on twelve
adult participant groups (3 persons per group) in an ecologically realistic
spoken communication context. Neural coupling of brain activity in the
left hemisphere between persons were computed by using WTC method.
The results showed that the neural coupling between the listener and the
attended speaker was significantly increased compared to that between the
listener and the unattended speaker in the temporoparietal junction (TPJ),
no matter whether the attended speaker was a priori appointed or selected
freely during the communication. Furthermore, this effect appeared in the
face-to-face condition, but not in the back-to-back condition. Together these
results suggested that in a “Cocktail Party” scene, the neural activity of the
listener was also coupled to that of the speaker, and attention play a key
role in modulating this neural coupling effect. Visual inputs can effectively
facilitate this neural coupling effect, and probably further enhance communication quality.

E80
COARTICULATION IN LEXICAL ACCESS - AN ERP-STUDY

Ulrike
Schild1, Claudia Teickner2, Claudia K. Friedrich1; 1University of Tuebingen, 2University of Hamburg — It is a matter of debate how detailed lexical representations in speech recognition are. Here we investigate the use of regressive assimilation by means of ERPs (Event-Related Potentials) recorded in
cross-modal word onset priming. Auditory primes with consonant-vowel
(c-v) structure were followed by visual German target words. Primes were
either the onsets of their following target words, e.g., ri- taken from RINNE
(Engl., chute; matching condition), or the onsets of pseudowords with a
different place of articulation of the consonant following the initial vowel,
e.g., ri- taken from RIMME (variation condition). Note, that primes only
differ in anticipatory coarticulation carried by the vowel (ri[n] and ri[m]
respectively). Unrelated prime-target pairs were taken as controls. Lexical decision times for target words were fastest in the matching condition,
intermediate in the variation condition and slowest in the control condition.
ERPs for both the matching condition and the variation condition start to
differ from the control condition at 200 ms, ERP differences between the
matching condition and the variation condition were not evident before
300 ms. Thus, less detailed representations appear to be accessed faster than
more detailed lexical representation. These results are evidence for coactivation of more and less detailed representations along the complex stream
of speech recognition.

LANGUAGE: Syntax
E81
THE SYNTACTIC PROCESSING OF CATAPHORIC PRONOUNS IN
DUTCH Leticia Pablos1, Bobby Ruijgrok1, Jenny Doetjes1, Lisa L. Cheng1;
1

Leiden University — The processing of cataphoric pronouns has been
shown to follow similar mechanisms as the processing of wh-dependencies in behavioural studies. The parser actively searches for an antecedent
to interpret the pronoun within the sentence, except in cases where the
pronoun must obey principle C of the binding theory (a name cannot be
c-commanded by a nominative pronoun). The present study investigated
the involved mechanism and ERP components generated in cataphoric
pronouns processing in Dutch by manipulating the pronoun-antecedent gender match. The Gender Mismatch (GMM) effect predicts a processing slowdown at the antecedent when there is a gender discrepancy
with the preceding pronoun, however that should only appear when the
pronoun can be bound by it according to the active search paradigm. An
EEG experiment was conducted on 24 native speakers of Dutch with 36
target sentences created in a latin square-design controlling the presence
of a constraint (Principle-C/No-Constraint) and the pronoun-antecedent
gender (Match/No-match). ERP analysis at the position of the potential
antecedent show a central anterior negativity in a post-stimuli 200-600ms
window in the No Constraint-mismatch condition with respect to the No
constraint-match condition (3-way ANOVA interaction of within factors
condition, hemisphere (left, Right, Central) and electrode position (AnteCognitive Neuroscience Society

179

Poster Session E	
rior, Middle, Posterior); F(12,276)=2.05, p=0.045)). In contrast, Principle-C
conditions yielded no significant ERP waveforms differences. Results support the active search for an antecedent whenever there is a pronoun that
must be bound locally, while grammatical constraints such as Principle C
are immediately respected.

E82
WHEN JAPANESE DO NOT SHOW OMITTED STIMULUS POTENTIALS Yuriko Oshima-Takane1, Noriaki Kanayama2, Hiroko Nakano3, Kazuo

Hiraki4, Akira Akabane4; 1McGill University, 2Hiroshima University, 3Saint Mary’s
College of California, 4University of Tokyo — Previous research has shown
that monolingual English adults showed Omitted Stimulus Potentials
(OSPs) when they listened to sentences that lacked object arguments (e.g.,
“Our freezer stopped working today. Will the landlord replace Ø?”), but
not when listening to sentences that contained pronominal objects (e.g.,
“Will the landlord replace it?”). The OSPs associated with the null object
sentences were characterized by early onset and prolonged positivity
(200 - 800 ms). The present study investigated whether OSPs elicited by
the English monolinguals reflect the detection of the physical absence of
expected stimuli, similar to P300, as well as the syntactic reanalysis, similar
to P600. It was expected that Japanese monolinguals would show decreased
or no OSP because, unlike English, Japanese is a null argument language
in which object omission is grammatically acceptable and often occurs in
everyday conversation when omitted arguments are recoverable from the
context. Electroencephalogram (EEG) activity was recorded while nine Japanese monolinguals listened to 51 pairs of context sentences followed by a
response sentence with pronominal or null objects. As expected, no OSPs
were elicited by Japanese monolinguals when listening to the null object
sentences. The follow-up experiment showed that Japanese monolinguals
(N=9) showed OSPs when listening to sentences with ungrammatical omissions (e.g., “Will the landlord replace our Ø?”). The finding that Japanese
showed OSPs only when listening to ungrammatical sentences suggest that
the OSPs elicited by English monolinguals reflect the detection of omission
as well as the subsequent syntactic reanalysis.

E83
SYNTACTIC PROCESSING IN BILINGUAL CHILDREN: EXAMINING THE OPTIONAL INFINITIVE STAGE WITH FUNCTIONAL NEAR
INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY Erica Seifert1, Maria M. Arredondo1, Xiaosu

Hu1, Lourdes M. Delgado Reyes2, Teresa Satterfield1, Ioulia Kovelman1; 1University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 2University of Iowa — Child language acquisition
in languages like English is marked by an Optional Infinitive (OI) stage
(ages 2-4) during which children use nonfinite and finite verb-forms interchangeably. For example, a preschooler might produce both “yesterday we
bake a cake” (nonfinite) and “yesterday we baked a cake” (finite). These
types of errors persist after age 4 in children with Specific Language Impairments, suggesting that research on the OI stage could provide insight on
the neurogenetic basis of syntax acquisition. The present study explored
if early and systematic bilingual exposure to Spanish and English affects
children’s processing of OI errors in English, behaviorally and in the brain.
METHOD: 22 Spanish-English bilinguals and 27 age-matched English
monolinguals participated (mean age = 10). During fNIRS brain imaging,
the children completed a grammaticality judgment task composed of sentences with OI errors (“Yesterday he walk.”), control errors (“He is walk.”),
and correct sentences (“He is walking.”). Control errors represented errors
that are not present in typical language development. RESULTS: Relative to
monolinguals, bilinguals were faster yet more likely to accept OI error sentences are correct. All children showed greater left frontal lobe activation
during the OI condition, while bilinguals also showed greater amplitude
and extent of activation across all conditions. CONCLUSIONS: Bilingual
language experience can modulate the neurodevelopmental course of syntactic processing, development of finiteness, and language organization in
the young brain. The results carry implications for the study of developmental language impairments in bilingual and monolingual populations.

180

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

E84
AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL EFFECT OF AUDITORY SEQUENTIAL LEARNING RELATED TO SYNTACTIC PROCESSING OF NATURAL LANGUAGE. Sonia Singh1, Jerome Daltrozzo2, Joanne Deocampo3,
Christopher M Conway4; 1Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. —
Sequential learning (SL) is a cognitive process enabling people to perceive
and learn environmental patterns. Since language acquisition is dependent
on learning temporal patterns of speech, SL is considered essential for language development and performance. Despite this, there is still insufficient
neural evidence supporting a relationship between SL and language ability. We investigated this relationship using event-related potentials (ERPs)
with a SL task in 9 adults (8 females, 18-27 years). Participants also completed a measure of syntactic processing of natural language: the Grammaticality Judgment subtest of the Comprehensive Assessment of Spoken Language (CASL). In the SL task, a non-verbal “predictor” preceded a “target”,
with varying probability. Results indicated that ERPs to the predictors were
modulated by this probability. There was an increased amplitude of a P300/
P600-like component to higher probability predictors, which demonstrated
that SL had occurred. This P600 effect interacted with Grammaticality [300400ms post-predictor onset: F(8,24)=3.59, p=.026, Î·p2=.545], thus suggesting that syntactic processing of one’s native language is directly related to
SL. Similarly, a recent ERP study of SL using visual instead of auditory
stimuli (Daltrozzo, Deocampo, Trapani, Sims, & Conway, 2013. Statistical
learning is correlated with language performance: An event-related potential study. Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic Society, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada, November 14-17. Abstract) also reported a relationship between a
P300/P600-like effect of SL and syntactic processing in natural language.
Taken together, these findings further suggest a strong and systematic link
between neural correlates of SL and those of syntactic processing of natural
language.

E85
THE ROLE OF THE GENDER-TO-ENDING CONSISTENCY IN SPANISH SENTENCE PROCESSING Sendy Caffarra1, Horacio Barber2; 1BCBL,

2
University of La Laguna — When we have to explicitly retrieve a morphosyntactic feature of a noun, such as grammatical gender, two possible
routes can be used. A lexical route recovers gender as an abstract feature
in the lexicon (e.g., “mesa”, tableF), while the form-based route takes
account of the strong correlations between the gender feature and a specific
formal cue (e.g., the Spanish word ending “-a” represents a cue because
it is strongly related with feminine gender). Evidence for the presence of
these two routes has been found with isolated word presentation. However
it is still unclear whether the two routes can be used during sentence reading and how these two routes work during the computation of agreement
dependencies. This ERP study investigated the processing of gender agreement in nouns that could provide a gender-related ending (i.e., transparent
nouns; e.g., “mesa”, tableF) or not (i.e., opaque nouns; e.g., miel, honeyF).
The gender agreement between an article and the noun was manipulated
and the 240 word pairs were embedded in sentences. Thirty-two Spanish native speakers were required to performed a grammaticality judgement test. ERPs to the target noun showed that transparent nouns elicited
greater fronto-central negativity between 200 and 500 ms, suggesting that
the system uses the form-based route even in sentence reading. In addition,
a LAN-P600 (350-500 ms; 500-800 ms) effect was observed for gender mismatches. Interestingly, this biphasic pattern did not differ for transparent
and opaque nouns, indicating that agreement computation would rely on
the lexical route, instead of the form-based route.

E86
DISTRIBUTION OF GRAMMATICAL FUNCTIONS ACROSS BIHEMISPHERIC AND LEFT PERISYLVIAN NETWORKS Mirjana Bozic1,2, Weiyu

Ye1,2, William D Marslen-Wilson1,2; 1University of Cambridge, 2MRC Cognition
and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge — Language comprehension engages
functionally distinct large-scale networks in both hemispheres. A distributed bilateral network has been linked to the semantic and pragmatic
interpretation of the spoken input, while a left hemisphere fronto-temporal network is strongly associated with complex syntax and inflectional
morphology. Neuroimaging and neuropsychological evidence suggests
however that the processing of syntactically simple utterances need only

2014 Annual Meeting	
involve bilateral temporal structures. This implies that the interpretation of
grammatical cues to phrasal and clausal structure is not solely restricted to
the LH perisylvian system, and that the bilateral system can support structurally simple grammatical computations. Defining structural simplicity as
linear sequences generated by a Finite State Grammar (FSG), we contrasted
three linear sequences of increasing complexity - (1) minimal two-word
strings (They listen); (2) longer three-word strings (I go home); (3) strings
with non-adjacent dependencies (We often walk) - with two types of strings
expected to engage the LH system. These were (4) structurally non-linear
sequences (Today I work) and (5) minimal strings that were inflectionally
complex (You agreed). Both univariate and multivariate analyses showed
results that departed from this framework, with only the minimal twoword phrases restricted to bilateral temporal regions. Conditions (2), (3),
and (4) grouped together to activate left inferior frontal regions as well as
bilateral temporal areas, similar to the inflectionally complex strings (5).
These data confirm that the bihemispheric system can support basic forms
of grammatical interpretation, and suggest that some redefinition is needed
of what constitutes syntactic complexity.

E87
CORTICAL ENCODING OF THE HIERARCHICAL STRUCTURE OF
SPOKEN LANGUAGE Nai Ding1, Hang Zhang1, Xing Tian1, Lucia Melloni1,2,3,

David Poeppel1; 1NYU, 2Max-Planck Institute for Brain Research, 3Columbia
University — Language is hierarchically organized into syllables, words,
phrases, and sentences. For spoken language, parsing a continuous speech
stream into these hierarchical linguistic structures is a fundamental and
challenging task. The boundaries between syllables generally have clear
acoustic signatures; in contrast, determining the boundaries between
words and phrases critically relies on a listener’s linguistic knowledge. It
is now well characterized that auditory cortical activity is entrained to the
syllabic rhythm of speech. However, how larger linguistic structures, such
as phrases, are encoded online remains elusive. We designed new phrasal
speech materials in which the hierarchical linguistic structure of speech is
dissociated from low level acoustic features and measured cortical activity using magnetoencephalography (MEG) from listeners listening to such
materials. We demonstrate that cortical activity is hierarchically entrained
to the rhythms of words, phrases, and sentences, unconfounded by the
tracking of acoustic properties of speech. Furthermore, such hierarchical
entrainment is demonstrated to be associated with the syntactic structure of
speech rather than the predictability of each incoming word. In summary,
when listening to a continuous speech stream, cortical activity is entrained
not only to the acoustic features or the syllabic rhythm of speech but also to
larger, abstract linguistic units such phrases.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
E88
NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF NAP-DEPENDENT CONSOLIDATION
OF DECLARATIVE MEMORY IN YOUNG ADULTS Bengi Baran1, Janna

Mantua1, Rebecca M.C. Spencer1; 1University of Massachusetts Amherst —
Declarative memories are better recalled after an interval of sleep compared
to wake, a difference thought to reflect sleep-dependent memory consolidation. While a large body of work shows that changes in memory performance are accompanied by quantifiable changes in the brain (i.e. consolidation related reorganization), less is known about the specific role of sleep
physiology on functional activation in the declarative memory retrieval
network. In the present study we used functional MRI and polysomnography to identify electrophysiological properties of a mid-day nap that relate
to changes in retrieval related activation. Participants (n= 12) were trained
on a word-pair learning task and recall was tested after a 5hr interval that
included a daytime nap or restful wake (within subjects, conditions separated by one week, order counter-balanced). Participants performed better
(i.e. decreased forgetting compared to baseline) when the intersession
interval included a nap. The nap benefit score (intersession performance
change following the nap minus the intersession performance change following wake) correlated positively with time spent in slow-wave sleep (r=
.70, p= .01), and participants with greater sleep efficiency retained a greater
memory for items after the delay (r= .66, p= .02). Functional activation associated with successful recall was contrasted between the nap and wake conditions. Following a nap, participants showed more activation in inferior

Poster Session E
frontal gyrus and insula, possibly due to better attentional allocation and
better cue-dependent search during retrieval. Overall, these results suggest
that an efficient nap rich in slow wave sleep enhances memory and facilitates attention allocation for successful recall.

E89
SOURCE MEMORY CONFIDENCE CO-VARIES WITH DIFFERENCES IN NEURAL REINSTATEMENT Emily K. Leiker1, Jeffrey D.

Johnson1; 1University of Missouri — The phenomenological experience of
retrieving qualitative information from episodic memory (“recollecting”) is
thought to be supported by hippocampally-mediated reinstatement of the
neurocognitive processes activated during encoding. Several fMRI studies have provided evidence for this hypothesis by demonstrating stronger
reinstatement when subjects report recollecting specific details compared
to when recollection fails. However, the precise nature of the relationship
between recollection and reinstatement remains largely unexplored, particularly in light of recent studies demonstrating that activity in some regions
(e.g., inferior parietal cortex and hippocampus) co-varies with the amount
or strength of information recollected. The current study addressed this
issue by examining whether a behavioral measure of recollection quality confidence ratings about source memory judgments - tracks the magnitude
of neural reinstatement. Subjects (n = 19) were first shown a series of words
in the context of one of three encoding tasks. A later memory test employed
a two-step procedure in which subjects first made source memory judgments (designating the task previously completed for a word) and then
rated their confidence about that judgment on a three-point scale. Pattern-classification analyses were used to index the degree to which task-related neural activity from encoding was reinstated during retrieval. The
results indicated that, when source memory judgments were correct, the
magnitude of reinstatement increased as a function of greater source confidence. These findings suggest that, not only does reinstatement appear to
be involved in recollection, but judgments about the subjective experiences
associated with retrieval may be directly supported by parametric changes
in reinstatement.

E90
UNITIZATION OF PSEUDOWORDS: AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF
THE ROLE OF SEMANTIC INFORMATION Ryan Hubbard1, Brian Gon-

salves1; 1Department of Psychology & Beckman Institute, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign — According to dual-process theories of memory,
recognition memory is dependent upon two distinct processes: familiarity
(a sense of oldness) and recollection (retrieval of contextual information).
In memory tasks that typically rely on recollection, such as associative
memory, items can be recognized by familiarity alone if stimuli are “unitized”, or mentally combined to form a single representation. However, it
remains unclear as to what mechanism underlies this increase in familiarity-based recognition for unitized pairs. One proposal is that unitization
may modulate the semantic relatedness between the two items. For example, “slope” is not semantically related to “bread”; however, following unitization, the relatedness of these two words might increase. If this is the case,
we would expect that stimuli with little semantic information would lead
to reduced unitization. To assess this claim, we performed two ERP experiments with pseudowords. In the first experiment, participants were shown
either a pair of words or a pair of pseudowords, and were given either a
perceptual unitization task or a non-unitization task. In the second experiment, participants were given either a pair of words or a pseudoword-word
pair, and were given a conceptual unitization task or a non-unitization task.
ERPs were recorded during a recognition test to assess any electrophysiological differences between conditions. ERP results show higher amplitude
N400 responses to unitized pseudowords, while the opposite effect is seen
for unitized words. While these results are preliminary, they suggest that
neural measures of familiarity-based retrieval may differ depending on the
semantic content of the information.

E91
THE INTERACTION OF UNITIZATION AND RELATIONAL ENCODING
STRATEGIES ON MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE ACTIVATION DURING
RETRIEVAL Hsiao-Wei Tu1, Rachel Diana1; 1Virginia Tech — In retrieval of
typical episodic memories, context details must be recognized using recollection process whereas familiarity alone can support item recognition.
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

181

Poster Session E	
Unitization is a specialized encoding strategy that allows context details
to be processed as item features and therefore increases the involvement
of familiarity-based recognition in retrieval of these context details. Relational encoding stores items and contexts as independent units whereas
unitization merges the item and context information into a single new
representation. Our previous study (Tu & Diana, under review) showed
that a mixture of unitized and non-unitized context details in the same episode reduced the contribution of familiarity to retrieval of any one detail.
However, this result may have been influenced by the perceptual linking
between the study word and its context (background color or font size). In
the current study, we removed the visual cues for the context in order to
ensure that encoding was based on the unitization manipulation: a scenario
describing an event. That is, participants were only able to extract necessary
contextual information from the scenarios provided at encoding. Receiver
operating characteristic curves suggest that the two individual context
details were processed independently under these conditions. We also collected neuroimaging data which show activation in the hippocampus and
perirhinal cortex when both details were unitized, as compared to when
one or more context details were not unitized.

E92
CHANGES IN FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY WITHIN THE DEFAULT
MODE NETWORK LINKED TO SUCCESSFUL ASSOCIATIVE
ENCODING Erin D. Horne1, Marianne de Chastelaine1, Danielle R. King1,

Michael D. Rugg1; 1Center for Vital Longevity and School of Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas — Negative subsequent
memory effects refer to lower levels of encoding-related activity for later
remembered than later forgotten study items. In the present study, subjects (n=36) were scanned as they studied a series of word pairs. On a later
test, they then discriminated between “intact” (same pairing as at study),
“rearranged” (different pairing from study) and new pairs. Subsequent
memory effects were identified by contrasting the neural activity elicited
by the study pairs according to whether they were later correctly judged
to be intact or incorrectly endorsed as rearranged. Consistent with numerous prior findings, negative effects were evident in posterior regions of the
default mode network, including the posterior cingulate and right lateral
parietal cortex. Psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analysis was used to
identify where functional connectivity with these regions was modulated
as a function of later memory performance. In several regions, connectivity was higher during the encoding of study pairs that went on to be
correctly rather than incorrectly endorsed on the later memory test. The
most prominent such regions were medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and
right temporoparietal junction (TPJ), both of which were identified regardless of the location of the seed (posterior cingulate or right parietal cortex).
Importantly, negative subsequent memory effects could not be identified in
the mPFC, even at a very liberal threshold. Thus, successful versus unsuccessful associative encoding is associated with differential engagement of
members of the default mode additional to those that manifest negative
subsequent memory effects.

E93
VISUOSPATIAL MEMORY: AT ENCODING OR RETRIEVAL, IS THE
RIGHT BRAIN CRITICAL FOR GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL PROCESSING?

Peii Chen1,2, Ashley Hartman1, Daniela Sacchetti1, Randall Miller3; 1Kessler
Foundation, 2Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, 3Seton Hall University —
Processing global configuration prior to local details (i.e., global-to-local
processing) predicts an accurate recall of visuospatial information. While
many have suggested that the right cerebral hemisphere underlies this hierarchical processing, the present study examined whether the right brain is
critical for global-to-local processing at encoding or retrieval. This study
assessed visuospatial memory in 44 healthy adults (age=64.5yr, SD=1.4)
and 33 right-brain-damaged stroke survivors (age=64.6yr, SD=2.4; <90 days
post stroke) who showed no signs of spatial neglect or depressive symptoms. All participants were asked to produce a copy of the Modified Taylor
Complex Figure without knowledge of immediate and delayed recall (30
minutes) trials. Drawings were scored for accuracy (0-36) and configuration
(0-10; indexing the degrees of global-to-local processing). After accounting
for the presence of right-brain damage, age, and years of formal education,
we replicated findings that a greater configuration score of the copy trial
predicted greater accuracy of the delayed recall trial, F(1,72)=6.02, p=0.017.

182

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
Configuration of the delayed recall trial showed a similar effect on recall
accuracy, F(1,72)=7.77, p=0.007. We also addressed our research question:
After controlling for age and education, we found that the presence of
right-brain damage did not predict the configuration score of the copy trial,
F(1,73)=1.49, p=0.225, but did predict poorer configuration of the delayed
recall trial, F(1,73)=5.30, p=0.024. Therefore, the right hemisphere may be
critical for global processing at retrieving, rather than encoding, visuospatial information. However, lesion-behavior mapping analysis failed to yield
a specific brain region critical for such function.

E94
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF INDUCED LIBERAL
VERSUS CONSERVATIVE DECISION STATES IN RECOGNITION
MEMORY Justin Kantner1,2, Jean M. Vettel1, Benjamin O. Turner2, Misty L.

Schubert2, James C. Elliott2, Barry Giesbrecht2, Michael B. Miller2; 1U.S. Army
Research Laboratory, 2University of California, Santa Barbara — Most theories
of recognition memory assume that people reach recognition decisions by
establishing a criterion beyond which there is sufficient memory evidence
to call an item “old” and up to which an item will be called “new.” The criterion can be neutral, or individuals can be biased to respond “old”(a liberal
bias) or “new” (a conservative bias). Research with patient populations and
recent neuroimaging work are consistent with the idea that maintaining a
conservative decision criterion requires greater frontally mediated control
over test responses than maintaining a liberal criterion. We hypothesize
that when an individual is compelled to adopt a conservative recognition
bias, s/he must engage cognitive control processes that suppress prepotent “old” judgments and support cautious responding. However, the relationship between cognitive control and a conservative decision state is an
open question. Meanwhile, while research has identified ERP components
that track the placement of the decision criterion, the cortical oscillations
that underlie decision bias in recognition are (to our knowledge) largely
unexplored. We collected EEG recordings while manipulating participants’
decision states via a “security patrol” recognition paradigm in which oldnew discrimination was minimal and shifts between strongly liberal and
strongly conservative states were necessary to avoid critical misses (letting dangerous people go free) or false alarms (harming innocent people),
respectively. We present EEG correlates of a conservative recognition
response state and consider the extent to which these overlap with patterns
of neural oscillations observed in cognitive control tasks.

E95
AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY OF INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN RECOGNITION MEMORY. Anjali Thapar1, Grace Ewing1,

Daniel Montgomery2, Saachi Malhotra1, Jacoba Johnson1, Amanda Glassner1;
1
Bryn Mawr College, 2Haverford College — The use of event-related potentials (ERPs) to study brain activity associated with encoding and retrieval
processes in recognition memory is well established. However, only a
handful of studies have explored individual differences in neural activity
associated with encoding and retrieval processes, and the majority of this
research has focused on age-related changes in episodic memory. The present study examined individual differences in the old/new effect in young
adult participants characterized as high vs. low medial temporal lobe participants based on a neuropsychological battery consisting of measures
tapping immediate and delayed recall of verbal and visual memory. The
old/new effect is commonly characterized by enhanced positive deflections in response to study (old) words as compared to new words. Participants studied a list of words and performed an item recognition memory
test while wearing a Neuroscan 40 channel EEG cap and EEG data was
recorded continuously throughout the memory task. Analysis of the behavioral data confirmed that the high- and low-MTL groups differed in performance on the recognition memory task. Analysis of the ERP data replicated
the old/new effect found in the literature in both the high- and low-MTL
groups but the magnitude of the ERP form was reliably different for the
high- and low-MTL groups. The results of the study indicate that young
adult participants can be reliably differentiated into high- and low-MTL
groups and that individual differences in MTL functioning is associated
with reliable differences in performance and neuronal activity on a yes/no
recognition memory test.

2014 Annual Meeting	

E96
EPISODIC FUTURE THINKING IN SEMANTIC DEMENTIA: A COGNITIVE AND FMRI STUDY Armelle Viard1,2,3,4, Pascale Piolino5,6, Serge

Belliard1,2,3,4,7, Vincent de La Sayette1,2,3,4, Béatrice Desgranges1,2,3,4, Francis
Eustache1,2,3,4; 1Inserm, U1077, Caen, France, 2Université de Caen Basse-Normandie, UMR-S1077, Caen, France, 3Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, UMRS1077, Caen, France, 4Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, U1077, Caen, France,
5
Université Paris Descartes, Institut de Psychologie, Paris, France, 6Inserm UMR
S894, Centre de Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, Paris, France, 7CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France — Semantic dementia (SD) is characterized by gradual
loss of semantic memory. While episodic memory is preserved, behavioral
studies show that future thinking is impaired in SD. Using fMRI, brain
activity was measured in three female SD patients (EP: 77 years old, LL:
73, EG: 62), while they remembered personal past events or envisioned
future events. Twelve healthy females served as controls (mean age 67.17
± 5.22 years). Episodic quality and consciousness (Remember/Know) were
checked at debriefing. Atrophy was assessed (VBM5) and subtraction analyses (SPM5; p<0.05 FWE corrected) were conducted to compare future to
past thinking (F>P). EP evoked few episodic future events and presented
atrophy in superior medial frontal gyrus (mPFC) which was less activated
for F>P. LL presented atrophy in left anterior hippocampus and hyperactivated its right counterpart for F>P. Hyperactivation of superior mPFC
during past remembering coincided with better “remember” responses
for past compared to future thinking. EG hyperactivated lateral temporal cortex for F>P, a region important for semantic processing, coinciding
with poorer episodic quality of future compared to past events. Altogether,
patients’ future projections were different depending on the severity and
localization of their neocortical atrophy. Superior mPFC has a role in information integration, self-reference and autonoetic consciousness, essential
for future thinking. Its atrophy may explain EP’s difficulty to pre-experience episodic future events. For LL, right anterior hippocampal hyperactivation for future thinking served to compensate for its left counterpart atrophy. Integrity of both regions in EG permitted future projection, although
episodic quality was poorer than past remembering.

E97
CROSS-DOMAIN CONTROL IN EPISODIC AND SEMANTIC
MEMORY: EVIDENCE FROM A NOVEL SIMULTANEOUS EEGFMRI PARADIGM Ravi D. Mill1, Akira R. O’Connor1; 1School of Psychology

and Neuroscience, University of St Andrews, St Mary’s College, South Street,
St Andrews, Fife, KY16 9JP, Scotland, UK. — Recent functional neuroimaging research has highlighted the importance of cognitive control in the
domain of memory evaluation, yet neural substrates which differentially
support control- and memory-specific processes have not been dissociated.
A related question with direct relevance to theories of cognitive control is
whether control is signalled in analogous fashion across different processing domains (e.g. episodic and non-episodic memory). We hence employed
a simultaneous EEG-fMRI paradigm involving two decision-making tasks
that were equated for underlying controlled processing, but which differed
in the processing domain being evaluated: the semantic (pleasant/unpleasant?) and episodic (old/new?) memory tasks. In both tasks, participants
had to decide if the status of to-be-judged words matched the status of
separately presented cue screens. ‘Mismatch’ trials were hypothesised to
heighten cognitive control relative to ‘match’ trials, and this manipulation
was combined with block-wise variation of cue-word ordering to enable a
comprehensive examination of the neural substrates of cross-domain control. We found cross-domain mismatch control activations localised to parietal and prefrontal cortices, which were heightened when cues preceded
the appearance of words (Cue-First condition) and attenuated when words
preceded the appearance of cues (Word-First condition). These findings
reveal the neural substrates of cross-domain control, and highlight that
these are sensitive to the format of the task in which control is recruited.

E98
THE BENEFIT OF TESTING: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL (ERP)
STUDY Cheng-hua Bai1, Emma K. Bridger1, Axel Mecklinger1; 1Saarland Uni-

versity, Germany — The enhanced memory performance for items that are
tested as compared to being re-studied (the testing effect) is a frequently
reported memory phenomenon. However, few studies have explored the

Poster Session E
neural correlates of this effect at the time point when testing takes place. In
this study, we utilized the ERP correlates of successful memory encoding
to address this issue, hypothesizing that if the benefit of testing is due to
retrieval-related processes at test then subsequent memory effects should
resemble the ERP correlates of retrieval-based processing in their temporal
and spatial characteristics. Participants were asked to learn Swahili-German word pairs before items were presented in either a Test or a Re-study
condition. Memory performance was assessed immediately and one-day
later with a cued recall task. Successfully recalling items at test increased
the likelihood that items were remembered over time compared to items
which were only re-studied. An ERP subsequent memory contrast (later
remembered vs. later forgotten tested items), which reflects the engagement of processes that ensure items are recallable the next day were topographically comparable with the ERP correlate of immediate recollection
(immediately remembered vs. immediately forgotten tested items). This
result shows that the processes which allow items to be more memorable over time share qualitatively similar neural correlates as the processes
which were related to successful retrieval at test. This finding suggests that
testing is more beneficial than re-studying on memory performance over
time because of its engagement of retrieval processes, i.e. the re-encoding
of actively retrieved memory representations.

E99
CONFIGURAL MEMORY REPRESENTATIONS: AN EVENT-RELATED FMRI STUDY OF STRUCTURAL AND NON-STRUCTURAL
LEARNING Samuel C Berens1, Chris M Bird1; 1University Of Sussex — The

medial temporal lobes (MTL) are critical for memory but the precise roles
of structures within the MTL are not known. Based on lesion studies in
rodents, Aggleton, Sanderson and Pearce (2007) proposed that the hippocampus underpins representations of the temporal and spatial arrangement of items (e.g. A is rewarded if presented to the left of B). This has
been termed “structural learning”. Recent evidence suggests that the perirhinal cortex is important for representing conjunctions of item features
(e.g. A is rewarded when presented with B). We used event-related fMRI to
investigate the brain regions involved in structural and non-structural configural learning. 23 right-handed participants engaged in a virtual reality
trial-and-error learning task involving spatial-structural and non-structural
trials. State-space modelling was used to compute trial-by-trial estimates of
acquisition rate and trace-strength for each stimulus type. These parameters were regressed against BOLD activity to identify regions involved in
memory encoding and retrieval respectively. As predicted, during periods
of retrieval, hippocampal activity increased as a function of trace-strength
for structural trials. In contrast, activity in the parahippocampal cortex
correlated with trace-strength for non-structural trials. During periods
of encoding, activity in Broca’s area was associated with the acquisition
of structural representations whereas activity in the left middle temporal
gyrus was associated with the acquisition of non-structural representations. These findings provide support for the functional segregation of MTL
areas in the learning of structural and non-structural configurations and
they suggest that separate regions may be utilised when processing such
information at encoding.

E100
FUNCTIONAL NEAR INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY REVEALS PREFRONTAL INVOLVEMENT IN ASSOCIATIVE RECOGNITION James

D. Schaeffer1, Amarnath S. Yennu1, Kellen C. Gandy1, Fenghua Tian1, Hanli
Liu1, Heekyeong Park1; 1University of Texas at Arlington — Previous functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have shown that neural
activity in the prefrontal cortex is involved in associative memory. Here
we investigated associative recognition with functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) using an item-item associative memory paradigm. Participants studied a list of word pairs and made judgments of whether one item
in the pair fit into the other. During retrieval, participants were presented
with intact word pairs (studied words in the same pair), rearranged word
pairs (studied words, but paired differently), and new word pairs. Participants made memory judgments toward test word pairs by responding”intact,” “rearranged,” or “new.” For word pairs to which participants made
accurate associative memory judgments (i.e. intact pairs correctly judged as
“intact”), increases in oxygenated hemoglobin were observed in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Brodmann’s areas 46/9), when compared to inac-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

183

Poster Session E	
curate associative memory judgments (i.e. intact pairs incorrectly judged
as “rearranged”). These findings corroborate previous fMRI findings that
have demonstrated lateral prefrontal cortical involvement in associative
memory. Therefore, the results of this study provide converging evidence
for the importance of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in retrieval of itemitem associations. Further, this study demonstrates that fNIRS can be a
viable neuroimaging tool for investigating cortical involvement in human
episodic memory as an easily accessible yet economical neuroimaging tool.

E101
BETTER TAKE A NAP! NAPPING BENEFITS RECOGNITION
MEMORY Sara Studte1, Emma Bridger1, Axel Mecklinger1; 1Saarland Univer-

sity, Saarbruecken — An increasing number of studies have shown that sleep
improves memory performance and that even short daytime naps can lead
to memory benefits. Sleep-specific parameters which can be measured with
EEG such as sleep spindles are thought to support memory consolidation.
Using event-related potentials (ERPs) we explored the role of nap sleep for
associative memory (AM) and item memory (IM). Subjects studied single
words and word-pairs before performing an IM- and AM-test (pre-test).
One group (n=22) was next allowed to nap (~90 minutes) while the other
watched DVDs (control; n=19). Both groups then performed a final IM- and
AM-test (post-test). IM performance decreased for both groups from preto post-test. Consistent with the view that nap sleep is particularly beneficial for hippocampus-dependent AM, performance dropped from pre- to
post-test in the control group but remained at the pre-test level for the nap
group. Both groups showed the expected ERP correlates of familiarity and
recollection at pre- and post-test. Unexpectedly, these ERP effects were not
modulated by nap sleep. However, spindle density correlated with pre-test
AM performance (r=0.45, p<0.05) and also with the ERP correlate of recollection in the AM pre-test (r=0.44, p<0.05). These findings imply that successful learning and retrieval before nap sleep modulate memory consolidation of associated information (as reflected in enhanced spindle activity)
during sleep. This, in turn, may help boost post-sleep performance.

E102
PARIETAL STIMULATION WITH TDCS LEADS TO ENHANCED MONITORING OF ITEM AND SOURCE MEMORY Denise Pergolizzi2, Eliza-

beth F. Chua2; 1The Graduate Center, CUNY, New York, NY, 2Brooklyn College,
CUNY, Brooklyn, NY — This study sought to clarify direct contribution of the
lateral posterior parietal cortex (PPC) on item and source recognition using
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS). The lateral PPC has been
implicated in contributing to objective accuracy during item recognition
in neuroimaging studies, but only subjective memory, such as confidence
in source memory, in neuropsychological studies. In the current study we
sought to observe what patterns of recognition memory could be altered
using tDCS of the PPC during item versus source recognition. Thirty-six
participants were randomly presented with a total of 50 words to be judged
“living” (animacy judgment) or “bigger than a shoebox” (size judgment).
Participants received 20 minutes of active (2 mA; n=18) or sham (n=18) tDCS
using a bilateral CP3/CP4 montage during a recognition test. During item
recognition, active stimulation participants had increased discriminability (d’= 2.33) compared to sham (d’= 1.90) between items correctly judged
“old” and falsely judged “old”, (p<.03) and a more conservative criterion
(C= 0.29) compared to sham stimulated participants (C= -0.07, p<.03). This
effect was revealed to be driven by a significant decrease in false alarms for
active (9%) compared to sham (20%) participants (p<.02). During source
recognition, sham stimulated participants revealed a criterion shift toward
“bigger” judgments (0.18), while active stimulated showed no significant
bias toward living or bigger judgments, revealing a more conservative criterion (-0.09, p<.01). These findings suggest the lateral PPC may be necessary in establishing criterial judgments for recognition decisions.

E103
“NEURAL WORDS” AS A SUBSTRATE FOR BOTH FLASH MEMORY
AND THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE Donald O’Malley1; 1Northeastern

University — Daily memory records (DMRs) are composed primarily of
sub-linguistic items which have deep evolutionary roots. While focused
attention is needed to memorize phone numbers or word lists, DMRs are
written by an effortless, one-trial, “flash” process. The writing of these
vast stores (which encode thousands of items: Brady et al., 2008; Gioioso

184

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
and O’Malley, 2009), parallels the hippocampal encoding of navigational
memories (Buzsaki and Moser, 2013), yet entails the epochal and chronological linking of preexisting neocortical representations. Neuronal gamma
rhythms that bring world items into conscious experience might precede the
writing of all DMR items / declarative memories. Parsimony suggests that
gamma-band inputs activate autoassociative networks to form momentary
epochs, which then become chained via a hippocampal sequencing algorithm, possibly by activating silent synapses (O’Malley, 2011, Neuroinformatics). Object recognition circuits are a potential substrate for the flash
memory process, but we suggest the existence of more compact representations operating in neocortex (“eural words”) along the lines of representations proposed to exist in hippocampus (McClelland et al., 1995). While
linguistic words are our most compact symbols, words, phrases and sentences are but a tiny part of our DMRs (Ganz and O’Malley, 2011). Indeed,
animals knew the objects, structures and physics of their world long before
language existed and could combine these items in syntactical ways: they
could store logical constructs and use such information at later times. We
therefore propose that “neural words” not only underlie DMRs but also
served as forerunners of the fully-arbitrary symbol manipulation system
that is language.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Other
E104
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL INDICES OF MANDARIN LEXICAL TONE
PROCESSING: EFFECT OF MEMORY AND LANGUAGE EXPERIENCE Yan Yu1, Valerie L. Shafer2, Elyse Sussman3, Margaret Kamows-ki-

Shakibai4, Jungmoon Hyun2; 1William Paterson University of New Jersey, 2City
University of NY, the Graduate Center, 3Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
4
Marymount Manhattan College — Language experience enhances discrimination of speech contrasts at a behavioral, perceptual level, as well as at a
pre-attentive level, as indexed by event-related potential (ERP) mismatch
negativity (MMN) responses. The enhanced sensitivity could be the result
of changes in acoustic resolution and/or long-term memory representations of the relevant information in auditory cortex. We used a short (ca. 600
ms) versus long (ca. 2600 ms) interstimulus interval in a passive, oddball
discrimination task to examine these possibilities. Mandarin and English
listeners listened to bisyllabic nonword tokens that differed in lexical tone
categories using a multiple oddball paradigm. The results revealed that
reduced MMN amplitude in the English group under the long ISI condition only. In addition, Mandarin listeners showed a larger late negativity
(LN) discriminative response than the English listeners for tone contrasts
in the long ISI condition. Lack of robust MMN and LN to tone contrasts in
English listeners under the long ISI condition suggests that that language
experience modulates neural representation of lexical tones, largely at the
phonemic level. They also suggest that the acoustic correlates of tone are
fairly robust and easily discriminated at short ISIs regardless of language
background. At longer ISIs beyond 2.5 s language-specific experience is
necessary for robust discrimination. Results from repeated ANOVAs,
linear mixed model, and principal component analysis will be compared
and discussed.

E105
THE IMPLICIT REINSTATEMENT OF EMOTIONAL INFORMATION
BIASES SOCIAL DECISIONS: AN FMRI STUDY Erik A. Wing1, Bran-

don Levy1, Ilana T. Z. Dew1, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke University — While the
influence of emotion on explicit memory has been well studied, previously
encoded emotional information may also have an implicit effect on current
decisions and actions. A central question concerning implicit emotional
influences on behavior is the nature of neural processes that support reinstatement of previously experienced affective content. In the present study,
we used functional neuroimaging to examine the link between implicit
reinstatement of emotional information and its effect on social decisions.
Participants initially viewed faces with either angry or happy expressions,
and subsequently made social judgments (e.g., would you want this person
as a boss?) about the neutral version of those same faces, along with new
faces. A final explicit memory test indicated that participants could not
remember the original emotional expression of faces when provided with
the neutral version. Nonetheless, social decisions showed an effect of previ-

2014 Annual Meeting	
ous expression: social ratings were more positive for previously happy vs.
angry faces. Consistent with past research, neuroimaging analyses revealed
repetition effects during the decision phase, with reduced activity in fusiform gyrus for previously-presented vs. new faces. Additionally, multivariate analysis of distributed activity in ventral occipitotemporal brain regions
showed that within the set of repeated faces, cortical patterns differed as a
function of the previous emotional expression (angry vs. happy), mirroring
a similar dissociation found at encoding. These results suggest that emotional information may bias subsequent decisions by subtly altering online
representations, and provide new parallels to work exploring retrieved
representations at an explicit level.

E106
EXPERIENCE MODIFIES THE CONJUNCTIVE NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS NECESSARY FOR COMPLEX OBJECT PERCEPTION

Jonathan Erez1, Rhodri Cusack2,3, Felicia Zhang1, Morgan D. Barense1,4; 1University of Toronto, 2University of Western Ontario, 3The Brain and Mind Institute, London, ON, Canada, 4Rotman Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada
— Critical to perceiving an object is the ability to bind its constituent features into a cohesive representation. We have recently shown that the perirhinal cortex, a region long-believed to contribute exclusively to a dedicated memory system, coded conjunctive representations of novel complex
objects, over and above their constituent features. One outstanding question is how the representations of such complex objects change with experience. To address this question, we trained participants on a visual search
task with a set of objects that comprised either one (e.g., A, B, or C), two
(e.g., AB, AC, BC), or three features (e.g., ABC). Following 6 training sessions, participants were scanned while performing a 1-back task with the
trained objects and a set of novel objects. We then conducted a correlational
multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) to examine the degree to which the
neural representation coded the conjunctions of features, over and above
the features themselves and whether any differences existed between
the conjunctive representations of familiar versus novel objects. Results
revealed that anterior regions of the ventral visual stream, including the
PRC, demonstrated complex conjunctive coding. In addition, we found that
extensive training with the objects shifted these conjunctive representations
to more posterior ventral visual stream regions. These results support the
recent representational-hierarchical view of object perception and memory.
Moreover, these findings suggest that experience shapes the representation
of the conjunctions of features comprising complex objects, such that they
are unitized and processed by more posterior ventral visual stream regions.

E107
DECREASED FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN THE HIPPOCAMPUS AND PREFRONTAL CORTEX IS ASSOCIATED WITH
LIFELONG HISTORY OF GETTING LOST Giuseppe Iaria1, Aiden E.G.F.

Arnold1, Clayton F. Burles1, Irene Liu1, Edward Slone1, Sarah Barclay2, Torben
N Bech-Hansen2, Richard M Levy3; 1NeuroLab, Department of Psychology
and Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada,
2
Department of Medical Genetics, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada, 3Faculty of Environmental Design, University of Calgary, Calgary,
Alberta, Canada — The lifelong history of getting lost in familiar surroundings despite any brain injury or neurological condition is known as Developmental Topographical Disorientation (DTD). To date, the neural correlates of this newly discovered cognitive disorder are unknown. Given the
well-known role of the hippocampus in spatial navigation and the selectivity of DTD to this specific domain, we hypothesized that the inability to
orient in DTD is related to ineffective functional connectivity between the
hippocampus and other brain regions critical for spatial orientation. Here,
we tested this by asking a group of individuals with DTD and a group of
control subjects to undergo a resting-state functional MRI (rsfMRI) scan.
In addition, both groups performed a task-based fMRI study while forming a cognitive map of a virtual environment. Finally, we performed Voxel
Based Morphometry to exclude structural differences between DTD and
control groups. The results study showed a decreased functional connectivity between the right hippocampus and the prefrontal cortex (PFC) in
individuals with DTD. The fMRI study revealed decreased signal change
in DTD individuals within the insular cortex, and the temporal and parahippocampal gyri in the right hemisphere while forming a cognitive map.
No structural differences were revealed between groups. These findings

Poster Session E
provide the first group based neural evidence of DTD and suggest that ineffective functional connectivity between hippocampus and PFC may affect
the monitoring and processing of spatial information while moving within
an environment, resulting in the selective inability to form cognitive maps
that are critical for orienting in the environment.

E108
STABILITY IN HIPPOCAMPAL REPRESENTATION OF FACES
DURING ENCODING RELATES TO RACE EFFECTS IN MEMORY

Thackery I. Brown1, Melina R. Uncapher1, Karen F. LaRocque1, Anthony D.
Wagner1; 1Stanford University — People are better at remembering faces
from their own race than other races - a phenomenon that has significant
implications in courtroom settings. To examine the representational basis
for this racial bias in face memory, 23 healthy young participants (7 African American (AA) and 16 European American (EA)) underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging while studying pictures of novel AA
and EA faces. Using representational similarity analyses, we examined
the relationship between neural pattern similarity for faces at encoding
and subsequent memory. Separate representational similarity measures
were computed for faces of the participant’s own race (in-group) and the
other race (out-group) within the fusiform gyrus and the hippocampus regions important for face processing and memory. Analyses of data from
the fusiform gyrus revealed that, for both in-group and out-group faces,
the stability of the representation of a face across repeated encoding trials
predicted later memory, such that subsequently remembered faces had
greater stability across exposures. Critically, in the hippocampus, stability
did not differ based on subsequent memory for in-group faces, but was
significantly greater for remembered than forgotten out-group faces. These
results suggest that a mechanistic account of racial bias in face memory
may involve hippocampal processes, such that the robustness of face representation during encoding in the hippocampus is important specifically for
recognizing individuals of another race.

E109
ENCODING-RELATED BRAIN ACTIVITY IN PATIENTS WITH ACCELERATED FORGETTING Kathryn Atherton1, Anna Christina Nobre1, Nicola

Filippini1, Adam Zeman2, Christopher Butler1; 1University of Oxford, 2University
of Exeter — Patients with transient epileptic amnesia (TEA, a sub-type of
medial temporal lobe epilepsy) commonly complain of accelerated longterm forgetting (ALF), despite performing within the normal range on
standard neuropsychological tests and having clinically normal structural
brain imaging. These patients typically exhibit normal learning and initial
retention, but forget rapidly over subsequent days and weeks. ALF is presumed to reflect a deficit in hippocampus-dependent memory consolidation. However, it remains possible that these patients suffer from a subtle
encoding abnormality. In this fMRI study, we presented 160 novel naturalistic visual stimuli to a group of patients with TEA, who complained of
ALF, and a group of controls. There were two subsequent recognition tests:
one immediately after the scan and one four days later. These patients actually demonstrated abnormally poor performance on the first test (within 45
minutes of encoding). They produced more false alarms than the controls
on both tests. In the left hippocampus, the patients showed a greater activity difference between subsequently remembered and forgotten items than
that seen in the controls. This effect was driven by a group difference in
the activity associated with subsequently forgotten items: these items were
associated with less activity, and a smaller proportion of active voxels, in
the left hippocampus in the patients than the controls. These group differences in encoding-related brain activity were significant only for delayed
test performance and not for early test performance. These results demonstrate that there are brain activity abnormalities at the stage of encoding in
patients with ALF.

E110
BINOCULAR RIVALRY OF NATURAL OBJECTS: A TOOL TO STUDY
THE INFLUENCES OF PRIOR EXPERIENCE ON OBJECT AWARENESS Delphine Oudiette1, John C. Plass1, Emmanuel Guzman-Martinez1,

Satoru Suzuki1, Marcia Grabowecky1, Ken A. Paller1; 1Northwestern University
— Binocular rivalry occurs when two dissimilar stimuli are presented, one
to each eye; conscious perception then spontaneously alternates between
the two. Probabilistic-inference accounts predict that stimuli with a higher
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

185

Poster Session E	
prior probability should dominate in binocular rivalry. However, it has
been challenging to study the effects of prior experience on visual competition at the level of object representation due to the difficulty of creating a
large set of distinctive but dominance-balanced pairs of real-world objects.
We created 28 pairs of images of objects matched for shape, size, orientation, and major contours (e.g. cigar vs. pen). To equalize low-level visual
features, we converted each image to grey-scale and matched contrast and
luminance independently for each pair. Nine participants observed the
pairs through a stereoscope in 30-s trials. Stimuli were tinted equiluminant
red or green (counterbalancing eye and color), and participants indicated
by keypress which percept they saw dominantly (red or green). For each
pair, we computed the mean dominance duration of the two percepts.
All 28 pairs triggered surprisingly crisp rivalry with minimal piecemeal/
blended perception (9% on average). Furthermore, in 15 pairs the durations
of the two percepts were statistically equivalent (difference in dominance
duration ranging from 0.5 to 8%). Using these 15 pairs, it is now possible
to examine how prior experience influences inter-object binocular rivalry.
These procedures open the door for determining the extent to which factors such as passive exposure, familiarity, and strategic attentional deployment subsequently influence stages of visual object processing that lead to
awareness.

E111
SAME STRATEGY - DIFFERENT STRUCTURE: HIPPOCAMPAL AND
CAUDATE VOLUME ARE DIFFERENTLY ASSOCIATED WITH NAVIGATION STRATEGY IN MEN AND WOMEN Kristin Nordin1, Jonas Pers-

son1, Eva Stening1, Agneta Herlitz2, Arvid Morell1, Lars-Olof Wahlund2, Johan
Wikström1, Hedvig Söderlund1; 1Uppsala University, Sweden, 2Karolinska Institutet, Solna Sweden — Spatial navigation performance depends on strategy,
favoring hippocampus-mediated allocentric strategies employing cognitive
maps over response-oriented egocentric strategies mediated by the caudate
nucleus. This distinction is reflected in neural activation but also in grey
matter volume. Men overall outperform women on spatial memory tasks,
and frequently display allocentric-associated right hippocampal activity
during navigation - however, whether strategy relates similarly to volume
in men and women is unclear. Therefore, we examined sex-differences
related to strategy in grey matter volume of the hippocampus and caudate nucleus. Young adults (m39/w40) performed a spatial memory task
involving recalling starting position in a virtual maze, rated their strategy,
and were scanned with structural MRI. Men performed better than women,
and allocentric men better than egocentric men. Women performed equally
across strategies. Allocentric strategy was positively related to volume in
the right hippocampus in both men and women, while egocentric strategy
was related to volume in bilateral caudate nucleus: positively in women
and negatively in men. Comparing strategies within each sex, allocentric
men had greater right hippocampal volume than egocentric men who
displayed greater left hippocampal volume. In women, strategy was not
reflected in lateralization but in systems; allocentric women had bigger
bilateral hippocampi while egocentric women had bigger bilateral caudate
nuclei. Furthermore, men could be successfully classified as allocentric or
egocentric based on whole-brain volume using multivoxel pattern analysis,
women could not. Strategy-use is hence indeed reflected in brain volume,
but men and women using the same strategy do not automatically share the
same neural structure.

E112
BOOSTING VOCABULARY LEARNING BY CUEING DURING SLEEP

Thomas Schreiner1, Björn Rasch2,3; 1University of Zurich, Institute of Psychology, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Zurich Center for Interdisciplinary Sleep Research
(ZiS), Zurich, Switzerland, 3University of Fribourg, Department of Psychology,
Fribourg, Switzerland — Experimentally reactivating memories during sleep
by re-exposure to associated memory cues (e.g., odors or sounds) improves
memory formation during sleep and enhances later recall. Here we tested
whether cued reactivation during NonREM sleep can improve vocabulary learning. We cued prior learned Dutch words either during NonREM
sleep or during active or passive waking. As we expected, re-exposure to
Dutch words during sleep improved later memory for the German translation of the cued words as compared to uncued words. Cueing did not
improve memory in both wake conditions. Furthermore, the benefits of
cueing during sleep on memory occurred without any “costs”, as recall of

186

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
uncued words in the main sleep group was identical to memory performance of sleeping control participants who did not receive any cues during
sleep. Finally, high-density EEG recordings revealed that successful cueing
during NonREM sleep is associated with a pronounced frontal negativity in
event related potentials and increased oscillatory theta power. Our results
indicate that cued reactivation of foreign words during sleep enhances
vocabulary learning, suggesting that cueing during sleep might prove to
be an efficient tool to facilitate vocabulary learning also in an educational
setting.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Skill learning
E113
PREDICTING INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN COGNITIVE GAINS
FROM VIDEOGAME TRAINING USING MACHINE LEARNING
ANALYSES OF FMRI FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY PATTERNS Aki

Nikolaidis1, Nicco Reggente2, Drew Goatz3, Kathryn Hurley3, Andrew Westphal2,
Arthur F. Kramer1; 1University of Illinois, Urbana Champaign, Beckman Institute,
2
University of California, Los Angeles, Psychology Department, 3University of Illinois, Bioengineering Department — One of the important questions in cognitive training, and learning and memory more broadly, is how pre-existing
individual differences in brain connectivity influence the effect of training.
In this study, we use the fMRI functional connectivity of multiple networks,
including the frontal-parietal and motor networks, to predict individual
differences in learning over the course of 30 hours of cognitive training
with the Space Fortress videogame. We used various metrics of functional
connectivity and graph theory-derived parameters from 45 young adult
participants as features to train adaptive multivariate regression models.
Using a leave-one-participant-out cross-validation procedure, we find that
we can predict a significant percentage of the variance in learning performance (defined as pre-post differences in Space Fortress score). By analyzing the performance of different regression models, we find that distinct
brain networks contain different types of information regarding individual
differences in learning rate. Furthermore, using both support vector regression and ridge regression we demonstrate how different feature and model
parameters have important effects on model performance, and we consider
how these parameters may have limited previous research using such techniques. We discuss implications of our results for cognitive training, as well
as the continued use of machine learning and graph theoretical analyses in
cognitive neuroscience.

E114
USING EEG TO IDENTIFY NEURAL SIGNATURES OF IMPLICIT
SEQUENCE LEARNING Kelsey R. Thompson1, Laura Batterink1, Ken A.

Paller1, Paul J. Reber1; 1Northwestern University — Implicit learning reflects
a reshaping of neural circuits through extensive practice and occurs largely
outside of conscious awareness. The Serial Interception Sequence Learning
(SISL) task provides a relatively process-pure measure of implicit motor
sequence learning. The task produces little to no explicit recognition of
the trained sequence in participants. During the task, participants watch
a rapid progression of moving cues and attempt to make precisely timed
4-alternative-forced-choice responses. The cues include a covertly embedded repeating sequence. Participants exhibit improved performance during
the repeating sequence compared to novel sequences. Using fMRI, we
found reductions in activity during performance of an implicitly learned
sequence (Gobel, Parrish, & Reber, 2011). However, the temporal dynamics of neural activity associated with performing a well-practiced sequence
have not been previously identified. Using a modified version of the SISL
task, participants were trained on a motor sequence and subsequently
tested on their sequence knowledge while their EEG was recorded. Brain
potentials time-locked to cues were analyzed to reveal distinct responses to
the four individual cues. Differences in the ERPs to the same cues within
trained and untrained sequences were observed in occipital scalp channels,
providing a detailed picture of the neural dynamics supporting implicit
learning. The findings indicate that implicit sequence learning produces
changes in the way cues comprising a trained sequence are visually processed, which then increases fluidity in response planning and execution.

2014 Annual Meeting	

E115
A COMPUTATIONAL MODEL FOR DOPAMINE FIRING AND
CONDITIONING USING A REPRESENTATION OF FUTURE TIME

Inderdeep Singh1, Marc Howard1; 1Boston University — It has been proposed
that conditioning should not be described as learning of an atomic association, but as learning the temporal relationships between the CS and the US.
Moreover, it has been proposed that conditioning is time-scale invariant.
We start with a mechanistic model that constructs a scale-invariant representations of future events. When a CS is presented, the representation
of future events changes abruptly to indicate the future arrival of the US.
The future occurrence of the US is immediately signaled---this mechanism
does not require chaining of intermediate states nor does it require the prediction error signal to march back in time. We use the dynamic changes in
net prediction to describe the dopamine cell response across the temporal
interval in multiple reinforcement learning paradigms. At the behavioral
level, the same model also provide a mechanistic model of several classic
conditioning paradigms as well as generating scale-invariant conditioning.

E116
EEG ALPHA DESYNCHRONIZATION IS RELATED TO IMPLICIT
LEARNING IN THE TRIPLETS LEARNING TASK. Guangsheng Liang1,

Seth A. Kiser1, Rebecca L. Fuller1, Katy M. O’Neil1, Darlene V. Howard2, James
H. Howard Jr1,2,3; 1The Catholic University of America, Department of Psychology, 2Georgetown University, Department of Psychology, 3Georgetown University, Department of Neurology — Implicit sequence learning involves learning the likely order of events making it possible to process future events
more effectively. For example, in the Triplets Learning Task (TLT) subjects
observe two “cues” and respond to a third “target” by keypress on each of
a series of trials. Unbeknownst to them, the first cue predicts the target on
80% of the trials (high frequency targets) and another location on 20% of the
trials (low frequency targets). Learning is reflected in faster and more accurate responding to high than low frequency targets. In a previous study
using electroencephalography (EEG) we demonstrated that the event-related potential N400 component had greater amplitude for low compared
to high probability targets and that this difference changed with practice.
Here we investigated whether spectral power in the EEG alpha frequency
band (7-13 Hz) is also related to target processing in the TLT. Fourteen college-age students completed three, 500-trial sessions of the TLT while we
recorded EEG. Time/frequency analysis of the EEG revealed a decrease
in alpha power (alpha desynchronization) in task-relevant electrodes coincident with target onset. This occurred early in learning and increased in
duration with practice. Additionally, alpha desynchronization was longer
for high than low frequency targets. These results are consistent with previous research using simultaneous EEG and MRI to show that alpha desynchronization is associated with default mode network (DMN) deactivation.
This suggests that alpha desynchronization in the present study may reflect
a shift from DMN to task-relevant networks in the TLT.

E117
THE RESTING BRAIN PREPARES MOTOR MEMORIES FOR SUBSEQUENT CONSOLIDATION BY SLEEP Dara Manoach1,2, Michael Greg-

ory3, Yigal Agam1,2, Chindhuri Selvadurai1, Amanda Nagy4, Matthew Tucker3,
Edwin Robertson3, Robert Stickgold3; 1Massachusetts General Hospital/ Harvard Medical School, 2Athinoula A. Martinos Center for biomedical imaging,
3
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center/ Harvard Medical School, 4Harvard
College — There is ongoing debate concerning the function of resting-state
brain activity. Prior work demonstrates that memory encoding enhances
subsequent resting-state functional connectivity within task-relevant networks and that these changes predict better recognition. Here, we used
functional connectivity MRI (fcMRI) to examine whether task-induced
changes in resting-state connectivity predict later consolidation by sleep.
In two separate sessions, resting-state scans were acquired before and after
participants performed a motor task. In one session participants trained
on the motor sequence task (MST), a well-established probe of sleep-dependent memory consolidation, and were tested the next day, after a night
of sleep. In the other session they performed a motor control task (MCT)
that involved only minimal learning. In an accompanying behavioral control study, participants trained on the MST and were tested after either a
night of sleep or an equivalent interval of daytime wake. Both fcMRI and

Poster Session E
sleep control participants showed significant improvement of MST performance, while the wake control participants did not. In the fcMRI participants, increased connectivity in bilateral motor cortex following MST
training predicted this next-day improvement. This increased connectivity did not appear to reflect initial learning since it did not correlate with
learning during training and was not greater after MST training than MCT
performance. Instead, we hypothesize that this increased connectivity processed the new memories for sleep-dependent consolidation. Our findings
demonstrate that physiological processes immediately after learning predict subsequent sleep-dependent enhancement of performance and suggest
that the resting brain prepares memories of recent experiences for later consolidation during sleep.

NEUROANATOMY
E118
DISENTANGLING DISORDERS OF CONSCIOUSNESS: INSIGHTS
FROM DTI AND MVPA Zhong A. Zheng1, Nicco Reggente1, Evan S. Lutken-

hoff1, Adrian Owen2, Martin M. Monti1; 1University of California, Los Angeles,
2
University of Western Ontario — The stratification of individuals surviving
severe brain injury in Minimally Conscious State (MCS) and Vegetative
State (VS) patients is, currently, entirely based on behavioral criteria. This
approach is problematic for at least two reasons: (i) behavioral assessments are known to be susceptible to sizeable misdiagnosis (~40%); (ii) this
stratification of patients is entirely blind to the underlying pathology. To
address both issues, we employed diffusion probabilistic tractography to
assess projections from thalamic nuclei in 8 MCS plus (+) patients, who
exhibit high-level behavioral responses, 8 MCS minus (-) patients, who
only show low-level responses, and 8 VS patients. Evaluation of thalamo-cortical connectivity revealed more connections from the lateral-group
nuclei to prefrontal, motor, and sensory regions in MCS+, as compared to
VS. Additionally, tractography maps from thalamic nuclei were used as
patterns in a logistic regression classification scheme. Using the ventral
lateral nucleus’ whole-brain tractography maps as patterns, a leave-twopatients-out cross-validation correctly classified 6/8 VS patients and 7/8
MCS+ patients. This classification relied mostly on increased thalamo-frontal connections in MCS+ patients, as compared to VS. These results suggest
that DTI combined with machine learning classification may facilitate the
diagnostic distinction between VS and subcategories of MCS by uncovering the neural markers and pathological changes underlying disorders of
consciousness.

E119
STABILITY OF THE SULCAL PATTERN OF THE ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX FROM CHILDHOOD TO ADULTHOOD: A LARGE
SCALE LONGITUDINAL MRI STUDY Cloélia Tissier1,2,3, Grégoire Borst1,2,

Marion Plaze3, Clara Fischer4, Jean-François Mangin4, Marie-Odile Krebs3, Nitin
Gogtay5, Jay Giedd5, Olivier Houdé1,2,6, Amin Raznahan5, Arnaud Cachia1,2,3;
1
Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 2CNRS U3521,
Laboratory for the Psychology of Child Development and Education, Sorbonne,
Paris, France, 3Center of Psychiatry and Neurosciences, INSERM U894, Paris,
France, 4Computer-Assisted Neuroimaging Laboratory, Neurospin, I2BM, CEA,
France, 5Child Psychiatry Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda,
MD, USA., 6Institut Universitaire de France, France — Brain imaging have
provided compelling evidence that differences in cognitive abilities are
correlated to quantitative differences in the brain anatomy (e.g. cortical
ribbon thickness or the cortical surface area). These correlations reveal
the dynamic interplay between brain maturation and learning/training
on cognitive development but provide no information on the early constraints imposed by the structure of the brain on cognitive development.
Recent works suggest that the sulcal pattern, a qualitative feature of the
cortex anatomy determined in utero, provide such information. However,
a strong assumption is that the sulcal pattern is a stable qualitative feature
of the cortex anatomy not affected by maturation and learning occurring
after birth. To provide evidence for this assumption, we studied the sulcal
pattern of 75 healthy subjects at the NIMH from childhood to adulthood
(263 MRIs; age range: 7.88-32.8 y.o.). Analyses were focused on the anterior
cingulate cortex which can present two distinct sulcal patterns: a “single”
type, with only the cingulate sulcus, or a “double parallel” type, with an
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

187

Poster Session E	
additional paracingulate sulcus (PCS). The ACC sulcal pattern type was
classified from visual inspections of the three-dimensional, mesh-based
reconstructions of the cortical folds. We found that the ACC sulcal patterns
remained exactly the same between the baseline and the latest scan for all
subjects (kappa=1). Our findings provide the first evidence that the sulcal
pattern of the ACC is stable over the course of brain development, and
therefore constitute a good candidate to investigate the early neurodevelopmental constraints on normal and pathological cognitive abilities.

E120
NEUROANATOMICAL AND COGNITIVE CORRELATES OF HIGH
DRINKING LEVELS IN VETERANS DIAGNOSED WITH ALCOHOLISM AND PTSD Arkadiy Maksimovskiy1,4, Regina E. McGlinchey1,2, Cather-

ine B. Fortier1,2, David Salat1,3, William Milberg1,2, Marlene Oscar-Berman4,5;
1
Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center (GRECC) and the Translational
Research Center for TBI and Stress-Related Disorders (TRACTS), VA Boston
Healthcare System, 2Harvard Medical School, 3A. A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, 4Boston University School of Medicine, 5VA Boston Healthcare System — Alcoholism frequently occurs in returning U.S. Veterans
and is often comorbid with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). This
study investigated the relationship between white matter abnormalities
and neuropsychological performance in Operation Enduring Freedom
and/or Operation Iraqi Freedom (OEF/OIF) alcoholic Veterans. Our two
primary aims were: (1) to examine the relationship of alcoholism to brain
structure and function, while controlling for the potential effects of comorbid PTSD, and (2) to examine whether the effects of drinking are moderated
by the quantity of lifetime alcohol consumption. Our sample consisted of
71 deployed OEF/OIF Veterans stratified into four groups: alcoholics without PTSD, alcoholics with PTSD, participants with PTSD without comorbid
alcoholism, and control participants without alcoholism or PTSD. Participants were given an exensive neuropsychological and psychiatric assessment battery, as well as Magnetic Resonance Diffusion Tensor Imaging
(DT-MRI) scans. Results showed that disruption of executive functioning,
and abnormal fractional anisotropy (FA; a measure of axonal integrity)
within the frontal subcortical and dorsolateral frontal-parietal regions,
occurred independently of the effects of PTSD. Furthermore, these cognitive and neuronal alterations were unique to the most severe subgroup of
alcoholics who consumed the greatest amount of alcohol over the course
of their lifetime, as compared to the rest of the sample. Axonal integrity
within this subgroup, in regions underlying the frontal subcortical area,
was shown to be decreased independently of cognitive changes. Integrity
of axons underlying the dorsolateral frontal-parietal region, however, was
increased. We hypothesized that the latter finding may be a compensatory
mechanism for executive dysfunction.

E121
HEALTHY ELDERS CARRYING THE APOLIPOPROTEIN-E Ε ALLELE
EXHIBIT GREATER BRAIN ATROPHY OVER 5 YEARS THAN
NON-CARRIERS Katherine E. Reiter1, Kristy A. Nielson1,2, Sally Durger-

ian2, John L. Woodard3, Michael Seidenberg4, J. Carson Smith5, Christina M.
Figueroa1, Kathleen E. Hazlett1, Christina Kay4, Cassandra D. Kandah4, Michael
A. Sugarman3, Andria L. Norman3, Stephen M. Rao6; 1Marquette University,
2
Medical College of Wisconsin, 3Wayne State University, 4Rosalind Franklin University, 5University of Maryland, 6Cleveland Clinic — Few studies have investigated long-term longitudinal changes in brain structure or cognitive function in healthy elders at risk for Alzheimer’s disease (AD). The goal of the
current project was to examine long-term changes in brain volume, using
MRI, as a function of Apolipoprotein-E ε allele inheritance. Sixty-seven
elders were examined with MRI and neuropsychological testing at baseline and 5 years later. Regional grey matter volumes (in percent intracranial
volume) were computed by Freesurfer (v. 5.1, http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu) for both timepoints and subtracted to change scores. Principal
components analysis on regional change scores revealed 6 components.
Two components significantly differed between gene groups (demographics covaried): a bilateral hippocampal component and a general, bilateral
medial and dorsal cortical component (e.g., cingulate, precuneus, superior
parietal, pre/post central, caudal middle frontal, paracentral, lingual gyri)
showed greater 5-yr atrophy in ε carriers. Although all participants were
cognitively intact at baseline, regression showed the combination of Îµ4,

188

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
baseline Mini-Mental State Exam, and baseline Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Task learning performance (Trials 1-5) significantly predicted medial-dorsal volume change over 5 years. Hippocampal volume change was
predicted only by ε. Thus, long-term longitudinal measures revealed that
large-scale volume reductions occur in those who carry the Apolipoprotein-E ε allele, especially in medial and dorsal brain regions, some of which
are commonly associated with the Default Mode Network. These reductions significantly exceed those exhibited by comparable non-carrier elders.
More, lower-normal cognitive screening and learning scores are predictive
of greater future global atrophy, suggesting that such individuals might
benefit from early interventions.

E122
BRAIN SURFACE CURVATURE-BASED BIOMARKERS FOR DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA Danielle D. Sliva1, Nora M. Raschle12, Jennifer Zuk1,

Sara A. Smith1, Bryce Becker1, Barbara Peysakhovich1, P. Ellen Grant12, Nadine
Gaab12, Rudolph Pienaar12; 1Boston Children’s Hospital, 2Harvard Medical
School — Magnetic resonance imaging studies have reported structural
differences in language-related brain regions in children and adults with
developmental dyslexia (DD), as well as children with a familial risk for
DD, using measures such as gray matter volume, cortical thickness and cortical surface area. Variation in cortical surface folding is implicit within all
of these measures, yet can be better characterized by using surface curvature-based measures. In this study, variations in cortical surface-based curvature measures were examined in adults with (aDD+) and without (aDD-)
a diagnosis of DD, children with (cDD+) and without (cDD-) a diagnosis
of DD, and pre-reading children with (FHD+) and without (FHD-) a familial risk for DD. We describe changes in cortical surface curvature between
groups to explore whether curvature measures can be used as a more sensitive biomarker for DD than prevailing structural measures. Cortical surface
reconstructions were generated using FreeSurfer, and curvature functions
were computed at each vertex. A distribution of values was then obtained
for each subject, for each curvature function, across: (1) regions defined as
the cortical lobes; and (2) regions defined at the intersection between lobar
regions. Finally, a cluster-based analysis was performed to compare distributions across groups. Statistically significant differences were observed
across a varying range of curvature measures between aDD+ and aDD-,
cDD+ and cDD-, and FHD+ and FHD- groups in several regions of interest.
These results suggest that cortical surface folding may provide a sensitive
biomarker for DD over a broad range of ages and levels of reading development.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition
E123
ATTENTION MODULATES EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL INDICES
OF THE PRECEDENCE EFFECT Benjamin H. Zobel1, Richard L. Freyman1,

Lisa D. Sanders1; 1University of Massachusetts Amherst — When presented
with two identical sounds from different locations separated by a short
onset asynchrony, listeners report hearing a single source at the location
of the lead sound, a phenomenon called the precedence effect (Wallach et
al., 1949; Haas, 1951). When the onset asynchrony is above echo threshold,
listeners report hearing the lead and lag sounds as separate sources with
distinct locations. Event-related potential (ERP) studies have shown that
perception of separate sound sources is accompanied by an object-related
negativity (ORN) 100-250 ms after onset and a late posterior positivity (LP)
300-500 ms after onset (Sanders et al., 2008; Sanders et al., 2011). The current
study tested whether these ERP effects are modulated by attention. Clicks
were presented in lead/lag pairs at and around listeners’ echo thresholds
while in separate blocks they 1) attended to the sounds and reported if
they heard the lag sound as a separate source, and 2) performed a difficult 2-back visual task. Replicating previous results, when attention was
directed to the sounds, an ORN and LP were observed for click pairs 1 ms
above compared to 1 ms below echo threshold. In contrast, when attention
was directed away from the sounds to the visual task, neither the ORN nor
the LP was evident. Instead, click pairs 1 ms above echo threshold elicited
an anterior positivity 250-450 ms after onset. These results indicate that
attention modulates early perceptual processes in the precedence effect and
may be critical for auditory object formation under these conditions.

2014 Annual Meeting	

E124
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AUDITORY SENSORY GATING AND
HIGHER-LEVEL COGNITIVE FUNCTION Monica Hill1, Carly Yadon2;
1

Drexel University, 2Missouri State University — Sensory gating refers to the
brain’s ability to regulate responsiveness to incoming sensory stimuli.
This mechanism represents an important step in information processing because irrelevant stimuli are filtered out, allowing the brain to allot
greater resources to relevant sensory material. Impaired sensory gating is
prevalent in many clinical disorders (e.g., schizophrenia). However, poor
gating is also common in otherwise healthy individuals. There is a dearth
of studies conducted solely on this population; consequently, the effects of
impaired sensory gating on healthy individuals are not well understood.
Because cognitive fragmentation may occur with poor sensory gating, we
hypothesized that participants with poor sensory gating would perform
more poorly on an executive function battery. Behavioral data were collected using the Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System (D-KEFS) and
scalp-derived electrophysiological data were recorded (Cz) during a
paired-tone event-related potential paradigm. Results are reported from 43
university students who met inclusion criteria. As expected, our sample
exhibited the typical sensory gating response (P50 component amplitude of
second tone was less than amplitude of first tone), t(42) = 9.15, p < .001. Participants with better P50 gating received higher overall executive function
scores, r(41) = -.316, p = .039, and exhibited more efficient problem-solving
behaviors, r(41) = -.400, p = .008. These results suggest that sensory gating
and executive function may be related. Understanding how sensory gating
is related to cognitive function in healthy individuals will allow for greater
understanding of how it may relate to psychopathology.

E125
RESTING STATE FUNCTIONAL NETWORKS IN TONE-DEAFNESS

Mary Kathryn Abel1,2, H. Charles Li2,3, Gottfried Schlaug2,3, Psyche Loui4;
1
Harvard College, 2Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 3Harvard Medical
School, 4Wesleyan University — Although music perception and production
is ubiquitous across cultures and from a young age, a subset of the population cannot perceive and produce fine-grained differences in musical pitch.
This disorder is commonly referred to as tone-deafness (TD), also known
as congenital amusia. The affected brain network includes superior temporal gyrus (STG), middle temporal gyrus (MTG), and inferior frontal (IFG)
regions, connected via the arcuate fasciculus, a white matter tract. Here
we ask what intrinsic functional neural substrates might be underlying
the auditory-motor system and its possible disruptions in tone-deafness.
Twenty subjects (10 TD) underwent resting state functional connectivity
MRI. Rs-fcMRI data showed decreased functional connectivity between the
IFG and STG in TD subjects, as well as decreased functional connectivity
between the right and left STG/STS. Interestingly, TD subjects showed
increased functional connectivity between the frontal and the occipital
lobe, suggesting visual compensatory mechanisms for this auditory deficit. In addition, graph theory analyses on pairwise functional correlations
obtained from atlas-based parcellations of the rs-fcMRI data showed that
TD subjects had decreased degrees, clustering, strength, and local efficiency
of functional correlations across the whole brain. Taken together, results
suggest that tone-deafness results from intrinsic regional disruption of network connectivity with additional effects in other brain regions, accompanied by possible compensatory mechanisms in the visual modality.

E126
EVIDENCE FOR GRADED REPRESENTATION OF VOICE ONSET
TIME IN AUDITORY CORTEX Nathaniel D. Anderson1, Joseph C. Toscano1,

Monica Fabiani1, Gabriele Gratton1, Susan M. Garnsey1; 1Beckman Institute,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — We investigated how speech
sounds are coded in auditory cortex using the event-related optical signal
(EROS), a non-invasive neuroimaging method that allows neural activity to
be observed with high spatial and temporal resolution (Gratton & Fabiani,
2001). A classic problem in speech perception concerns how listeners transform continuous acoustic cues (e.g., differences in voice onset time [VOT])
into discrete linguistic categories (e.g., phonemes like /b/ and /p/). Listeners’ behavioral responses are non-linear, with acoustic differences near
phoneme boundaries showing larger effects on categorization. This has
been taken as evidence that speech is perceived categorically. However,
previous ERP work has shown that early stages of perception are continu-

Poster Session E
ous: auditory N1 amplitude changes linearly with VOT, showing no effect
of phoneme categories (Toscano, McMurray, Dennhardt, and Luck, 2010).
The current study sought to localize this effect to determine whether it represents the way listeners code speech sounds in auditory cortex. Subjects
heard stimuli varying in VOT between the words “beach” and “peach”.
EROS responses were measured using a montage of 40 near-infrared
sources and 24 detectors attached to the scalp. Neural activity was measured by changes in the phase delay of light scattered back to the scalp
surface. A significant linear trend across the VOT continuum was found in
posterior STG around 96-120 ms post-stimulus onset. These results provide
an online non-invasive demonstration that acoustic features in speech are
coded continuously in auditory cortical areas.

E127
FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION OF THE HUMAN AUDITORY FIELDS:
ACTIVATION OF AUDITORY CORTEX IN A PATIENT WITH AUDITORY
AGNOSIA FROM TRAUMA TO THE INFERIOR COLLICULUS Oren

Poliva1, Patricia EG Bestelmeyer2, Michelle Hall3, Janet Bultitude4, Robert D
Rafal5; 1Bangor University — An fMRI investigation mapped the auditory
fields that were selectively activated, or unresponsive to sounds, in a young
woman with auditory agnosia due to a lesion to the inferior colliculus.
The patient was unable to recognize speech or environmental sounds (or
reliably distinguish them from each other) but discrimination was greatly
facilitated by context. Auditory temporal resolution was severely compromised. Discrimination of words differing in voice onset time was more
impaired than for words differing in place of articulation. Words presented
to the right ear were extinguished with dichotic presentation; and auditory
stimuli in the right hemifield were mis-localised to the left. Correlation of
selective fMRI field activations with her symptoms suggested that 1) her
auditory perceptual deficit is primarily due to bilateral unresponsiveness
to sounds of the anterior STG and STS (auditory ventral streams); 2) her
partially spared leftward-localization, audio-visual integration and phonemic perception are due to intact processing in the right posterior STG (right
auditory dorsal stream); 3) the separation into ventral and dorsal streams
occurs earlier than often hypothesized, already at the primary auditory
cortex, with area hR projecting to the anterior STG, and hA1 to the middle-posterior STG; 4) voicing is processed in the ventral stream. We further
conclude that auditory agnosia patients are capable of segregating sounds
into auditory objects (i.e. syllables) but are impaired at perceiving the
details of each auditory object (i.e. phonemes). Auditory agnosia patients
are also capable of acoustic imagination and, therefore, have intact inner
language.

E128
NEGATIVE AUDITORY CONDITIONING IN DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTER Adrianna Krul1, Jessyka Venchkoski1, Alexa Gammo1, Alexa Decker1,

Julian Keenan1; 1Montclair State University — In previous studies, adult Drosophila melanogaster have been conditioned employing classical Pavlovian
methods such that a positive UCS (e.g., sugar) elicits a positive CR (e.g.,
proboscis-extension reflex) following repeated paring with an auditory
stimuli (CS+). The purpose of this research experiment was to study the
abilities of third-instar Drosophila melanogaster to associatively learn with
auditory stimuli. Five different hertz levels (0, 50, 100, 250, and 500) were
used as the conditioned stimuli, while caffeine served as the negative, gustatory, unconditioned stimulus (UCS-). The auditory tone was placed over
the half the petri dish containing caffeine, while the other half had only
agar. Data was obtained by recording the placement of the larvae on an
agar petri dish at timed intervals following five conditioning trials. Primary
analysis of the data shows two trends. 1.) The average location of the larvae
on the petri dish was farther away from the tone at 100 and 250Hz, which
are known to be in the auditory detection range of melanogaster, This result
indicates that the larvae were successfully conditioned at 100 and 250Hz
2.) The average movement of the larvae in the petri dish was towards the
tone as time progressed. This second trend may indicate that with the 3
minute test trial, melanogaster discover that there is no longer a UCS- and
CS- relationship. These data support the hypothesis (and our previous finding using UCS+ and CS+) that Drosophila melanogaster have the ability to
be classically conditioned to an auditory stimulus.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

189

Poster Session E	

E129
THE ROLE OF THE INTRAPARIETAL SULCUS IN SYSTEMATIC
RHYTHMIC TRANSFORMATIONS Mary Elizabeth Sutherland1,2,3, Robert

J. Zatorre1,2,3, Sonja A. Kotz4,5; 1Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University. Montreal, 2BRAMS International Laboratory for Brain, Music and Sound
Research. Montreal, 3CRBLM Centre for Research on Brain, Language and
Music. Montreal, 4Max Plank Institute for Cognitive and Human Brain Sciences,
5
School of Psychological Sciences, University of Manchester — This functional magnetic resonance imaging study deals with the problem of constancy, our ability to recognize objects as the same even under different
transformations, in the musical domain. Specifically, we are interested in
how people can recognize a rhythm as the same even when it is played at
different speeds. This skill of systematically transforming auditory stimuli
has previously been investigated in the realm of melodic transposition and
melodic reversal. These studies have shown both functional and structural
changes in the intraparietal sulcus, a region known to be involved systematic transformations in other modalities such as mental rotation. Therefore,
we hypothesized that the systematic transformation of purely rhythmic
stimuli would also recruit the intraparietal sulcus. In order to investigate
this hypothesis, we developed a rhythm transformation task. The behavioral results showed that the different tempo condition was more difficult
than the same tempo condition (p < .001). These differences were reflected
in the functional imaging data, which showed that recognizing a rhythm
as the same or different when it was played at a different tempo led to an
increased BOLD response in bilateral intraparietal sulcus and superior temporal gyrus. Additionally, we found an increased response in dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex, an area involved in working memory. Taken together, our
results expand the role of the IPS in systematic auditory transformations to
the rhythmic domain, adding to the evidence that this area is responsible
for the systematic transformation of perceptual information across different
reference frames regardless of modality or of stimulus features.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Multisensory
E130
MULTIMODAL CORTICAL MECHANISMS IN SOUND PROCESSING Garrett Cardon1, Anu Sharma1; 1University of Colorado at Boulder —

Hearing occurs via both air conduction and bone conduction. That is, sound
travels to the cochlea both through the air and skin and bone, via sound
waves or vibration, respectively. Having arrived at the cochlea, air-conducted and bone-conducted stimuli are transduced into neural impulses
that are processed by the brain as sound. Thus, it is plausible that, in addition to auditory processing, the somatosensory system is also involved in
sound perception. The aim of this project was to test the hypothesis that
the somatosensory cortex is involved in sound processing. In this study,
we examined the cortical sources of activity underlying air- vs. bone-conducted signals. Using 128 channel high-density EEG, we evaluated cortical responses to a 250 Hz tone presented via loudspeakers and a clinically
used bone oscillator. Independent components analysis (ICA) and current
density reconstruction (i.e., sLORETA) revealed activation from both the
auditory and somatosensory cortical systems in sound processing, though
activity from the auditory cortex dominated the response. These data provide evidence of highly synchronous cooperation between the auditory
and somatosensory systems during sound processing. Our results may
have implications for clinical processes and research regarding cross-modal
interaction between these two cortical systems in patients with hearing loss.
Supported by NIH-NIDCD F31 DC013218-01A1 to G.C and NIH-NIDCD
R01DC0625 to A.S.

E131
MULTISENSORY LEARNING AND INTERATION IN A FIRST-PERSON FISHMAN GAME Yile Sun1, Barbara Shinn-Cunningham2, David

Somers2, Robert Sekuler1; 1Brandeis University, 2Boston University — Integration of Information from multiple modalities shapes human cognition,
but the limiting factors and mechanisms are poorly understood. We have
examined multisensory integration in a first-person video game in which
players encountered rapidly-swimming fish belonging to two different species, and made speeded categorization of each fish’s species. In three exper-

190

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
iments, fish from the two species were visually identical, but differed in rate
at which they oscillate in size. Each fish could be accompanied by a broadband sound that was amplitude modulated at either 1) the same frequency
(and in synchrony with) the fish’s size oscillation, or 2) the frequency that
would have matched the visual oscillation of a fish of the other species. This
made a fish’s temporal auditory and visual modulations either congruent
or incongruent. To increase chances that audio-visual modulations might
be perceptually integrated, we chose frequencies (6 and 8HZ) similar to
speech’s auditory and visual modulations: syllable rate (auditory modulation) and the rate at which the mouth opens and closes (visual modulation).
Throughout, players were instructed to categorize fish solely on the visual
dimension. Two experiments included control conditions in which each
fish was accompanied by no sound or by a broadband sound not temporally modulated. Congruent audio-visual modulation produced responses
faster and more accurate than did incongruent audio-visual modulation.
Moreover, control condition’s responses were indistinguishable from ones
with incongruent audio-visual modulations. Our results demonstrate that
temporally-correlated congruent information from multiple modalities can
facilitate perceptual-based decisions.

E132
INTERACTIONS IN LOWER-LEVEL CORTICAL AREAS CAN EXPLAIN
AUDIO-VISUAL ILLUSIONS: A NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL STUDY

Cristiano Cuppini1, Elisa Magosso1, Nadia Bolognini2,3, Giuseppe Vallar2,3,
Mauro Ursino1; 1University of Bologna, 2University of Milano-Bicocca, 3IRCCS
Istituto Auxologico Italiano — The ability of the brain to integrate information from different sensory channels is fundamental to perceive the external
world. Recent experimental findings suggest that multisensory interactions
occur in lower-level cortical areas at early processing stages, contrary to the
classical idea of independent sensory processing streams. The mechanisms
underlying these early processes and the organization of the underlying
circuitries are still a matter of debate. The aim of the present work is to
investigate audiovisual interactions by means of a simple neural network
consisting of two layers of visual and auditory neurons. We suggest that the
spatial and temporal aspects of audio-visual illusions, such as the Shams
illusion and the ventriloquism effect, can be explained within this simple
framework, based on two main assumptions: auditory and visual neurons
communicate via direct excitatory synapses; spatio-temporal receptive
fields are different in the two modalities, auditory processing exhibiting a
higher temporal resolution, visual processing a higher spatial acuity. With
these assumptions, the model is able: i) to simulate the sound-induced flash
fission illusion; ii) to account for other audio-visual illusions, such as the
sound-induced flash fusion and the ventriloquism illusions; iii) to predict
that visual and auditory stimuli are combined optimally in multisensory
integration. In sum, the proposed model provides a unifying summary of
spatio-temporal audio-visual interactions, able to account for a wide set of
empirical findings, and to represent a framework for future experiments.

E133
INFANTS ARE SENSITIVE TO AUDIOVISUAL SPEECH ASYNCHRONY Kathleen Shaw1, Lauren Powers1, Heather Bortfeld1; 1University of

Connecticut — Speech perception is multimodal, with listeners receiving
information from both the auditory and visual speech signals simultaneously. Researchers have suggested that audiovisual integration develops
more slowly than unimodal, with children being less sensitive than adults
to asynchronous audio and visual signals (Hillock et al., 2011). However,
research with infants has relied on simple stimuli, such as single CV-syllables (Lewkowicz, 2010) when assessing audiovisual sensitivity. The current
study provided a more ecologically-valid test by exposing infants to tri-syllabic words that were audiovisually synchronous or asynchronous. Twenty
infants, 5-9-months of age, were presented with two counter-balanced
video blocks, one synchronous and the other asynchronous. For synchronous blocks, audio and visual signals were simultaneous. In asynchronous
blocks, the audio signal preceded the visual signal by 300ms. Infants were
median-split into younger (M = 6.23 months) and older (M = 8.2 months)
age groups. A 2 (age: younger, older) x 2 (word type: visible, less visible)
x 2 (proportion of looking: synchronous, asynchronous) mixed-model
ANOVA was conducted. There was a main effect of word and marginal
interaction of age and synchrony, with both groups of infants preferring to
look at visible articulations regardless of audiovisual synchrony (p < .05)
and older infants looking longer to asynchronous presentations, p = .054. In

2014 Annual Meeting	
contrast to previous work, we suggest that sensitivity to audiovisual timing
is driven by the causal relationships between articulators and the sounds
produced. Future directions include assessing hemodynamic responses to
asynchronous presentations to determine the neural correlates of audiovisual perception in infancy.

E134
IMPACT OF VISUAL MIRROR THERAPY ON PHANTOM LIMB
PAIN FOLLOWING AMPUTATION: VISUAL RESPONSIVENESS IN
SOMATOMOTOR CORTEX Annie Chan1,2, Emily Bilger2, Sarah Griffin1, Vik-

toria Elkis2, Sharon Weeks2, Lindsay Hussey-Anderson2, Katie Hughes1, Mikias
Wolde1, Howard Gilmer3, Paul Pasquina1, Jack Tsao1, Chris Baker2; 1Walter
Reed National Military Medical Center, 2National Institute of Mental Health,
3
National Rehabilitation Hospital — Almost 90% of amputees experience
phantom limb pain (PLP) in their missing limb. Visual input from mirror
therapy has been widely reported to reduce PLP - amputees place a mirror
between their missing and intact limbs, then simultaneously move both the
intact and phantom limbs while viewing the reflected image of the intact
limb in the mirror. Research suggests that deprivation of somatosensory
input can lead to cortical reorganization in somatosensory cortex, and it has
been proposed that PLP may be a consequence of such reorganization. We
investigated the impact of visual input on PLP and cortical reorganization
in amputees undergoing four weeks of mirror therapy. Eleven lower limb
amputees and controls completed three fMRI scans at two-week intervals.
After the first scan, amputees began daily mirror therapy (15-mins) and
recorded daily pain experiences. During each scan, we measured activation elicited by visual presentation of hands and feet. We also measured
somatomotor activation for the intact and amputated limb as well as adjacent body regions. We observed differences in visually-elicited activations
that were modulated over the course of mirror therapy. Visual presentation
of a foot (but not hand) corresponding to the amputated limb produced
stronger activation of somatomotor cortex than in controls, and the strength
of this activation diminished following therapy. These results suggest
that removal of somatosensory input due to limb amputation unmasks
responses or inhibitory inputs in somatosensory regions, which may contribute to or be a marker for PLP, and that mirror therapy helps to reverse
these changes.

E135
SPACE AND TIME IN THE PARIETAL CORTEX: FMRI EVIDENCE FOR
A NEURAL ASYMMETRY Tom Gijssels1,2, Shirley-Ann Rueschemeyer3,4,

Roberto Bottini5, Daniel Casasanto1; 1University of Chicago, USA, 2Free University of Brussels, Belgium, 3University of York, UK, 4Donders Institute for
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, Netherlands,
5
University of Milan-Bicocca, Italy — How are space and time related in the
brain? This study contrasts two proposals that make different predictions
about the interaction between spatial and temporal magnitudes. Whereas
A Theory Of Magnitude (ATOM) implies that space and time are symmetrically related, Metaphor Theory predicts that they are asymmetrically
related. Numerous behavioral experiments show asymmetric cross-dimensional interference between space and time in magnitude comparison or
reproduction tasks. Here we investigated whether space and time modulate
activity in the same neural structures in the inferior parietal cortex (IPC),
and whether this activity is symmetric or asymmetric across domains. We
used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to measure participants’ neural activity while they made spatial and temporal judgments on
the same visual stimuli. The behavioral results replicated earlier observations of a space-time asymmetry: Temporal judgments were more strongly
influenced by irrelevant spatial information than vice versa. The fMRI data
indicated that encoding space and time drives the Blood Oxygen Level-Dependent (BOLD) signal in overlapping clusters in the IPC and that, consistent with Metaphor Theory, this activation was asymmetric: The BOLD
signal in the shared region of IPC was higher during temporal encoding
than during spatial encoding. We consider three possible interpretations of
this neural asymmetry, based on three possible functions of IPC.

Poster Session E

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
E136
INFLUENCE OF VISUAL SPATIAL FREQUENCY CONTENT AND
COLOR PROPERTIES ON PREFERENCE OF NATURAL AND URBAN
SCENES Omid Kardan1, Emre Demiralp2, John Jonides3, Marc Berman1; 1The
University of South Carolina, 2Adobe Systems, Inc., 3The University of Michigan — Previous research has shown that interacting with natural environments such as walking in a park or viewing nature images can have a
beneficial effect on memory, attention and mood (Berman et al., 2008; 2012).
However, there has been little research aimed to uncover the properties
of natural environments that may lead to such benefits. In this study we
explored the relationships between visual spatial frequency content and
color properties of images from natural and urban scenes and related them
with participants’ preferences for those images. Variables related to spatial
frequency and color content from a corpus of two hundred images with
mixed natural and man-made content were measured. Regression analyses showed that more high-frequency content, fewer straight edges, more
color saturation, and less hue predict greater liking. To further investigate
the influence of semantic categories (nature vs. urban), we performed the
same analysis for another set of images consisting of 50 high-natural and
50 high-urban scenes. Our results showed that more high-frequency content and color saturation predict more liking for the images in the urban
category (replicating the previous results). However, more hue, and less
high-frequency content predict greater preference in the images of nature
scenes suggesting a shift of preference toward low frequency semantic content such as sky, mountains, and sea in this category. While preference does
not necessarily equate to an environment leading to memory and attention
benefits, this study provides a first-step in attempting to uncover the properties of natural environments that may lead to salubrious effects.

E137
MAPPING THE EMERGENCE OF CONJUNCTIVE OBJECT REPRESENTATIONS IN VISUAL CORTEX WITH FMRI Rosemary Cowell1, John

Serences2; 1University of Massachusetts Amherst, 2University of California San
Diego — In the ‘standard model’ of object recognition, object representations are built up in stages from elemental building blocks: each successive
stage in visual cortex represents conjunctions of the features represented at
the previous stage. We tested this model with fMRI, by measuring BOLD
activation in visual cortex elicited by hierarchically composed visual stimuli. Stimuli were constructed by defining binary visual features (e.g., low
vs. high spatial frequency), combining those into simple conjunctions,
and creating complex conjunctions by combining the simple conjunctions.
We performed multi-voxel pattern analysis on BOLD activation patterns
to assess conjunction information in each region of visual cortex. To do
so, we measured the accuracy of classifying BOLD activation patterns at
two levels: (1) the feature-level (2-way classification problems in which
the class of a stimulus is defined by its value on a particular binary visual
feature), and (2) the conjunction-level (a 16-way problem in which each of
the 16 unique stimuli forms a class of its own). Next, we compared the
measured conjunction-level accuracy with the conjunction-level accuracy
that was predicted from the measured feature-level accuracies for the features comprising the conjunctions. If a brain region contains no information about conjunctions, the measured conjunction-level accuracy should
be no greater than predicted by combining the individual feature accuracies. The measured conjunction-level classification accuracy exceeded the
conjunction-level accuracy predicted from features by a greater amount in
later cortical stations (e.g., V2) than in earlier stations (e.g., V1), implying
an increase in ‘conjunction knowledge’ with progression along the ventral
pathway.

E138
STIMULATING THE RIGHT FRONTAL EYE FIELD AT BETA FREQUENCIES: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES AND IMPACT
ON CONSCIOUS PERCEPTION. A PILOT TMS-EEG STUDY Marine

Vernet1, Romain Quentin1, Lorena Chanes1, Antoni Valero-Cabré1; 1Centre de
Recherche de l’Institut du Cerveau et la Moelle (CRICM), Paris, France, CNRS
UMR 7225-INSERM UMRS 975-UPMC — Long considered noise, ongoing
fluctuations of neural oscillations are now believed to be functionally releCognitive Neuroscience Society

191

Poster Session E	
vant. Rhythmic neurostimulation techniques such as transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) recently emerged as unique tools to explore such causal
role of ongoing oscillations in visual cognition. We recently showed that
uniform 30 Hz TMS bursts delivered pre-target onset to the right frontal eye field (FEF) increased conscious visual sensitivity. Using the same
paradigm, the present study combines TMS with electroencephalography
(EEG) to elucidate if: (1) uniform TMS bursts are indeed able to entrain
beta oscillations; (2) their electrophysiological signature differs from that of
non-uniform bursts with random frequencies; and (3) differences in baseline activity may influence the effects of neurostimulation. Healthy subjects
performed a visual detection task with near threshold Gabor patches. Participants indicated if the target appeared left or right of a fixation cross, or
was not perceived. Prior to target onset, uniform 30 Hz bursts of 4 pulses
were delivered on the right FEF. The behavioral and EEG signature was
compared to the one evoked by non-uniform bursts with random frequencies. Preliminary results suggest that uniform bursts increased visual performance and entrained beta oscillations via an increase of inter-trial coherence, suggesting a mechanism of phase alignment. In contrast, non-uniform
bursts entrained oscillations in several frequency bands. Finally, the level
of pre-target beta activity may be predictive of the ability of TMS bursts to
enhance visual detection. Thus, TMS-EEG not only allows demonstrating
the mechanism of TMS facilitation but also predicting its magnitude.

E139
PERCEPTUAL INFLUENCES ON BLOCK DESIGN TASK PERFORMANCE IN AUTISM Victoria M Doobay1, Vanessa Bao1, Domenico Tullo1,

Armando Bertone1,2; 1McGill University, 2Université de Montréal — Individuals
with autism recurrently demonstrate faster and more accurate performance
(cognitive peaks) on the Block Design Task (BDT) subtest of the Wechsler
Intelligence Scale. Using a computerized version of the BDT, the current
study assessed whether this characteristic peak originates from a perceptual (bottom-up) origin by manipulating the visual attributes defining the
component blocks of the BDT. Secondly, this study assessed whether there
is a relationship in performance difference between manual (traditional)
and computerized measures of the BDT. Twenty participants with and
without autism completed both traditional and computerized versions of
the BDT. For the computerized version, participants were asked to match
a centrally presented target design with one of 4 surrounding probes as
quickly and accurately as possible, presented on a touch-sensitive screen.
The visual attributes of the blocks were manipulated: traditional, red/
white; luminance-defined, black/white; or texture-defined blocks. The perceptual coherence of blocks, was also manipulated, where low-coherence
(LC) designs necessitated increased local analysis relative to high-coherence (HC) designs. Reaction times in the LC condition were significantly
lower in the autism group (i.e., cognitive peak) for the black/white luminance condition only. Correlations between the manual and computerized
BDT performance were negative, demonstrating that there is no relationship between performances on these two versions of the test. These results
indicate that the characteristic, higher-level visuo-spatial performance in
autism, as exemplified by cognitive peaks, may have a perceptual (bottom-up) rather than cognitive (top-down) origin. These results can inform
clinical decisions regarding the perceptual and cognitive strengths in individuals with autism.

E140
EXPLORING THE REPRESENTATIONAL GEOMETRY OF OBJECT
REPRESENTATION IN THE VENTRAL STREAM USING BRAIN-BEHAVIOR CORRELATIONS Michael Cohen1, Talia Konkle1, Ken Nakayama1,

George A Alvarez; 1Department of Psychology, Harvard University — The
visual processing stream contains regions that selectively respond to different objects, and the representational geometry within each region can
be measured by the similarity of responses across different items. Here we
asked if interference between objects in a perceptual task is predicted by
the representational geometry across different regions of the visual system.
Participants performed a visual search task with eight categories. We measured the time to find a target from one category among distractors from a
different category, (e.g. one face among seven chairs), for all possible category pairings. These reaction times were used as an index of perceptual
similarity, yielding an 8x8 behavioral similarity matrix. Six new participants
underwent functional neuroimaging while viewing individual items from

192

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
each category. We computed the correlation in responses for all category
pairings, yielding an 8x8 neural similarity matrix for each region. We found
a significant correlations between behavioral and neural similarity in ventral-temporal (r=0.62), lateral-temporal (r=0.48), and dorsal-parietal cortex
(r=0.28), but not early visual cortex (r¬=-0.07). To explore the spatial locus,
each region was divided into ten ROIs based on overall voxel activity. The
correlations in these sub-regions remained high throughout ventral-temporal and lateral-temporal cortex (rs>0.39; Ps<0.05). This uniformity in the
brain-behavior correlations across the ventral stream is surprising given the
well-known differences in response selectivity, and suggests that different
regions of this cortex may be emphasizing different aspects of a common
perceptual feature space. Broadly, these results suggest that the representational geometry across high-level ventral visual cortex constrains object
perception.

E141
SHARK OR MARINE ANIMAL? DETECTION AND RECOGNITION
ACROSS CATEGORICAL LEVELS IN RSVP Carl Hagmann1, Mary

Potter2; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Massachusetts Institute of
Technology — Although pictured objects and scenes can be understood in a
brief glimpse, there is a debate about whether the categorical level at which
they are first encoded is the basic level proposed by Rosch (1976) or a superordinate level. Participants attempted to detect a target presented among
six pictures using RSVP at 80, 53, 27, or 13 ms/picture. The target was specified by one of 28 superordinate names (e.g., marine animal) or by a corresponding basic-level name (e.g., shark). The name appeared either before
or after the picture sequence, between groups. Detection (d’) was significantly above chance in all conditions, including 13 ms. There was a main
effect of presentation duration that did not interact with group or level.
Detection in the name-before group was more accurate with the basic-level
than the superordinate name, showing that specific advance information
facilitated visual encoding. In the name-after group the two levels did not
differ significantly, suggesting that encoding had occurred at the basic level
during presentation. The results are consistent with the claim that the basic
level is usually the entry level for object perception.

THINKING: Decision making
E142
NEURAL SYSTEMS INVOLVED IN RULE LEARNING AND SWITCHING Hillary Wehe1, Zhiya Liu2, Kurt Braunlich1, Carol Seger1; 1Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, Colorado, 2South China Normal University, Guangzhou,
China — In this study we explore the cognitive processes of hypothesis
testing, rule application, and rule switching in order to dissociate neural
networks active in each. During fMRI scanning, participants categorized
letter stimuli that could be sorted by eight individual features (e.g. color,
size, font). Participants had to learn which feature to sort by through feedback. Once each rule had been learned, subjects were cued via either negative feedback or visual cues to shift to a new rule. Learning was divided
into three phases: Shifting (orienting to the new task), Hypothesis Testing,
and Rule Application (correct responding after the rule was learned). Conditions were compared using the General Linear Model (GLM); overall,
frontoparietal networks and the basal ganglia were active during hypothesis testing, and ventral striatum during Shifting, Constrained principal
component analysis (CPCA) identified three primary networks involved
during the task. The first was most active during Shifting, and included
large regions of the lateral frontal cortex and superior parietal lobe. This
network may have been involved in switching to a hypothesis testing strategy and/or formulating a new hypothesis. The second extended across the
entire Hypothesis testing phase, and decreased during Rule Application.
It included regions of the inferior parietal lobe and medial parietal cortex.
A third network included areas commonly associated with the default network, including medial parietal and medial frontal cortex and the angular
gyrus. It increased in activity during Rule Application, consistent with participants being able to reduce their focus on the experimental task.

2014 Annual Meeting	

E143
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC IDENTIFICATION OF NEUROCOGNITVE DEFICITS WITHIN CONCUSSED ATHLETES Chan Hee

Lee1, Jessican Peterson1, Cheyenne Layman1, Karch Connors1, Jessica Bove1,
Joel Bish1; 1Ursinus College — Concussions can be the result of blunt force
or blow to the head. These often cause changes in the chemical balance
within the brain which in turn affect the behavior and cognitive ability of
affected individuals. The impairments differ in duration from a few hours,
to weeks or even months and years. Sports related activity is currently
the largest cause of concussions. This study used electroencephalography
(EEG) as well as cognitive/behavioral testing, to identify potential differences between student athletes with a history of concussion(s) and student
athletes without a history of concussion(s). During an EEG analysis, participants completed a series of tests intended to investigate impulse control
abilities and basic memory capacities. Using event-related potentials and
spectral analysis, the levels of brain bands (alpha, beta, theta, delta) over
frontal and parietal electrode sites of the brain were evaluated. Significant
lower levels of bands (theta, alpha, delta) within concussed athletes were
observed. Concussed individuals also exhibit slower reaction times to each
cognitive task. Additionally, significant correlations between the power of
the synchronized activity over the frontal lobes and reduced cognitive efficiency were exhibited particularly in those tasks requiring impulse control
and executive function. Previous research has shown theta and alpha bands
have been correlated in understanding inhibition to elicited responses.
Lower levels of theta bands may suggest a decreased inhibition to these
responses. Concussed individuals produce similar delta waveforms to
those that have a history of sleep deprivation and/or prolonged disturbed
sleep also previously shown to be a symptom of concussions.

E144
DOPAMINE MODULATES EFFORT- AND STAKE-INCENTIVISED
DECISION MAKING Trevor T-J Chong1,2, Valerie Bonnelle1, Sanjay Mano-

har1, Kai-Riin Veromann1, Kinan Muhammed2, Masud Husain1,2; 1Department
of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3UD, 2Nuffield
Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU
— Humans adapt the degree of effort they are willing to expend according
to the rewards they expect to receive. Data from animal studies suggest
dopamine might be a key neurotransmitter involved in such incentivised decision-making. Here, we examined the role of dopamine in choice
behaviour when participants are required to decide how much effort they
are willing to exert for different magnitudes of reward. Parkinson’s disease
patients (n=20) were tested ON and OFF their usual dopaminergic medication. On each trial, they had to decide whether they would be willing to
exert one of six pre-specified levels of effort (as measured by force exerted
on a hand-held dynamometer) to obtain one of six pre-specified stakes
that were offered. For each patient, we calculated both the effort level and
stake magnitude at which they were willing to exert the pre-specified force
on 50% of occasions (the Effort and Stake “ndifference Points”). Our key
finding was that patients had higher Effort Indifference Points and lower
Stake Indifference Points when ON their usual dopaminergic medications
relative to OFF. These findings are not explained by differences in physical strength between the two sessions. The results indicate that dopamine
increases the willingness of patients with Parkinson’s Disease to invest a
greater amount of effort for a given stake, and conversely lowers the stakes
for which patients are willing to expend a given amount of effort. Overall,
this demonstrates that dopamine can enhance motivation towards effortful
actions and willingness to work for reward in humans.

E145
VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN AMBIVALENT ECONOMIC DECISION-MAKING Linda Yu1, Sangil Lee1, Joseph Kable1; 1Uni-

versity of Pennsylvania — The ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) has
been implicated in calculation and comparison of the subjective value of
choice options, and in decreased susceptibility to contextual influences.
Patients with vmPFC damage show a slightly pronounced asymmetric
dominance effect, a well-known contextual influence on preference. It has
been hypothesized that the asymmetric dominance effect may be a rational
response to incomplete (or unknown) preferences. This raises the possibility that the asymmetric dominance effect in vmPFC patients arise from

Poster Session E
incomplete preferences. To further test this idea, we developed a series of
tasks to differentiate incompleteness from another form of ambivalence,
indifference (regarding options as equal in value). We trained healthy controls on two sets of symbols that corresponded to monetary amounts in different fictional currencies. They then had to make a series of choices within
symbols of the same currency (indifference), and across different currencies
without knowing the exchange rate between them (incompleteness). When
participants were presented with choices between equivalent amounts,
they were more likely to allow the computer to make their decisions for
them in the within-currency condition, but not in the across-currency condition. In addition, when they are presented with the choice between a
lower and a higher amount option, they were more likely to select the latter
in the within-currency condition compared to the between-currency condition. Ongoing work is exploring whether the choices of vmPFC patients
are more similar to the pattern associated with incomplete or indifferent
preferences.

E146
WHY THE NEXT BIG WIN WILL NOT HELP YOU STOP: ERP CORRELATES OF GAMBLING BEHAVIOR Kevin Alexander1, Heather Bruett1,

Dolores Cutler1, Andrew Leynes1; 1The College of New Jersey — Event-related
potentials (ERPs) were recorded during a simple gambling tasks in which
subjects wagered small amounts of money ($.05 or $.25) on each trial. On
a subset of trials, the outcome (gain or loss) was known before the wager,
and on another subset of trials they were forced to bet either the high or low
amount (no choice condition). All trials elicited an outcome related positive ERP (ORP) peaking at about 400 ms which was larger for gain relative
to loss trials; thereby, replicating previous ERP studies (e.g., Kamarajan et
al., 2009: BBS, 197, 62-76). Interestingly, this ERP was smallest when the
outcome was known in advance and reduced on trials with force-choice
betting. The gain vs. loss ERP difference was significant only for gambling
trials. These differences suggest that the physiological response to gambling is driven by the uncertainty more than the actual outcome (gain vs.
loss).

E147
FRAMING EFFECTS ON PREFERENCES IN APPETITIVE AND
AVERSIVE CHOICE SCENARIOS Colleen Finnerty1, Catherine Hanson1,

Stephen Jose Hanson1; 1Rutgers University — Recent research has characterized decisions about tangible rewards such as money and food. However,
little is known about behavioral or brain dynamics when decisions involve
no tangible reward. In the present study, participants made hypothetical
choices between appetitive and aversive options. In the appetitive task, 9
participants chose between pairs of options self-selected to be either high or
low value (e.g. travel destinations, sports), under either positive or negative
framing (“which do you like more/less”). In the aversive task, 15 participants chose between options they perceived to be either higher or lower
in severity (e.g. illnesses, car accidents), again under positive and negative
framing (“which would you rather have/avoid”). A separate group of 10
participants then underwent fMRI scanning while performing the appetitive framing task. As predicted, response time for negative/loss framed
scenarios was significantly longer than for positive/gain framed scenarios
in both the appetitive and aversive tasks. Neuroimaging analysis showed
differential response between conditions during appetitive framing. There
was greater activation in ventromedial prefrontal cortex (PFC) in negative
framing and dorsolateral PFC during positive framing. Graph analysis was
performed to quantify effective connectivity differences between conditions
in areas including striatum, anterior cingulate, insula, and PFC. Differences
were observed in the number, strength, and directions of connections in
positive compared to negative framing. Taken together, these results suggest that framing has reliable effects on choices for preferences, regardless
of valence, and even when those decisions occur without action-outcome
contingencies.

E148
RISKY DECISION-MAKING IN TEENAGE GIRLS: THE INFLUENCE
OF PUBERTAL HORMONES, REWARD MAGNITUDE, AND SOCIAL
COMPARISON Zdena Op de Macks1, Silvia Bunge1, Lance Kriegsfeld1,
Andrew Kayser2, Ron Dahl1; 1University of California, Berkeley, 2University of
California, San Francisco — This study examines the role of pubertal develCognitive Neuroscience Society

193

Poster Session E	
opment, reward magnitude, and social comparison in adolescent risky
decision-making and associated brain processes. In a revised version of
the Jackpot task (Op de Macks et al., 2011), 64 healthy, female adolescents
aged 11-13yrs chose to “play” the game or “pass” based on information
about risk (low/high), reward magnitude (small/large), and type of feedback (social ranking/money). Decisions to “play” were influenced by risk
and reward magnitude. Among girls in mid/late puberty, as defined by
the Pubertal Development Scale, decisions were differently influenced by
social and monetary feedback, whereas early pubertal girls made similar
decisions in both contexts. Salivary gonadal hormone assessments revealed
that girls with higher testosterone levels made more decisions to “play”
in the high-risk, small-reward condition. Preliminary whole-brain analyses
(n = 45) focusing on regions engaged more strongly for rewards vs. losses
revealed ventral striatum across the social and monetary feedback conditions, orbitofrontal and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices (OFC, DLPFC) in
the social ranking condition, and amygdala and ventrolateral PFC (VLPFC)
in the monetary condition. Losses vs. rewards engaged VLPFC in the monetary condition, and lateral OFC and DLPFC in the social condition. While
making risky decisions, risk-avoidant girls showed stronger activation in
control-related regions (lateral PFC and anterior cingulate cortex), whereas
risk-taking girls showed stronger activation in affective regions (striatum
and medial PFC). These initial findings provide insights regarding the
neural and hormonal underpinnings of social influences on risky decision-making in peri-pubertal girls.

THINKING: Reasoning
E149
WHERE SMART BRAINS ARE DIFFERENT: A META-ANALYSIS OF
BRAIN IMAGING STUDIES ON INTELLIGENCE Kirsten Hilger1, Christian

J. Fiebach1,2,3, Ulrike Basten1; 1Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany,
IDeA Center for Individual Development and Adaptive Education, Frankfurt am
Main, Germany, 3Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud
University Nijmegen, The Netherlands — Individual differences in general
intelligence have been associated with differences in brain structure and
function. Based on a review of both structural and functional brain imaging
studies on intelligence, a popular theory - the Parieto-Frontal Integration
Theory of Intelligence (P-FIT, Jung & Haier, 2007) - describes a network of
frontal and parietal brain regions as the main neural basis of intelligence.
Here, we put the P-FIT to an empirical test by conducting a voxel-based
quantitative meta-analysis of 18 functional and 20 structural imaging studies published until 2013. The quantitative approach allows testing for spatial convergence of effects across studies and yields exact localizations for
clusters of common foci in a standard brain space. We focused our analysis
on studies that reported coordinates in standard brain space for an association between an established test of psychometric intelligence and either (a)
brain activation during a cognitive task (functional meta-analysis) or (b) a
measure of morphological brain attributes (structural meta-analysis). The
functional meta-analysis resulted in seven clusters distributed across both
hemispheres, located in lateral frontal, medial frontal, parietal, and occipito-temporal cortices. The structural meta-analysis resulted in two clusters
in the left hemisphere, located in frontopolar and inferior occipital cortex.
A pooled meta-analysis, considering both functional and structural foci,
also yielded a set of fronto-parietal regions. In sum, this first quantitative
meta-analysis of brain imaging studies on intelligence, using all currently
available reports, confirms the importance of fronto-parietal networks in
explaining inter-individual differences in intelligence that was postulated
earlier in the P-FIT.
2

E150
DAMAGE TO THE VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX
INCREASES LENIENCY OF PRISON SENTENCING TOWARDS
INDIVIDUALS WHO COMMIT VIOLENT CRIMES Kelsey Warner1, Erik

Asp1, Daniel Tranel1; 1University of Iowa — Studies using attitude measures
have shown that patients with damage to the ventromedial prefrontal
cortex (vmPFCs) present a “doubt deficit” that manifests as higher authoritarianism. Individuals high in authoritarianism submit easily to authorities and are often aggressive towards others in the name of authority. The
Criminal Judgment Task was used as a behavioral measure of authoritar-

194

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
ianism in vmPFCs. VmPFCs (n = 10), brain-damaged comparisons (BDC,
n = 24), and normal healthy comparisons (NC, n = 31) were presented
with fictitious criminal vignettes of putatively “real criminals” and details
about their crimes. Individuals responded to each report by sentencing the
criminal with a prison term. Since vmPFCs are unable to garner “doubting
safeguards” revealed in patterns of higher authoritarianism, it was hypothesized that these individuals would be more punitive in their judgments
towards criminals. Results revealed that vmPFCs were more lenient in their
criminal judgments than BDCs and NCs. Further analysis indicated that
this leniency was moderated by whether or not the crime had a victim.
This suggests that vmPFCs fail to take the perspective of victims of violent crimes. The False Tagging Theory (FTT), a neuroanatomical model of
belief and doubt, asserts that the prefrontal cortex is critical for doubting
initially believed cognitive representations. According to the FTT model,
vmPFCs fail to take the perspective of others due to an inability to adjust
from their viewpoint towards that of another. These findings implicate the
critical nature of the prefrontal cortex in the assignment of culpability to
criminal actions.

E151
ABSTRACT ANALOGICAL REASONING IN HIGH-FUNCTIONING
CHILDREN WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS Natalie Galla-

gher1, Benjamin Yerys3, Lauren Kenworthy2, Mosner Maya3, Fearon Edward1,
Balhana Carlos1, Green Adam1; 1Department of Psychology, Georgetown University, 2Center for Autism Spectrum Disorders, Children’s National Medical
Center, 3Center for Autism Research, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia —
Identifying abstract similarities between superficially different experiences
enables children to form regularities (rules and expectations) that they can
rely on to navigate their world. Children with autism spectrum disorders
(ASD) often do not spontaneously recognize abstract similarities, focusing instead on surface-level features. This likely contributes to deficits in
the development of appropriate schemas for navigating novel situations,
including social interactions. Analogical reasoning is the central cognitive mechanism that enables typically developing children to understand
abstract similarities between different situations. Intriguingly, studies of
high-functioning children with ASD point to a relative cognitive strength
in basic, non-abstract forms of analogical reasoning. If this analogical reasoning ability extends to abstract analogical reasoning, then it may provide
a bridge between a cognitive strength and core ASD deficits. We explored
this possibility by testing children with ASD and typically developing controls on explicitly instructed (i.e., non-spontaneous) abstract analogical
reasoning with real-world pictorial images. The relative abstractness of the
analogies was determined via a quantitative measure of semantic distance
derived from latent semantic analysis. Children with ASD performed as
well as typically developing children, including performance on abstract
(semantically distant) analogical reasoning. Children with ASD, but not
typically developing children, showed an effect of age on semantically distant analogical reasoning. Semantically distant analogical reasoning ability
predicted social function as measured by the Social Responsiveness Scale.
These data provide new indication that children with ASD are capable of
identifying abstract similarities through analogical reasoning, and that this
ability can be leveraged to improve social function.

Poster Session F
ATTENTION: Other
F1
NEURAL CORRELATES OF THE COST OF DISTRACTOR DISENGAGEMENT Benjamin Dorn1, Jyoti Ramanathan1, Jacob Bollinger1, Adam

Gazzaley1; 1UCSF — Several studies have shown that distractions impede
goal-relevant processing and behavior. Recent studies suggest that the
impact that distracting stimuli have on performance is not mediated by
the susceptibility for attentional capture, but rather the speed in which one
recovers from capture; i.e., the disengagement from distraction. We studied
the neural basis of this phenomenon using high-density EEG recordings
simultaneous with a task in which peripheral visual distractors precede
presentation of a target array. We find that distractors significantly engage
visual processing prior to target presentation. Further, the extent of visual
engagement by a distractor prior to the target predicts the negative impact
on target discrimination performance. These results will be presented in the
context of different latencies of pre-target distractor presentations.

F2
THE TEMPORO-PARIETAL JUNCTION NODE OF THE VENTRAL
ATTENTION NETWORK IS BILATERAL AND SUBDIVIDED INTO
ANTERIOR AND POSTERIOR PATCHES. Kathryn J. Devaney1, Emily

J. Levin1, Maya L. Rosen1, Samantha W. Michalka1, Lingqiang Kong1, David
C. Somers1; 1Boston University — The ventral attention network (VAN)
functions as a “circuit-breaker” to facilitate stimulus-driven reorienting of
attention. Previously, this network has been described as right-lateralized
and comprised of the tempo-parietal junction (TPJ), the inferior frontal
gyrus and the inferior frontal junction. Frequently, the VAN is localized
with fMRI by comparing the BOLD response to stimuli in expected vs.
unexpected locations. Here, we used a novel localizer task incorporating
unexpected (oddball) images to quickly and reliably localize the VAN in
individual subjects (n = 12). Our results indicate a bilateral TPJ with a posterior patch (pTPJ) in the dorsal superior temporal sulcus and an anterior
patch (aTPJ) in the supramarginal gyrus. Although both anterior and posterior TPJ are responsive to oddball stimuli, they display distinct functional
connectivity profiles. During the resting state, the pTPJ, but not the aTPJ,
is temporally correlated with early visual areas. Both aTPJ and pTPJ are
connected with medial nodes of the cognitive control network, and with
each other. These results indicate functional specialization within what was
previously believed to be a single node of the VAN, and suggest multiple
follow-up questions to further elucidate our understanding of the human
attention system.

F3
CHANGES IN P100 AMPLITUDES TO ALCOHOL IMAGES IN
FRESHMAN FEMALES ARE MODERATED BY ETHNICITY AND
ALCOHOL-RELATED ATTITUDES Kyle Thurin1, Natalie Ceballos1, Reiko

Graham1; 1Texas State University Department of Psychology — The transition
from the home to the college environment increases exposure to alcohol,
in turn increasing the risk for problem drinking. Relatively little is known
about how this transition affects young women, Latinas in particular. We
assessed changes in event-related potentials (ERP) to alcohol images in 42
freshman females using a 3-stimulus oddball paradigm. Freshman females
(24 Non-Hispanic/Caucasian, 18 Hispanic/Latina, mean age = 18.0) completed 2 sessions approximately 6 months apart. In each session, participants completed self-report questionnaires and two versions of the task
(counterbalanced): one where alcohol images were designated as target
stimuli, another with non-alcohol images as targets. No changes in alcohol consumption and alcohol-related attitudes were observed over time.
ERP analyses focused on the P100, a marker of exogenous visual attention
and revealed an attenuation of P100 amplitudes over time. For Hispanics/
Latinas, P100 amplitudes were higher for alcohol images at both Time 1
and Time 2, and P100 attenuation did not differ as a function of stimulus
type. For Non-Hispanics/Caucasians, P100 amplitudes were equivalent for

alcohol and non-alcohol images at Time 1 and attenuation over time was
less for alcohol images. Exploratory correlations revealed that positive and
negative attitudes towards alcohol were predictive of P100 amplitudes at
Time 1, whereas only negative attitudes were predictive at Time 2. Results
suggest that prior exposure to alcohol images, as long as 6 months prior to
re-testing, results in attenuation of the P100. Furthermore, attitudes toward
alcohol influence the salience and subsequent visual processing of alcohol-related stimuli.

F4
REFLEXIVE ORIENTING TO HAPPY AND DISGUSTED GAZING
FACES AND TOBACCO TARGETS IN SMOKERS AND NONSMOKERS Matthew Light1, Natalie Ceballos1, Shelby Bertsch1, Ben Euhus1, Reiko

Graham1; 1Department of Psychology, Texas State University — Evidence
regarding the moderating role of facial expression on gaze-triggered orienting has been mixed, suggesting that experimental context and task
demands are important factors in these effects. This study examined how
attitudes toward tobacco and smoking status might influence gaze and
expression interactions in an attentional orienting task with expressive
gazing cues and tobacco/non-tobacco targets. Eighty-three participants
(61 nonsmokers, 22 smokers; Mage = 20.7 years) completed a Posner-style
cuing task wherein expressive faces (disgusted vs. smiling) either validly or
invalidly cued the location of cigarettes or pens. Smokers and nonsmokers
did not differ with respect to negative attitudes toward tobacco; however,
smokers were less likely to endorse positive attitudes. Repeated measures
ANOVA of mean reaction times to identify targets revealed that nonsmokers were faster to identify cigarette targets than smokers. Main effects of cue
expression and validity were mitigated by an interaction, such that cuing
was only present for disgusted faces. There was also a target type by validity interaction: the cuing effect was only present for control images. Error
analyses revealed that smokers were more likely to misidentify tobacco
images cued by disgusted faces. Exploratory correlations revealed that
positive tobacco attitudes were associated with fewer errors to tobacco targets cued by disgusted faces, whereas negative attitudes were related with
more errors to tobacco targets cued by happy faces. These results suggest
that experimental context is an important determinant of gaze / expression interactions and gaze-triggered orienting, as are pre-existing attitudes
toward target objects.

F5
BLUE LIGHT MODULATES EEG ALPHA ACTIVITY

HongChae Baek1,
Insoo Kim1, Hyensou Pak2, Yeon-Hong Jeong2, Byoung-Kyong Min1; 1Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 136-713,
Republic of Korea, 2LGE Advanced Research Institute, LG Electronics Inc.,
Seoul 137-724, Republic of Korea — We experience that lighting conditions influence on our daily physiological and psychological phenomena.
Light substantially affects brain functions through modulation of alertness and performance. In the present study, we used monochromatic blue
light exposure to promote alertness during the post-lunch dip hours. In
order to investigate lighting designs that are actually applicable in a real
workplace, we used 33.33 % (x=0.2364, y=0.1765 on CIE chromaticity) and
66.66% (x=0.1787, y=0.0828 on CIE chromaticity) blue-enriched lights. The
peak wavelength of blue was 451nm. EEG data were collected from 10
healthy individuals while they performed a continuous performance task
under 4 different illumination conditions: white, dark, light blue (33.33%
blue-enriched), and dark blue (66.66% blue-enriched). All measures were
analyzed with a repeated measures analysis of variance, which included
a within-subjects factor (illuminance). We observed a gradual increment
in the upper alpha power (10 to 13Hz) as the blue-enriched component
was gradually enhanced (F(3,27)=4.773, p<0.01; dark=1.15ã�¶2; 33% blue=
1.37ã�¶2; 66% blue= 1.52ã�¶2; white= 2.24ã�¶2). Since upper alpha activity reflects cognitive processes such as perceptual performance, blue light
seems to modulate the efficacy of our work-performance. Further studies
on illumination parameter-dependent efficacy of the cognitive performance
are necessary to develop appropriate applications to enhance the efficacy of
our work-performance.
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

195

Poster Session F	

F6
COMPARING THE ORIENTING OF ATTENTION TO TWO TYPES OF
TASK-IRRELEVANT AUDITORY STIMULI UNDER VARYING LEVELS
OF TASK LOAD: IMPLICATIONS FOR MEASURING ATTENTIONAL
RESERVE Matthew Miller1, Amber Leiker1, Kirk Grand1, Andrew Thompson1,

Ford Dyke1, Maurice Godwin1, Jeremy Rietschel2, Craig McDonald3; 1Auburn
University, 2Veteran’s Health Administration, Baltimore, Maryland, 3George
Mason University — The availability of spare attentional resources (attentional reserve) during task performance determines the ability to process unexpected events. Thus, the development of a metric of attentional
reserve is of interest. Attentional reserve can be indexed by the magnitude
of attentional orienting to task-irrelevant auditory stimuli, as reflected by
the amplitude of the P3a component of the event-related potential. As such,
the utility of the P3a in indexing attentional reserve is dependent upon the
ability of stimuli to elicit contrasting degrees of attentional orienting under
varying task conditions. Therefore, an important question is which types of
task-irrelevant auditory stimuli most effectively elicit attentional orienting?
To begin to answer this question, an experiment was conducted in which
participants engaged in the videogame Tetris under incrementally-varied
levels of task load while being probed at random times with one of two
different types of task-irrelevant auditory stimuli: an ecologically-valid
sound or a pure tone. Attentional orienting to the stimuli, as reflected by
P3a amplitude, was contrasted among Tetris levels to determine which
stimulus was most effective in yielding load-dependent changes in orienting. P3a amplitude to the ecologically-valid sounds significantly decreased
as a function of task load, whereas P3a amplitude to the pure tones did not.
This suggests that ecologically-valid sounds are more effective at eliciting
contrasting degrees of attentional orienting under varying task load than
pure tones; and, as such, ecologically-valid sounds are more effective in
indexing attentional reserve.

F7
AUTOMATIC ACTIVATION OF SEMANTIC COLOUR CONCEPTS
MODULATES ATTENTIONAL SELECTION Sol Z. Sun1, Jenny Shen1, Mark

Shaw1, Susanne Ferber1; 1University of Toronto — Object information is represented as a distributed pattern of activation for different physical and
semantic features with related physical characteristics and concepts sharing overlapping neural networks. Behaviourally, it has been shown that
words can prime other words based on similarity in shape and in action
affordances, making these primed words easily accessible for other aspects
of cognition. The results for colour word priming have been less clear, possibly owing to contextual effects of different paradigms. However, colour
is a strong featural characteristic that can direct attention based on topdown mediated control sets. We sought to investigate how the representational activation of colour (e.g., presenting the word “frog”) would affect
search times on a secondary visual search task and how this interacts with
visual working memory (VWM). Participants began each trial by studying a memory array of either one (low load) or three (high load) words. In
the high load condition, all three words shared colour concept information
(e.g., forest, algae, frog), although this information was irrelevant to task
performance. Next, the items were removed from the display and during
this delay period, participants engaged in an intervening visual search task
with target items congruent, neutral, or incongruent with the colour information of words held in memory. We found faster response times for the
congruent item in both low and high-load conditions. These results suggest
that words held in VWM are automatically processed to the semantic level,
activating the shared representational feature, leading to facilitative effects
spreading to subsequent attentional tasks.

F8
ASSESSING COGNITIVE LOAD USING A THREE-DIMENSIONAL
MULTIPLE OBJECT TRACKING TASK. Domenico Tullo1,2, Jocelyn Fau-

bert3,4, Armando Bertone1,2; 1The Perceptual Neuroscience Laboratory (PNLab)
for Autism and Development, 2McGill University, 3Laboratoire de psychophysique et de perception visuelle, 4Université de Montréal — As attentional abilities become more efficient, the individual’s requisite for attention during
academic task completion declines. This results in the general reduction of
the cognitive load of the task, which leads to an increased probability of a
successful performance (Maddox, Bohil, & Ing, 2004). One component of

196

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
the attentional process is the ability to selectively attend to specific targets
while ignoring others, a process referred to as selective attention. The use
of a three-dimensional multiple object-tracking task (3D-MOT) can be used
as an accurate measure of everyday attentional processing. In the present
study, measuring performance on a 3D-MOT task while manipulating
the number of targets to be tracked, determined participants’ processing
capacity, or cognitive load. Eleven adult participants (7 M, 4 F) were asked
to follow 1 through 4 target spheres (separate trials) among 8 distractor
spheres moving randomly in a virtual volumetric space during an 8 second
trial. Depending on correct or incorrect responses, the speed of spheres
changed for each trial until threshold performance was attained, defined
by the average speed at which target spheres for each condition (1 through
4) could be tracked. An analysis of variance revealed that increasing the
number of objects tracked significantly decreased performance (p < .001) in
a linear fashion. In addition to our finding suggesting that performance on
the 3D-MOT is a good indicator of cognitive load, we are presently assessing the differences across development as well as the role of feedback using
the same 3D-MOT paradigm.

F9
ATTENTIONAL SELECTION CAN BE AUTOMATIZED BY LEARNING Mahalakshmi Ramamurthy1, Erik Blaser1; 1University of Massachusetts,

Boston — The selective processing of visual information, through attention,
is based on bottom-up biases and top-down intentions. Here we sought
evidence for a third way, through learned rules that are implemented automatically, without cognitive supervision; what we term “dark attention”.
Methods: Our main goal was to find evidence for selection in the absence
of bottom-up demands and top-down intentions. We used the duration of
the motion aftereffect (MAE) as a passive assay of selective resource allocation. In our main condition, observers saw two superimposed fields of limited-lifetime dots, green and red, moving coherently to the left and right,
respectively. Such a stimulus is physically balanced and should yield no net
MAE (as tested by a static test field of red/green dots), unless the observer
selectively attends to one field. In our attempt to train a new selection rule,
eight observers participated in a three-day training paradigm where they
explicitly attended to the red field (encouraged through: direction detection
task on the attended field). Before training, MAE’s were measured while
observers concurrently performed an auditory two-back memory task (a
distracting task aimed at disrupting top-down selection); MAE’s were minimal as expected (Mean: 0.37s; SE: 0.10). Following training, observers were
retested in the same condition. Results: show that, despite of maintaining
physical salience (sidestepping bottom-up selection), and being distracted
by the two-back task (preventing top-down selection), MAE’s were significantly increased without a significant decrease in the auditory performance
(Mean: 2s; SE: 0.47; two-tailed t-test =-3.45; p= 0.01): an existence proof for
dark attention.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Development &
aging
F10
TRAIT IMPULSIVITY AND REWARD-RELATED BRAIN ACTIVATION
IN ADOLESCENCE Merav Silverman1, Robert Krueger1, William Iacono1,

Stephen Malone1, Ruskin Hunt1, Kathleen Thomas1; 1University of Minnesota —
Background: Research using fMRI suggests increased ventral striatal (VS)
activation during reward processing in adolescents, although this finding
is not universally replicated, indicating the need for more research in this
area. Furthermore, despite evidence for behavioral impulsivity during
adolescence, and research suggesting a relationship between impulsivity
and reward-related brain activation in adults, less is known about associations between trait impulsivity and reward-related brain activation in
adolescents. This study tested the hypothesis that trait impulsivity positively correlates with increased VS activation in a community sample of
adolescents. Methods: Our study consisted of 92 adolescents ranging from
15 to 17 years of age, who completed the monetary incentive delay task, an
fMRI-based reward task. The contrast of interest was the anticipation of
reward greater than no incentive. Trait impulsivity was measured with the
Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire (MPQ) for each subject. Findings: In a voxel wise whole brain analysis, trait impulsivity was positively

2014 Annual Meeting	
correlated with activation in the VS, including in the right putamen and the
right caudate, as well as activation in the right orbital frontal cortex and
the right pallidium. Conclusion: We provide evidence for a positive correlation between VS activation and trait impulsivity, extending the existing
literature, which focuses primarily on adults, to adolescents. The finding
that increased VS activation during reward processing positively correlates
with trait impulsivity may help explain the neurobiological processes
involved in impulsive behaviors. Understanding the neural correlates of
trait impulsivity can provide the groundwork for developing better methods of prevention of high-risk impulsive behaviors.

F11
DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF FEAR: COMPARING FEAR GENERALIZATION PATTERNS BETWEEN CHILDREN AND ADULTS

Miriam A. Schiele1, Julia Oechsner1, Christian Baumann1, Marcel Romanos1,
Paul Pauli1, Jürgen Deckert1, Andreas Reif1; 1University of Würzburg — Overgeneralization of conditioned fear is one learning mechanism thought to
be involved in the pathogenesis of anxiety disorders. However, developmental aspects of fear generalization throughout the life span remain
poorly understood. Comparing fear generalization patterns in children and
adults may help to shed light on the developmental trajectories of anxiety disorders. We investigated 53 healthy adults and 53 healthy children
(8-12 years) in a fear generalization paradigm. Neutral facial expressions
of two actresses were used as conditioned stimuli, one of which (CS+) was
paired with an aversive stimulus, while the other was not (CS-). Four generalization stimuli (GS1-4) were presented during the generalization phase,
depicting gradual morphs of CS+ to CS-. Skin conductance response (SCR)
was measured continuously during the experiment. Subjective ratings of
valence and arousal of the stimuli were obtained. Both groups rated CS+
as most arousing; expressed arousal for the GS correlated negatively with
their similarity to the CS+; and CS- was rated as least arousing. However,
compared to adults, children rated CS- and GS1-3 as overall more arousing.
No differences were found regarding valence. Similar patterns in SCR were
observed in children and adults, depicting a decrease from CS+ over GS to
CS-. The observed pattern of enhanced arousal may point to difficulties in
differentiating threat cues from safety cues in children. Developmental differences such as maturing into the ability to distinguish between aversive
and non-aversive stimuli more efficiently, or failing to do so, may be a key
aspect related to the development of anxiety disorders.

F12
RECOGNITION OF FACIAL EMOTIONS IN ADOLESCENCE

Klara
Mareckova1,2,3, Claire Lawrence2, Gabriel Leonard4, Michel Perron5,6, Louis
Richer6, Suzanne Veillette5,6, Zdenka Pausova2,7,8, Tomas Paus1; 1Rotman
Research Institute, University of Toronto, Canada, 2University of Nottingham,
United Kingdom, 3Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University,
Czech Republic, 4Montréal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Canada,
5
Recherche et transfert, Cegep de Jonquière, Canada, 6Université du Québec a
Chicoutimi, Canada, 7The Hospital of Sick Children, Toronto, Canada, 8Centre
hospitalier de l’Université de Montréal, Canada — Effective recognition of
emotions is essential for appropriate approach-avoidance behavior and
social interactions. We used Morphed Faces Task (Pollak & Kistler, 2002) to
study development of face processing during adolescence (451 males, 390
females; 12-18 years old). Adult male and female “Ekman” faces were morphed along happy-sad, happy-fear, angry-sad, and angry-fear continuum
(11 morphs per continuum). Sex of the face was a between-subject factor.
Emotion-recognition skills of adolescents were described by inverted efficiency scores (Townsend & Ashby, 1978), calculated as the ratio of reaction time and accuracy. MANOVA showed that effects of adolescent’s
age, adolescen’s sex, and face sex were changing in a contrast-dependent
manner. Emotion recognition improved with age particularly in the unambiguous contrasts (3 morphs at each end of the continuum). Largest female
advantage in emotion recognition was in the unambiguous contrasts of
happy-sad and happy-fear continuum. Largest effects of face sex were in
the ambiguous contrasts (morphs in the middle of the continuum): happiness and anger were easier to read in female faces, sadness in male faces.
Next, multiple regression explored the relative contribution of performance
IQ, verbal IQ, age, and sex on emotion recognition (mean performance on
unambiguous contrasts). Performance IQ was the strongest predictor of
emotion recognition, followed by age, and sex. Verbal IQ had no effect.

Poster Session F
Together, performance IQ, age, and sex explained 29% variance in the performance. We conclude that recognition of emotions in faces continues to
develop during adolescence in a contrast-dependent manner and that performance IQ significantly contributes to these skills.

F13
DISCRIMINATION OF SPECIES-SPECIFIC EMOTIONS ACROSS
DEVELOPMENT: AN ERP STUDY Lina Montoya1, Alissa Westerlund1, Sarah

McCormick1, Charles Nelson1,2; 1Boston Children’s Hospital, 2Harvard Medical
School — Event-related potentials (ERPs) recorded from occipital-temporal regions of the scalp elucidate perceptual processing of structural information from faces. Developmentally, emotional information in faces has
been shown to drive differences at the N290 component, a precursor for the
N170 component in adults (Leppänen, Moulson, Vogel-Farley & Nelson,
2007; Rigato, Farroni, & Johnson, 2010). The purpose of the current study
is to examine the neural mechanisms underlying infants ability to discriminate emotions across species-specific stimuli. Five-, 7-, and 12-month-old
infants were shown either female human or animal faces expressing happy,
fearful, and angry expressions while ERPs were recorded. Across every
age and emotion, infants who saw human faces (n = 36) presented a more
negative N290 compared to infants who viewed animal faces (n = 34), F(2,
63) = 12.530, p < .001. Further, infants who saw human faces displayed a
more negative N290 to fearful faces, whereas infants who saw animal faces
showed a more negative N290 to angry faces. The results of this study illustrate the conditions under which different electrophysiological patterns
are present; namely, infants processing of human versus animal faces, and,
within the human species, emotions impact the way a particular face is
processed. The findings of this study ultimately shed light on the typical
trajectory of emotion processing.

F14
DRAWN TO DANGER: WHY TEENS APPROACH RATHER THAN
RETREAT FROM FEAR Michael Dreyfuss1, Kristina Caudle1, Andrew T.

Drysdale1, Natalie E. Johnston1, Alexandra O. Cohen1, Leah H. Somerville2,
Adriana Galván3, Nim Tottenham3, Todd A. Hare4, BJ Casey1; 1Sackler Institute, Department of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medical College, 2Department of
Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge Massachusetts, USA, 3Department
of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles California,
USA, 4Laboratory for Social and Neural Systems Reasearch, Department of
Economics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland — There is a significant
inflection in risk taking and criminal behavior during adolescence, but the
basis for this increase remains largely unknown. An increased sensitivity
to rewards has been suggested to explain these behaviors. Yet juvenile
offenses often occur in emotionally charged situations of negative valence.
How behavior is altered by changes in negative emotional processes during
adolescence has received less attention than changes in positive emotional
processes. The current study uses a measure of impulsivity in combination
with cues that signal threat or safety to assess developmental changes in
emotional responses to threat cues. We show that adolescents, especially
males, impulsively react to threat cues relative to neutral ones, more than
adults or children, even when instructed not to respond. This adolescent
specific behavioral pattern is paralleled by enhanced activity in limbic cortical regions implicated in detection and assignment of emotional value to
inputs and in the subsequent regulation of responses to them when successfully suppressing impulsive responses to threat cues. In contrast, prefrontal
control regions implicated in detecting and resolving competing responses
show an adolescent emergent pattern (i.e., greater activity in adolescents
and adults relative to children) during successful suppression of a response
regardless of emotion. Our findings suggest that adolescence is a period of
heightened sensitivity to social and emotional cues that results in diminished regulation of behavior in their presence.

F15
USING DIFFUSION TENSOR IMAGING (DTI) TO EXPLORE EFFECTS
OF AGE AND PUBERTY ON WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY IN ADOLESCENCE Lara Menzies1, Anne-Lise Goddings1, Emily Garrett1, Sarah-Jayne

Blakemore1, Russell Viner1; 1University College London — White matter development continues throughout adolescence and is critical in the maturation
of connectivity pathways between brain regions. During this time puberty

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

197

Poster Session F	
also occurs, bringing about physiological and hormonal changes with considerable inter-individual timing variation. While DTI studies have investigated effects of age on white matter development during adolescence (e.g.
Lebel et al., 2008), our goal was to understand the differential effects of age
and puberty on this process. Strong sex-based variation in brain development suggests that pubertal maturation may have an important effect on
white matter development. We used a 64-direction DTI-MRI protocol to
acquire diffusion images from 60 boys, aged between 12-16 years, at varying stages of pubertal development with individuals being at all stages
from early puberty to post-pubertal. Saliva samples were collected to measure levels of Testosterone, Dehydroepiandrosterone and Oestradiol. Additionally, pubertal stage was assessed using self-report measures (Pubertal
Developmental Scale [Petersen et al., 1988] and a pictorial Tanner stage).
Behavioural measures were obtained through completion of validated
questionnaires of risk-taking, impulsivity and sensation-seeking. Two repetitions of DTI acquisition were performed, allowing improved estimation
and correction of susceptibility-induced distortions during pre-processing
within FSL (FMRIB, Oxford, UK). DTI structural indices including voxel-based fractional anisotropy were then calculated for participants. Our
results incorporate both group-based and regression analyses to show relationships between puberty, chronological age and white matter structure.
In conclusion, this work aids our understanding of the factors influencing
brain development during adolescence, using DTI to probe differential
effects of age and puberty on white matter development.

F16
NEURAL AUDIENCE EFFECT ON RELATIONAL REASONING IN
ADOLESCENCE Laura K Wolf1, Iroise Dumontheil1,2, Sarah-Jayne Blake-

more1; 1University College London, 2Birkbeck, University of London — When
children enter adolescence, relationships with peers become increasingly
elaborate and important. Adolescents have also been found to be particularly sensitive to peer influence relative to younger children and adults.
Previous studies have focused on peer influence on risk-taking and little is
known about the neural mechanisms of peer influence on adolescent decision-making. The aim of the current study was to investigate the effect of
the presence of peers on a cognitively challenging task - relational reasoning, which is the ability to evaluate and integrate multiple mental representations. Previous functional imaging studies have consistently shown
the activation of a frontoparietal network of regions including the parietal
cortex, dorsolateral, ventrolateral and rostrolateral prefrontal cortex during
relational reasoning. Here, we were interested in the effect of the presence
of a peer relative to being alone on the recruitment of this frontoparietal
network associated with relational reasoning and its development between
mid-adolescence (14-16 years) and adulthood (23-28 years). These questions were studied in a 2x2x2 factorial design including within-subjects factors audience condition (peer vs. alone) and task condition (relational vs.
control), and between-subjects factor age group (mid-adolescent vs. adult).
Regions of interest analysis on the task-related clusters (relational>control)
showed that adolescents’ and adults’ activation patterns in the frontoparietal regions during relational reasoning were differentially modulated by
an audience (peer vs. alone). Findings from this study might have implications for educational contexts in which adolescents do classwork or homework in the presence of an audience of peers.

F17
RECONSOLIDATION UPDATE: A NOVEL METHOD FOR PREVENTING THE RETURN OF FEAR IN ADOLESCENTS David Johnson1, B.J.

Casey1, Alisa Powers2; 1Weill Cornell Medical College, 2Long Island University
— The ability to learn the associative relationship between aversive stimuli
and the environmental elements that predict their presence is critical for
adaptive function. However, these forms of learning can sometimes become
maladaptive and result in the kind of dysregulated fear responding that
characterizes psychiatric and anxiety disorders, which often emerge during
adolescence. The most efficacious treatment for adolescent anxiety disorders is cognitive behavioral therapy, a therapeutic approach based on the
principles of fear extinction learning. However, this method is not always
effective in persistently attenuating fear responses. Furthermore, adolescents may be additionally challenged, as suggested by recent evidence that
fear extinction learning is compromised during this developmental stage.
These findings suggest that alternatives to extinction-based attenuation of
learned fear should be explored. Reconsolidation update offers a promising

198

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
alternative approach. This method is based on the principles of memory
reconsolidation and has been shown to prevent the return of fear memory
in adult humans and rodents. In the current study, we used a three-day
Pavlovian fear conditioning/extinction/reinstatement paradigm to test the
effect of reconsolidation update to attenuate the return of fear memory in
adolescents and adults as measured by skin conductance response. Both
adolescents (n=29, aged 12-17) and adults (n=28, aged 18-35) in the reconsolidation update condition showed attenuated post-reinstatement fear
compared to their respective cohort in the extinction only condition. These
preliminary results are consistent with recent adult findings and suggest
the possibility for novel approaches to designing more efficacious treatment therapies targeted especially for adolescents.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
F18
TWO ROUTES TO THE ATTRIBUTION OF EMOTIONAL REACTIONS: EMOTION CONTAGION VERSUS COGNITIVE PERSPECTIVE TAKING Brian Haas1,2, Ian Anderson1, Megan Filkowski1; 1Department

of Psychology, University of Georgia, 2Interdisciplinary Neuroscience Graduate
Program, University of Georgia — The ability to understand the cause of
another person’s emotional reaction is an essential component leading to
the success of human social relationships. It is currently unclear how the
social-cognitive brain identifies the cause of another person’s emotional
reaction. This study was designed to test the hypothesis that identifying
the cause of another person’s emotional reaction is achieved through dissociable routes of information processing. In this study, participants underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging while identifying the cause
of another person’s emotional reaction. Here we present evidence that
emotional attribution is accomplished through either an emotion contagion
route or a cognitive perspective-taking route within the brain. The emotion
contagion route acts to engage a visceral experience of the target’s emotion
and leads to a rapid identification of attribution. Conversely, the cognitive
perspective-taking route acts to evaluate potential target-cause associations
and leads to a delayed identification of attribution. Within the brain, we
found that the emotion contagion route is processed through regions that
include the insula, and the cognitive perspective-taking route is processed
through regions that include the medial and prefrontal cortex. These findings provide support for the existence of dissociable information processing streams that function to identify the cause of other people’s emotional
reactions.

F19
FROM SELF TO SOCIAL COGNITION: THEORY OF MIND MECHANISMS AND THEIR RELATION TO EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING

Elisabeth E.F. Bradford1, Ines Jentzsch1, Juan-Carlos Gomez1; 1University of
St Andrews, Scotland — “Theory of Mind” refers to the ability to attribute
mental states to oneself and other people (Premack & Woodruff, 1978).
This study examined the extent to which “Self” and “Other” belief-attribution processes within the Theory of Mind (ToM) mechanism could be
distinguished behaviourally, and whether these separable components differentially related to Executive Functioning (EF) abilities. A computerized
false-belief task was utilized to assess ToM, and a face-image Stroop task
was employed to assess EF, within a population of typically-developed
adults. Results revealed significantly longer reaction times when attributing beliefs to other people as opposed to recognizing and attributing beliefs
to oneself. Intriguingly, results revealed that “perspective-shift” requirements (i.e. changing from adoption of the “self” perspective to the perspective of the “other”, or vice versus) across false-belief trials influenced
reaction times. When the perspective shift was from self-to-other, reaction
times were significantly longer than when they were from other-to-self. It is
suggested that the “self” forms the stem of understanding the “other”, and
is therefore processed regardless of ultimate task demands; in contrast, the
“other” perspective is only processed when explicitly required. Two Stroop
scores (emotion-recognition and gender-recognition) were calculated.
Affective Stroop scores positively correlated with performance on the ToM
task, whilst non-affective Stroop scores negatively correlated with ToM
task performance. Results indicate that adopting another person’s perspec-

2014 Annual Meeting	
tive, even when their belief state is matched to one’s own, requires more
cognitive effort, as indicated through longer reaction times, than recalling
and reflecting on self-oriented belief-states.

F20
THE EFFECT OF INVERSION ON EMOTION DISCRIMINATION
DECREASES WITH FIXATION ON THE MOUTH AT BRIEF PRESENTATION TIMES: A BACKWARD MASKING AND EYE-TRACKING
STUDY Karly Neath1, Roxane Itier1; 1University of Waterloo — Support for

holistic processing of emotional faces comes from the disruption of emotion discrimination performance by face inversion. However, the effect of
inversion on each emotion remains inconsistent between studies. Here we
examined whether the impact of inversion on facial emotion discrimination
varies with fixation to facial features and presentation time. Eye-tracking
was used to ensure fixation to the mouth, nose, left eye or right eye of neutral, disgusted, fearful, happy, surprised and angry faces. Faces were presented for 17, 50 and 100ms and then immediately masked by an upright
or inverted neutral face. Greatest performance was seen across all timings
for neutral, happy and angry faces which were impacted by inversion as
early as 17ms, demonstrating their holistic processing even with brief presentation time. Disgust, fear and surprise yielded lower performance across
all timings and were impacted by inversion from 50ms onward. However,
performance for inverted disgusted, happy and surprised faces increased
when participants fixated on the mouth for 50ms compared to the other features while this mouth advantage was seen for fearful faces at 100ms presentation. Thus, the mouth improves discrimination performance for these
emotions but only when holistic processing is disrupted. Results support
a general holistic processing of facial emotions but suggest an important
role of the mouth for disgusted, fearful, happy and surprised faces when
holistic processing is disrupted.

F21
AN FMRI STUDY OF THE GENDER AND CULTURE EFFECTS IN
VIEWING TAIWANESE AND CAUCASIAN EMOTIONAL FACES Sig-

mund Hsiao1, Hsu-Huei Weng1,2,3, Mei-Yu Yeh2, Ho-Ling Liu4,5, Liwen Lee1, Shihtseng T. Huang1; 1Department of Psychology, National Chung-Cheng University,
Taiwan, 2Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital
at Chiayi, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Chiayi, Taiwan, 3Departments of Respiratory Care, Chang Gung University of Science and Technology,
Chiayi, Taiwan, 4Department of Medical Imaging and Radiological Sciences,
Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, 5MRI Center, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan — The present study investigated the gender and
culture effects in mediating emotional processes through evaluation of the
brain areas associated. Twenty Taiwanese participants participated. Pictures of happy, angry, fearful, and neutral expressions of Taiwanese and
Caucasians and non-face pictures were presented in eight event-related
functional runs, with 40 trials in each. Participants were asked to view the
pictures with attention while undergoing functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) scanning. The results found a culture and gender interaction with higher activations in the left post-central cortex, left middle
occipital cortex, left superior frontal cortex, and right medial frontal cortex.
Results supported a cultural specificity hypothesis, evidence suggested
higher activations in responses to the female and Caucasian faces relative
to those of Taiwanese faces. It is suggested that the participants had higher
activations at the primary areas related to emotional processes as well as at
those related to the frontoparietal attentional network when viewing emotional expressions from people of other culture than viewing expressions
from one’s own culture.

F22
PARANOID TRAITS ARE RELATED TO DEFICITS IN COMPLEX
SOCIAL DECISION-MAKING AND REDUCED SUPERIOR TEMPORAL SULCUS VOLUME Lauren Demers1, Elizabeth Olson1, Mareen Weber1,

Shreya Divatia1, Lily Preer1, William Killgore1; 1Social, Cognitive, & Affective
Neuroscience Laboratory, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School — Paranoid traits are often characterized by inaccurate interpretation of other
people’s motives. Individuals with high trait paranoia may have difficulties in interpersonal situations involving complex social judgments. Social
decision-making has previously been related to superior temporal sulcus

Poster Session F
volume. To explore these relationships, 59 healthy adults (ages 18-45,
M=30.66, SD=8.00; 30 males) underwent neuroimaging and completed
the Personality Assessment Inventory (PAI) to measure paranoid tendencies, the Ekman 60 Faces Test (EFT) to control for potential differences in
emotional face recognition abilities, and a novel task, the Facial Intuition
Task (FIT), probing social complex decision-making. In FIT, participants
decided whether computer-generated face stimuli were high or low on an
unspecified trait determined by principal components analysis of previously rated traits. Trial-by-trial feedback was provided to help participants
learn to make correct discriminations. Higher scores on the PAI paranoia
scale correlated with lower average accuracy on FIT, even when controlling
for basic emotional recognition scores on the EFT, r(58)=-.33, p=.01. Voxel-based morphometry, controlling for age and gender, was used to explore
neural correlates of this finding, using a mask to restrict the analysis to the
superior and middle temporal gyrus. Multiple regression analysis revealed
a negative relationship between paranoia scores and a cluster of gray
matter volume (k=69 voxels) in a region proximal to the superior temporal
sulcus (p<.001, uncorrected; MNI:68,-43,6). Results suggest that paranoid
traits are related to reduced gray matter volume in a region associated with
social processing and poorer ability to integrate learning of subtle social
cues into complex decision-making.

F23
CAN THE ACTIVATION OF ANTERIOR CINGULATE PREDICT THE
EMOTIONAL SUPPRESSION? A FMRI STUDY WITH MASKED
FACES Jiaolong Cui1, Olga Tkachenko1, William “Scott” Killgore1; 1Social, Cog-

nitive, & Affective Neuroscience Laboratory, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School — Purpose: Emotional suppression (ES) plays a very important role in emotional self-regulation. People who demonstrate chronic ES
often experience heightened anxiety or depression. The role of ES in brain
responses to emotional stimuli has been relatively unexplored. Currently,
we aim to examine the relationship between the level of ES and the functional response to backward-masked facial expressions of various affects
presented below the threshold of conscious perception. Method: Sixty-three healthy adults (Age: 30 ±8; 33 males) were recruited. The Courtauld Emotional Control Scale (CECS) was used to assess the tendency
to suppress negative emotions including anxiety, anger, and depression.
Blood oxygen level-dependent fMRI was acquired at 3T with TR/TE/flip
angle=3.0s/30ms/90degree, 60 images per slice. Three 3-minute sessions
were acquired during backward masked presentations of anger/happy/
fearful faces separately. Each session included a neutral Control face masked
with a Neutral face, the stimulus (Angry/Happy/Fearful) masked with
Neutral. Each trial was 1500ms, containing the 20ms-Target, 80ms-Mask,
and 1400ms-Blank screen. Data were preprocessed and analyzed in SPM8.
CECS-anger was the covariate of interest, controlling for age and gender.
The threshold was set at FDR corrected p<0.05. Result: There was a cluster
located within the rostral anterior cingulate gyrus (rACC) (MNI: -2, 36, 8;
297 voxels; p=0.006, FDR corrected) showing a significant positive correlation between Anger/Control contrast and CECS anger score. No significant
correlation was found with Happy or Fearful faces. Conclusion: Functional
activation within rACC was positively correlated with higher CECS anger
suppression during masked-anger perception, suggesting a role of rACC in
emotional control.

F24
THE INTERACTION BETWEEN LEARNING AND MOOD Eran

Eldar1,
Yael Niv ; Princeton University — Fluctuations of good and bad mood characterize the emotional life of many. We show that fluctuations of mood
may emerge from trial-and-error learning if we assume that surprising
outcomes affect mood and mood biases perception of outcomes (i.e., the
same outcome seems better when in a good mood and worse when in a bad
mood). Accordingly, we show empirically that a large surprising outcome
affects both mood and the perception of subsequent outcomes, specifically
in individuals who are susceptible to mood fluctuations: In participants
who were characterized as susceptible by the hypomanic personality scale,
both choice behavior and blood-oxygen-level-dependent striatal response
to reward reflected higher valuation of rewards received after a mood-affecting gain, as compared to rewards received after a mood-affecting loss.
Less susceptible participants were not biased by mood in either choice
behavior or neural response. We present a reinforcement-learning model
that captures the proposed interaction between learning and mood. The
1 1

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

199

Poster Session F	
model outperforms standard reinforcement learning in explaining trial-totrial choices and striatal activity of participants whose behavior reflected a
mood-related bias. The model correctly predicts participants’ mood, and
the reward-perception bias that it infers from behavior correlates with individual susceptibility to mood fluctuations. In sum, our findings suggest
that learning affects and is affected by mood, and that the dynamics that
result from this interaction may contribute to mood instability. The findings uncover a decision bias relevant to behavioral-economics models of
sequential decisions. Our theory may inspire novel approaches to the study
and treatment of disorders of mood instability.

F25
THE ERP STUDY OF THE BRAIN ACTIVATIONS IN PROCESSING
CONGRUENCY OF FACIAL EXPRESSION AND EMOTIONAL PROSODY Liwen Lee1,3, Shih-tseng Tina Huang1,2,3, Ming-Chun Lee1,3; 1Department

of Psychology, National Chung-Cheng University, Taiwan, 2Center for research
in Cognitive Science, National Chung-Cheng University, Taiwan, 3Laboratory of
Brain and Emotion, Department of Psychology, National Chung-Cheng University, Taiwan — The present study used ERP to investigate the brain activations in processing acoustic emotional prosody and facial expression.
Twenty young adults participated. Congruous and incongruous of angry
and sad face and voice were presented. In each congruous pair, an angry
(or sad) voice fragment accompanied with a congruous angry (or sad) facial
expression. Each incongruous pair contained an angry voice prosody was
paired with a sad face, or a sad face paired with an angry voice. Ten runs
of 80 trials were presented with two kinds of percentage in combinations of
the congruous and incongruous trials. Five of them contained 85% congruous trials (as standard pairs) and 15% incongruous trials (as deviant pairs).
The other five runs contained 85% incongruous trials and 15% congruous
trials. The results found both P120 and N170 at Pz was higher than Fz and
Cz and N170 at Cz was higher than Fz. It was also found that higher mean
amplitudes (MAs) of P300-500 in processing incongruous standard trials
and congruous deviants when the standard trials were incongruous at Fz
and Pz. Similar results were found in P500-800 at Fz and Pz. The Results
suggested higher activation at the frontal and parietal lobes in the integration of face with voice information in the processing of affect.

F26
SOCIAL OBJECT KNOWLEDGE: EVERYDAY OBJECTS VARY IN
THEIR SOCIAL POTENTIAL Kathryn Russo1, Vanessa Troiani1,2, Brooks

Rudy1, Ingrid Olson1; 1Temple University, 2Center for Autism Research — The
mental representations of common objects consist of visual features as well
as semantic and social-emotional information. In many instances, these
various attributes are so indelibly linked that they are nearly inseparable.
For instance, an image of a stroller is more than shape and color - it has an
important social attributes such as being a common baby shower gift that is
typically pushed by parents to transport infants. Similarly, previous work
has found that seemingly neutral objects vary on a subtle emotional dimension, termed “microvalences”. Here we present a corpus of objects that
vary on several dimensions, including social and emotional dimensions,
and discuss the relationship between this social property and other highlevel object properties. Three sets of participants (N=29) independently
rated a set of 795 objects on three property dimensions using the following instructions: Is this object social or non-social? Is this object pleasant or
unpleasant? How many people would you share this object with? Participants consistently identified 158 of the images as social (average>7 across
participants) and 175 images as non-social (average <1 across participants).
When these images were grouped into High Social and Low Social objects,
categories significantly differed on their pleasantness (t(332)=7.2, p<0.001)
but not on their sharedness. This shared variance between the social dimension was confirmed with a significant correlation between the two object
dimensions across all images r(793)=0.246, p<0.001. Further exploration of
the relationship between this social dimension and other high-level object
properties will inform explorations of social knowledge in the brain.

F27
CHARACTERIZING THE SOCIAL PROFILES OF ADULTS WITH WILLIAMS SYNDROME THROUGH NARRATIVE AND QUESTIONNAIRE

Casey O’Loughlin1,2, Philip Lai1,2,3, Judy Reilly3, Ursula Bellugi1; 1The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California, 2University of California San

200

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
Diego, La Jolla, California, 3San Diego State University, San Diego, California
— Williams Syndrome (WS) is a genetic disorder, sometimes characterized
by an unusual inclination towards hyper-sociability. Children with WS are
considered gregarious and display an almost magnetic attraction to strangers. The goal of the present study is to investigate two separate channels
of sociability in adults with WS. Subjects included 21 adults with WS, and
19 typically developing (TD) adults. Sociability was measured through
duration of eye contact with the experimenter while subjects described
a complex scene in a picture, and via the Salk Institute Sociability Questionnaire (SISQ), which provides an independent measure of propensity
of individuals to approach strangers. This pattern has not been frequently
reported in TD adults. Differences in duration of eye contact over time were
significant, with the WS group engaging in more eye contact than the TD
group (p<.026). The WS group spent 25.8% of the time looking at the experimenter, compared to only 13.2% in the TD group. On the SISQ, the WS
group were rated far more likely to approach strangers than were the TD
group (p<.001). With regards to the number of words produced, no significant differences were found (p=.336). Thus the WS adults showed a greater
affinity toward social interaction through eye contact as well as through
interacting with strangers. Importantly, this provides added information
about how WS adults behave through two separate social dimensions. Specifically, differences in eye gaze may index the characteristic WS attraction
toward social interaction, suggesting the power of the genetic underpinnings of the disorder throughout their lifetime.

F28
DOES CULTURE PLAY A ROLE IN THE PROCESSING OF EMOTIONAL NON-VERBAL VOCALIZATIONS? AN EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS STUDY Cameron Davidson1, Marcelo Dias2, Margarida Vas-

concelos2, Jason Ridge2, Andréia Rauber2, Laura Donaldson1, Amanda Henderson1, Kristina Hernandez1, Gabrielle Andrick1, Heather Daly1, Kristin Perrone-McGovern1, Stephanie Simon-Dack1, Oscar Gonçalves1, Ana P. Pinheiro1;
1
Ball State University, 2Universidade do Minho — We investigated the role of
focused attention in the processing of non-verbal vocalizations with neutral and emotional (happy and angry) valence, by using the event related
potentials (ERP) methodology. A modified version of the auditory oddball task was used. Stimuli were vocalizations selected from the Montréal
Affective Voices database, which were presented pseudorandomly in four
blocks. Each block was composed of 210 standard and 40 deviant vocalizations (block 1: neutral standards and happy deviants; block 2: happy
standards and neutral deviants; block 3: neutral standards and angry deviants; block 4: angry standard and neutral deviants). In order to examine
cross-cultural differences in vocal emotional processing, eleven American
and fifteen Portuguese individuals participated in the study. The analysis
of P300 was based on a subtraction method (the ERP activity of a standard
was subtracted to the ERP activity of the same sound presented as a deviant). P300 mean amplitude and peak latency were measured from a time
window ranging from 350 to 450ms post-stimulus onset. In American participants, P300 amplitude tended to be more positive for angry relative to
happy vocalizations (p= 0.072), and was increased for neutral (presented in
the context of angry sounds) compared to happy vocalizations (p=0.029).
In the Portuguese sample, P300 amplitude was more positive for happy
relative to neutral (presented in the context of happy sounds) vocalizations
(p=0.015), and for angry relative to neutral (presented in a happy context)
vocalizations (p=0.003). These findings suggest that the attentive processing of emotional vocalizations may be modulated by culture.

F29
TITLE: ROLE OF ROSTRAL ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN EMOTION REGULATION Akos Szekely1,

Wendy Heller2, Gregory A. Miller3, Aprajita Mohanty1; 1SUNY Stony Brook University, 2University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 3University of California at
Los Angeles — The rostral ventral anterior cingulate cortex (rACC) has
strong anatomical connections to other regions of the ACC and to amygdala, insula, and motor and prefrontal (PFC) cortices. An examination of its
functional connectivity to limbic, motor, and prefrontal cortices can clarify
how it contributes to the integration of emotional, cognitive, and behavioral processes. This integration is critical for emotion regulation in normal
individuals and may play a role in emotion dysregulation in anxiety. In
the present study, three groups of adult participants, 11 high in anxious

2014 Annual Meeting	
apprehension, 10 high in anxious arousal, and 18 controls scoring low in
both, indicated the ink color of unpleasant and neutral words during fMRI.
RT was slower for unpleasant than for neutral words. For unpleasant relative to neutral words, rACC showed elevated functional connectivity with
anterior insular cortex, dorsal ACC , dorsolateral PFC, and motor cortex.
This connectivity was reduced in anxious groups. The anxious arousal
group showed stronger rACC connectivity with left lateral parietal lobe for
unpleasant versus neutral words than did the anxious apprehension and
control groups. These findings provide evidence for the critical role rACC
plays in integrating interoceptive emotional experience (via connectivity
to insular cortex) with appropriate cognitive and behavioral processes (via
connectivity to dACC, DLPFC, and motor cortices) to regulate emotional
interference in normal individuals as well as its dysregulation in individuals with anxiety.

F30
CULTURAL DIFFERENCES IN THE EMOTION-INDUCED MEMORY
TRADE-OFF EFFECT Laura Ligouri1, Aysecan Boduroglu2, Angela Gutchess1;
1

Brandeis University, 2Boğaziçi University — Numerous previous studies
reveal emotion trade-off effects, with emotional items (of positive or negative valence) impairing memory for neutral background information,
compared to when neutral items are present. This research, however, has
primarily been conducted with Americans; it is possible that Easterners,
who attend to contexts more than Westerners, may show a reduced emotion trade-off effect or exhibit differences in the tradeoffs for positively vs.
negatively valenced items. The present study investigated whether culture
impacts the emotion trade-off effect, comparing participants originating
from Turkey, a country shaped by both Eastern and Western values, to
those from the United States, a Western country. Participants (44 Americans, 32 Turks) studied complex visual scenes that included an item (positive, negative, or neutral) placed on a neutral background. Participants
later completed a recognition memory test for the items and backgrounds
separately. A 2x2x3 ANOVA tested the effect of culture (U.S. or Turkish)
on memory of a given component of an image (item or background) as
related to a specific emotional valence (positive, neutral, or negative) of the
item. An emotional-induced memory trade-off occurred when there was
worse memory for backgrounds that had been paired with an emotional
item as opposed to a neutral item. Results indicated that in comparison to
American participants, Turkish participants showed a reduced emotional-induced memory trade-off effect. These results support the idea that culture mediates memory for emotional events, specifically impacting emotion-induced memory trade-offs. Implications for cross-cultural differences
in neural regions underlying emotional memory will be discussed.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Self perception
F31
ANTERIOR INSULA ACTIVITY MANIPULATION THROUGH REALTIME FMRI FEEDBACK INFLUENCES ERROR AWARENESS Andrea

Caria1, Rahim Malekshahi1, Niels Birbaumer1, Anil Seth2; 1University of Tübingen, 2University of Sussex — A range of previous literature emphasized a
core role for the anterior insula cortex (AIC) in interoceptive processing
supporting both autonomic control and conscious access to emotional
states. This study builds on our previous results showing that both healthy
participants and patients can achieve successful regulation of insular cortex
that in turn is associated with changes in behaviour and brain connectivity.
Here, we adopted an instrumental learning of BOLD response paradigm to
study the effects of AIC manipulation on human awareness. We aimed to
assess the effects on conscious error perception using an antisaccadic task
in which subjects were required to fixate a central position on the screen
and to make an antisaccade (i.e., to look away from this stimulus) to an
abruptly appearing peripheral stimulus. During rtfMRI feedback training
three subjects were trained to voluntarily control the local BOLD signal of
the right AIC. The three subjects learned to control the BOLD signal in the
target region. Post-to-pre assessment showed no differences in error rate
of aware and unaware trials comparing last to first regulation condition.
Interestingly, in two subjects an increase of error aware rate was observed
in post error trials in the last regulation condition with respect to the first.
These preliminary results suggest that increased activity in the right AIC

Poster Session F
might modulate error awareness. In particular, augmented insular activity
associated with increased sensitivity to interoceptive signals might lead to
increased error awareness.

F32
NEURAL CORRELATES OF OWN, FAMILIAR AND UNFAMILIAR
VOICE RECOGNITION Christine Heinisch1, Patrik Roser2, Martin Brüne2;

1
Friedrich-Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 2Ruhr University Bochum
— Voice recognition is a crucial part of social interaction. Although highly
familiar, listing to the own voice usually sounds strange. There are only
few studies on the cortical responses related to the recognition of the own
voice and studies on voice identity matching are still in its infancies. In the
present study, twelve subjects listened to syllables spoken with their own,
a familiar (friend) and an unfamiliar voice in an oddball paradigm. The
Mismatch Negativity (MMN) and the P3 were analysed. Amplitudes and
latencies of all voices were correlated to the experienced nearness to the
person with the familiar voice, indicating that the context influences brain
activity towards all stimuli. Furthermore, the results of the experimental
group were compared to a control group for whom the same set of voices
was completely unfamiliar. Results indicate that early potentials differ
between the unfamiliar and the two other familiar voices at fronto-central
areas, lateralised to the right hemisphere. Activation for the own voice to
the familiar voice differs in a later potential occurring after 300ms. This is
the first study comparing the own voice to familiar and unfamiliar voices
in an EEG paradigm. It can be stated, that the brain is able to discriminate
between these three voice familiarity very early. In the brain the own voice
is processed different from the familiar voice.

F33
SELF-ENHANCEMENT INFLUENCES MEDIAL FRONTAL CORTEX
ALPHA POWER TO SOCIAL REJECTION FEEDBACK Jordan Leitner1,
Eric Hehman2, James Jones1, Chad Forbes1; 1University of Delaware, 2Dartmouth College — While previous research has demonstrated that individuals are motivated to self-enhance, the neurocognitive mechanisms and temporal dynamics of self-enhancement are poorly understood. The current
research examined whether self-enhancing motivations affect early-stage
perceptual processing of social feedback. Participants who varied in self-enhancement motivations received accept and reject feedback while EEG
was recorded. Following this task, we measured perceptions of feedback
by asking participants to estimate the number of times they were rejected.
Source localization and time-frequency analyses were used to examine
alpha power, a neural oscillation associated with attention. Alpha power
in the medial frontal cortex (MFC) fully mediated the relationship between
self-enhancement motivations and rejection estimates. Specifically, greater
self-enhancement motivations predicted decreased MFC alpha power
to reject compared to accept feedback, which predicted decreased rejection estimates. These findings suggest that self-enhancement motivations
decrease attention to social rejection by influencing how the MFC processes
social feedback.

F34
PAYING ATTENTION TO SELF: PERSONALLY SALIENT CUES
AFFECT SELF-REFERENT AND AFFECTIVE PROCESSING IN
DEPRESSION Roselinde Kaiser1,2, Jessica Andrews-Hanna3, Franziska

Goer1,2, Miranda Beltzer1,2, Diego Pizzagalli1,2; 1McLean Hospital, 2Harvard
Medical School, 3University of Colorado Boulder — Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is characterized by increased attention to negative information,
reduced attention to positive information, and difficulty disengaging from
self-referent thought. However, the relative contributions of emotional
valence or personal salience to cognitive biases remain unclear. The present
studies aimed to disentangle such effects. In Study 1, individuals with or
without MDD performed a task in which they evaluated the self-descriptiveness of emotional words while ignoring distractor images of themself or a gender/race-matched stranger. Results showed that participants
were faster and more accurate evaluating self-descriptive words in the
presence of self- than other-images, suggesting priming effects of self-imagery. Valence and depression moderated these effects: priming emerged
for depressed individuals responding to positive words, and healthy individuals responding to negative words. Critically, opposing affective biases
detected in the other-image condition drove this pattern. In the absence of
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

201

Poster Session F	
self-imagery, depression predicted poorer accuracy for positive traits, but
psychiatric health predicted poorer accuracy for negative traits. In the presence of self-imagery, affective biases were reduced for both depressed and
healthy individuals, i.e. better recognition of positive and negative traits,
respectively. These findings converge with schema theory, which holds
that the tendency to ruminate on negative self-referent thought strengthens its availability for information processing. Accordingly, negative beliefs
about the self may be easily accessible in depression, regardless of stimulus
context, whereas retrieval of positive beliefs may be facilitated by priming. Ongoing studies investigate the effects of self-imagery when task goals
change (Study 2) and the neural substrates of these effects (Study 3).

F35
RESTORING JUSTICE: PUNISHING ON BEHALF OF ANOTHER,
BUT NOT FOR ONESELF Oriel FeldmanHall1, Peter Sokol-Hessner1, Jay Van

Bavel1, Elizabeth Phelps1; 1New York University, Department of Psychology —
Classic social psychology and experimental economics studies argue that
punishment is the ubiquitous response to violations of fairness norms. Here
we show that expanding choice options (e.g. to include compensation of the
victim) reveals that alternative forms of justice restoration are strongly preferred to punitive measures. Furthermore, we find that these other-regarding preferences for justice restoration are differentially deployed depending on the perspective of the deciding agent. When people are the recipient
of an unfair offer, they prefer to compensate themselves and apply no
punishment to the transgressor. However, when people observe a fairness
violation targeted at another, people compensate the victim and punish the
transgressor. Such choices were made far more swiftly and automatically
compared to the same choices made for the self, suggesting that retributive
decisions involving the self require greater deliberation. Together, our findings challenge the classic theory that humans have strong other-regarding
preferences to punish violators of fairness norms. Instead, when we are personally a victim of a fairness violation, it seems that we only punish when
we must; when there are other options to restore justice, punishment is no
longer preferred.

F36
FROM ARMCHAIR TO WHEELCHAIR: HOW PATIENTS WITH A
LOCKED-IN SYNDROME INTEGRATE BODILY CHANGES IN EXPERIENCED IDENTITY Marie-Christine Nizzi1, Athena Demertzi2, Oliva Gos-

series2, Marie-Aurelie Bruno2, Francois Jouen3, Steven Laureys2; 1Harvard University, 2Universite de Liege, 3Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes — Different
sort of people are interested in personal identity. Philosophers frequently
ask what it takes to remain oneself. Caregivers imagine their loved-one’s
experience. Healthcare professionals rely on their technical knowledge. But
all of them think from the armchair: they can only make assumptions about
what it is like to experience a sudden and massive bodily change. Patients
with a locked-in syndrome (LIS) suffer a full body paralysis without cognitive impairment. They can tell us how LIS impacts their sense of self. In
this study, 44 chronic LIS patients and 20 age-matched healthy healthcare
professionals (MD) answered a 15-items questionnaire targeting: (A) global
evaluation of experienced identity, (B) body representation and (C) experienced meaning in life. Literature so far assumes that LIS patients reporting
a preserved identity do so in virtue of their preserved cognitive functions
and despite their bodily changes. In our patients, self-reported identity was
strongly correlated with body representation and experienced meaning in
life. Patients’ reports differed with controls’ predictions in the experienced
meaning in life. These results suggest that the paralyzed body remains
a strong component of patients’ experienced identity, that patients can
adjust to drastic objectives changes when perceived as meaningful and that
healthcare professionals fail in predicting patients’ experience. We draw
both clinical recommendations and ethical implications of these findings,
namely: to increase physical therapy aiming at body integration on top of
rehabilitation purposes and to develop tools to access non-communicative
patients’ own decision.

F37
FUNCTIONAL RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND POSTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX DURING
SELF-REFERENTIAL PROCESSING Yunjin Bak1, Kyeong-jin Tark1, Hyo

Jeong Kim1, Do-Joon Yi1; 1Yonsei University — It is thought that the cortical

202

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
midline structures (CMS) including medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and
posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) are involved in self-referential processing.
However, it remains unclear how each sub-region of the CMS dynamically
interplays with each other. Here, we used fMRI with a modified version
of self-reference paradigm to examine the functional connectivity patterns
between sub-regions of the CMS during self-referential processing (Lee,
Ahn, & Yi, 2013). In each trial, participants viewed a trait adjective and
judged how well it described a given person (referent: myself vs. president)
from a given point of view (viewpoint: my own view vs. my friend’s view).
The results showed a significant two-way interaction in bilateral PCC,
temporal poles and left temporoparietal junction (lTPJ); specifically, these
regions showed greater activity for thinking of a president (rather than the
self) when participants thought from their own viewpoint, but no difference for two different referents when they thought from their friend’s view.
In contrast, mPFC showed greater activity when evaluating themselves
regardless of the type of viewpoints. We further conducted a generalized
psychophysiological interaction (gPPI) analysis with a PCC region as a seed
and found that the connectivity between PCC and mPFC was greater when
participants evaluated themselves, compared to a president. These findings
corroborates a hypothesis that the self-related information may be initially
represented in mPFC and integrated with social perspectives in PCC.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development
& aging
F38
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CREATIVITY AND COGNITIVE CONTROL
DIFFERS FOR YOUNGER AND OLDER ADULTS Jennifer L. Mozolic1,

Jonna Kwiatkowski2, Michael F. Neelon3; 1Warren Wilson College, 2Mars Hill University, 3University of North Carolina at Asheville — Creative problem solving
requires a number of complex brain processes, many of which are likely
influenced by the cognitive and sensory changes that occur with age. Currently, there are several conflicting ideas about the nature of the association
between creativity and cognitive control, and there is much still to learn
about this relationship, especially within the context of aging. This study
enrolled 41 older adults (mean age = 70) and 42 younger adults (mean
age = 21) in behavioral testing and a subset of these individuals in EEG
testing in order to examine how the relationship between cognitive control and creativity changes with age. All participants were healthy and had
normal sensory and cognitive function. Older adults demonstrated significantly poorer performance than younger adults on cognitive control tasks
of visual working memory and spatial reasoning, however, there were no
age-related differences on the Remote Associates Test (RAT) of creative
problem solving. Interestingly, there was a significant positive correlation
between these measures of cognitive control and RAT performance in older
adults (visual working memory: r=.55. p=.032; spatial reasoning: r=.38.
p=.013), but no significant correlation between these measures in younger
adults (visual working memory: r=.13; spatial reasoning: r=-.076). Additionally, EEG results partially support previous findings (Gazzaley et al.,
2008) suggesting that there are age-related deficits in our ability to suppress
distracting information and this may play a role in the altered relationship
between cognitive control and creativity observed in healthy older adults.

F39
AGE-RELATED DECLINE IN DUAL-TASK PROCESSING IS RELATED
TO REDUCED PREFRONTAL ACTIVATION Benjamin Boller1,2, Samira

Mellah1, Sylvie Belleville1,2; 1Centre de Recherche de l’Institut Universitaire de
Gériatrie de Montréal, 2Université de Montréal — Many studies have reported
an age-related decrease in dual-task performance. It has been proposed
that the ability to perform dual-tasks is supported by attentional control
processes. Neurophysiologically, attentional control processes involve the
prefrontal cortex. Moreover, the prefrontal cortex is particularly vulnerable
to changes associated with aging. The purpose of the current study was to
examine the relationship between aging and regional brain activity (fMRI,
3T) while performing a dual-task. Forty healthy older adults aged 60 to 84
performed a dual-task that was comprised of a visual detection task and a
visual alpha-arithmetic judgment task. Participants were instructed to control their attention by modulating the proportion of attentional resources
allocated to each task (20%, 50% and 80%). Positive and negative correla-

2014 Annual Meeting	
tions between the BOLD signal and the participant age were analyzed with
SPM8. To account for individual differences years of education, gender and
MOCA score were included as covariates. This analysis revealed a negative
correlation between age and BOLD signal in the medial prefrontal regions
(mPFC, BA 10), suggesting decreased neural efficiency for the oldest individuals. These results are even more striking in that this negative correlation was found for each of the three attentional modulation conditions.
Accordingly, age-related reduction of activation in the medial prefrontal
cortex may underlie an age-related decline of attentional control processes.

F40
OF GOALS AND HABITS: AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN MODEL-BASED AND MODEL-FREE LEARNING AND DECISION-MAKING Benjamin Eppinger1, Hauke R. Heekeren2, Shu-Chen Li1,3; 1Chair of

Lifespan Developmental Neuroscience, TU Dresden, Germany, 2Department
of Education and Psychology, Freie Universität Berlin, Germany, 3Center for
Lifespan Psychology, Max-Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany — Foresighted, strategic decisions depend on the ability to learn the
value of future rewards and the means to achieve them. In two recent studies we investigated age-related impairments in learning of sequential task
structures that lead to future reward. In the first study we used a three-state
Markov decision and functional MRI to investigate age differences in the
neural systems that mediate the learning of transition structures. We found
pronounced age-related learning impairments, which were associated with
an under-recruitment of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) in the elderly. Furthermore, our results show that in younger adults learning of transition
structures is characterized by abrupt shifts in PFC activity, which were
predictive of choice behavior. In older adults PFC activity was delayed,
less pronounced and not related to behavior. In the second study we examined the interplay of goal-directed (model-based) and habitual (model-free)
decision mechanisms using a two-stage Markov task. The results show a
shift from model-based to model-free decision-making with age. This shift
in decision strategies is particularly pronounced in situations in which
unexpected rewards signal the need for behavioral adaptations. In these
situations, younger adults use their knowledge of the task structure to optimize decision-making, whereas older adults show perseverative behavior.
Taken together, our results suggest that age-related impairments in the
learning of sequential task structures are related to functional deficits in the
PFC. Age-related impairments in the application of model-based decision
strategies are due to perseverative behavior in situations in which unexpected rewards signal the need for behavioral adjustments.

F41
PREFRONTAL CORTEX RECRUITMENT DURING WORKING
MEMORY FILTERING IN ADOLESCENTS AND ADULTS Matthew

Peverill1, Amy Finn2, Katie McLaughlin3, Margaret Sheridan1,4; 1Boston Children’s Hospital, 2Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 3University of Washington, 4Harvard Medical School — Previous research has demonstrated that
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex recruitment increases with load and presence
of distractors during working memory encoding. It has been amply demonstrated that this effect of load on prefrontal activation increases across age
from childhood through adulthood (Thomason, et al., 2008), however, the
development of working memory filtering remains relatively unexplored.
We recruited 14 adults (mean age 26, sd=4.915) and 19 adolescents (mean
age 17, sd=1.45) to participate in an fMRI study of visual-spatial working
memory. Participants were asked to remember the location of 2 or 4 stimuli.
When 2 stimuli were presented they were sometimes presented with two
distractors which participants were told to ignore (McKnab & Klingberg,
2008). Images were acquired at the Center for Brain Science at Harvard University on a 3T Siemens Tim Trio MRI scanner and analyzed using Freesurfer and FSL through Nipype. Adult and Adolescents performed similarly on the task. There was a trend towards better performance in adults
(p=.058), but there were no significant age by condition interactions. We
observed that dorsolateral prefrontal and occipital activation for high relative to low load trials increased with age, consistent with previous work
(Scherf et al., 2006). For the distractor relative to non-distractor trials, we
observed increasing frontal and occipital activation with age. These findings are consistent with a difference in strategy for adults relative to adolescents where older participants filtered less, reflecting age related increases
in working memory capacity.

Poster Session F

F42
RECALL-TO-REJECT: STRATEGIES TO REDUCE FALSE RECOGNITION IN PATIENTS WITH MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT Neil Nad-

karni1, Sean Flannery1,2, Rebecca Deason3, Bruno Frustace1,2, Sahar Ahadi1,2,
Brandon Ally4, Andrew Budson1,2; 1Center for Translational Cognitive Neuroscience, VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA,, 2Boston University Alzheimer’s Disease Center, Department of Neurology, Boston University School of
Medicine, 3Texas State University, San Marcos, TX, 4Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN — Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) patients often demonstrate
high rates of false memories, which can often create stressful and frustrating situations for both patients and caregivers in everyday life. What types
of interventions can be used to enhance the ability of MCI patients to use a
“recall-to-reject” metacognitive strategy to lower their false memory rates?
We set out to use the picture superiority effect (remembering pictures
better than words), which has been shown to be at least as large of an effect
in MCI patients as in healthy older controls, to help MCI patients use this
recall-to-reject strategy in a simulation of real-world memory task. In this
experiment, MCI patients and healthy older adults were asked to simulate
preparing for and then taking a trip to the market. First, subjects studied
30 pictures of items in their “cupboard,” and then they studied a list of 30
words of items on their shopping list. At test, participants saw 90 pictures
(30 cupboard, 30 list, 30 new) as they would if walking down the market
aisles, and are provided with either standard or metacognitive instructions.
With standard instructions, they were asked if they needed to buy the item.
With the metacognitive instructions, they were asked a series of questions
to help guide them through a recall-to-reject strategy. Our results showed
that the metacognitive instructions did significantly reduce the false
memory rates for the MCI patients. Further studies need investigate how to
best implement these practical strategies into the everyday lives of patients.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Goal
maintenance & switching
F43
COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY IN AN INSTRUCTION-BASED RULE
REVERSAL TASK CUEING PARADIGM Yiquan Shi1, Uta Wolfensteller1,

Torsten Schubert2, Hannes Ruge1; 1Technische Universität Dresden, 2Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin — Cognitive flexibility is essential in an environment full of changing demands. Using fMRI, we compared multiple
levels of demand changes and explored the underlying neural mechanisms
for level-specific flexible control. On a global block level, rules guiding
responses for a certain number of trials were reversed in half of the blocks.
On a local trial level, switching between different rules was required in half
of the trials. The current rules were instructed either globally or additionally locally on each trial. Each block started with a display of the current
rules for 4.5s (female-left, male-right for face task; odd-left, even-right for
number task; or the reversed mappings). After this block-level instruction, each trial in the block was cued by a task-cue (e g., face) or a rule-cue
which explicitly reminded subjects of the current rule (e. g., female-left,
male-right).The results suggest a fast initiation of reversed rules during
block-level instructions, which relies on elevated activation in the common
executive control network including dorsal pre-motor cortex, pre-SMA, lateral prefrontal cortex, anterior insula, and parietal regions. Another large
scale network showed increased activation throughout practice within a
block. This network overlapped with that observed previously for instruction-based learning of novel rules and included medial anterior prefrontal cortex, anterior caudate, posterior insula, superior temporal gyrus, and
parahippocampus. These results indicate that instructed rule reversal is
achieved through complementary neural mechanisms: one for fast initiation of rules and another for pragmatic implementation of rules.

F44
DISTINCT FRONTO-STRIATAL COUPLINGS REVEAL THE DOUBLE-FACED NATURE OF DIFFERENTIAL RESPONSE OUTCOMES
IN INSTRUCTION-BASED LEARNING OF GOAL-DIRECTED ACTION
Hannes Ruge1, Uta Wolfensteller1; 1Department of Psychology,Technische Universitaet Dresden — It is well-established that distinct striatal sub-regions

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

203

Poster Session F	
serve purely stimulus-based habitual action on the one hand and goal-directed action directed towards anticipated outcomes on the other hand.
Recent research suggests that striatal areas interact with lateral prefrontal
cortex (LPFC) when learning of novel contingencies is based on explicit
rule representations. Yet it remains largely unknown whether under such
model-based learning conditions a similar striatal differentiation emerges
through fronto-striatal interactions. First evidence suggests that LPFC-caudate coupling but not LPFC-putamen coupling is sensitive to response-outcome (R-O) contingency during instructed stimulus-response (S-R) learning. Yet, sensitivity to R-O contingency alone is not sufficient to conclude
an involvement in goal-directed action. The present fMRI study addressed
the fundamental question whether R-O sensitive LPFC-caudate coupling
indicates merely the rapid learning of R-O associations by itself or rather
their actual usage for goal-directed action selection. We correlated learning-related functional couplings with behavioral indices of both R-O association strength and R-O usage. R-O strength was exclusively correlated
with LPFC-putamen coupling consistent with a habit-like nature of R-O
associations. By contrast, the behavioral index of actual R-O usage was
correlated with LPFC-caudate coupling consistent with an involvement in
goal-directed action selection. This fronto-striatal differentiation was paralleled by similar dissociations between fronto-hippocampal couplings,
suggesting a tripartite neural architecture of instruction-based learning.
Together, our results suggest a similar differentiation of the striatal machinery under model-based learning conditions as described previously for
feedback-driven learning conditions - with the important distinction that
this striatal differentiation emerges specifically through functional couplings with the LPFC.

F45
DYSFUNCTIONAL ERROR-RELATED EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS
(ERPS) IN INCARCERATED ADOLESCENTS WITH PSYCHOPATHIC
TRAITS J. Michael Maurer1, Vaughn R. Steele1,2, Lora M. Cope1,2, Vince D.

Calhoun1,2,3, Kent A. Kiehl1,2; 1The Mind Research Network and Lovelace Biomedical and Environmental Research Institute, 2University of New Mexico, 3Yale
School of Medicine — Adult incarcerated offenders with psychopathic traits
show an increased propensity towards impulsivity, violence, incarceration,
and recidivism. Recent evidence suggests that youth with psychopathic
traits show similar personality traits, remaining constant throughout the
life span. Identifying specific cognitive deficits in juvenile offenders consistent with adult psychopathy is necessary to further develop treatment techniques aimed towards early intervention. Here, incarcerated male juvenile
offenders (n = 100) performed a Go/NoGo response inhibition task while
event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded. Both the error-related negativity (ERN/Ne) and the error-related positivity (Pe) elicited by a response
error were analyzed with classic windowed components and principal
component analysis. As predicted, and consistent with adults, juveniles
with high, compared to those with low levels of psychopathic traits, exhibited similar ERN/Ne amplitudes, but reduced Pe amplitudes. These results
suggest that juveniles with elevated psychopathic traits are deficient in
post-error processing (as indexed by the Pe), but not in error-monitoring
(as indexed by the ERN/Ne). Linear regressions were performed, associating reduced Pe amplitude with the developmental, antisocial, impulsive,
and early behavioral problems associated with high levels of psychopathic
traits. This is the first evidence to suggest that juvenile delinquents with
high psychopathic traits are deficient in post-error processing. Successful treatment approaches could further benefit by specifically targeting
post-error processing in juveniles with high psychopathic traits.

F46
AN FMRI EXAMINATION OF BILINGUAL NON-VERBAL TASK
SWITCHING Kelly Vaughn1, Maya Ravid1, Aurora Ramos1, Arturo Hernan-

dez1; 1University of Houston — How do bilinguals switch between tasks and
what factors may help to reduce switching costs? Previous research using
non-verbal switching tasks examined differences between bilinguals and
monolinguals, but not differences between cue presentation and response
trials, nor the effects of second language age of acquisition (AOA). A group
of Spanish-English bilinguals (n=44) performed a rule-switching task inside
an MRI scanner. Participants switched between responding to the shape or
color of a stimulus, signaled by a single non-verbal cue. The cues (switch
or non-switch) were separated by 8-12 response stimuli. Activation in cue

204

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
and stimulus response trials differed, along with activations in the switch
and non-switch conditions. While greater activity in visual and cognitive
control regions appeared during switch compared to non-switch cues, the
opposite pattern emerged for switch versus non-switch response trials.
Furthermore, regression analyses indicated that AOA is positively related
to activity in visuo-motor areas during switch response trials. Greater activation for switch cues suggests that participants engaged in more effortful
task switching during the cue. Greater activation during the non-switch
response trials may indicate that bilinguals are attempting to recall/maintain the previous rule. Additionally, higher AOA may put bilinguals at a
disadvantage for this task. These results extend previous studies by showing that switching and maintaining a rule may involve many of the same
neural areas in differing configurations. Furthermore, type of bilingualism
may interact with these neural areas. Hence, learning a second language
later in life may result in less efficient switching on non-verbal tasks.

F47
OCULOMOTOR TASK-SWITCHING: UNIDIRECTIONAL REACTION
TIME SWITCH-COST WHEN ALTERNATING FROM A NON-STANDARD TO A STANDARD RESPONSE Jeff Weiler1, Matthew Heath1; 1The

University of Western Ontario — The non-standard antisaccade task requires
the top-down and cognitively based inhibition of a standard prosaccade
(i.e., response suppression) and the execution of a saccade to a target’s mirror-symmetrical location. Recent work by our group has shown that the
completion of an antisaccade imparts a selective reaction time (RT) switchcost on subsequent prosaccades (i.e., unidirectional prosaccade switch-cost).
We, in turn, proposed that such a result reflects that response suppression
engenders a residual inhibition of the oculomotor networks supporting
prosaccades. Here we sought to confirm this hypothesis by determining
whether prosaccades requiring response suppression similarly increase
the RTs of subsequent prosaccades. To that end, participants alternated
between pro- and antisaccades in a pseudo-randomized trial order wherein
task instructions (prosaccade, antisaccade) were provided prior to response
cuing (i.e., target onset) or concurrent with response cuing. Notably, trials
wherein task instructions were given concurrent with response cuing
required the suppression of a stimulus-driven saccade and thus provided
equivalent response suppression across pro- and antisaccades. Results
showed that an increase in prosaccade RT was restricted to the completion
of a preceding antisaccade. Indeed, that prosaccades requiring response
suppression did not increase RT on subsequent prosaccade trials demonstrates that response suppression does not selectively engender a residual
inhibition of the oculomotor networks supporting prosaccades. Instead, the
present findings are in line with task-set inertia which predicts a unidirectional switch-cost when alternating from a response with a non-standard
stimulus-response mapping (e.g., antisaccade) to a response with standard
stimulus-response mapping (e.g., prosaccade).

F48
THE INTERPLAY BETWEEN EXECUTIVE CONTROL AND MEMORY
ENCODING IN TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY: AN FMRI STUDY Jes-

sica Paxton1,2, Nancy Chiaravalloti1,2, Glenn Wylie1,2; 1Kessler Foundation, 2Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey — Individuals with traumatic brain
injury (TBI) demonstrate impairment in the encoding phase of memory
and a tendency to remember more task-irrelevant (distracting) information than healthy adults (HCs). The current study investigated the effect
of executive control demands on the ability to encode task-relevant instead
of task-irrelevant information in TBI. A task-switching paradigm was used
to manipulate executive control demands, and memory was assessed for
both task-relevant and task-irrelevant information. Specifically, TBI and
HC participants switched between classifying words and pictures during
an fMRI scan, which was followed by a recognition test outside the scanner.
Picture-specific ROIs were derived from a scan with only picture stimuli
and determined to be task-relevant on picture task trials and task-irrelevant
on word task trials. Overall, TBI participants demonstrated greater recognition scores for task-irrelevant information and lower recognition scores
for task-relevant information compared with HCs. Differences between
groups were increased under high executive demands. While HCs showed
the expected pattern of greater task-relevant compared with task-irrelevant activation, individuals with TBI showed the reverse pattern (i.e.,
greater task-irrelevant compared with task-relevant activation). Results
suggest that individuals with TBI demonstrate deficits encoding task-rel-

2014 Annual Meeting	
evant information and inhibiting encoding of task-irrelevant information,
especially under high executive demands. Likewise, individuals with TBI
demonstrate a pattern of lower task-relevant activation compared with
HCs, suggesting that difficulty directing attention to task-relevant stimuli
contributes to memory encoding deficits post-TBI.

F49
INCREASED GLOBAL CONTROL IN SIMULTANEOUS INTERPRETERS Laura Babcock1, Antonino Vallesi2; 1Scuola Internazionale Superiore di

Studi Avanzati, Trieste, Italy, 2University of Padova, Italy — Previous research
has shown enhanced cognitive control in bilinguals, posited to be due
to practice managing two languages. In particular studies have shown
smaller switching costs on non-linguistic task-switching paradigms for
bilinguals compared to monolinguals and for bilinguals who regularly
code-switch than for those who do not. Despite the important effect that
dual language management has on cognitive abilities, little research has
focused on the cognitive control abilities of simultaneous interpreters. In
Simultaneous Interpretation (SI) the individual must comprehend a stream
of oral material in one language and with a few seconds delay produce
the same content in another language; a process that requires a high level
of language management. Thus, benefits in cognitive control beyond those
seen for bilingualism may be expected for SI. The present study examined
professional interpreters and matched multilinguals on a non-linguistic
task-switching paradigm. The interpreters were overall faster, on both single-task and mixed-task blocks, and they showed a smaller mixing cost (the
difference between single-task blocks and repetition trials in the mixed-task
block), though no difference in switching cost (the difference between repetition and switch trials in the mixed-task block). Switching costs index the
difficulty in switching between task-sets and often exhibit an advantage for
bilinguals. While mixing costs, which do not usually show advantages for
bilinguals, index the global sustained control required for maintaining two
task-sets. The results suggest that interpreters are generally advantaged in
this sustained control, a process that might enable the simultaneous access
to two languages needed in SI.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory
F50
WORKING MEMORY ACCUMULATES MORE INFORMATION
FROM REAL-WORLD OBJECTS THAN FROM SIMPLE STIMULI:
EVIDENCE FROM CONTRALATERAL DELAY ACTIVITY Timothy F.

Brady1, Viola S. Störmer1, George A. Alvarez1; 1Harvard University — Visual
working memory (WM) is an active storage system into which visual information can be encoded to make it resistant to interference from new perceptual input. Information about simple stimuli - colors, orientations - is
encoded into visual WM rapidly: in under 100ms, WM ‘fills up’, revealing a
stark capacity limit of 3-4 items. However, for real-world objects, the same
limits do not hold: with increasing encoding time, observers store more
real-world objects and do so with more detail (Brady et al., 2009). We tested
whether the benefit of extra time for real-world objects reflects the consolidation of information into long-term memory (LTM), as traditionally
assumed, or whether it reflects active WM storage. To address this directly,
we measured the contralateral delay activity (CDA)-a marker of WM capacity, which reflects active storage of visual information in the parietal lobe
(Vogel & Machizawa, 2004). We manipulated encoding time (200ms and
1s) for real-world objects and found that:(1) the CDA continues to build in
strength during the entire 1s encoding interval, and (2) this results in a CDA
that is significantly larger after 1s than after 200ms (t(11)=2.8, p=0.01). Thus,
the ability to remember more information about real-world objects with
increased encoding time does not merely reflect LTM consolidation, but
reflects active storage in WM. These results demonstrate that WM shows
different properties for simple stimuli and real-world stimuli, and suggest
that more work is needed to understand the properties of the WM system
as we use it in the real world.

Poster Session F

F51
REDUCING THE DECREMENT: TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT
STIMULATION REDUCES RESUMPTION TIME POST-INTERRUPTION Cyrus K. Foroughi1,2, Eric J. Blumberg1,2, Melissa R. Scheldrup1,2, Mat-

thew S. Peterson1,2, Raja Parasuraman1,2, Deborah A. Boehm-Davis1,2; 1Center
of Excellence in Neuroergonomics, Technology, and Cognition (CENTEC),
2
George Mason University — Previous research has shown working memory
is mediated by the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). Transcranial
direct current stimulation (tDCS) over the DLPFC modulates working
memory performance. Research has shown that working memory performance can predict resumption time for a task following an interruption.
The goal of this research was to determine whether tDCS would modulate
resumption time of a task post-interruption. Resumption lag, or the time
it takes to restart a task after being interrupted, is a common measure of
the disruptiveness of an interruption. Generally speaking, the longer the
resumption lag, the more disruptive an interruption is considered. Therefore, we hypothesized that anodal stimulation of the right DLPFC (F4 on
the 10-20 EEG system) would reduce resumption lag post-interruption,
reducing the overall disruptiveness of an interruption. Participants performed a procedural data entry task containing periodic interruptions
while receiving either active (2mA) or sham anodal stimulation of F10.
Participants receiving stimulation resumed tasks faster post-interruption
compared to sham. These data suggest that tDCS can be used to reduce the
decrements caused by interruptions.

F52
WORKING MEMORY FOR ACTION: EVIDENCE FOR USING MOTOR
REPRESENTATIONS IN ENCODING VISUO-SPATIAL STIMULUS
SEQUENCES Robert Langner1,2, Melanie A. Sternkopf2,3, Tanja S. Keller-

mann2,3, Christian Grefkes4,5, Florian Kurth6, Frank Schneider3, Karl Zilles2,
Simon B. Eickhoff1,2; 1Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Germany, 2Research
Centre Jülich (INM-1), Germany, 3RWTH Aachen University, Germany, 4University of Cologne, Germany, 5Max Planck Institute for Neurological Research,
Cologne, Germany, 6UCLA — The mechanisms of action-oriented visual
working memory are not yet well understood. Here, we studied the neural
correlates of translating visuo-spatial stimulus sequences into delayed
(memory-guided) sequential actions to clarify whether motor representations are involved in the encoding of visual sequences that are to be reproduced subsequently. Using fMRI, we measured brain activity in 36 healthy
adults while they encoded sequences of 4-7 dots appearing on fingers of
a left or right schematic hand. After delays of either 500 or 7000 ms, these
sequences were to be reproduced with the corresponding fingers. Recall
became less accurate with longer sequences and was initiated faster after
long delays. Across hands, both encoding and recall activated bilateral prefrontal, premotor, superior and inferior parietal regions as well as the basal
ganglia, whereas hand-specific activity was found (albeit to a lesser degree
during encoding) in contralateral premotor, sensorimotor and superior
parietal cortex. Activation differences after long versus short delays were
restricted to motor-related regions, indicating that rehearsal during long
delays might have facilitated the conversion of the memorized sequence
into concrete motor programs at recall. Furthermore, basal ganglia activity
during encoding selectively predicted correct recall. Taken together, these
results suggest that to-be-reproduced visuo-spatial sequences are encoded
as prospective action representations (“motor intentions”), possibly in
addition to retrospective sensory codes. Overall, our study supports and
extends multi-component models of working memory, highlighting the
notion that sensory input can be coded in multiple ways depending on
what the memorandum is to be used for.

F53
STRUCTURAL DIFFERENCES IN GRAY MATTER VOLUME CORRESPOND TO INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN SPATIAL NAVIGATION
ABILITY Elizabeth R. Chrastil1,2, Katherine R. Sherrill1,2, Irem Aselcioglu1,

Chantal E. Stern1,2; 1Boston University, 2Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging — Spatial navigation is an important part of our everyday
lives, but it is also a cognitive ability that has notable individual differences.
Here we investigate how this variability relates to differences in underlying brain structure. 25 healthy young adults completed a battery of stan-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

205

Poster Session F	
dardized spatial navigation and spatial ability measures. Participants then
underwent structural MRI scanning using a high-resolution T1-weighted
multi-planar rapidly acquired gradient echo (MP-RAGE) scan (TR =2530
ms; TE = 3.31 ms; flip angle = 7°; slices = 176; resolution = 1 mm isotropic).
Spatial measures included a perspective-taking test (Perspective Taking/
Spatial Orientation Test, PTSOT), a route turn-following test (Road Map
Test, RMT), a self-report questionnaire about navigational ability (Santa
Barbara Sense of Direction Scale, SBSOD), and a questionnaire that we
developed detailing video game experience. We used SPM8 to conduct
voxel-based morphometry, analyzing the relationship between navigational ability and gray matter volume across the whole brain. Preliminary
analysis found a relationship between task performance on the PTSOT,
SBSOD, and RMT and gray matter volume in brain regions that functional
studies have shown to be associated with navigation, including medial
temporal lobe structures, striatum, orbitofrontal cortex, and posterior parietal cortex. Gray matter volume in the insula was also found to correlate
with abilities that involved perspective-taking. Since the standardized spatial navigation and spatial ability measures focus on different aspects of
spatial abilities, these results can help us develop a richer understanding of
the diverse underlying cognitive processes involved in spatial navigation
and their relationship to brain structure.

F54
NEURAL CORRELATES OF WORKING MEMORY DEFICITS FOLLOWING TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Starla M. Weaver1,2, Helen M.

Genova1,2, Nancy Chiaravalloti1,2, Glenn Wylie1,2; 1Kessler Foundation, 2Rutgers New Jersey Medical School — Working memory tends to be impaired
following brain injury. For example, in the popular N-back task used to
assess working memory under various loads, persons with traumatic brain
injury (TBI) tend to miss targets more often than their healthy counterparts.
The current study assessed brain activity related to this reduced working
memory performance. Persons with a TBI and healthy controls performed
an N-back tasks under small, 0-back, and large, 2-back, load conditions. An
event related paradigm was used to allow for a comparison of brain activity
associated with both target and non-target trials. Among TBI participants,
increased working memory load was associated with increased neural activation. In addition, changes in activation associated with increased working memory load varied as a function of whether the current trial was or
was not a working memory target. For non-target trials, increased working
memory load was associated with increased activation in frontal, anterior
cingulate and parietal regions, suggesting increased engagement of the
attention network. On target trials increased working memory load was
associated with decreased activation of the insula and posterior regions,
suggesting reduced used of the default network. It seems that increases in
working memory load result in both target specific and more tonic changes
of brain activation among persons with TBI. These results will be compared
to those found among healthy controls.

F55
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY CORROBORATES DISSOCIABLE ABSTRACT-CATEGORY AND SPECIFIC-EXEMPLAR VISUAL
OBJECT SUBSYSTEMS Brenton W. McMenamin1, Chad J. Marsolek2, MacK-

enzie F. Speer3, Brianna K. Morseth3, Philip C. Burton2, E. Darcy Burgund3;
University of Maryland - College Park, 2University of Minnesota, 3Macalester
College — A controversial issue regarding visual object representations
involves categories and exemplars. Visual object representations may be
abstract and categorical, in that a common representation can be activated
by multiple object exemplars within a category. Alternatively, visual object
representations may be specific and exemplar-based, in that different representations can be activated by different object exemplars. In contrast with
the notion that a single, unified system accomplishes visual object processing, divided-visual-field studies have supported the hypothesis that dissociable and asymmetric neural subsystems underlie the ability to recognize
the abstract category to which an image belongs and the ability to recognize
the specific exemplar to which an image corresponds. However, neuroimaging tests of the dissociable neural subsystems theory are lacking. Here we
used event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging during abstract
and specific visual working memory tasks and examined functional connectivity involving visual object processing areas (left and right lateral
occipital cortex) during working memory maintenance. We found that a

1

206

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
region in the right inferior parietal lobule (RH IPL) that previously has been
implicated in working memory maintenance exhibited the expected pattern of asymmetry in functional connectivity. During the abstract category
task, the RH IPL had greater connectivity with left lateral occipital cortex
than right lateral occipital cortex. In contrast, during the specific exemplar
task, the RH IPL had greater connectivity with right lateral occipital cortex
than left lateral occipital cortex. This neuroimaging evidence corroborates
evidence from divided-visual-field studies in support of dissociable neural
subsystems for abstract-category and specific-exemplar visual object processing.

F56
AN N250 INVESTIGATION OF WORKING MEMORY SELECTIVITY UNDER STRESS Ash Tilak1, Lauren Walter1, Samuel Warn1, Martin

Paczynski1, Amishi Jha1; 1University of Miami — Previous work has demonstrated that individuals readily maintain complex visual information within
working memory. In the current study, we investigated how maintenance
of such complex visual representations is affected by low intensity psychological stress, induced by presentation of disturbing visual images. Participants first learned to discriminate a Target face from probes which share
80%, 60%, 40%, or 20% of visual features with the Target. Participants’ EEG
(N=17) was recorded as they then engaged in a continuous target discrimination task in both “safe” and “stress” blocks during which either neutral or
negative IAPS images, respectively, were presented. Consistent with previous behavioral findings, we found that participant performance for easily
discriminable stimuli (e.g. 40%, 20%, and novel faces) was improved under
stress (increased accuracy and reduced reaction time), while performance
for difficult-to-discriminate (e.g., 80%) faces was impaired (decreased accuracy and increased reaction time). Behavioral responses to Target faces
were unaffected by stress. The N250 monotonically decreased as a function of target-probe similarity (Target>80%>60%>40%>20%). A significant
stress by target-probe similarity interaction was also found, driven by a
stress-induced increase in N250 amplitude to Targets and decreased N250
amplitude to 80% probes; this decrease correlating with stress-induced
reaction time increases to 80% probes. Taken together, our results suggest
that participants may maintain representations of both Target and 80%
probes in working memory to aid in discriminating between two visually
similar stimuli, while, under mild stress, only the Target representations
may remain active. Thus, representation selectivity to target stimuli may
increase under mild stress.

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
F57
LANGUAGE DEFICITS IN AUTISM AND ASSESSMENT OF THE
CNTNAP2 KNOCKOUT MOUSE Amanda Rendall1, Dongnhu Truong1, Brian

Castelluccio1, Inge-Marie Eigsti1, R. Holly Fitch1; 1University of Connecticut —
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a heterogeneous neurodevelopmental
disorder with deficits in social interactions, language/communication and
repetitive behaviors. ASD has a strong though complicated genetic basis,
with at least 100 risk genes identified. One of these genes, contactin associated like protein 2 (CNTNAP2), was first associated with Specific Language
Impairment (SLI) and has been linked to ASD. CNTNAP2 is responsible
for encoding a cell adhesion protein that regulates signal transmission at
the synapse. In addition, Cntnap2 has been found to promote myelin formation and speed/efficacy of signal transmission. Therefore, disruption
of CNTNAP2 may impair synapse formation, resulting in disruptions in
language development. Research on language deficits in ASD and SLI indicates that low-level deficits in temporal auditory processing may impair
language development. In contrast, hyper-acute pitch discrimination
was found to correlate with early language delays in ASD (Eigsti, 2013).
To better understand the behavioral and biological mechanisms of ASD,
a transgenic mouse model was generated with a genetic knockout (KO)
of the rodent homolog of CNTNAP2. Studies of this model reported poor
social interactions and reduced vocalizations (Peñagarikano, 2011). The
current study was designed to assess the intermediate behavioral phenotype, focusing on temporal auditory processing and pitch discrimination
abilities. Results show Cntnap2 KO mice exhibit significant deficits in rapid
auditory processing and significant strengths in pitch discrimination. These
findings suggest CNTNAP2 may have an underlying role in the develop-

2014 Annual Meeting	
ment of neural systems important to auditory temporal processing, and
disruption of this function could be associated with language impairments
in ASD.

F58
INVESTIGATING THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF VOICE OR CONTENT DIRECTED INFORMATION WITHIN HUMAN SPEECH IN
PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN Sara Ashley Smith1,3, Nora Maria Raschle1,2,

Jennifer Zuk1,2, Maria Regina Dauvermann1,2, Michael Joseph Figuccio1, Nadine
Gaab1,2,3; 1Laboratories of Cognitive Neuroscience, Division of Developmental
Medicine, Department of Medicine, Boston Children’s Hospital, 2Harvard Medical School Boston, 3Harvard Graduate School of Education — Speech processing implicitly requires the analysis of the human voice, which conveys both
linguistic and extra-linguistic information. Studies in newborns and infants
propose that the superior temporal sulcus (STS) is involved in speech processing soon after birth. However, due to technical and practical challenges
when neuroimaging young children, evidence of neural correlates of voice
processing in young children remains scarce. In the current study, we
employed whole brain functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in 20
typically developing children (mean age=5.8y) to investigate the neuronal
correlates of voice matching with a particular view on directing attention
to speaker identity (VM: voice matching) as opposed to the verbal content
(FSM: first sound matching) of speech. Results (p=0.005) reveal a common
network of brain regions responsible for processing content directed and
voice-specific components of speech including bilateral primary and secondary language brain areas. The contrast VM>FSM predominantly activates the anterior part of the right-hemispheric STS. This finding underlines
the importance of the right STS as a temporal voice area and indicates that
this brain region is specialized, and functions similarly to adults by the age
of five. Furthermore, analyses of functional connectivity with seeds in bilateral STS reveal positive coupling between right STS and temporal as well
as prefrontal regions. We thus extend previous knowledge of voice-specific
regions and their functional connections to the young human brain which
may further our understanding of the neuronal mechanism of speech-specific processing in children with developmental disorders, such as autism
or specific language impairments.

F59
SUCCESSFUL SECOND LANGUAGE LEARNING IS MODULATED
BY NEURAL MECHANISMS RESPONSIBLE FOR PROCESSING OF
FEEDBACK Olga Kepinska1, Ferdi van de Kamp1,2, Johanneke Caspers1, Niels

O. Schiller1; 1Leiden University, 2Utrecht University — This study aimed to
examine the role of Language Analytic Ability (LAA) in feedback processing during the acquisition of a novel language. We investigated whether
the neural basis of feedback processing during an artificial grammar-learning (AGL) task differs between populations of highly and moderately
skilled second language learners. Two groups (high vs. moderate LAA) of
15 participants each were formed on the basis of a test measuring LAA
(part of the LLAMA language aptitude test) in a large group of participants
(N=200). Participants performed an AGL task that consisted of learning and
test phases. Event-related potentials (ERPs) evoked by feedback provided
after participants’ grammaticality judgments on test items were analyzed.
Behavioral data showed a learning effect in both groups, with a faster rate
of learning for the highly skilled learners. Between-group analyses were
performed with group as independent variable and mean amplitudes of
feedback-related negativity (FRN) and positivity (FRP) at midline electrodes as dependent variables. In addition, an analysis examining learning-related development of these ERP components was performed. Mean
amplitude of the FRN was higher over the whole task for highly compared
to moderately skilled learners. Also, a larger decrease of FRP over time
among the highly skilled learners was observed. The results suggest that
successful and efficient second language learning is modulated by neural
mechanisms responsible for processing of feedback.

F60
PHONOLOGICAL AND LEXICAL-SEMANTIC EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS ARE ATYPICAL IN CHILDREN WITH DEVELOPMENTAL LANGUAGE DISORDER (DLD) Sergey Kornilov1,2,3, James Magnu-

son1,3, Natalia Rakhlin2, Elena Grigorenko2,3,4, Nicole Landi1,2,3; 1University of

Poster Session F
Connecticut, 2Yale University, 3Haskins Laboratories, 4Moscow City University
for Psychology and Education — Most ERP studies of DLD to date have
focused on auditory (tone) and speech processing. We investigated phonological and lexical-semantic processing in school-aged children with
DLD (n=23) and their typically developing (TD, n=16) peers, drawn from
a population in rural Russia with high incidence of DLD in the absence
of apparent sensory, neurological, or genetic pathology. We used a crossmodal auditory word-picture matching paradigm where children saw
pictures and heard words in five conditions: a) Match (target condition;
see and hear “cat”); b) Cohort (initial phonological overlap; see “cat”, hear
“coat”); c) Rhyme (see “cat”, hear “hat”); d) Semantic (semantically related,
see “cat”, hear “mouse”); and e) Unrelated (see “cat”, hear “doll”). Conventional amplitude/latency analysis and temporospatial principal component analysis indicate that children with DLD showed atypical early
occipital negativities (N2, 196 ms post-stimulus-onset) across all conditions
(p = .002). Crucially, children with DLD showed reduced N400s for Cohorts
(p = .001) and Unrelated words (p = .024). The N400 reduction for Cohorts
but not Unrelated words was associated with lower scores on behavioral
indices of phonological (r = -.46, p = .006) and lexical development (r = - .47,
p = .004). These results suggest that children with DLD display deficits in
the dynamics of lexical activation and lexical semantic processing potentially coupled with or mediated by deficits in phonological processing. In
particular, the reduced Cohort and Unrelated N400 effects - both failures to
show robust responses to mismatches in onset phonology - are consistent
with weak phonological inhibition.

F61
LONGITUDINAL INVESTIGATION OF RISK FACTOR IN EMERGING WEAKNESS IN GRAMMAR UNDERSTANDING IN RUSSIAN-SPEAKING CHILDREN Sergey Kiselev1; 1Ural Federal Univer-

sity — The goal of this research was to examine the hypothesis that
Russian-speaking children at the age of 4 with weakness in holistic abilities
have a risk in emerging weakness in grammar understanding at the age of
6. 78 children at the age of 4 were assessed with the Rey-Osterieth Complex Figure Test to reveal children with different level of holistic abilities.
We have revealed 14 children with immature (part-oriented) strategy in
copying Complex Figure. These children were included in the experimental
group with weakness in holistic abilities. The control group included 12
children with holistic strategy in copying Complex Figure. In the framework of longitudinal research children at the age of 6 from both groups
were assessed by Grammar Understanding Test from Luria’s neuropsychological assessment technique. Two-way ANOVAs with repeated measures
revealed significant differences between groups for scores in the Grammar
Understanding Test. Children from experimental group had weakness in
grammar understanding. Therefore, we revealed that children at the age
of 4 with weakness in holistic abilities have a risk in emerging weakness
in grammar understanding at the age of 6. In view of the obtained results,
it can be assumed that brain mechanism responsible for holistic abilities
has influence on the development of grammar understanding in preschool
children.

LANGUAGE: Lexicon
F62
AN ERP STUDY FOR THE PHONETIC CONSISTENCY AND HOMOPHONE DENSITY EFFECTS IN WRITING CHINESE CHARACTERS

Pei-Chun Chao1, Wei-Fan Chen2, Chia-Ying Lee1,2; 1Institute of Neuroscience,
National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, 2Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica,
Taiwan — The bi-modal interactive-activation model (BIAM) assumes that
the bidirectional mapping consistency between orthography (O) and phonology (P) (P-to-O and O-to-P consistency) shall influence a word’s recognition in both visual and auditory modalities. In Chinese, most of characters
are phonograms that consist of a semantic radical and a phonetic radical.
The reliability of a phonetic radical in providing the whole character’s phonological clue can be defined by phonetic consistency (whether the pronunciation of a character agrees with those of its orthographic neighbors
containing the same phonetic radical). Studies have demonstrated the phonetic consistency effect in reading, yet it is unclear such an effect could be
found in auditory modality. This study aims to investigate the bidirectional

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

207

Poster Session F	
coupling between orthography and phonology in writing Chinese characters with dictation by manipulating the O-to-P consistency (measured by
the phonetic consistency) and P-to-O consistency (the homophone density,
the number of characters sharing exactly the same pronunciation). Participations would hear 108 monosyllabic Chinese spoken words, and then
were asked to write down the corresponding characters. These candidates
for orthographic outputs were divided into four conditions based on their
phonetic consistency (high/low) and homophone density (high/low). The
event-related potentials (ERPs) to the spoken words revealed an interaction
between phonetic consistency and homophone density on N400 and typical
homophone density main effect at the later time window (600-800msec).
These findings support the reverberation of the O-to-P consistency effect in
Chinese writing to dictation.

F63
LEVELS OF VISUAL WORD PROCESSING IN TYPICAL ENGLISH
SPEAKING ADULTS: AN FMRI STUDY Elpis Pavlidou1,2, W. Einar Mencl2,

Dina L. Moore3, Stephen J. Frost2, Kenneth R. Pugh2,4,5; 1The University of Edinburgh, 2Haskins Laboratories, 3Southern Connecticut State University, 4University of Connecticut, 5Yale University — We examined the effects of different
levels of visual word processing on the neural circuitry for reading in 20
(10 males; 10 females) neurologically normal native English speakers (2046 years, Median = 28). Behavioral and neuroimaging data were obtained
from three experimental conditions, which increased the degree of processing demands (i.e. simple naming < Go/No-Go lexical < Go/No-Go
semantic ). We manipulated the spelling-to-sound consistency of the words
within each task and stimuli were matched on frequency, number of letters, and on number and summed frequency of friends (words with the
same spelling and pronunciation of the word body, e.g., MILL vs. PILL)
and enemies (words with the same spelling of the word body but a different pronunciation, e.g., PINT vs. MINT). Tasks were conducted in separate
functional imaging runs. We observed that as the demands on processing
increased so did the role for posterior reading areas, including the middle
temporal gyrus (MTG) and the angular gyrus (AG) as well as the connectivity between these areas. Thus, the role of AG in reading may go beyond
its proposed involvement in the mapping of letters to phonemes. Analyses
on the effects of consistency of words confirmed the involvement of more
posterior regions of inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) in phonological processing: inconsistent words activate IFG more than consistent due to resolving competing phonological codes. In line with developmental studies,
we speculate that this anterior system operates in close conjunction with
the temporoparietal system to decode new words during normal reading
development.

F64
CLASSIFIER INFORMATION AFFECTS SPEECH PRODUCTION:
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FROM OVERT SPEECH
IN MANDARIN CHINESE Man Wang1,2, Yiya Chen1,2, Niels O. Schiller1,2;

1

Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition (LIBC), Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Leiden
University Centre for Linguistics (LUCL), Leiden, The Netherlands — The current study investigated the role of classifier selection in speech production
in Mandarin Chinese. This study asked native Mandarin speakers to name
pictures using the picture-word interference paradigm in two different
tasks while measuring their electroencephalogram. Bare noun naming
yielded both semantic congruency and classifier congruency effects. Participants also named the same pictures in a noun phrase consisting of the
elements “one + classifier + noun”. In this condition, the semantically-related distractor words affected picture naming in contrastive ways depending on whether or not their classifiers were congruent with those of the
picture names. Results of bare noun naming showed stronger N400 effects
when the distractor (e.g. duck) and the picture name (e.g. hand) belonged
to different semantic categories, compared to when the distractor (e.g. foot)
was from the same category as the picture name, regardless of classifier
congruency. In semantically congruent trials, stronger late positive effects
were observed around 600 ms after picture onset when the classifier of the
distractor was incongruent (e.g. classifier-ge4, head) with the picture name
(e.g. classifier-zhi1, hand), compared to the congruent condition (e.g. classifier-zhi1, duck). These results provide evidence supporting the hypothesis

208

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
that our brain retrieves and encodes linguistic information in a sequential
manner - semantic congruency occurs at an earlier stage whereas classifier
congruency affects a later stage in speech production.

F65
IMPLICIT LEARNING OF NOVEL COLOR WORDS IN A MANUAL
STROOP TASK? - DISTINGUISHING RESPONSE LEARNING
FROM SEMANTIC LEARNING Sebastian Geukes1, Dirk Vorberg1, Pienie

Zwitserlood1; 1University of Muenster, Germany — In the manual version of
the Stroop task, participants are asked to press the button whose color corresponds to a presented word’s text color. If the word is a color word that
is incongruent to the text color, responses are typically slower compared
to the case where the color word is congruent to the text color. If in such
a task, pseudowords are presented instead of color words, and if each of
the pseudowords is presented in one of the colors more frequently than
in the others, a similar but smaller congruency effect emerges over time.
This phenomenon promises to be an interesting approach for the investigation of basic semantic integration effects in novel word learning. However,
because this paradigm includes a fix layout of colored buttons, it is unclear
whether the learned association is that of the word and the color meaning
or that of the word and the response position. To test whether word learning in this paradigm represents semantic learning, response learning, or a
mixture of both, we independently varied color and response contingencies. We found strong evidence for response learning but none for semantic
learning. Thus, this implicit learning procedure seems to lack the prerequisites necessary for the semantic integration of novel words. Nevertheless,
because such a low-level investigation of novel word integration allows to
exclude many potentially contributing factors, we consider it a valuable
complement to the more natural and more complex studies on novel word
learning.

F66
NEUROCOGNITIVE PROPERTIES OF CONCATENATIVE AND
NON-CONCATENATIVE MORPHOLOGY IN ARABIC: EVIDENCE
FROM MULTIVARIATE FMRI ANALYSES. Francesca Carota1, Sami

Boudelaa1,2, Mirjana Bozic1, William D. Marslen-Wilson1; 1Neurolex Group,
Department of Psychology, Downing Site, University of Cambridge, Cambridge
CB2 3EB, UK, 2Department of Linguistics, United Arab Emirates University, Po
Box 17771 Al Ain, UAE — Results from Indo-European languages suggest
that morphological derivation activates a bilateral fronto-temporal network underlying whole-form access processes, whereas inflection involves
a left-lateralised fronto-temporal subsystem specialised for grammatical
combinatorial processes (Bozic et al. 2010; 2013). However, it is unclear
whether these patterns also hold for typologically more distant languages.
Recent fMRI work on the Semitic language, Arabic, analysed using classical univariate methods, suggested that non-concatenatively complex words
(kaatib, “writer”, derived by interleaving roots ktb, “writing” and word
patterns -aa-i-, “agent noun”) as well as concatenatively complex words
(kitaab+uhaa, “her book”, formed by linearly adding an inflectional affix
to a non-concatenative stem) activated the same left-lateralised fronto-temporal network as supports concatenative inflection in English and in Slavic
languages. Here we explored the neurocognitive properties of Arabic morphology using multivariate Representational Similarity Analysis (RSA:
Kriegeskorte et al., 2006) to ask whether differences in morphological organization were coded in neural activation patterns across key fronto-temporal regions. Brain responses to non-concatenative and concatenative
complexities were correlated to theoretical models that predict distinct
similarity-patterns for each process, using partial correlation to separate
out process-specific similarity effects. RSA revealed fine-grained fronto-temporal similarities between non-concatenatively complex words in
bilateral inferior frontal areas (BA45-47), left temporal pole and left inferior
temporal areas, related to semantic comprehension. In contrast, concatenative complexity was correlated with left-lateralised inferior frontal (BA44)
and bilateral superior/middle temporal areas, relevant to the processing of
syntactic structure. These results suggest subtle underlying parallels and
differences in the neural encoding of morphological functions across contrasting language families.

2014 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session F

F67
NEUROCOGNITIVE SUBSTRATES OF MORPHOLOGICAL REGULARITY IN ARABIC: BEHAVIOURAL AND IMAGING EVIDENCE
1,2

2

2

2,3

Sami Boudelaa , Francesca Carota , Mirjana Bozic , William Marslen-Wilson ;
1
United Arab Emirates University, Linguistics Department, PO. Box: 15551 Al
Ain, UAE, 2University of Cambridge, Department of Psychology Downing St,
Cambridge CB2 3EB, UK, 3MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge,
15 Chaucer Road, Cambridge CB2 7EF — Behavioural and neuroimaging
studies of English suggest that regular and irregular inflectional processes
depend on distinct cognitive mechanisms and associated cortical structures.
Here we combine behavioural and imaging methods to re-examine the role
of regularity in the context of Arabic inflectional morphology, where the
plural system allows novel and unconfounded contrasts between regular
and irregular plurals (known as sound and broken plurals, respectively).
Three lexical decision experiments, using masked, cross-modal and intramodal auditory-auditory priming, found that regular plurals (as in prime/
target pairs like jawolAt / jawola , tours/tour) and irregular plurals (as in
pairs like EawASim /EASima , capitals/capital) were equally effective in
priming their stems, showing that regularity contrasts need not invoke different cognitive response patterns. A fourth experiment used event-related
fMRI to contrast spoken regular and irregular singular and plural forms,
employing a passive listening paradigm with occasional 1-back memory
tests. Consistent with the behavioral results, no differences were found as
a function of regularity, either for the singular source nouns or for the regular (sound ) or irregular (broken ) plurals. Bilateral STG and MTG were
strongly activated for all stimulus sets, but LIFG activation was only seen
for the singular forms possibly implying a greater degree of storedness for
the plural forms. The overall convergence of the behavioural and imaging
data for Arabic suggest that regularity, per se, is not a universal determinant of neurocognitive processing style.

F68
NEURAL CORRELATES OF A LANGUAGE AND NON-LANGUAGE
VISUOSPATIAL PROCESSING IN ADOLESCENTS WITH READING
DISABILITY Anish M. Kurian1,2, Joshua J. Diehl1,3, Stephen J. Frost1, W. Einar

Mencl1, Kenneth R. Pugh1,2; 1Haskins Laboratories, New Haven, CT, 2Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, 3Department of
Psychology, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN — The current study
examined the cognitive and neural bases of visuospatial processing abilities in adolescents with reading disability (RD) relative to typically developing (TD) peers. Research on RD has often focused on the neurocognitive basis of phonological deficits; however, there remains interest in the
contributions of visual processing abilities to reading and its disorders. In
the current study, we used several cognitive tasks along with functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to contrast print processing tasks
with non-language visuospatial processing tasks. Specifically, we expect to
see an enhanced ability in RD individuals in visuospatial processing tasks
compared to TD peers. Behaviorally, RD individuals showed a visuospatial
processing advantage (shorter latencies and equivalent accuracy) on a geometric figure-processing task relative to TD peers, replicating findings in
two published studies. Analysis of fMRI data revealed a disordinal pattern
across fronto-striatal networks (putamen, motor and premotor sites) with
decreased activation for RD relative to the TD for figures but the opposite
pattern for print. Additionally, fMRI data revealed a stronger hemispheric
differentiation for print vs. figures for TD but not for RD participants. For
TD individuals, several LH networks responded more strongly to print
than figures (fusiform and IFG), while a number of RH networks (IPL, fusiform, and MFG) showed stronger responses to figures relative to print, with
less overall hemispheric differentiation for RD individuals. These findings
suggest a more circumscribed and efficient neural organization for those
stimuli in which a given group showed a latency advantage; thus revealing
convergent brain and behavioral data.

LANGUAGE: Other
F69
LANGUAGE MODULATED COLOR PERCEPTION IN GREEK-ENGLISH AND RUSSIAN-ENGLISH BILINGUALS Brendan Tomoschuk1,

Janet G. van Hell1, Guillaume Thierry2, YanJing Wu3; 1Pennsylvania State University, 2Bangor University, 3University of Sheffield — Can the language you
speak affect your perception of the world? Thierry et al. (2009) showed that
the Greek language affects how native Greek speakers process the color
blue (two terms in Greek: ghalazio light blue and ble dark blue ). Using the
visual Mismatch Negativity (vMMN) component of Event Related Potentials (ERPs) as an index of perceptual change, they showed that native
speakers of Greek perceived the switch between these two shades more
saliently in an oddball paradigm than the switch between two shades of
green (one term in Greek - prasino). We sought to show that color perception can be modulated by the alphabetic context in the task at hand.
Greek-English bilinguals were subjected to a go-no go judgment task
while ERPs were recorded. Participants were presented with letters from
the Roman alphabet in the first block, letters from the Greek alphabet in
a second. They pressed a button for upper case letters (5%) and ignored
lower case ones (95%). Letters were surrounded by peripherally perceived
color circles in light or dark blue and light or dark green. The probability
of occurrence of the circles conformed to an oddball paradigm and participants received no instruction regarding color. Greek and Roman letters
created a language-based script context. Findings show that language context does not affect color perception. We are currently running a follow
up using Russian-English bilinguals to understand the role of attention on
color perception (Russian, like Greek, has two terms for blue - ”goluboy”
and ”siniy”).

F70
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN SEQUENCE LEARNING, LANGUAGE,
AND SOCIAL ENVIRONMENTAL VARIABLES: AN EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL STUDY. Joanne A. Deocampo1, Leyla Eghbalzad1, Michelle

Pinns1, Jerome C. Daltrozzo1, Christopher M. Conway1; 1Georgia State University — Research suggests sequence learning (SL) is an essential component of language development; however, neural evidence, especially in
children, is scarce. In addition, although research has shown that certain
demographic variables, such as primary caregiver’s (PC) education level,
are related to language outcomes, there has been minimal research examining the relationship between these and SL. We measured event-related
potentials (ERPs) in 10 children aged 7-12 while performing a SL task. Participants pressed a button when they saw targets in a stream of standards.
Embedded within the sequence were high and low predictor items that
preceded the target with 90% and 20% probability. ERPs time-locked to
each predictor and reaction times (RTs) were obtained for the 3 probability
conditions. Various language, cognitive, and demographic measures were
also obtained. ERP results revealed a late positivity (300-800ms post-predictor onset in the left posterior region) that showed a trend toward increasing with probability [F(2, 18) = 2.958, p = .078]. Furthermore, Spearman’s
correlations indicated that PC education was significantly positively correlated with the difference in RT between the low-high predictor conditions
[rs(8) = .658, p = .039]; other correlations were observed between language,
SL, and demographic measures. These results suggest that SL is associated
with an ERP component similar to a P300 or P600, replicating earlier results
with adults and children (Christiansen et al., 2012; Jost et al., 2011). Furthermore, PC education appears to modulate SL, providing new evidence
that social environmental factors can contribute to the development of SL.

F71
DISRUPTED WHITE MATTER IN APHASIC PATIENTS WITH MOVEMENT DEFICITS Y. H. Wu1, Fan-pei Yang1, Y. L. Tsai1, C. M. Lin2, C. Y. Hsu3,

B. S. Yip3, S. H. Lin3, T. M. Chiang4, L. Y. Tseng3, L. Y. Hong3, L. P. Chen3, L.
W. Kuo5; 1National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan, 2Changhua Christian Hospital,
Taiwan, 3National Taiwan University Hospital, Hsinchu Branch, Taiwan, 4Hsinchu Cathay General Hospital, Taiwan., 5National Health Research Institutes,
Miaoli, Taiwan. — Stroke patients with aphasia often demonstrate deficits
in various domains. Some preserve good language abilities but poor motor
movements; others retain good movements but poor speech; still others
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

209

Poster Session F	
show severe deficits in both. Disruptions in white matter (WM) tracts may
be associated with these impairments. Current research has not shown
consistent findings. The study aims to investigate WM damage in aphasic patients with or without movement disorders using diffusion tensor
imaging (DTI). Six stroke patients with Broca’s Aphasia (4 males, 2 females,
mean age = 48.3, SD =10.4) underwent DTI and T1 scans and the Concise
Chinese Aphasia Test (CCAT). The tractography revealed that longitudinal
tracts are mostly intact in patients, suggesting that motor or speech deficits
are less associated with these tracts. Interestingly, corpus callosum (CC)
was severely damaged in patients with severe aphasia but moderately
damaged in patients with serious movement deficits. This suggests that
CC’s connection between two hemispheres is crucial for speech, but less
so for movement. Besides, patients with poor speech while retaining good
movements usually show great damage in cortico-spinal tracts in the frontal branch (CSf). This suggests that CSf affects speech production but not
motor movement coordination. In sum, the hemispheric disconnection due
to damaged CC have moderate to large impacts on speech and movement,
whereas CSf only affects the speech ability. Continuous analysis of more
aphasic stroke patients’ WM will reveal more insights into the functions of
specific pathways, affected or rewired, in this population.

F72
PRE-EXISTING AUDITORY PERCEPTUAL ABILITIES, NOT BILINGUALISM, PREDICT NOVEL SPEECH LEARNING Pilar Archila-Su-

erte1, Arturo Hernandez1; 1University of Houston — The goal of this study
was to investigate how phonetic experience in two languages influences
the perception of novel speech sounds and to reveal the underlying neural
mechanisms involved in novel speech learning. Adult English monolinguals (n = 20) and early Spanish-English bilinguals (n = 24) participated
in four consecutive sessions of phonetic discrimination training (same vs.
different) while listening to Hungarian pseudowords that contained novel
phonemes. Participants completed two fMRI sessions, one before training
and another one after training. The in-scanner task consisted of passively
listening to the novel speech stimuli with which participants trained outside the scanner. The behavioral results showed that even though monolinguals and bilinguals learned after training, the groups did not significantly
differed from each other in the discrimination of novel speech. Nonetheless, the neural processes engaged by monolinguals and bilinguals differed
after training (left anterior cingulate gyrus in monolinguals and bilateral
parietal regions in bilinguals). An additional post-hoc regression analysis
examined how participants’ overall discrimination performance predicted
brain activity before and after training. Here it was found that, regardless of
language group membership, better perceivers were more likely to recruit
sensory-perceptual areas (bilateral superior temporal gyrus), whereas
worse perceivers were more likely to recruit higher-order cognitive areas
after training (right postcentral gyrus, superior parietal lobule, and left
supramarginal gyrus). These findings suggest that growing up in bilingual
phonetic environments does not facilitate novel speech learning. Instead,
the ability to discriminate novel speech appears to originate from individual enhanced perceptual abilities present prior to training.

F73
BUILDING PHRASES VS. WORDS: AN MEG INVESTIGATION Meera

AlKaabi1, Liina Pylkkänen2; 1New York University, NYNYC, 2NYUAD Institute,
NYUAD — A central part of knowing a language is the ability to combine
basic linguistic units into more complex representations. Whether complex phrases and complex words are built by the same combinatory mechanisms has been a matter of significant theoretical debate (e.g., Aronoff,
1994; Marantz, 1997). Within cognitive neuroscience, composition has so
far been studied at the phrasal level, but not at the word level. Within the
phrasal research, several recent studies have implicated the left anterior
temporal lobe (LATL) as the strongest candidate for combinatory effects
across words (Bemis & Pylkkänen, 2011; 2013ab). This study is an MEG
investigation of the neural correlates of within-word vs. across-words
composition. The main goal was to test whether within-word composition
deploys the same brain mechanisms as across-words composition, with a
primary focus on the LATL. Our design used three noun types, varying in
internal structure: compound, suffixed and monomorphemic nouns. Each
condition appeared in a modified (preceded by an adjective) and non-modified (preceded by an unpronounceable string of consonants) context. ROI
and full brain analyses showed significantly larger activity in the LATL for

210

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
compounds and suffixed nouns than for monomorphemic nouns, in the
non-modified context. However, within-word and across-word composition interacted interestingly: across word composition effects were only
observed when the target noun was itself structurally simple, i.e., across
words and within-word composition effects did not linearly add up. In
sum, our results provide the first neurophysiological demonstration that
composition mechanisms within-words and as across-words may in fact be
qualitatively the same.

F74
NEURAL BASIS OF THE LEFT VISUAL FIELD SUPERIORITY FOR
PROCESSING CHINESE CHARACTERS Wen-Jui Kuo1, Chad Chen1,

Ovid Tzeng2; 1Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei,
Taiwan, 2Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan — The goal
of this study is to examine neural basis of the left visual field (LVF) superiority for processing Chinese characters. Chinese characters were simultaneously, bilaterally presented to the participants, one in the LVF and one
in the RVF. On the same (visual) presentation frame, there was a central
cue (< or >) accompanying the two characters to indicate which character
(the LVF one or the RVF one) to attend and process for lexical decision. For
robustness checking, frequency of the characters was included as a variable and varied (low, medium, and high). Behavioral data of reaction time
and accuracy, across all three frequency levels, showed robust, stable LVF
superiority. That is, characters presented in the LVF were processed with
higher efficiency and accuracy. Our findings are consistent with what a
previous study reported (Tzeng et al., 1979). By suing fMRI, we found that
the processing characters presented in the LVF resulted in greater activity
in the right parietal region. Therefore, the LVF superiority for processing
Chinese characters seems to be supported by the higher efficiency of the
dorsal processing stream.

F75
THE NEURONAL LATERALITY OF THE PHONOLOGICAL AND
VISUAL SIMILARITY EFFECTS IN PROBED SERIAL RECOGNITION
IN CHINESE-ENGLISH BILINGUALS Monica Y.C. Li1,2, Daisy L. Hung1,2,

Ovid J.-L. Tzeng2,3, Denise H. Wu1,2; 1National Central University, Taiwan,
2
National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, 3Academia Sinica, Taiwan — Previous
behavioral findings of verbal short-term memory (STM) have suggested
that English monolinguals mainly depend on phonological representation
to retain English words, whereas unbalanced Chinese-English bilinguals
utilize both phonological and orthographic information to retain English
(L2) words as they do with Chinese (L1) characters. To determine whether
such functional differences between the two groups of participants reflect
distinct neural mechanisms underlying verbal STM, the current fMRI study
investigates the neural responses associated with the effects of phonological
and visual similarity (PSE and VSE) of English words in a probed serial recognition paradigm in English monolinguals and in Chinese-English bilinguals. The neuroimaging results generally showed a left lateralized fronto-temporo-parietal network of verbal STM for both groups of participants.
The PSE was associated with a left lateralized and a more bilateralized fronto-parietal networks in native English readers and in Chinese-English bilinguals, respectively. On the other hand, the VSE was only associated with a
right lateralized fronto-parietal network in Chinese-English bilinguals, but
not with any brain region in native English readers. The present findings
indicate that reading experiences modulate the neural mechanisms underlying verbal STM. They also suggest that the behaviorally observable VSE
only in Chinese-English bilinguals might be associated with the right lateralized fronto-parietal activations which support the successful retention of
visual/orthographic information of verbal materials.

LANGUAGE: Semantic
F76
EFFECTIVENESS OF LOW-FREQUENCY REPETITIVE TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION ON POST-STROKE CHINESE
APHASIA Yu-Chun Liao1, Wen-Hsu Sung2, Po-Yi Tsai3, Tzu-Chen Yeh3; 1National

Taiwan University, 2National Yang-Ming University, 3Taipei Veterans General
Hospital — Previous studies have shown that low-frequency repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation (LF-rTMS) activates aphasic patients’ left

2014 Annual Meeting	
inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and improves their naming ability. However,
most of the studies examine the effects of LF-rTMS on English-speaking
aphasics, but not post-stroke Chinese aphasia (pSCA). Therefore, the aim
of the current study was to investigate the effectiveness of LF-rTMS in
patients with pSCA. More specifically, we were interested in how LF-rTMS
would change Chinese-speaking aphasic individuals’ linguistic performance and brain activities. The patient was a 27-year-old woman with
chronic nonfluent pSCA. LF-rTMS was applied to her pars triangular portion of right Broca’s homologue at 1 Hz, 20 minutes per day over the period
of ten days. Additionally, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
data and scores on a set of neurolinguistic tests were obtained before and
after the LF-rTMS sessions. The results showed that the average response
time was significantly decreased to 24.5 (±4.95) seconds from 56.5 (±10.60)
seconds after the LF-rTMS sessions. Additionally, the fMRI data showed
that the patient with pSCA used the right Brodmann area 44/ 47/ 22/ 39
(language-homologous areas, LHAs) to compensate for the language-impaired abilities. In sum, the patient with pSCA used the right LHAs but not
the left hemisphere to shorten the speed of linguistic processing, suggesting
that Chinese-speaking aphasics and English-speaking aphasics might use
different neural circuits to compensate for their speech impairment.

F77
NEURAL CORRELATES OF VERBAL FLUENCY Alex Teghipco1, Eduardo

Navarrete2, Bradford Mahon1,3,4; 1Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences,
University of Rochester, USA, 2Department of Developmental and Social Psychology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 3Department of Neurosurgery,
University of Rochester Medical Center, USA, 4Center for Language Sciences,
University of Rochester, USA — Neuroimaging studies employing exogenous paradigms that utilize carefully controlled stimuli have demonstrated
the importance of a network of brain regions involved in semantic processing and language production. The present study used an overt speech
production task during functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)
to study regions associated with letter, noun and verb fluency. We developed a new method for clustering the words that participants produce in
verbal fluency into clusters, defined either by inter-item latency or interitem semantic similarity; this new method was validated with a behavioral
study (Experiment 1). We then repeated this experiment during fMRI scanning, while also recording all response latencies in the magnet. We show
that we are able to replicate the findings from previous studies of the neural
correlates of verbal fluency, and to significantly extend those findings. For
instance, previous work had shown that Blood Oxygen Level Dependent
(BOLD) contrast in the left inferior frontal gyrus dissociates clusters from
cluster switches. We replicated that finding, and then showed that the left
inferior frontal gyrus tracks inter-item response latency in clusters, but
only during letter fluency. Furthermore, BOLD responses in the left fusiform gyrus and posterior middle temporal gyrus negatively correlate with
inter-item semantic similarity and inter-item latency, both for clusters but
also for cluster switches. These findings shed new light on the roles played
by left hemisphere regions long identified to be involved in semantic and
language processing, and provide a new means with which to study spontaneous speech in a controlled fashion with fMRI.

F78
FAST RIGHT-HEMISPHERE NEURAL SYSTEMS FOR READING EMOTION FROM WRITTEN WORDS Tomoe Inomata1, Kimihiro

Nakamura2, Akira Uno1, Hidenao Fukuyama2; 1University of Tsukuba, Japan,
2
Kyoto University, Japan — Reading is generally known to involve distributed regions in the left hemisphere. However, previous research suggests
that written words with emotional valence quickly activate additional
neural components distinct from this reading network, such as the left
and right amygdala showing sensitivity to fearful non-linguistic stimuli.
We examined the entire stretch of the neural systems for emotion words
and its potential hemispheric bias by using functional magnetic resonance
imaging. Fifteen healthy adults participated in the present study. In each
trial, participants made concrete/abstract judgment about a centrally presented target preceded by a masked prime flashed to the left or right visual
field. Targets and primes were Japanese Kanji (logographic) words having
either positive or negative emotional valence, and were either emotionally
congruent or incongruent with each other. Frequency and imageability
were matched between positive and negative words. Behaviorally, reaction

Poster Session F
time for emotionally congruent targets were faster than that of incongruent
targets for positive primes, and negative primes produced opposite patterns of congruency priming, irrespective of their visual field, creating a
significant interaction between affect type and emotional congruency. At
the neural level, this affective priming was associated with repetition suppression primarily in the right hemisphere, including the temporo-parietal
junction and amygdala previously associated with emotion processing.
These results suggest that subliminal emotion words rapidly engage these
structures outside the typical reading network in the left hemisphere, and
that this automatic activation occurs irrespective of the functional requirements of behavioral tasks.

F79
DISSOCIATING SEMANTIC REPRESENTATION AND COMBINATORIAL PROCESSING IN HUMAN VENTRAL PATHWAY Gangyi Feng1,

Qi Chen1, Jian Huang1, Suiping Wang1; 1School of Psychology, South China
Normal University, Guangzhou, China — Comparing with reading or listening random word lists, reading or listening sentences evoke greater BOLD
signal changes in left ventral pathway, including fronto-tempo-parietal
regions. Two theoretical components, semantic association and combinatorial processes, have been proposed to be critical for sentence comprehension. However, the contributions of sub-regions within this ventral pathway
to these two components are elusive. We addressed this question by using
a priming paradigm and manipulating the linguistic relationship between
prime and target. Word-pair phrases with four types of relationships
were constructed: combinatorial (“lemon-cake”), semantically associated
(“bread-cake”), unrelated (“driver-cake”), or pseudoword-word (“kmbolcake”) relation. Both implicit (Experiment 1) and explicit (Experiment 2)
semantic processing tasks were used to explore how different task demands
modulate activation of related regions. Twenty-six subjects were recruited
in this fMRI study, in which subjects were required to participate in both
two experiments. Experiment 1 used a lexical-semantic decision task. It is
demonstrated that implicit combinatorial processing evoked enhanced activation in left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG), left anterior superior temporal
gyrus (LaSTG), and left inferior parietal lobule (LIPL), and semantic association effect was found in LaSTG and left middle temporal gyrus (LMTG).
Experiment 2 employed a prime-target relationship judgment task. LaSTG
was found to be the only one region exhibiting task-invariant activation
pattern for both combinatorial processing and semantic association effect,
whereas the LIFG, LMTG, and LIPL were modulated by tasks. These results
suggest that there is a neural dissociation between semantic representation
and combinatorial processing during sentence comprehension.

F80
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS IN RESPONSE TO SIMILAR AND
RELATED WORDS Alice F. Jackson1, Donald J. Bolger1; 1University of Mary-

land, College Park — The present study investigated neurophysiological
correlates of different types of relationships between words, namely “ssociated” and “similar” words (Chiarello, Burgess, Richards, & Pollock, 1990).
Event-related potentials (ERPs) were collected from 19 high-skill native
English speakers during a relatedness decision task. Our analyses compared neural activity in response to word pairs that were associated only,
similar only, and both associated and similar, to words that were rated as
dissimilar and unrelated in a separate judgment task. ERPs were analyzed
using cluster-based permutation testing (Groppe, Urbach, & Kutas, 2011).
It was found that relationship type modulated ERP amplitude such that
words pairs that were both associated and similar elicited a less negative
N400 than words that were only similar or only associated; word pairs that
were similar only or associated only elicited less negative N400s than unrelated/dissimilar words; but, similar-only word pairs did not elicit a different effect than associated-only word pairs with respect to timing or scalp
distribution. The present findings do not support a multiple-mechanism
account of processing relationships among words. However, differences in
stimulus duration, stimulus quantity, and other features of experimental
design may influence differing results and will be discussed.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

211

Poster Session F	

F81
BILATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTICES SUPPORTING SEMANTIC,
PHONOLOGICAL AND NON-LINGUISTIC SELECTION PROCESSES

Jie Zhuang1, Micah Johnson1, Deborah Burke2, David Madden1,3, Trevor
Thomas1, Mary Elizabeth McLaughlin1, Sarah Danehower1, Michele Diaz1,3;
1
Brain Imaging and Analysis Center, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
NC, USA, 2Department of Linguistics and Cognitive Science, Pomona College,
Claremont, CA, USA, 3Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA — Left inferior frontal gyrus
(LIFG) has been taken as a critical region supporting selection or cognitive
control in many neural models (e.g. Thompson-Schill et al. 2005), however
the role of right (R) IFG remains underspecified. Previous research (Bozic et
al. 2010) suggests that RIFG might play a similar role as LIFG in cognitive
control of sound to lexical mapping in spoken language comprehension. To
further understand the function of bilateral IFG, we manipulated selection
demands as continuous variables in word-level semantic, phonological and
non-linguistic visual processes. Specifically, we tested whether left-lateralization of neural activity in prefrontal cortex is driven by linguistic properties, perceptual properties, or a combination of the two. In an fMRI study,
participants were instructed to select which of two items better matched
a cue based on a) shared semantic features, b) phonemic overlap, or c)
perceptual similarity. A measure of selection demands was calculated in
each task by subtracting the similarity between the cue and target from
similarity of the cue and distractor. Behavioral results showed increasing
response times for higher selection demands across all three tasks. Accordingly, greater activation was observed in bilateral IFG and insula when the
selection demands increased across all three tasks. These findings suggest
that selection processes are supported by a bilateral prefrontal system and
RIFG might play a similar role as LIFG in selection processes.

F82
THE EFFECTS OF CUE MODALITY ON AN OBJECT MEMORY
RETRIEVAL TASK Justin Eroh1, Hsueh-Sheng Chiang1, Raksha A. Mudar2,

Michael A. Kraut3, John Hart, Jr.1; 1University of Texas at Dallas, TX, 2University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL, 3The Johns Hopkins Hospital, MD — There
has been debate as to how to demonstrate the presence of multiple semantic
memory systems. The purpose of this study is to investigate the retrieval of
semantic information when cued in different modalities. We administered
an object-memory retrieval task where participants were given two features
of an object and then indicated whether the combination of the two features
resulted in retrieval of an object memory (retrievals vs. non-retrievals). We
used a between-subjects design with 3 different versions of the task where
the first feature was presented either as a spoken word (AW, N=16), as
a line drawing (PW, N=16), or as a written word (WW, N=18), while the
second feature was always presented as a written word. The same features
and feature pairings were used in all three versions (e.g. hear a speaker
say “arm” (AW), drawing of an arm (PW), written word “arm”). All participants were undergraduate students (mean age = 22.39). Reaction times
were faster for retrievals than non-retrievals for the AW and WW conditions, but showed no difference for PW. ERPs time-locked to the second
feature (written word) showed a late separation over the left frontal and
left temporal regions from 600 - 1200 ms with retrieval trials having more
negative potentials than non-retrievals only in the AW and WW conditions.
Our data suggest that receiving cues via the language system facilitates
the retrieval process and that semantic information may be stored and/or
retrieved differently among sensory/perceptual modalities.

F83
INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY IN A CORTICAL SEMANTIC HUB Michael

Bonner1, Jonathan Peelle2, Amy Rose Price1, Murray Grossman1; 1University of
Pennsylvania, 2Washington University in St. Louis — Semantic memory underlies the representation of meaning in language. The neural system for lexical-semantic memory is often assumed to be highly similar across healthy
individuals. Here we challenge this assumption in a series of experiments,
which demonstrate that individual variability in the anatomy of a cortical
semantic hub relates to lexical-semantic performance, functional activation,
and the shared anatomic properties of the lexical-semantic network. We
examined fMRI activation and cortical thickness in healthy young adults
performing a word-recognition task. A cortical hub in the left angular gyrus

212

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
was strongly activated during word recognition (p<.05 whole-brain corrected). We next identified critical structure-behavior and structure-function relationships in this region, demonstrating that increased cortical
thickness accounts for both faster performance and greater semantic activation (all p<.05, corrected within search volume). Furthermore, we found
that this region covaries with the structural properties in a broad network
of lexical-semantic regions (p<.05 whole-brain corrected). Altogether, these
findings illustrate the fundamental biological link between structural neuroanatomy and the functional, behavioral, and network properties of the
lexical-semantic system.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
F84
THE OCCURRENCE OF REFERENCES TO RECENT WAKING LIFE
EVENTS IN REM SLEEP DREAMS IS CORRELATED WITH FRONTAL
THETA ACTIVITY Jean-Baptiste Eichenlaub1, Elaine van Rijn1, Gareth Gaskell2,

Penelope Lewis3, Emmanuel Maby4, Matthew Walker5, Frederic Boy1, Mark Blagrove1; 1Department of Psychology, Swansea University, Swansea, Wales, UK,
2
Department of Psychology, York University, York, UK, 3School of Psychological
Science, Manchester University, Manchester, UK, 4Lyon Neuroscience Research
Center, INSERM, CNRS, University of Lyon, Lyon, FR, 5Sleep and Neuroimaging Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, US — One constituent of
dreams are past memories. Although prior waking events are not replayed
identically in dreams, dreams are believed to arise from recent and often
emotional memories recombined together into a series of images (Stickgold
et al., 2001). There is evidence of the involvement of Rapid-Eye Movement
(REM) sleep, and associated frontal theta EEG oscillations, in the processing of recent emotional memories (Nishida et al., 2009; Payne et al., 2012).
While recent work has attempted to link sleep physiology with the content
of dreams (Dresler et al., 2011; Horikawa et al., 2013), no study has examined how specific sleep oscillation is related to the memory sources of that
dream content. Here, using EEG recordings during 1 night with multiple
REM awakenings and diary records across the previous 10 day period, the
incorporation of events from daily life into dream reports was investigated.
We assessed the number of incorporations from each of the 10 prior days
in each REM dream. Analyses were conducted separately for incorporation
of recent events (from the 2 days prior to sleeping in the laboratory) versus
older events (from 3 to 10 days prior). The number of recent incorporations was found to be positively correlated with theta EEG activity over the
frontal cortex during the last 3 minutes of the REM sleep period (F3: r=0.65
p=.003; F4: r=0.68 p=.002) while no such correlation was observed for references to older events. These findings suggest that dream content may index
the processing/consolidation of recent memories in REM sleep.

F85
FROM THE LAB TO REAL LIFE: BRIDGING A GAP BETWEEN LABORATORY EPISODIC MEMORY AND MEMORY FOR REAL-LIFE
EVENTS Talya Sadeh1, Asaf Gilboa1, Yonatan Goshen-Gottstein2; 1Rotman

Research Institute, Baycrest Centre, 2School of Psychological Sciences, TelAviv University — Laboratory tests of episodic memory often examine recognition or recall of individual items, wherein each item is treated as a
distinct event, independent of other studied-items. However, a key feature
of memory for real-life events is that they are embedded in time. As eloquently articulated by Tulving: “Organization of knowledge in the episodic
system is temporal. One event precedes, co-occurs, or succeeds another in
time.” In laboratory settings the unfolding of events in time is captured
by the temporal-contiguity effect. This finding entails that the closer two
words are during the study phase, the higher the probability that they
will be retrieved in succession during the test phase. In the current fMRI
study, participants were scanned while retrieving 24 lists of 12 words in
a free recall test. Recalled items were classified as contiguous if they were
recalled following an item that preceded or followed them at study. Activity in the hippocampus was detected when contrasting the contiguous
versus non-contiguous items. A functional-connectivity analysis with the
hippocampus as a seed region revealed a set of structures including the
medial prefrontal cortex (BAs 9 and 10), posterior-cingulate and cerebellum. This set of regions is strikingly similar to that commonly detected
in studies of autobiographical memory. The similarity in brain activation

2014 Annual Meeting	

Poster Session F

between free recall of temporally-successive items and memory for real-life
events implies that important aspects of the processes underlying retrieval
of real-life memories may be captured in laboratory-controlled settings via
examination of the temporal-contiguity effect.

F86
THE EFFECT OF POST-ENCODING STRESS ON PERFORMANCE
IN THE DRM FALSE MEMORY PARADIGM Enmanuelle Pardilla-Del-

gado1, Sara E. Alger1, Brian Kinealy1, Jessica D. Payne1; 1University of Notre
Dame — Stress has a marked influence on how information is remembered.
However, whether stress facilitates or impairs memory depends on several
factors, including the stage of processing during which it occurs (i.e. encoding, consolidation, retrieval). Although an increasing number of studies
have investigated the impact of stress on veridical memory, the research on
stress and false memory formation is lacking. The majority of this research
has involved inducing stress prior to encoding and, coupled with short
experimental sessions (i.e. 1-3 hours between encoding and retrieval), it has
been difficult to isolate the effects of stress to a single stage of memory. The
current study targeted the consolidation phase of memory by administering psychosocial stress immediately after the encoding of fifteen emotionally neutral Deese-Roediger-McDermott (DRM) false memory wordlists.
Twenty-four hours after encoding, participants were given a free recall
test followed by a recognition test. True recognition memory was impaired
in stressed participants, compared to controls, t(29)=2.41; p=.02, but there
was no change in false recognition memory (t=1.09, p=.28). However,
while control participants recognized true and false words equivalently,
paired t(14)=.84, p=.42, stressed participants recognized more false than
true words, paired t(15)=2.63, p=.019. Although true free recall results were
numerically similar (t= 1.64, p=.11), only when controls were compared to
stress responders (those with an increase from baseline in cortisol) is the
difference nearly significant, t(23)=1.99, p=.058. These results suggest that
stress impairs true memory consolidation, arguably by hindering specific-event processing in the hippocampus and facilitating gist-based processing in cortical regions

F87
DOES A SLOWLY-CHANGING REPRESENTATION OF WHAT AND
WHEN EXIST IN MULTIPLE BRAIN REGIONS? Zoran Tiganj1, Shinya

Nakamura2, Inderdeep Singh1, Marc Howard1; 1Center for Memory and Brain
and Department of Psychology, Boston University, 2Institute for Behavioral
Genetics, University of Colorado — It is well known that the brain shows
long-range temporal correlations. It is not clear, however, whether these
autocorrelations reflect the maintenance of information about external
stimuli or intrinsic dynamics that are independent of external stimuli. We
analyze temporal correlations of neural data from a variety of data sets at
different time scales. The autocorrelation is noticeable along multiple trials
and, in at least some cases, appears to be stimulus-locked. Also, consistently with the theoretical predictions, information about the time of occurrence of a stimulus grows more fuzzy as time passes, consistent at least
qualitatively with Weber-Fechner scaling. These results suggest that the
brain is indeed capable of maintaining information about the recent past
in the dynamics of neural firing. With other data sets, the strategy could
be applied to establish stimulus-specificity over longer time scales. More
broadly, this strategy for data analysis can be extended to other recording
methodologies, including fMRI.

F88
RETRIEVAL CONTROL IN SCHIZOTYPY

Amie N. Doidge1, Edward L.
Wilding , Lisa H. Evans ; Cardiff University Brain Imaging Centre (CUBRIC),
School of Psychology, Cardiff University, UK — Individuals with schizophrenia have memory impairments. This study was designed to determine
whether these deficits arise from failures of cognitive control operations.
This was achieved by measuring dimensional correlates of schizophrenia
(schizotypy ratings) in healthy volunteers, alongside event-related potential (ERP) markers of successful cognitive control. In an initial study phase,
equal numbers of words were presented in one of two study contexts. ERPs
were acquired in a test phase where these words were re-presented, interspersed with unstudied words. Participants made binary responses; one
for studied words from a ‘target’ context, another for unstudied words and
studied words from the alternate ‘non-target’ context. This judgment can be
1

1

1

made by prioritising retrieval of the target context and making a non-target response when recovery of the target context fails. ERPs were acquired
because they can index how well people prioritise target over non-target
context retrieval. Correlations between schizotypy measures and how well
people prioritise retrieval of certain contexts would point to one locus for
memory problems associated with schizophrenia. The ERP measures indicated participants could prioritise recovery of target information at the
expense of non-target information. There was, however, no correlation
between schizotypy scores and the ERP evidence for the extent of retrieval
prioritisation. One potential explanation is that in this sample the range of
schizotypy scores was insufficient to extrapolate to cognitive dysfunction
in schizophrenia patients. Alternatively, it could be that control processes
during encoding, rather than at retrieval, are responsible for the memory
problems experienced by schizophrenia patients.

F89
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INDICES OF PREPARATION FOR EPISODIC MEMORY RETRIEVAL Angharad N. Williams1, Lisa H. Evans1,

Edward L. Wilding1; 1Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC),
School of Psychology, Cardiff University, UK — This experiment was designed
to delineate the processes engaged while people prepare for memory
retrieval. This was achieved by comparing event-related potentials (ERPs)
elicited by two preparatory cues signalling that participants should prepare
for different retrieval tasks. One cue signalled episodic retrieval: identify
the location in which an object had been seen in a prior study phase. The
other signalled semantic retrieval: identify the location in which an object
is most commonly found. Participants were cued trial-by-trial as to which
task to complete, and only two trials of the same task were completed in
succession. This enabled contrasts between ERPs elicited by cues on “stay”
trials, where the cue on the preceding trial signalled the same retrieval task,
and “switch” trials, where the cue differed from that on the preceding trial.
A significant difference between the preparatory activity following each
cue was evident for switch trials only. These findings diverge from previous outcomes where the activity differentiating cues signalling preparation
for episodic or semantic retrieval has been restricted to stay trials. In previous studies the episodic/semantic switching requirement was accompanied by the additional requirement to switch to recover different kinds of
contents. This second requirement was minimised here because location
information was required for both episodic and semantic judgments. These
findings suggest, therefore, that inferences made previously about consistent neural signatures associated with preparation for episodic retrieval do
not hold under certain circumstances.

F90
EPISODIC SIMULATION AND PROSPECTIVE MEMORY: CORRELATES OF SUSTAINED EXECUTIVE ACTIVITY Kevin P. Madore1, R.

Nathan Spreng2, Daniel L. Schacter1; 1Harvard University, 2Cornell University
— The ability to form and later retrieve a task intention has implications for
functioning in everyday life. In the current study we examined the relationship between episodic simulation of an intention and prospective memory
using fMRI and a within-subjects design. Before scanning began, 28 healthy
young adults were introduced to a lexical decision paradigm where they
practiced classifying words, non-words, and special target words (from the
categories of animals or tools) with different fingers. For half of the target
words participants simulated what they would do in the scanner when
they saw the respective words (i.e., the simulation intention condition),
whereas for the other half they rhymed with the words (i.e., the control
condition). In the scanner, participants encountered blocks where they 1)
classified words and non-words alone, 2) classified words, non-words, and
simulated or rhymed target words, and 3) classified words and non-words
alone but were told they would see simulated or rhymed target words.
Contrasts focused on blocks where participants made word or non-word
classifications alone, with the additional instruction that they would see
simulated or rhymed target words or not. These blocks differed only in the
instruction to maintain an intention. We found that maintaining an intention for simulated target words reduced sustained activity in executive
regions during the classification task compared to maintaining an intention
for rhymed target words. These regions included dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex, anterior insula, and superior parietal lobule. Our findings suggest
that simulation can reduce executive demands on prospective memory.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

213

Poster Session F	

F91
CONFIGURAL MEMORY DISRUPTIONS ASSOCIATED WITH CHEMOTHERAPY AND HORMONE DEPLETION IDENTIFIED USING
CONCURRENT EYETRACKING AND FMRI. Alyssa B. Cunningham1,

Anthony J. Ryals1, Kelly L. Brandstatt1, Joel L. Voss1; 1Northwestern University
— Subjective and objective memory and cognitive deficits have been identified in individuals receiving chemotherapy and hormone depletion for
cancer treatment. Although rodent models suggest that both chemotherapy and hormone depletion cause specific damage to hippocampus and
reduced hippocampal-dependent memory performance, relatively little is
known regarding the functional neuroanatomical basis of impairment in
humans. We therefore investigated scene configural memory (SCM), which
is related to hippocampal function in healthy individuals, in 17 premenopausal breast cancer survivors who received chemotherapy combined with
hormone depletion therapy within 18 months prior to the study. SCM was
studied using a scene recognition task that incorporated eye-tracking task
during fMRI scanning. Eye tracking provided a covert measure of hippocampal function as eye movements reflected SCM for repeated scene
configurations. Subjects also made overt recognition decisions for repeat
versus novel scenes. Relative to an equal number of healthy age-matched
controls, patients demonstrated significantly reduced eye-movement
expressions of SCM, despite intact overt recognition memory performance.
Patients were therefore not globally impaired, but instead showed selective
disruption of SCM, suggesting that hippocampal function is particularly
disrupted by chemotherapy and hormone depletion in humans. Further
differences between controls and patients in brain activity in regions such
as prefrontal cortex associated with SCM will be discussed. These findings
deepen understanding of the nature of impairments in memory and cognition following cancer treatment and could motivate future interventions to
improve cognition-related life quality among cancer survivors.

F92
PLURALITY MEMORY ROCS INDICATE RECOLLECTION IS A CONTINUOUS PROCESS Brittany Jeye1, Chad Dodson2, Scott Slotnick1; 1Boston
College, 2University of Virginia — Is recollection a continuous (graded) process or a threshold (all-or-none) process? Receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) analysis can answer this question, as the continuous model and the
threshold model predict curved and linear recollection ROCs, respectively.
As memory for plurality - an item’s previous singular or plural form - is
assumed to rely on recollection, the nature of recollection can be investigated by evaluating plurality memory ROCs. The present study consisted
of four plurality memory experiments. During encoding, words (singular
or plural) or objects (singular or duplicate/plural) were presented. During
retrieval, old items were presented with the same or different plurality
along with new items, and participants made confidence ratings from
very sure “old” (same plurality) to very sure “new” (different plurality or
new). To generate plurality memory ROCs, hit rate and false alarm rate
reflected the proportion of old items classified as “old” with the same
or different plurality, respectively. Chi-square analysis revealed that the
majority of plurality memory ROCs were adequately fit (p > 0.05) by the
continuous unequal variance model (and better fit by a continuous model
that accounted for plurality misattribution), whereas none of the plurality
memory ROCs were adequately fit by the two-high threshold model (all
ps < 0.001). These plurality memory ROC results indicate recollection is
a continuous process, which is consistent with previous source memory
and associative memory ROC findings. More broadly, ROC analysis can
be used to evaluate brain activity to investigate the nature of processing in
specific neural regions.

F93
EFFECT OF VALENCE ON THE RECAPITULATION OF SENSORY
PROCESSING DURING EMOTIONAL REMEMBERING Sarah M Kark1,

Elizabeth A Kensinger1; 1Boston College — Negative memories tend to be
remembered with more sensory detail than positive or neutral memories
(Ochsner, 2000). While prior work has separately reported increased sensory processing during encoding (Mickley Steinmetz & Kensinger, 2008)
or later retrieval of negative information (Maratos et al., 2001), little is
known about the overlap of neural processes engaged during encoding and
retrieval of emotional information. Here, we examined the effect of valence

214

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
on retrieval-related reinstatement (or “recapitulation”) of neural processes
engaged during encoding. We hypothesized that memory for negative
information would be associated with stronger recapitulation of sensory
processing activity, compared to positive or neutral information. Participants (ages 19-35) underwent an fMRI scan while studying a line-drawing
outline of a negative, positive, or neutrally valenced image from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS), followed by the complete photo.
After a twenty-minute delay, participants were shown the line-drawing
outlines of the previously studied photos and outlines they never studied.
Participants indicated whether the line drawing was old or new. Data were
acquired during encoding and retrieval on a Siemens 3T Tim Trio scanner. All fMRI data analysis was performed using SPM8. In agreement with
prior research, results revealed that retrieval of negative stimuli elicited
more visual activity, compared to positive or neutral stimuli. Further, as
hypothesized, conjunction analysis revealed more extensive recapitulation
of sensory (temporo-occipital) activity in the negative>neutral condition
compared to the positive>neutral condition. These findings suggest stronger retrieval-related recapitulation processes during retrieval of negative
information compared to positive or neutral, especially within visual areas.

F94
DIFFERENT MODES OF CONTEXTUAL ASSOCIATION LEARNING
AND THEIR NEURAL CORRELATES Daniel O’Young1, Joel L. Voss1;

1
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine — Associative learning
occurs in specific contexts that govern the appropriate behavioral expression of memory (e.g. remembering to dress formally for a wedding, but
not the gym). Human and animal research implicates differential involvement of hippocampus/prefrontal cortex versus striatum during associative learning, with the former involved in relatively flexible, rule-based
memory and the latter in inflexible, habit-based memory. We studied contextual association learning under conditions designed to promote flexible
versus habitual memory expression. Trials were presented in one of four
quadrants (e.g. contexts). Given a “cue” object, subjects attempted to select
the associated “target” object (from a target-foil pair). Cue-target associations varied by context. Each subject performed the task during two sessions, including either: (i) repetitive, predictable trial sequences to promote
habitual responding, or (ii) pseudo-randomized trial sequences to promote
rule-based responding. Accuracy was high and did not vary by session
(N=14), indicating successful learning across conditions. Preliminary ERP
findings indicate trends for greater late-frontal potentials for contextual
association memory in the rule-based condition, suggesting that different modes of learning distinguished only by the order and predictability
of trials can engage different brain systems during contextual association
learning. Results are interpreted with regards to distinctions between
human and animal memory research, which often differ in consistency and
predictability of training, potentially promoting involvement of different
brain systems.

F95
A SINGLE BOUT OF RESISTANCE EXERCISE CAN ENHANCE EPISODIC MEMORY PERFORMANCE Lisa Weinberg1, Anita Hasni1, Minoru

Shinohara1, Audrey Duarte1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology — Acute stress,
both physical and psychological, has the potential to enhance episodic
memory consolidation. This enhancement is often specific to emotionally
arousing materials. Physical exercise can produce similar beneficial effects
on episodic memory performance, as it results in the same physiological
response as other stressors. This stress response includes an increase in
levels of cortisol and norepinephrine. The goal of this study is to determine
if a resistance exercise task performed immediately following encoding
will improve recognition memory performance 48 hours later. We used a
knee extension/flexion task and measured salivary alpha amylase (a biomarker of central norepinephrine), heart rate, and blood pressure to assess
the physiological stress response. To test recognition memory, we used a
remember-know paradigm with equal numbers of positive, negative, and
neutral IAPS images as stimuli. Overall recognition memory performance
was better in the active group, who performed the exercise, than in the
passive group, who did not exercise. We found a robust valence effect, with
higher accuracy for emotional items than neutral items and no difference in
accuracy between positive and negative items. This effect was related to the
physiological response, as within the active group, it was only present in
the participants who exhibited a high physiological response. These results

2014 Annual Meeting	
indicate that a single bout of resistance exercise can positively impact recognition memory performance for emotional materials and open up the
possibility of therapeutic uses of resistance exercise.

F96
COGNITIVE CONTROL OF MEMORY AND MOTOR RESPONSES: A
COMPARISON OF NETWORKS SUPPORTING ACTIVE INHIBITION

Avery Rizio1, Nancy Dennis1; 1The Pennsylvania State University — Active
inhibition includes both response inhibition (the suppression of prepotent
motor response) and memory inhibition (the suppression of either encoding or retrieval). While the majority of behavioral research has considered
them a single process, neuroimaging research suggests otherwise. Specifically, memory inhibition typically exhibits activation in the superior/
middle frontal gyrus, while motor inhibition typically activates the inferior
frontal gyrus. Despite these findings, there have been no further attempts
to investigate the degree to which active inhibition might be mediated by
two separate networks. The current study directly compared the neural
networks that mediate both response and memory inhibition through the
use of fMRI and connectivity analyses. Direct comparisons between each
type of inhibition focused on differences within the frontal cortex and
neural network supporting each type of inhibitory process. These analyses provide insight into two distinct inhibitory networks that separately
support response and memory inhibition. Specifically, memory inhibition
is subserved by a network that includes the superior/middle prefrontal
cortex and parietal lobe, while successful response inhibition depends on
the inferior prefrontal cortex, subthalamic nucleus, and pre-supplementary
motor area. Additionally, connectivity analyses help to further differentiate
these networks, as memory inhibition relies on the negative connectivity
between inhibition and encoding regions, while motor inhibition depends
on the negative connectivity between inhibition and motor regions. The
current project is the first within-subjects investigation of the neural correlates of both the cognitive control of memory and motor responses. As
such, these results provide valuable evidence towards a comprehensive
theory of active inhibitory control.

F97
MULTIVARIATE PATTERN ANALYSES REVEAL DISTINCT ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS INVOLVED IN CONTINUOUS RECOGNITION Mason Price1, Angelica Flores Barrios2, Jeffrey Johnson1; 1University

of Missouri, 2University of the Americas Puebla — Numerous behavioral,
electrophysiological, and functional neuroimaging studies have established that recognition memory can be based on multiple neurocognitive
processes. These studies typically employ methods that explicitly encourage the use of different processes, such as having subjects indicate which
judgments are based on recollecting details versus a sense of familiarity.
However, the extent to which differential processing is also involved in
situations requiring relatively simple and speeded recognition judgments
remains largely unexplored. Here, subjects (N=15) completed a continuous
recognition task in which they made binary old/new judgments to words
that were repeated up to four times. Scalp EEG was acquired throughout
the task and later subjected to multivariate pattern-classification analyses.
Two different classifiers were trained on the EEG data. One was trained to
distinguish the first versus fourth presentations, presumably on the basis
of broad changes that span multiple intervening items. The other classifier was trained to detect more pronounced differences present between
the first and second presentations. Although both classifiers performed at
above-chance levels, significant performance for the former emerged at
300-400 ms post-stimulus onset, which was about 200 ms earlier than that
for the latter classifier. Furthermore, classifier performance across presentations followed distinct trends: Whereas one exhibited a gradation in accuracy from first to fourth presentations, the other following a threshold-like
pattern that leveled off after the second presentation. These findings indicate that even simple recognition tasks can reveal distinct forms of neural
signal, lending further support to the idea that memory is supported by
multiple neurocognitive processes.

Poster Session F

F98
FUTURE ALTRUISM: THE EFFECT OF EPISODIC FUTURE THOUGHT
ON INTERPERSONAL DISCOUNTING Paul F. Hill1, Lauren Costello1,

Rachel A. Diana1; 1Virginia Tech — Humans have a predisposition to discount the value of larger, temporally distant rewards in favor of smaller
but immediate rewards. Mentally simulating hypothetical future events, or
episodic future thought (EFT), may override impulsive decisions by creating foresight into the utility of future outcomes (Boyer, 2008). Recent studies have shown that EFT decreases discounting of future rewards through
increased functional connectivity between the hippocampus and regions
encoding subjective reward value, including the anterior prefrontal cortex
(Benoit et al., 2011), and anterior cingulate (Peters & Buchel, 2010). Social
cooperation is similarly characterized by decisions involving immediate vs.
future consequences and has been linked to discounting rates (Stephens et
al., 2002). The current study provides novel insight into the effects of EFT
on social decision making. Participants were offered hypothetical monetary
rewards and asked to choose to keep that reward or to give a larger amount
to others at varying social distances (e.g., closest friend or relative vs.
acquaintance). During these decisions, participants were prompted with
social and non-social EFT cues as well as semantic visualization cues serving as a control condition. Results indicate that subjects are more altruistic
when prompted with social vs. non-social EFT cues; however, this effect
diminishes with increasing social distance. Surprisingly, a similar effect is
seen in semantic vs. non-social EFT conditions, regardless of social distance.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Semantic
F99
DIFFERENTIAL BRAIN PROCESSING OF NATURAL AND TRANSFORMED FOOD Francesco Foroni1, Giulio Pergola12, Paola Mengotti1, Geor-

gette Argiris1, Raffaella I. Rumiati1; 1International School for Advanced Studies
(SISSA) - Trieste, Italy, 2University of Bari - Bari, Italy — Visual recognition and
categorization of objects rely on different features depending on the category they belong to. This event-related potentials (ERP) study investigated
whether recognition of food differing in the degree of transformation (i.e.,
natural versus transformed) relies more on sensory and functional features,
respectively. Healthy and underweight participants (N=30) were shown a
sentence (prime) and a photograph of a food. Primes described either a
sensory aspect (“It tastes sweet”) or a functional aspect (“It is suitable for
a wedding party”) of the food, while photographs depicted either a natural (e.g., cherry) or a transformed food (e.g., pizza). Sentence-photograph
pairs were either congruent or incongruent. This design aimed at modulating the N400 component. In the healthy participants the magnitude of
the late component of the N400 (450-650 ms) yielded a double dissociation
with left frontal anterior topography. N400 amplitude was significantly
larger for transformed food than for natural food when a sensory prime
was shown, while the opposite pattern was found with a functional prime.
These results were not replicated with the underweight participants. The
pattern inversion in healthy was associated with a peak of activation in the
premotor cortex (Brodmann area 6). The evidence suggests that in healthy
participants, but not in underweight participants, transformed food is represented more with reference to its function and natural food to its sensory
aspects. These findings highlight that the level of transformation of food is
an important aspect to be considered in food perception and categorization.

F100
REWARD RELATED DIFFERENCES IN MEMORY OF PICTURES
ARE WIPED OUT BY DOPAMINE AGONIST PRAMIPEXOLE GIVEN
BEFORE RETENTION SLEEP Gordon B. Feld1, Luciana Besedovsky1,

Kosuke Kaida2, Thomas F. Muente3, Jan Born1; 1University of Tuebingen, Germany, 2National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST),
Tsukuba, Japan, 3University of Luebeck, Germany — The consolidation of
memory traces encoded during wakefulness relies on their reactivation
during subsequent sleep. Memory for pictures is improved if a reward is
promised for successful retention. Activity in the ventral tegmental area,
the nucleus accumbens, the hippocampus and connectivity between these
areas during encoding predicts these differences, reflecting dopaminergic
enhancement of plasticity. In a within-subject placebo-controlled balanced
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

215

Poster Session F	
crossover study we manipulated dopaminergic signalling during sleep
using the d2-like dopamine receptor agonist Pramipexole. Sixteen healthy
young males were presented 160 pictures of landscapes and interiors, each
of which was preceded by a 1 or 2 cents symbol (indicating high or low
reward for successful later retrieval). Afterwards, the participants received
a single dose of 0.35 mg Pramipexole or Placebo and then slept for 8 hours,
while polysomnographic data were recorded. At retrieval, approximately
24 hours after encoding, high and low reward pictures were presented
intermixed with an equal amount of completely new pictures and participants had to indicate whether they remembered or knew each picture (d’
was estimated as the z-score of the hit-rate minus the z-score of the falsealarm-rate). Under Placebo, high reward pictures were retained better than
low reward pictures and this effect was wiped out by Pramipexole. Rapid
eye movement sleep and slow wave sleep were reduced by the treatment in
favour of sleep stages 1 and 2. These results suggest that reward contingencies are reprocessed during sleep including dopaminergic activity, possibly
relying on a striatal feedback-loop initiated by replay in the hippocampus.

F101
THE ROLE OF ATTENTION IN GOAL-DIRECTED SEMANTIC
RETRIEVAL: EVIDENCE FROM MULTI-VOXEL PATTERN ANALYSIS

Gavin K. Hanson1, Evangelia G. Chrysikou1; 1University of Kansas — Neuroimaging studies of semantic memory have revealed different cortical networks supporting semantic retrieval for different kinds of information
about common objects. For example, tasks requiring judgments of semantic
similarity based on specific object properties, such as color or shape, tend
to be associated with activity in the left intraparietal sulcus (IPS). Evidence
from transcranial magnetic stimulation studies also shows that disruption
of activity in left IPS impairs performance on semantic tasks that require
comparisons between such perceptual features. Moreover, semantic judgments can be made with respect to more abstract object properties, such as
thematic context or function. However, the functional networks that underlie judgments based on such abstract object features have not been systematically investigated. Here, we use multi-voxel pattern analysis of functional magnetic resonance images to examine the neural representations
of both specific and abstract object properties. Participants were required
to complete a series of semantic judgment tasks, wherein they were asked
to match a target object to one of two response object options along one of
five dimensions, namely, color, shape, function, theme, or mode of manipulation. In addition, participants performed a visual search task, requiring
attention to color or shape. Results show that activation patterns within
the IPS can reliably differentiate between semantic dimensions, both perceptual and abstract. In addition, differences in classification performance
within left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex suggest a biasing role of this
region for different object attributes. These results are discussed in the context of partially distributed models of semantic memory for object concepts.

F102
TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF CUED RECALL: AN EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL STUDY Robin Hellerstedt1, Mikael Johansson1; 1Lund University

— Retrieval is a fundamental function of long-term memory. Whereas previous event-related potential (ERP) research on the time course of memory
retrieval typically has focused on recognition memory, less is known about
the temporal dynamics of cued recall. In the present study, electrophysiological measures of brain activity were recorded while the subjects engaged
in a semantic cued-recall task. A category (e.g. FRUIT) and a word stem
(e.g. Ki___?) were presented sequentially and the subjects were instructed
to generate an exemplar that completed this category-plus-word-stem cue.
Retrieval attempts were related to a late posterior negativity (LPN), which
previously has been suggested to reflect parietal activity related to topdown controlled search in long-term memory. Consistent with this interpretation, retrieval success was related to an attenuation of the LPN, signaling
that search was discontinued when retrieval was successful. Interestingly,
retrieval success was also related to an early frontal negativity that was elicited by the category cue. Similar frontal negativities have previously been
related to semantic preparation processes in the subsequent memory effect
literature. The retrieval-success sensitive frontal negativity in the present
study may reflect increased accessibility to memories that are semantically
associated with the category cue or integration of the category cue and

216

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
the word-stem cue in working memory. The present study provides new
insights into the temporal dynamics of cued recall and suggests that multiple neural mechanisms are involved in this long-term memory function.

F103
SLEEP-RELATED CHANGES OF NOVEL WORD LEARNING IN
NATIVE ENGLISH SPEAKERS Laura Kurdziel1, Brian Long2, Rebecca

Spencer1,2; 1Neuroscience and Behavior Program, University of Massachusetts
Amherst, 2Psychology Department, University of Massachusetts Amherst —
Sleep has been shown to improve the retention of newly learned words.
However, most methodologies for examining novel word learning use
nonsense or foreign languages to control for previous exposure. These languages typically have different rules and properties than an individual’s
native language, making the interpretation of this research difficult. In this
study, native English speakers were taught forty-five of the least frequently
used English words, as designated by the English Lexicon Project. During
encoding, words paired with their definitions were displayed on a computer one at a time. Participants were then shown a definition and were
asked to provide the corresponding word. Feedback was provided, and
encoding continued until a 62% accuracy criterion was reached. To assess
baseline knowledge, participants then recalled words for each definition
without feedback. Delayed recall was probed twelve hours later, either in
the evening (wake group, n=19) or in the morning (sleep group, n=24). Performance change from immediate to delayed recall was significantly better
in the sleep than the wake group (t(41) = 2.94, p = 0.005). Additionally,
responses that were incorrect, but similar to the correct words, were quantified. Over sleep, incorrect responses became significantly more similar to
correct words compared to wake (t(41) = -3.07, p = 0.004). This suggests
that sleep not only helps with retention of newly learned words within the
individual’s native language, but also helps to improve recall of words that
are not yet accurately learned.

F104
WHAT THE EAR HEARS AFFECTS WHAT THE EYES SEE: SEMANTIC
INTERFERENCE ON VISUAL TASK PERFORMANCE Peter Boddy1,

Eiling Yee1; 1Basque Center for Brain and Language, San Sebastian, Spain —
According to sensorimotor accounts of object knowledge, representations
of object concepts are distributed over the same brain areas that are active
when experiencing those objects. Because these accounts hold that object
representations are experience-based, they predict that representations
of objects with which we have relatively more visual experience should
involve brain areas supporting vision more than those with which we
have relatively less. One possible consequence of such an account is that
accessing representations of “more-visually-experienced” objects could
impair performance on an orthogonal ongoing (and incompatible) visual
task more than “less-visually-experienced objects” do because of competition for shared neural substrates in brain areas supporting both visual
task performance and “visually-experienced” objects’ representations. We
tested this prediction in a behavioral experiment where participants performed a Motion Object Tracking visual task while they made concreteness
judgments about aurally presented object names which varied (according
to ratings) in the relative amount of visual experience participants had of
them (e.g. “pencil” = less-visual, “penguin” = more-visual). Results show
that participants had greater difficulty with the Motion Object Tracking
task when making concreteness judgments on “more-visual” objects than
on “less-visual” objects. This interference suggests that: (a) the conceptual
representations of frequently seen objects share resources with parts of the
visual system required to perform Motion Object Tracking, (b) visual information is accessed when performing concreteness judgments on “more-visual” words, and that (c) visual task performance can be interfered with by
thinking about “more-visual” objects.

F105
THE VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX (VMPFC) AND
SCHEMA INSTANTIATION Vanessa Ghosh1,2, Morris Moscovitch1,2, Brenda

Colella3, Asaf Gilboa1,2,4; 1Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, 2University of
Toronto, 3Toronto Rehabilitation Institute, 4Canadian Partnership for Stroke
Recovery — Neuroimaging and animal studies have shown that the vmPFC
is involved in mediating the influence of prior knowledge, and more specifically schemas, on learning and memory. We hypothesized that: (1) the

2014 Annual Meeting	
human vmPFC is critical for schema representation; (2) supports the instantiation of appropriate schemas that are represented elsewhere; (3) is differentially involved in schema representation and not other types of prior
knowledge: categories. In a first study, two groups of vmPFC patients,
those who confabulate and those who do not, and controls made speeded
decisions about whether words were closely related to a schema (visiting a
doctor). Ten minutes later they repeated the task for a new schema (going
to bed), which included some lures related to the first schema. Non-confabulating vmPFC patients performed similarly to controls, with accuracy
close to ceiling. However, confabulating vmPFC patients were impaired
on the task. Interestingly, these patients accurately identified words that
belonged to the schemas, implying that the representation itself was still
present. However, they showed difficulty constraining their responses
to the relevant schema, suggesting an error in schema instantiation. In a
second study of healthy adults, performance on the schema paradigm was
compared to an identical task probing membership of words to one of two
categories. Results indicate that, in contrast to schema instantiation, previously relevant categories do not affect current category membership decisions. Schemas and categories may thus be instantiated differently, with
differing vulnerabilities to previously relevant categories. Electrophysiological data will also be presented.

F106
SEMANTIC BIAS IN VISUAL WORKING MEMORY

Farahnaz Ahmed
Wick1, Lucia Saura1, Chia-Chien Wu1, Marc Pomplun1; 1University of Massachusetts Boston — Previous studies (Hwang, Wang & Pomplun, 2011) indicate
that our strategies for memorizing objects in naturalistic scenes can be predicted by the semantic relationships between objects in that scene. That is,
we tend to make saccades to objects that are most semantically related to the
object in the current fixation. Why do such biases exist? One possibility is
that consecutive inspection of semantically similar objects facilitates object
memorization. We tested this hypothesis using an experimental paradigm
in which a series of eight grayscale object images were shown for 250 ms
each. Subsequently, participants saw another image and indicated whether
it had been in the series. In six experiments, we varied the object sets presented (either randomly chosen or taken from a specific context such as
airport, park, or bedroom), the target objects for negative responses (objects
from same or different contexts, or even of the same type as an object in the
set), and their order of presentation (consecutive objects of high versus low
semantic relationship). Recall rates were significantly better when objects
were from the same context, and improved even further when they were
ordered to maximize the semantic similarity of consecutive objects. Generally, these recall rates seemed to be governed by object types and semantics rather than by the specific visual features of individual objects. These
results give an insight into the use of the semantic structure of the environment for daily tasks.

F107
WHAT MAKES A GOOD LEARNER? NEURAL EVIDENCE FOR VARIATION IN ENCODING STRATEGIES William J. Beischel1, Natalie Mandel1,

Bianca Wells1, Izabelle Rymut1, Kavita Patel1, Robert G. Morrison1; 1Loyola
University Chicago — Successful encoding is critical for long-term memory
and is an important variable in understanding successful learning. In this
study we used a retrieval practice paradigm in conjunction with EEG to
examine the neural correlates of encoding throughout face-name association learning. For each of 108 unique faces, participants saw the face and
then heard an assigned name. After studying several other face-name pairs
participants 1) saw the face again while trying to recall the name, 2) made a
prospective judgment of learning, and 3) saw the face and heard the correct
name again, a sequence which repeated twice during a block of trials. Sixteen participants were divided into high and low performers based on final
recall test performance after learning. We focused on neural differences
during re-encoding (number 3 above), specifically calculating event-related
potentials (ERPs) when participants heard the name again. Presentation of
the name served both as feedback for the previous recall attempt and also as
an additional study opportunity. High and low performers showed a P300
(Cz) interaction with high performers showing a greater P300 with negative feedback, while low performers showing a greater P300 with positive
feedback. Also of note high performers showed a much greater memory
updating benefit than low performers as judged by the mean amplitude
of the late positive complex (PZ) during re-encoding. These results sug-

Poster Session F
gest that the nature of feedback may be critical in appraising learning and
allocating encoding resources during iterative learning opportunities may
differ according to learning ability.

F108
SEMANTIC STRATEGIES IN VERBAL LEARNING ARE ASSOCIATED
WITH GREY MATTER VOLUME IN VENTRAL OCCIPITOTEMPORAL
CORTEX. Jeffrey S. Phillips1,3, Corey T. McMillan1,3, Brian B. Avants2,3, Murray

Grossman1,3; 1Penn Frontotemporal Degeneration Center, 2Penn Image Computing and Science Laboratory, 3University of Pennsylvania — Deficits in
verbal learning occur across a number of neurodegenerative diseases and
are often presumed to result from disease in the medial temporal lobes,
which are typically implicated in episodic memory. However, verbal learning is also affected by semantic strategies for encoding and retrieval of
verbal information. We hypothesized that semantic processing in a verbal
learning task would depend on the integrity of grey matter in sensory-motor brain areas supporting conceptual knowledge. We examined the immediate recall performance of a heterogeneous group of patients (n=140) with
Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal degeneration on two verbal list
learning tasks with similar structure: the Philadelphia Verbal Learning Test
(PVLT), which uses semantically related target words, and the verbal learning component of the Philadelphia Brief Assessment of Cognition (PBAC),
which does not. Behavioral analysis revealed an interaction of test and
clinical phenotype, suggesting that patient groups differed in their ability to employ semantic strategies. Semantic dementia patients performed
poorly in both tasks and differed from multiple phenotype groups on
PVLT learning scores. In imaging analyses, T1-weighted anatomical magnetic resonance images were used to quantify grey matter volume. Semantic processing was assessed by the residual variance in PVLT scores after
accounting for PBAC performance. This measure was associated with grey
matter volume in the left anterior temporal lobe and bilateral ventral occipitotemporal cortex. These results corroborated the hypothesis that patients’
ability to leverage semantic strategies in an immediate verbal recall task
was related to the structural integrity of brain areas associated with semantic memory.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Skill learning
F109
TIME COURSE OF FACE FAMILIARITY PROCESSING AS REVEALED
BY EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Wanyi Huang1, Zhe Qu1, Yulong Ding1;

1
Sun Yat-Sen University — There is often a controversy in previous studies
about how early face familiarity can be cognitively processed. The present
study used event-related potentials (ERPs) to investigate the time course
of face familiarity processing. An explicit familiarity judgment task was
adopted in which subjects were presented with upright or inverted faces
and were required to judge whether a face was famous or not. The face
familiarity effects (FFEs) were defined as ERP differences between famous
and unknown faces. Significant FFEs were found on occipital P1 and N170,
occipital-temporal N250 and central P300. However, FFEs on P1 and N170
showed reversed polarities for upright and inverted faces, and these FFEs
were not correlated with any behavioral measure (accuracy, response
time) or modulated by learning sessions, demonstrating that they merely
reflected low-level visual differences between stimulus categories. For
N250 and P300, instead, the FFE polarities were consistent between face
orientations with larger and earlier FFEs for upright relative to inverted
faces. More importantly, the amplitudes of these FFEs were significantly
correlated with behavioral measures (larger FFEs were accompanied by
better or quicker face recognition) and increased through learning, suggesting that these FFEs reflected cognitive extraction of familiarity information.
In summary, the present study suggested that cognitive discrimination of
familiar and unfamiliar faces begins around 230ms after stimulus onset,
and the FFEs of mid-latency ERP component - N250 and P300 - can predict
the performance of face recognition.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

217

Poster Session F	

F110
CUED MEMORY REACTIVATION DURING SLOW-WAVE SLEEP
PROMOTES EXPLICIT KNOWLEDGE OF A MOTOR SEQUENCE

James Cousins1, Penny Lewis1, Wael El-Deredy1, Laura Parkes1, Nora Hennies1; 1University of Manchester — Memories are gradually reorganized
after initial encoding, and this can sometimes lead to the emergence of
explicit knowledge from what was initially implicit learning. The exact
processes underlying this reorganization remain unclear. Here, we test
whether active reactivation of procedural memory during seep underlies
this restructuring of memories. We used a serial reaction time task (SRTT)
to determine whether targeted memory reactivation (TMR) in slow-wave
sleep (SWS) promotes the emergence of explicit knowledge for a procedural skill. Participants learned two 12-item sequences (A and B) that differed in cue order and in the set of four associated tones (higher or lower
pitch). Overnight sleep was polysomnographically monitored and tones
associated with one learned sequence were replayed during SWS. Upon
waking, participants demonstrated greater explicit knowledge (P=0.005) as
well as improved procedural skill (P=0.04) for the cued sequence relative
to the un-cued sequence. Furthermore, slow-wave activity (~1Hz) during
cued reactivation predicted explicit knowledge (r=0.7, P=0.01), while local
fast spindles (13.5-15Hz) predicted enhanced procedural skill, both during
cued replay (r=0.71, P=0.01) and during subsequent silent periods (r=0.69,
P=0.01). Conversely, cues had no effect on post-sleep memory performance
in a control group receiving tonal replay prior to sleep. These findings show
that cued memory reactivation during sleep can alter memory representations to promote the extraction of explicit knowledge, supporting the role
of spontaneous reactivation as a central mechanism in actively restructuring memory representations during sleep.

F111
MAKING IT INTERESTING: THE RELEVANCE OF A MOVEMENT
SEQUENCE AS A FACTOR IN PROCEDURAL MEMORY CONSOLIDATION IN CHILDREN Shoshi Dorfberger1,2, Hazar Moadi1, Karni Avi1; 1EJ

Safra Brain Research Centre for the Study of Learning Disabilities, 2Gordon
College of Education, Haifa, Israel. — Behavioral relevance may constitute
an important factor in biasing brain systems toward allowing experience
driven adaptation and plasticity in adults. Monetary or social rewards
have been shown to improve “offline”, between-session, skill consolidation
(delayed performance gains). Here, using the finger-to-thumb opposition
sequence (FOS) learning task, we show that, in 12 year-olds, the affordance
of a context in which task relevance is increased can lead to more robust
delayed performance gains. All of the children were given an identical
training experience on a 5-element FOS. In Experiment 1 (n=34), children
who practiced the sequence of movements in the more meaningful context
showed a small advantage in performance speed and accuracy within the
training session but in addition were able to express larger delayed gains
compared to children practicing the sequence of movements in a neutral
context. In Experiment 2 (n=34), practicing the sequence of movements in
the more meaningful context, resulted in significantly reduced susceptibility of the trained movement sequence to interference by a subsequent learning experience; more robust delayed gains were expressed in the relevant
than in a neutral context. Overall, the results show that the relevance of a
task may constitute an important parameter for offline skill consolidation
and the generation of procedural memory. We propose that the effects of
an expected reward on skill consolidation may constitute a part of a wider
spectrum of factors which gate learning processes and contribute to the
selection of what is to be maintained in long-term memory in pre-adolescents.

F112
ESTABLISHING THE CAUSAL ROLE OF SLOW WAVE SLEEP IN
LEARNING CONSOLIDATION AND NEURAL PLASTICITY Joseph

Arizpe1,2, Madhumita Shrotri1, Chris Baker2, Vincent Walsh1; 1Applied Cognitive
Neuroscience Group, Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College
London, London, United Kingdom, 2Unit on Learning and Plasticity, Laboratory
of Brain and Cognition, NIMH, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA — Much correlational
evidence suggests that specific electrophysiological stages of sleep (e.g.
Slow Wave Sleep, SWS) are involved in specific types of memory consolidation (e.g. declarative memory); however, this evidence is indirect and

218

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
suffers from critical confounds (e.g. differences in sleep deprivation, body
clock, and sleep disruption between conditions). We investigated whether
a causal role of sleep architecture in consolidation could be established with
administration of the circadian hormone melatonin. Melatonin reduces
SWS, has a short one-hour half-life, and no “hangover” effects, affording
modulation of endogenous sleep EEG architecture. This enables participants to learn and test under the same circadian, homeostatic, cognitive,
and physiological states between high- and low-SWS sleep conditions. Participants were trained on a classic perceptual learning task (line orientation discrimination) and tested again following a 90-minute afternoon nap.
We manipulated the amount of SWS during the nap in a within-subject
design by administering 3 mg of melatonin or placebo 45 minutes before
each nap. As expected, melatonin disrupted SWS, reducing delta (0-4 Hz)
EEG power during nap. Critically, this reduction in SWS was associated
with reduced improvement on the line discrimination task. In contrast,
melatonin increased improvement on a control task (letter discrimination)
indicating that its detrimental effect on the perceptual task was not due to
reduced vigilance, but rather specifically perceptual discrimination ability.
Our findings confirm an afternoon nap is sufficient to consolidate perceptual learning and directly demonstrate that SWS is causally involved in
consolidation. Importantly, we established melatonin is useful for overcoming confounds in sleep studies.

F113
MENTAL AND ACTUAL PRACTICE IN LEARNING A COGNITIVE
SKILL Rinatia Maaravi1,2, Shoshi Dorfberger1,2, Avi Karni1; 1EJ Safra Brain

Research Centre for the Study of Learning Disabilities, University of Haifa, Haifa,
Israel., 2Gordon College of Education, Haifa, Israel — INTRODUCTION:
Mental practice refers to a training technique whereby the procedures
required in performing a given task are mentally rehearsed in the absence
of physical movement. Physiological evidence and neuroimaging studies
suggest an overlap in the neural networks activated during mental practice
of actions and during their actual execution. We studied the time-course of
learning a higher-level cognitive skill - solving a modified version of the
Tower of London (ToL) task, and compared, in terms of effectiveness and
transferability of the acquired knowledge, between two different training
modes - actual vs. mental practice. METHODS: 52 healthy right- handed
students were tested and trained using a physical (wood discs and pegs)
modified version of the ToL. The task was solved either by actual moving
the discs (act) or mentally by visualizing the sequence of moves (ment).
RESULTS: Both “act” and “ment” conditions resulted in ‘within-session’
improvements in speed & accuracy. Only participants who experienced
actual training showed ‘between-sessions’ gains. Mental practice resulted
in less effective transfer to actual performance but, a limited experience
with actual performance resulted in robust gains in both mental and actual
performance. CONCLUSIONS: The gains in the mental and actual practice
were accrued in different phases of learning - only the actual training condition resulted in delayed gains, and transfer from ment to act was limited.
Mental training was effective in improving performance on the modified
ToL task, but actual training may be more similar to the (procedural) learning of simple perceptual and motor tasks.

F114
EVIDENCE FOR DISSOCIABLE NEURAL SUBSTRATES UNDERLYING OPEN AND CLOSED LOOP FORMS OF SKILL LEARNING.

Calvin Goetz1, Amy Finn1, Jennifer Minas1, Zhenghan Qi1, John D.E. Gabrieli1;
Massachusetts Institute of Technology — Although the Basal Ganglia and
Cerebellum are associated with skill learning, there is evidence that each
are more likely to be involved depending on the kind of feedback that is
associated with the learning. Specifically, the Basal Ganglia may play a
larger role in sequence learning tasks, in which the representation must be
open-loop since there is a temporal gap between the mental and physical
action and the feedback (one doesn’t know whether their action is correct
until it is performed). In contrast, the Cerebellum, may be more involved
in learning transformations (such as mirror tracing) in which the representation is closed-loop and one receives continuous visual feedback. To
investigate these possible distinct roles, we examined the neural substrates
involved during a serial reaction time (SRT) task in adults (n=62). The task
was a four-choice reaction time task in which subjects were instructed to
press the button corresponding with one of 4 locations. Stimuli could be
sequential, random, or transformed. In the transformed task, subjects were
1

2014 Annual Meeting	
instructed to press the button corresponding with the box directly to the
right of the box containing the dot. In the other tasks, they were instructed
to simply press the button corresponding to the box containing the dot.
The transformed task (vs. random) was associated with recruitment in the
Cerebellum, while the sequential task (vs. random) was associated with
recruitment of the Basal Ganglia (bilateral Caudate). Results indicate that
the different kinds of feedback/representation are likely to be associated
with distinct neural substrates.

METHODS: Neuroimaging
F115
THE FUNDAMENTAL ERROR IN INTERPRETING BRAIN MAPS
AND A PROPOSED SOLUTION Philip Burton1, Stephen Engel1; 1Univer-

sity of Minnesota — Neuroimaging activation maps typically color voxels to
indicate whether the blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signals measured among two or more experimental conditions differ significantly at
that location. This data presentation, however, omits information critical
for interpretation of experimental results. First, no information is represented about trends at voxels that do not pass the statistical test. Second,
no information is given about the range of probable effect sizes at voxels
that do pass the statistical test. This leads to a fundamental error in interpreting activation maps by naïve viewers, where it is assumed that colored,
“active” voxels are reliably different from uncolored “inactive” voxels. In
other domains, confidence intervals have been added to data graphics to
reduce such errors. Here, we first document the prevalence of the fundamental error of interpretation, and then present a method for solving it by
depicting confidence intervals in fMRI activation maps. Presenting images
where the bounds of confidence intervals at each voxel are coded as color,
allows readers to visually test for differences between “active” and “inactive” voxels, and permits for more proper interpretation of neuroimaging
data. Our specific graphical methods are intended as initial proposals to
spur broader discussion of how to present confidence intervals for fMRI
data.

F116
USING STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY GRAPH ANALYSIS TO PREDICT COGNITIVE DECLINE IN PATIENTS AFTER CAROTID SURGERY

Salil Soman1,2, Gautam Prasad3,4, Elizabeth Hitchner5,6, Michael Moseley1, Wei
Zhou5,6, Allyson Rosen7; 1Lucas Center, Radiology Department, Stanford University, 2California War Related Illness and Injury Study Center, Palo Alto Veterans Affairs Hospital, Palo Alto, CA, 3LONI, University of Southern California,
4
Psychology Department, Stanford University, 5Vascular Surgery Department,
Stanford University, 6Vascular Surgery Department, Veterans Affairs Palo Alto
Health Care System, 7Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences Department, Stanford
University — Introduction: While Carotid Endarterectomy or Stenting has
been noted to reduce the risk of future stroke in patients with high-grade
carotid stenosis, many patients still experience postoperative neurocognitive decline. We sought to apply structural connectivity metrics to identify
patients at increased risk for postoperative decline. Methods: 28 patients
underwent presurgical evaluation under an IRB approved protocol that
included T1 structural and 30 direction diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) MRI
and a battery of neuropsychological tests both before and 1 month after surgery. Patients were classified as decliners based on decreased performance
on the Rey-AVLT on 1 month follow up. The T1 images were processed
using FreeSurfer, with resulting segmentations being reviewed and edited
as needed under the supervision of a neuroradiologist. Whole brain tractography was performed using Diffusion Toolkit and visually inspected.
Connectivity matrices were then generated from the FreeSurfer segmentation and DTK fiber tracking using Matlab, and graph metrics were computed using the Brain Connectivity Toolbox. Results: Controlling for age,
classifiers using the graph analysis metrics “weighted optimal community
structure” & “binary component sizes” were able to identify patients that
would experience cognitive decline with 81% sensitivity 83% and specificity (p>.05, false discovery rate .05). These two measures were computed at
10 proportion edge thresholds from .1 to 1 at intervals of .1 in weighted and
binary networks respectively. Conclusion: Applying structural connectiv-

Poster Session F
ity analysis may be capable of identifying patients at increased risk for postoperative cognitive decline, and can may help guide therapy and provide
patients’ families guidance regarding prognosis.

F117
POSTERIOR CINGULATE CONNECTIVITY DURING STRESS-INDUCED ALCOHOL CRAVING PREDICTS RELAPSE IN ALCOHOL-DEPENDENT INDIVIDUALS Yasmin Zakiniaeiz1,2, Dustin Scheinost2,

Cheryl Lacadie2, Rajita Sinha3, R. Todd Constable2; 1Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 2Diagnostic
Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 3Department of
Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT — Alcohol-dependence is a chronic relapsing disease known to impact neural network
processes subserving cognition and emotion regulation and to influence
motivated behaviors. Alcohol craving is an important predictor of drug
use and post-treatment relapse. Stressful events increase alcohol craving in
alcohol-dependent individuals resulting in increased alcohol consumption
to reduce stress. However, we do not fully understand the neural mechanisms of alcohol craving and stress-induced alcohol craving that may jeopardize recovery from the disease. Thirty 4-week, abstinent, recovering alcohol-dependent inpatients and thirty matched healthy controls listened to
audiotaped, individualized script-driven imagery of alcohol-cue, stress-cue
and neutral content to perpetuate cue-induced alcohol craving, stress-induced alcohol craving and relaxed states during fMRI imaging. Novel voxel-wise global connectivity analyses revealed increased medial prefrontal
and decreased bilateral insular connectivity [t(2,60)=2.00, p<0.05] during
drug-cue exposure in alcohol-dependent patients compared to healthy
controls, suggesting corticolimbic dysfunction and disruption in emotion
regulatory and introspective reward salience circuitry in alcoholic patients.
The effect in the medial prefrontal cortex was driven by the interaction
between the alcohol-cue condition and alcohol-dependent group. We also
found that the interaction between stress-cue and the alcohol-dependent
group in the posterior cingulate connectivity correlated with relapse, where
greater global connectivity within the posterior cingulate during stress was
associated with a longer time to subsequent alcohol relapse [r(1,28)=0.375,
p<0.05]. These findings reveal important functional mechanisms of stress
modulation in alcohol craving and suggest that reduced connectivity in the
posterior cingulate may serve as a neural marker of increased risk of alcohol relapse in recovering alcohol-dependent individuals.

F118
FUNCTIONAL PARCELLATION OF CORTICAL REGIONS THAT CONTRIBUTE TO SPEECH MOTOR CONTROL Jason Tourville1, Alfonso Nie-

to-Castanon1, Frank H Guenther1,2; 1Boston University, 2Massachusetts General Hospital — The goal of this study was to parcellate the cortical areas
involved in speech motor control into functionally homogenous regions of
interest (ROIs). Between-subjects variability clustering was performed on
a large set (140 datasets from 116 unique subjects) of speech production
neuroimaging data. Data were pooled over 10 functional magnetic imaging (fMRI) experiments in which blood oxygen level dependent responses
were measured while subjects overtly produced speech. Speech conditions
included single- and bi-syllable words and pseudowords. Baseline conditions consisted of viewing strings of letters or symbols. Surface-based
estimates of the Speech-Baseline contrast were derived for each subject,
then mapped to the FreeSurfer ‘fsaverage’ cortical surface template. The
cortex was then subdivided using hierarchical clustering that minimized
within-ROI variability in Speech-Baseline contrast. Bootstrap resampling
was used to determine the population-level distribution of functional ROI
boundaries. This distribution was tested against a null hypothesis of stationary spatial covariance and corrected across the entire brain using false
discovery rates to estimate the location of the most robust ROI boundaries.
A representative whole-brain parcellation was obtained from these boundary probability maps using watershed-based segmentation with adaptive
smoothing to maximize the joint likelihood of the parcellation boundaries.
The resulting parcellation divided each hemisphere into 91/93 ROIs (left/
right hemispheres). ROI-level statistics were computed to assess withinand between-region functional homogeneity. Boundary-level statistics
were also computed to determine between-subject variability in boundary

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

219

Poster Session F	
position and their relationship with macro-anatomical cortical landmarks.
ROIs optimized to detect functional differences provide improved statistical power for detecting subtle task and/or population effects.

F119
THE INTERACTION BETWEEN DEPRESSIVE SYMPTOMS AND
ADIPOSITY IN THE HYPOTHALAMUS: A FUNCTIONAL MRI STUDY.

Elissa McIntosh1, Aaron Jacobson1, Erin Green2, Claire Murphy1,2; 1San Diego
State University, 2SDSU/UCSD Joint Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology
— Depression and obesity affect hedonic evaluation of sweet tastes. People
with a history of depression have abnormal neural responses to pleasant
taste stimuli in reward processing brain regions. Similarly, obese individuals have decreased neural responses in reward regions during hedonic
evaluation of sweet tastes. The goal of this study was to investigate the
presence of an interaction between depressive symptoms and adiposity
during hedonic evaluation of sucrose. The current study used functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate the effect of depressive
symptoms as measured by the Beck Depression Inventory II (BDI), adiposity as measured by body mass index (BMI), and the interaction between
depression and adiposity on neural reward processing. Fifty-seven participants were scanned using an event-related fMRI paradigm. During imaging, participants were orally administered sucrose in aqueous solution.
After each taste, water was administered twice and served as a rinse and a
baseline. Following each taste presentation, participants used a joystick to
indicate the pleasantness of the stimulus. After imaging processing, beta
coefficients were extracted from a priori regions of interest (ROIs) implicated in taste and reward processing. For the analyses, activation in a priori
ROIs was regressed on BDI, BMI, and their interaction. Results revealed a
significant interaction between BDI and BMI in the hypothalamus. As BMI
increased, activation in the hypothalamus decreased. This negative association tended to strengthen as BDI scores increased. These findings warrant
further investigation to better understand the relationship between depressive symptoms and adiposity and its effect on neural responses during
hedonic evaluation.

F120
HOW AUTOMATION BIAS INFLUENCES HUMAN-HUMAN AND
HUMAN-AUTOMATION TRUST: AN FMRI STUDY Kimberly Goodyear1,

Allison Bowman1, Sergey Chernyak1, Ewart De Visser1, Raja Parasuraman1,
Frank Krueger1; 1George Mason University — People often encounter situations in their everyday lives when they must rely on trustworthy advice.
With new technological advances, such advice often comes from automated
devices, such as GPS navigation systems, other “cognitive agents,” etc.
People initially tend to trust automation more highly than humans because
of an existing automation bias (i.e., perfect automation schema). Previous
behavioral studies have investigated the influence of automation bias on
human-human and human-automation trust; however, the underlying
neural mechanisms involved during these interactions are still unexplored.
In this study, we combined fMRI with an X-ray screening task, where
healthy participants were asked to search for knives hidden in cluttered
X-ray images of luggage. Participants decided whether to search or clear
the luggage after receiving advice (presence or absence of a knife) from a
human or automated luggage inspector with a reliability of 90% (unknown
to the participants). Our results showed that trust, which was measured by
the acceptance rate of advice, was initially lower for human advice compared to automation advice. This may be due to preconceived notions that
automated systems are perfect. However, trust differences between human
and automation disappeared over time because of higher confidence in the
human agent to provide correct advice based on the received feedback. The
reinforcement learning process was mirrored by activations in reward-sensitive brain regions, including the caudate head and ventromedial prefrontal cortex. The findings provide neural evidence for how automation bias
mediates human-human and human-automation trust, leading to behavioral differences in the context of advice taking.

F121
FUNCTIONAL BRAIN ATLAS OBTAINED BASED ON HIGH RESOLUTION FMRI RESTING-STATE DATA Xilin Shen1, Emily Finn1, Dustin

Scheinost1, Fuyuze Tokoglu1, Xenophon Papademetris1, Robert Constable1;
1
Yale University — Network based analysis has been applied to fMRI studies

220

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
to explore the functional organization of the brain. Such analyses require a
set of pre-defined nodes, where it is crucial that time courses within a node
are temporally consistent. In our recently published work, we presented
a group-wise parcellation algorithm that divides the whole brain into a
number of subunits with optimized functional homogeneity and spatial
coherence using fMRI BOLD data. The algorithm is aimed at maximizing
the similarity within each subunit, and simultaneously minimizing the similarity between different subunits, where the similarity is measured by the
temporal synchronization from each gray matter voxel. Follow-up analyses
compared our functional parcellations with anatomical atlas defined based
on Broadmann areas, and showed that fMRI signal variation within a subunit is significantly smaller using our function-based atlas. Therefore such
functional parcellation provides the optimal node definition for subsequent
network analyses. We have recently applied the parcellation algorithm to a
high resolution resting-state fMRI data-set collected from 100 healthy subjects. This data-set was acquired at a spatial resolution of 2.5mm isotropic
and a temporal resolution of 956ms, using a multiband sequence with multiplicity factor of 6. We obtained a series of functional atlases at a number
of scales (100, 200, 300, 400 and 500 subunits for the entire brain) with reasonable across subject reproducibility. These atlases can be applied directly
to examine the network level contrast in rest vs task studies, in patients vs
control studies, in drug studies, etc.

F122
THE MAGIC NUMBER 57 PLUS OR MINUS 3%: WHY IS MULTIVOXEL PATTERN CLASSIFICATION SUCCESS SO LOW IN THE
LATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX? Christopher Gagne1, Apoorva Bhan-

dari1, Patricia Shih1, Christopher Chatham1, David Badre1; 1Brown University
— Multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) of the lateral prefrontal cortex
(PFC) has yielded potentially important insights in recent years. However,
among published studies, decoding performance in lateral PFC is consistently low, usually less than 60% for binary classification. This classification
performance is consistently lower that other areas of the brain and typically
amounts to only a handful of successful classifications above what would
be expected by chance. Moreover, it is unclear whether these small effects
would withstand attempts to control for known confounds, such as reaction time (Todd et al. 2013), as most studies have not done so. Here, we
sought to investigate the reasons for consistently low classification success
in the lateral PFC. We presented stimuli composed of three dimensions (i.e.
color, shape, orientation), one of which was always relevant to responding.
We then classified lateral PFC activity based on this relevant dimension
in order to test three hypothetical accounts of low classification success in
PFC. Specifically, we systematically tested (1) whether common choices
regarding the implementation of the classification itself are suboptimal, (2)
whether PFC voxels are too homogenous in their neural coding (i.e., the
spatial frequency of contextual coding is too high for standard fMRI), and
(3) whether PFC representations are non-linear and/or multiclass. We will
discuss the impact of each of these investigations on classification success
and consider these results with regard to the nature of lateral PFC representations for flexible behavior.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control
F123
CLASSIFICATION OF PERCEPTION-BASED MOTOR IMAGERY
WITH SINGLE TRIAL EEG ANALYSIS Yi-Hung Liu1, Hao-Ling Chen2, Wei-

Chun Hsu3, Po-Ming Chen1, Yu-Tsung Hsiao1, Chun-Fu Yeh2, Ya-Ting Chen2,
Chein-Te Wu2; 1Department of Mechanical Engineering, Chung Yuan Christian
University, 2School of Occupational Therapy, National Taiwan University, 3Graduate Institute of Biomedical Engineering, National Taiwan University of Science
and Technology — Mental practice through Motor Imagery (MI) has been a
contemporary intervention for motor rehabilitation. However, the quality
of MI is difficult to evaluate, which limits the effectiveness of the MI-based
intervention. The current study therefore aimed to develop a single-trial
EEG-based paradigm to evaluate the effectiveness of motor imagery during
functional motor training (e.g. goal-directed arm movement). In two experiments, participants (N=13) performed four conditions (15 trials each) of
perception-based MI tasks (Condition1 & 2: inserting coins into slots of different sizes, small [3.5 × 0.4 cm] v.s. big [8 × 7 cm]; Condition 3 & 4: insert-

2014 Annual Meeting	
ing peg sticks into slots of different shapes, round v.s. star). Spectral powers
of EEG and principal component analysis were adopted to extract features
from the EEG signals between condition1 and 2 (SIZE), and those between
condtion3 and 4 (SHAPE), and k-nearest neighbor algorithm was used to
classify the extracted features. Results showed that the mean classification accuracy was 62.93% for SIZE and 61.72% for SHAPE, indicating that
object-based difference during MI can be differentiated using single-trial
EEG analysis. Interestingly for both types of classification, the temporal
scalp region (SIZE: 65.80%, SHAPE: 62.11%) and the prefrontal scalp region
(SIZE: 64.57%, SHAPE: 63.35%) show significantly higher classification
accuracy than other scalp regions, which may reflect the characteristics of
object-based perception in the ventral visual pathway and motor planning
in the prefrontal cortices. The current findings therefore demonstrate that
single-trial EEG signals can be used as neurophysiological indices to evaluate the quality of perception-based MI.

F124
SENSORIMOTOR CORTEX RHYTHMS EXPRESS ANGULAR SEPARATION BETWEEN ALTERNATIVE MOVEMENT OPTIONS Tineke

Grent-’t-Jong1,2, Robert Oostenveld1, Ole Jensen1, W.Pieter Medendorp1, Peter
Praamstra1,2; 1Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Cognition,
Brain, and Behavior, 2Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Department of Neurology — Movement direction is coded by groups of neurons
that share directional preference. Monkey neurophysiology and computational modeling have suggested that cooperative and competitive interactions between cell groups encoding alternative response options are
shaped by the task context. The goal of the present study was to investigate whether a particular contextual factor - angular separation between
alternative movement targets - would be expressed in power and spectral
properties of sensorimotor cortex rhythms. Besides this explorative goal,
previous behavioral work informed the hypothesis that spatial separation
may have a non-monotonous effect on motor cortical activity. I.e. at angular
separations smaller than ~35 degrees, speeded hand and eye movements
to a target frequently land between targets (“spatial averaging”), whereas
beyond this separation the endpoint distribution is bimodal. MEG data
were recorded while participants were precued to two possible movement
targets at different angles of separation (30°, 60° or 90°), with one of the
locations subsequently cued as the target for a joystick pointing movement.
Time-frequency analyses did not identify effects in high frequency bands
likely to represent interactions between competing cell groups. However,
as predicted, the results showed a convergent pattern, across ERFs, theta,
beta and low gamma power, for stronger delay-period motor preparatory
activity in the 30º separation condition compared to the 60º and 90º separation conditions. We propose that the stronger motor activation early in
the delay, represented in theta activity, is a possible substrate of spatial
averaging in reaching.

F125
DYNAMIC VISUAL ACUITY AND EYE HAND COORDINATION IN
TABLE TENNIS PLAYERS WITH DIFFERENT LEVEL OF PERFORMANCE Yi-Jia Lin1, Hao-Ling Chen2, Kuang-Tsan Hung3, Yi-Hung Liu4, Yi-Chan

Li1, You-Cai Jhong1, Li-Wen Tseng1, Chun-Fu Yeh2, Wei-Chun Hsu1; 1Graduate
Institute of Biomedical Engineering National Taiwan University of Science and
Technology, 2School of Occupational Therapy, National Taiwan University,
3
De-Ling Institute of Technology, 4Mechanical Engineering, Chun Yuan Christian
University — Dynamic visual acuity (DVA), the ability to perceive subtle
changes of a moving object and has been suggested to be associated with
saccadic performance of eye, and eye hand coordination (EHC), involving
the processing of visual input and the mutual guidance with hand proprioception and motion, both play crucial role in sports performance. The
aim of the study was to evaluate the two abilities through a visual stimuli moving at a speed close to those experienced by table tennis players.
Twenty male elite table tennis athletes were recruited. DVA was measured
in four directions including left-to-right, right-to-left, up-to-down, and
down-to-up by a software. EHC was evaluated by quantifying the reaction
time (RT) between a Landolt C rings moving at a set of speed as the visual
stimuli and the time at which the player tell its direction through a controller manipulated by player’s hand. Measured variables were compared
between two groups of table tennis players with different levels. For the
comparison between two disciplines, better EHC (RT: 0.48 ±0.03 vs. 0.61

Poster Session F
±0.12 sec) were found in elite group while no significant finding were found
in DVA (400 ±69 vs. 600 ±82 pixels/frame). Difference in sports-specific
level can be explained that, for the table tennis, EHC ability was more critical than DVA around the upper limit of performance. Table tennis requires
both superior DVA and EHC with anticipatory and reactional psychomotor
process when dealing with balls traveling around the limit of eye motion.

F126
EFFECTS OF SHORT AND LONG TERM MOTOR LEARNING ON
CORTICAL STRUCTURE Aaron Trefler1, Cibu Thomas2,3, Elizabeth Aguila1;
1

National Institute of Mental Health, 2National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, 3Center for Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine at USUHS
— Previous studies have reported changes in cortical structure over shortterm (hours) and long-term (weeks) training using an array of different
tasks (e.g. juggling). However, the robustness of these prior results is under
question. Here, we employ a carefully controlled paradigm to investigate
the topography of any learning based structural changes, the reliability of
these changes, and whether they correlate with performance in a lateralized motor sequence-learning task. The task involved learning a specific
sequence of eight speeded button presses. Each participant was scanned
before and after short-term (90 minutes) or long-term (1 hour/day for one
week) training. In addition, equivalent control scans were conducted in
the absence of any training within the same participants. Further, multiple
scans were collected in each session to test the reliability of any apparent
changes. To investigate potential structural plasticity, we compared any
changes in measures of cortical structure before-and-after training with
any changes occurring in the absence of training. While measures of cortical thickness revealed some greater differences over training compared to
equivalent control conditions, these effects were widely spread, not always
consistent between replication scans, and not always consistent between
short- and long-term training. Additionally, cortical areas of change did
not exclusively include motor areas and were found in both the contralateral and ipsilateral hemispheres. We conclude that although measures of
cortical structure appear to reveal some plasticity, the results do not appear
robust.

F127
COGNITIVE BRAIN FUNCTION AND BALANCE IMPAIRMENTS
FOLLOWING MILD TBI Elizabeth Woytowicz1, Chandler Sours1, Joseph

Rosenberg1, Rao Gullapalli1, Kelly Westlake1; 1University of Maryland Baltimore
School of Medicine — Introduction: Traumatic brain injury (TBI) results
in both cognitive and physical impairments, with approximately 30% of
patients reporting impaired balance, even in mild TBI. Investigations of
the effect of divided attention on balance have revealed important links
between delayed postural responses, risk of falling, and cognitive function. To date, no observations have been made regarding the relationship
between neural changes in cognitive network function and impaired balance following TBI. We aimed to investigate the neural shift from a resting to an attentionally demanding state in relation to balance performance
in subjects with mild TBI. Methods: Using functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), we used a general linear analysis to compare default
mode network (DMN) suppression and fronto-parietal activation during a
2-back working memory task in subjects with mild TBI and balance impairments (BI) (n = 7, age 47 ±15yrs) or no balance impairments (NB) (n=7,
age 47 ±15yrs). Results: BI subjects showed a decreased ability to suppress
the DMN compared to NB subjects during the working memory task. In
contrast, an increased activation of the fronto-parietal executive regions
was found in BI compared to NB subjects. Results were cluster corrected
at p<0.05. Conclusions: Our results provide the first evidence of a direct
relationship between altered neural network suppression and impaired
balance. This mechanism may underlie an ineffective attention shifting
ability towards important sensory information related to balance. Ongoing
research using data-driven fMRI analysis will extend our findings to the
role of anticorrelated whole brain functional networks in balance control
and executive cognitive function.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

221

Poster Session F	

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Other
F128
NEURAL CIRCUITRY AND TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF ACTION AND
ANIMAL CATEGORIZATION Maddalena Fabbri-Destro1, Pietro Avanzini2,

Carlos Cevallos2, Giacomo Rizzolatti1,2; 1Italian Institute of Technology, 2University of Parma — The aim of the present study was to evaluate the neural
circuitry underlying animal and action categorization. To this purpose, we
recorded high-density EEG in 18 healthy volunteers who were presented
with two categories of static stimuli. The first consisted of exemplars of
birds and mammals, while the second comprised two types of hand-object
interactions, namely precision grip and whole hand grasping. Participants
were required to press one of two keys, according to the stimulus category.
ERPs were computed for each condition (Animals and Actions), microstate analysis was carried out, and LAURA algorithm was used for source
localization. For both conditions, following an initial activation of visual
areas, bilaterally, there was an activation of the left inferotemporal cortex.
The next microstate, occurring approximately between 200 and 270ms following image onset, was characterized by disappearance of the temporal
activation and reactivation of the extrastriate visual areas. The most salient
aspect of the next microstate (270-320ms) was the bilateral activation of the
temporal pole. These results suggest that inferotemporal cortex is the core
area for the “basic level” perception of different categories. The subsequent
top-down activation of extrastriate areas is most likely the neural correlate
of “subordinate level”, while the final temporal pole activation could represent the neural substrate for”superordinate level” perception. Note that, in
spite of the differences in the two tasks, the processing involved the same
regions and followed the same temporal dynamics, suggesting an automaticity in the categorization processing steps.

F129
HUMAN MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM ACTIVITY IS CONSERVED IN
MIDDLE CEREBRAL ARTERY STROKE PATIENTS Panthea Heydari1,3,4,

Julie M. Werner1,2,4, Mona Sobhani5, Lisa Aziz-Zadeh1,2,3,4; 1Brain and Creativity
Institute, 2Division of Occupational Science and Occupational Therapy, 3Neuroscience Graduate Program, 4University of Southern California, 5Vanderbilt University — Stroke is a leading cause of disability among adults, often requiring intensive rehabilitative therapy. Recent studies indicate that standard
therapies may be enhanced by priming motor execution via action observation. The neural basis of this result is the mirror neuron system (MNS),
which is active during the observation, execution, and imitation of actions.
In our study, we aim to understand the properties of the MNS post-stroke,
and what task conditions activate it the most. The study will also aim to
address effects of lesion location and effector used. Methods/Participants:
Functional MRI (fMRI) was used to test the hypothesis that MNS function is preserved in adults with chronic left middle cerebral artery (MCA)
stroke (n=8) with mild-to-moderate motor impairments. During scanning,
stroke participants and age- and gender-matched control participants
(n=8) observed, executed, or imitated button-pressing actions. Results: As
expected, in non-disabled participants, activity increased from observation
to execution to imitation in several regions, including the inferior frontal
gyrus, a major component of the MNS. Interestingly, stroke participants
also followed a similar trajectory in brain activity. Conclusions: Our results
suggest that stroke participants follow a similar pattern of brain activity as
non-disabled controls in motor related brain regions: imitation of actions
results in the most activity, followed by execution, and, lastly, action observation. The clinical implications of this preserved functioning suggest that
imitation may be the most effective motor practice condition, though action
observation may also show improvements. Further analyses are needed to
understand effects of lesion location and effector used.

F130
FUNCTIONAL AND SPATIAL DISSOCIATION IN THE BRAIN SYSTEMS ENCODING OBJECT SHAPE AND DIRECTION Moira Dillon1,

Daniel Hyde2, Elizabeth Spelke1; 1Harvard University, 2University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign — Recognizing objects is essential to interacting with the
world. Behavioral research has identified certain geometric properties of
objects that are essential to their recognition: angle and length information
differentiate object shape; directional (i.e., sense) information, however,

222

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
does not and is both difficult to detect and easy to ignore. Previous behavioral and neuroscientific research has evaluated how object recognition is
affected by shape properties that either vary or do not vary according to
rotation in depth. The present study investigates how the specific geometric
information that underlies object shape and direction may be encoded in
the brain. We recorded the ongoing electroencephalogram from 128 scalp
sites while participants passively viewed instances of the same shape in
varying positions and sizes on a computer screen. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were derived from occasional test images presenting either the
same shape again (no-change), a different shape varying in angle, length,
or both (shape-change), or the same shape’s mirror reversal (sense-change).
Preliminary results (N = 16) suggest that, relative to a no-change baseline,
shape changes produce a larger-amplitude mid-latency positivity over the
central parietal electrode sites compared to sense changes (t(15) = -2.30, p
= .036). During roughly the same time window, sense changes produce a
larger-amplitude positivity over central occipital-parietal scalp sites compared to shape changes (t(15) = 2.52, p = .024). This functional and spatial
dissociation provides evidence for distinct brain systems encoding object
shape and direction.

F131
PREDICTIVE CODING IN BRAIN REGIONS ASSOCIATED WITH
ACTION OBSERVATION Lieke Heil1, Stan van Pelt1, Sasha Ondobaka1,

Johan Kwisthout1, Iris van Rooij1, Harold Bekkering1; 1Donders Institute for
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, the Netherlands
— In the predictive coding framework, the neural signal is assumed to consist of signals reflecting predicted states of the world and signals reflecting
deviations of these predictions from actual observations (i.e. prediction
errors). Although this framework has repeatedly been shown to successfully describe sensory processing, few studies have focused on its validity
in the more abstract domain of action observation. It has, however, been
suggested that neural responses to biological motion and other people’s
beliefs and desires are modulated by the predictability of an event, in compliance with the features of predictive coding. In the current study, subjects watched animations of bowling actions in which information about
the agent and his movements allowed them to predict kinematics and
action outcome. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and
multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) techniques, we examined whether
predicted events result in reduced activation and a sharpening of representations in areas associated with the predicted aspect of the event, as would
be expected if the prediction improves and the error is reduced. Our results
show that the activation patterns in superior temporal sulcus (STS) and
temporoparietal junction (TPJ) do indeed comply with the characteristics
of predictive coding. Therefore, this study shows that the predictive coding
framework seems to be promising not only for sensory processing, but also
for more abstract cognitive functions, such as action observation.

F132
IMPACT OF TASK ON THE CORTICAL REPRESENTATIONS OF
REAL-WORLD SCENES Marcie King1, Assaf Harel1, Dwight Kravitz1,2, Chris-

topher Baker1; 1National Institute of Mental Health, 2The George Washington
University — The Parahippocampal Place Area (PPA) is a key region representing visual scenes, particularly their high-level spatial properties. However, it remains unclear how independent these representations are of topdown, observer-based factors, such as task demands. To determine how
task demands impact scene representations, we performed an event-related
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiment manipulating
both higher-level visual scene properties and task context. Scanned on a
7T fMRI scanner, participants viewed a diverse set of real-world scenes,
spanning three dimensions (open/closed, manmade/natural, near/far)
and were asked to perform either a spatial task (determining whether a
scene was open or closed) or a semantic task (determining whether a scene
was manmade or natural). Importantly, participants performed the two
tasks while viewing the same scene images, ruling out potential stimulus
effects. Task context played a key role in constraining the nature of scene
representations in PPA. First, in response magnitude there was an interaction between task and scene properties. Second, while multivariate pattern
analyses revealed similarities in the representations of scenes across task
with a separation of open and closed scenes, the strength of this distinction

2014 Annual Meeting	
varied with task. Together, these findings suggest that the nature of scene
representation is determined not only by image properties but also by highlevel cognitive factors, such as task context.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
F133
ARE LETTERS AND FREQUENT LINE CONFIGURATIONS ENCODED
IN EARLY VISUAL CORTEX? Hui-Chuan Chang1, Kimihiro Nakamura2,3,4,5,

Antoinette Jobert2,3,5, Christophe Pallier2,3,6,5, Stanislas Dehaene2,3,4,5; 1Institute
of neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, INSERM, Gif-sur-Yvette, France, 3CEA, DSV, I2BM, NeuroSpin
Center, Paris, France, 4Collège de France, Paris, France, 5University Paris-Sud,
Paris, France, 6Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, France —
It has been reported that letter strings provoked stronger activations than
non-letter controls in the visual cortex, including early areas. There can
be two, non-necessarily incompatible hypotheses about these activations.
They could reflect letter learning or a more general sensitivity to line configurations in visual scene (Changizi et al., 2006, “The structures of letters
and symbols throughout human history are selected to match those found
in objects in natural scenes” in The American naturalist).The current experiment was designed to disentangle letter status and line configuration frequency. We selected 8 letters and created 8 corresponding non-letter stimuli
by rotation or symmetry. The stimuli were repeated either along the horizontal or the vertical meridian. We expected that letter-status might have
larger effects in the cortical region corresponding to the horizontal meridian, because words are usually presented horizontally. fMRI data obtained
in 18 participants showed that, in early retinotopic area (V1/V2), letters
elicited stronger activations than non-letters. This effect was reversed in
higher-level retinotopic areas, which can be tentatively explained by supposing that non-letters are recognized as rotated letters, increasing the
processing load in higher visual areas. Both in low-level and high levels
areas, these effects were mainly found in the horizontal meridian. Moreover, activation correlated with letter frequency but not with configuration
frequency, conforming to the existence of experience-dependent plasticity
resulting from reading acquisition.

F134
THE EFFECT OF FEEDBACK ON 3D MULTIPLE OBJECT TRACKING
PERFORMANCE AND ITS TRANSFERABILITY TO OTHER ATTENTIONAL TASKS Chiara Perico1,2, Domenico Tullo1,2, Krista Perotti1, Joce-

lyn Faubert3,4, Armando Bertone1,2; 1Perceptual Neuroscience Laboratory for
Autism and Development, 2McGill University, 3Visual Psychophysics and Perception Laboratory, 4Université de Montréal — Attentional processes play an
integral role in learning, affecting performance on most cognitive tasks. In
addition, feedback - instant information delivered to the individual that
guides their subsequent behavior in relevant situations - plays a critical role
in the efficiency and quality of learning. However, its effects are not often
empirically assessed. The goal of this study was to assess whether performance on attentional capacities acquired during training on a 3D Multiple
Object Tracking (MOT) task are transferrable to other measures of attention. The role of feedback was also investigated to determine whether performance, and its subsequent transferability to other measures, is affected
by feedback. Forty typically developing adults participated in 4 testing sessions on consecutive days. On day 1, intellectual and attentional abilities
were assessed along with a baseline measure of MOT without feedback.
Participants were split into 2 experimental groups and assessed for three
subsequent days (days 2 through 4): one group received feedback during
the MOT task trials; the other group received no feedback. On day 4, all
participants were re-assessed on the same attentional measures as well
as the MOT to determine improvements from day 1. MOT performance
resulted significantly higher for the feedback group, as defined by an
increased speed threshold for tracking 4 out of 8 items. The feedback group
also revealed better transferability to other cognitive tasks. The results indicate that feedback is an important component during a learning regiment
and that it may affect transferability of cognitive abilities.

Poster Session F

F135
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF PARIETAL PHOSPHENE PERCEPTION Chiara Bagattini1, Chiara Mazzi1, Silvia Savazzi1;
1

University of Verona and National Institute of Neuroscience, Italy — Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) of the occipital cortex is known to induce
visual sensations, i.e. phosphenes, which appear as flashes of light without
light actually entering the eyes. Recent studies have shown that TMS can
produce phosphenes also when parietal cortex is stimulated. As the neural
bases involved in parietal phosphenes perception still remain unknown,
the main question is whether these percepts are generated directly by local
mechanisms or emerge through indirect activation of other visual areas.
Specifically, the aim of this study was to investigate the electrophysiological correlates of phosphenes evoked by parietal stimulation in a sample
of healthy participants and in a hemianopic patient who suffered from
the complete destruction of early visual cortex. We recorded EEG signals
while stimulating left parietal cortex, and we compared trials in which the
TMS pulse was followed by a phosphene perception with trials in which
no visual sensation was reported. Analyzing the pre-TMS Î± power, i.e. an
index of cortical excitability, we found that phosphene perception was associated with reduced Î± power, indicating that a higher cortical excitability
correlated with phosphene perception. Analyzing TMS-evoked potential,
we found that phosphene perception modulated brain activity at different
latencies after the TMS pulse, with enhanced components’ amplitude when
phosphenes were perceived. Given that the same pattern of results was
obtained for both healthy participants and the hemianopic patient, the role
of V1 in parietal phosphenes can be ruled out. These findings thus support
the idea that parietal cortex is an independent generator of phosphenes.

F136
IS BLINDSIGHT REALLY BLIND? HOW DIFFERENT MEASURES OF
SUBJECTIVE EXPERIENCE CAN MODULATE AWARENESS IN THE
BLIND FIELD Silvia Savazzi1, Chiara Bagattini1, Chiara Mazzi1; 1University of

Verona and National Institute of Neuroscience, Italy — Blindsight is classically
defined as the ability shown by some hemianopic patients to detect, localize and discriminate visual stimuli in their blind field, without consciously
experiencing any visual percepts. In spite of the definition, the literature
documents cases of blindsight patients who demonstrated a preserved
degree of awareness in their blind field. The aim of this study was to investigate the correlation between discrimination ability and awareness in the
blind field of a hemianopic patient. A 45-years old right-handed woman
(SL), with a right homonymous hemianopia caused by a complete destruction of the left primary visual cortex, was tested. The patient was asked
to discriminate a feature (orientation, color, contrast, motion) of different
stimuli presented in her blind field in a two alternative forced-choice task.
Subsequently, the patient had to report her subjective experience: in the
first experiment as “seen” or “guessed”, whereas in the second experiment
as the degree of clearness of her experience according to the Perception
Awareness Scale (PAS). The first experiments showed that SL demonstrated a performance above chance level in the contrast discrimination
task for”guessed” trials, thus showing blindsight when the classic binary
methodology (seen/guessed) was applied. The second experiment, however, showed that PAS ratings correlated with discrimination accuracy,
thus revealing that SL’s above chance performance was due to a certain
degree of awareness. In conclusion, patient’s preserved discrimination
ability seemed to rely on conscious, although degraded, vision rather than
unconscious vision.

F137
REAL EFFECTS OF ILLUSORY EFFECTS: THE INFLUENCE OF PERCEIVED LUMINANCE ON BEHAVIOR Ramisha Knight1, Chiara Mazzi1,

Silvia Savazzi1; 1University of Verona and National Institute of Neuroscience,
Italy — Simple reaction times (RT) are inversely related to the luminance/
contrast of a visual stimulus, with RT increasing as luminance/contrast
decreases. In the present experiment, we tested whether an illusory luminance/contrast yields a similar effect on RT by using the well-known
simultaneous brightness contrast (SBC) illusion: a stimulus appears darker
when viewed over a light background than when viewed over a dark background. In Experiment 1, participants were asked to respond as quickly as
possible to visual stimuli (light- or dark-gray) presented over backgrounds

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

223

Poster Session F	
with an actual difference in luminance (control condition) or inducing the
SBC (illusory condition). The results showed that RTs were modulated both
in the control and illusory conditions, thus indicating that the perceived
and not the actual luminance/contrast influences behavior. In Experiment 2, we test the hypothesis that SBC illusion could also modulate the
frequency and/or RTs to artificially induced visual percepts. Using the
same two types of backgrounds as Experiment 1, we applied TMS over the
primary visual cortex in order to induce sensations of light (phosphenes)
and darkness (scotomas) and participants were asked to react as quickly
as possible to the percepts and to report their luminance on a gray-scale
bar. The results showed that for both the control and illusory conditions,
frequency of and speed in responding to percepts were modulated by the
background. These data reinforce our conclusion that the perceived rather
than the actual luminance/contrast influences behavior and, more importantly, that this effect can be found also for artificially induced percepts.

F138
DIRECT EVIDENCE FOR DEPENDENCE OF SCENE CATEGORY
JUDGMENTS ON NEURAL ACTIVITY IN LATERAL OCCIPITAL COMPLEX AND PARAHIPPOCAMPAL PLACE AREA Drew Linsley1, Sean

MacEvoy1; 1Department of Psychology, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts, USA. — Behavioral studies indicate that scene categorization
draws heavily upon analysis of scenes’ spatial properties, such as three-dimensional layout (Greene & Oliva, 2009) as well as the kinds of objects
scenes contain (Davenport & Potter, 2004; Joubert et al., 2007; MacEvoy &
Epstein, 2011). fMRI studies have identified regions of ventral-temporal
(VT) cortex sensitive to these resources, notably the parahippocampal place
area (PPA) for scenes’ spatial properties and the lateral occipital complex
(LOC) for their object contents. Although activity patterns in these regions
correspond to the identities of viewed scenes (Walther et al. 2009, MacEvoy & Epstein, 2011), their contribution to perceived category has remained
unclear. To directly measure the influence of VT areas on behavior, we used
fMRI to record patterns of brain activity while observers categorized computer-generated scenes as bathrooms or kitchens; each was either unambiguously a member of one category in terms of spatial properties and object
contents, or configured to be completely category-ambiguous. Observers
were periodically instructed to base their decisions on either scenes’ spatial
properties or object contents. A classifier trained on responses to unambiguous scenes successfully predicted observers’ categorical judgments
of ambiguous scenes from their activity patterns evoked in both LOC and
PPA. Critically, predictions by LOC patterns were more accurate when
observers attended to objects, while those by PPA were more accurate
during attention to scenes’ properties. These differentials are inconsistent
with LOC and PPA patterns simply following observers’ judgments, and
instead indicate a significant dependence of judgments on neural activity
in these regions.

F139
THE TIME COURSE OF SCENE PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FROM
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Assaf Harel1, Dwight Kravitz2, Leon

Deouell3, Chris Baker1; 1National Institutes of Health, 2George Washington University, 3Hebrew University of Jerusalem — Humans are extremely adept at
recognizing complex real-world scenes, an ability supported by a network
of scene-selective cortical regions. In spite of growing knowledge about the
functional properties of these regions, much less is known about the temporal dynamics underlying scene perception. To address this question, we
recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) while participants viewed images
of scenes, faces, and objects. Focusing on posterior sites, we found that the
first ERP component to distinguish between scenes and faces and objects
was the P2 component peaking around 200 ms post-stimulus onset, with
highest amplitude to scenes relative to the other two categories. In comparison, the sensory-driven P1 component was equal in amplitude to all
categories, and the N1/N170 showed the expected face selectivity. We then
asked how sensitive are these early ERP components to different scene-diagnostic dimensions. We presented the same participants with a diverse
set of real-world scenes, which spanned three stimulus dimensions: spatial
boundary (open/closed), relative distance (near/far), and semantic content (manmade/natural). Consistent with its putative scene selectivity, P2
amplitude was sensitive to the spatial boundary of the scene, with higher
amplitude to closed than open scenes. P2 amplitude was also modulated by

224

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
the semantic content of the scene, a distinction that appeared earlier, at the
N1/N170 level, arguably reflecting low-level stimulus properties. In sum,
our findings highlight the existence of an ERP marker indexing high-level
scene processing, which peaks 200 ms after stimulus presentation and represents complex scene-diagnostic information.

F140
SUBJECTIVE ONSET AND REPETITION IN HIGH-LEVEL VISUAL
PERCEPTION Javid Sadr1; 1University of Lethbridge — There are a number

of important and timely questions in cognitive neuroscience surrounding
the mechanisms of high-level visual perception. In the present study, we
explore the neural correlates of the onset of subjective visual perception
and of perceptual hysteresis for both face and object stimuli. We do so in a
manner that allows for direct comparisons of neural activity that are both
categorical (contrasting successful versus unsuccessful high-level perception) and parametric (across graded levels of carefully controlled image
degradation); further, with this paradigm all comparisons involve images
or image classes that are normalized on a number of stimulus dimensions
known to influence both perceptual and neural measures. Using magnetoencephalography, we specifically ask, for faces and for objects, whether
the M100 and M170 components exhibit modulation coincident with perceptual onset and/or as a function of repeated viewings -- of the identical
image seen at a later time (particularly when an item is successfully perceived on the second but not the first viewing) and of the same object/face
depicted in other images parametrically differing in their level of degradation. With this approach, for both faces and objects we find significant
modulation of the M100 and M170 corresponding to the onset of perception
and as a function of repeated viewings. Further, for the M170 the results
indicate an enhancement effect for repeated viewings of face images and a
suppression effect for repeated object images.

THINKING: Decision making
F141
FITTING DIFFUSION MODELS TO VALUE BASED DECISIONS Doris

Voina1, Samuel F. Feng1, Amitai Shenhav1, Jonathan D. Cohen1; 1Princeton University — Researchers have taken an increased interest in modeling value-based decisions (e.g., choices between consumer goods) as processes
of evidence accumulation. The drift diffusion model (DDM) has become
one of the most commonly leveraged models in this endeavor. Yet questions remain regarding (a) how to design one’s value-based decision task
to best exploit the DDM and (b) what analytic methods are most appropriate to then use when fitting the DDM to their data? Here we explore
both questions and propose best practices for design and analysis of value-based decision tasks that seek to utilize the DDM. We systematically
test a variety of possible experimental designs by simulating data-sets of
varying trial numbers and distributions of values across trials. We then
analyze each data-set with DDMs with varying numbers of free parameters
and using two common approaches to fitting DDM predictions to choices
and response times (RTs): maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) and the
least-squares method (LSM). We first find that testing more value levels
allows an experimenter to improve accuracy and precision of DDM parameter estimates (e.g., given 50 trials per subject, better fits are obtained by
sampling 5 trials at 10 value levels as opposed to 50 trials at a single level).
Second, we find that MLE always outperforms LSM, but is biased for fits
with fewer than 50 trials. However, LSM fits improve with fewer parameters and are always completed faster than MLE. We also discuss fitting
performance as sample size, parameter breadth, and trial distribution vary.

F142
STRIATAL HYPERSENSITIVITY TO IMMEDIATE REWARD DRIVES
SELF-CONTROL DEFICITS IN PSYCHOPATHY Erik Kastman1, Hayley

Dorfman2, Arielle Baskin-Sommers3, Kent Kiehl4, Joseph Newman5, Joshua Buckholtz6; 1Harvard — Psychopaths exhibit severe self-control in many contexts,
as evidence by the high rate of antisocial behavior, sensation seeking, and
substance abuse in the population. Prior work in community volunteers
with psychopathic traits suggests that reward-related striatal hyper-reactivity may drive impaired self-control in these individuals(Buckholtz 2010);
however, the specific mechanisms by which striatal hypersensitivity contributes to poor decision-making in psychopaths remain unclear. Given

2014 Annual Meeting	
the role of this region in calculating subjective value, we hypothesized that
exaggerated striatal reactivity leads to an immediacy bias in subjective
value assignment during decision-making, predisposing impulsive choice
behavior. To test this hypothesis, 49 male inmates at two state prisons performed an intertemporal monetary choice paradigm, and each individual’s hyperbolic discounting factor k was calculated; this was used to compute trial-wise estimates of subjective value for each option. A subjective
value difference measure (SVDiff = SVsooner - SVlater) was calculated and
entered as a parametric modulator in a random-effects general linear model
analysis within SPM8. For each subject, we calculated correlations between
their PCL-R score and SVDiff fMRI betas, with age and substance abuse Hx
as covariates. Across participants, neural signals encoding subjective value
were observed in ventral striatum and medial prefrontal cortex (pFDR <
0.05). Consistent with our hypothesis, PCL-R total scores were positively
correlated with these striatal subjective value signals. On the whole, these
data support the notion that striatal hyper-reactivity in psychopaths may
impair self-control by biasing the assignment of subjective value to immediate reward options during decision-making.

F143
CORTICOSTRIATAL STRUCTURAL DIFFERENCES DISSOCIATE
IMPULSIVE-ANTISOCIAL BEHAVIOR FROM PSYCHOPATHY Hayley

Dorfman1, Erik Kastman2, Arielle Baskin-Sommers3, Kent Kiehl4, Joseph
Newman5, Joshua Buckholtz6; 1Harvard University, 2Harvard University, 3McLean
Hospital, 4University of New Mexico, 5University of Wisconsin - Madison, 6Harvard University — Antisocial behavior refers to a pervasive pattern of disregard for widespread norms of acceptable conduct. However, individuals
can arrive at a common endpoint (e.g. crime, aggression, rule-breaking) via
multiple causal pathways. Two antisocial subtypes are especially well characterized clinically - an impulsive-reactive variant (“impulsive-antisocial;”
IA) and a callous/instrumental form (Psychopathy; PS) - but our understanding of the neurobiological basis of this distinction is poor. Here, we
used morphometric analyses in a sample of incarcerated male offenders
to uncover common and subtype-specific associations to antisocial behavior. Given that features related to reward and motivation are common to
both (e.g. substance abuse), we predicted IA and PS would show a common
pattern of striatal volumetric aberration. By contrast, executive function
is impaired in IA but relatively preserved in PS, suggesting that that IA
individuals - but not PS - would show significant reductions in prefrontal
cortical thickness. To test this hypothesis, we recruited 48 inmates at two
medium-security state prisons; they received extensive clinical assessments
and T1 structural scans via mobile 1.5T MR. Estimates of cortical thickness
and subcortical volume were obtained using Freesurfer. Consistent with
our prediction, higher levels of IA were associated with higher gray striatal
gray matter volume. However, while we observed lower lateral prefrontal
cortical thickness in IA individuals, prefrontal structural deficits were not
observed in PS. These data suggest that clinically distinct trajectories for
antisocial behavior may both arise from a common deficit in reward and
motivation, but are differentiated by subtype-specific preservation of prefrontal executive control.

F144
CRAVINGS IN A VIRTUAL REALITY ENVIRONMENT PREDICTED BY
EATING DISORDER RISK Alexandra Palmisano1, Andrew Carew1, Rachel

Niezrecki1, Bonnie Deaton1, Franchesca Kuhney1, Melissa Santos2, Robert
Astur1; 1University of Connecticut, 2Connecticut Childrens Medical Center — It
is essential to examine what factors influence conditioned place preference
(CPP) in order to predict potential attitudes toward food and to establish
treatment for those with eating disorders. Despite ample nonhuman studies,
there has been limited human research aimed at elucidating the underlying
factors of environmental or contextual cues that impact eating attitudes.
Within rodent research, these cues are often studied using a conditioned
place preference paradigm, whereby a specific environment is paired with
a reinforcement like a drug, sex, or food, and via classical conditioning, a
preference emerges for an environment in the absence of the reinforcement.
In an attempt to extend this paradigm to humans, we created a virtual reality CPP task with real-life M&M rewards. Previous studies by our lab have
demonstrated that participants display a CPP by spending significantly
more time in the room previously paired with M&Ms (p<0.01). With reliable preferences established, we invited participants to complete the Eating

Poster Session F
Attitudes Test (EAT-26) and using their responses examined the correlation between self-reported attitudes toward eating and a preference for the
M&M-paired room. We observed a strong negative correlation between a
participant’s risk for bulimia and their preference for the M&M room (r =
-0.562, p < 0.05) that was strengthened when examining female participants
only (r = -0.825, p < 0.01). We believe this to be the first time that factors
affecting CPP have been measured in an attempt to examine the extent to
which CPP may be used as a food attitude predictor.

F145
USING KNOWLEDGE ABOUT PERCEPTUAL PERFORMANCE
TO MAKE VALUE-BASED DECISIONS Ming-Jen Yeh1, Shih-Wei Wu2;

1
National Yang-Ming University, 2National Yang-Ming University — In many situations, we often have to make economic, value-based decisions by taking
into account our performance in various tasks. Little is known, however,
about how and how well subjects estimate their perceptual performance
under different contexts and use it to make value-based decisions. Method:
There were two sessions in the experiment. First, in a random-dot motion
(RDM) task, subjects were trained to make judgments on motion direction
when there were two possible correct directions (2AFC task) or 8 possible
correct directions (8AFC task). In the second session, we asked the subjects
to choose between two different RDM stimuli, one with two alternatives
and the other with 8 alternatives. Subjects were instructed to choose the
one they preferred. Subjects received a reward if making a correct direction
judgment and otherwise nothing. We specifically designed the RDM stimuli such that they would differ in motion coherence levels but would have
the same probability of making a correct judgment based on performance
in the first session. In other words, the objective stimulus value between
the two options was the same. Results: Six subjects participated in the
experiment. Preliminary results suggested that, when making value-based
decisions in the second session, all subjects took into account knowledge
about their own perceptual performance in the first session. We also found
that when the value of the competing options was equal, subjects exhibited
a slight bias toward the 8-alternative option. This suggested that subjects
might systematically overestimate performance in the 8AFC task when
making value-based choices.

F146
LOW TEMPORAL DISCOUNTING IN ANOREXIA NERVOSA NORMALIZES WITH WEIGHT RESTORATION Johannes Decker1, Bernd

Figner2, Tim Walsh2, BJ Casey1, Joanna Steinglass2; 1Weill Cornell Medical College, 2Columbia University — Anorexia nervosa (AN) has the highest mortality rate of any psychiatric illness, as individuals engage in persistent caloric
restriction resulting in pathologically low body weight. AN patients seemingly forgo immediate rewards (food) in favor of a possible future reward
(weight loss). Steinglass et al. (2012) recently showed that AN patients have
a stronger preference for delayed monetary rewards than healthy controls
(HC), suggesting that excessive self-restriction in AN may extend beyond
the realm of food. Using a temporal discounting task - offering a series of
binary choices between a smaller sooner (SS) and larger later (LL) reward
- we explored whether discounting rates, a measure of delay preference,
change with weight restoration. AN patients (n=63) were tested within one
week of admittance and retested (n=50) after 2 consecutive weeks of weight
restoration. A healthy comparison group was tested twice 1-3 months part
(HC:n=39,n=32). A subset successfully performed the task during an fMRI
scan (AN:n=24,n=19 and HC:n=22,n=16). There was a Diagnosis X Session interaction (F(1,69.2)=14,p<.0005 full sample; F(1,33.5)=6.0,p<.01 scan
sample) with AN patients showing a lower discount rate (LL preference)
than HC at session 1, (t(94)=-2.37,p<.02 full set, p=.34 scan set) and an
increase in their discounting rate at session 2 (t(100)=-3.37,p<.005 full set,
t(41)=-2.60,p<.05 scan set). HC showed no change across sessions. A choice
(SS/LL) X diagnosis (AN/HC) X session (T1/T2)interaction was observed
in the striatum, anterior cingulate cortex, R-parietal cortex (whole-brain
corrected p<.05,). These differences in reward-related processing suggest
an abnormal neural mechanism in temporal discounting in AN.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

225

Poster Session F	

F147
REWARD-RELATED MODULATION OF CONDITIONED STIMULUS
PERCEPTION AFTER ASSOCIATIVE LEARNING James Howard1, Thor-

sten Kahnt2, Jay Gottfried1; 1Northwestern University, 2University of Zürich —
Research on the behavioral and neural underpinnings of reward-related
associative learning typically overlooks the role of sensory processing.
In order to more closely examine the interaction between sensation and
reward we conducted an experiment in which human participants (N=8)
underwent a Pavlovian associative learning paradigm involving four olfactory cues as conditioned stimuli (CS) and monetary reward as unconditioned stimuli (US). Before and after learning subjects provided ratings of
odor pleasantness and perceptual similarity between each possible odor
pair. During the learning phase two of the odors (CS+) were paired with
$1.00 rewards with 100% contingency and the remaining two (CS-) were
never paired with reward. Analysis of the pleasantness ratings revealed
that the CS+ were rated as significantly more pleasant than CS- after learning. Moreover, the two CS+ were rated as significantly more similar to each
other after learning compared to the similarity of the CS- pair. By applying
multidimensional scaling to the similarity ratings, we observed the emergence of a reorganized perceptual space occupied by these odors such that
associated reward value constituted a principal dimension after learning.
The magnitude of this perceptual reorganization was directly related to the
change in pleasantness rating across subjects. Taken together, these findings suggest that sensory and reward processing of conditioned stimuli are
closely linked, and that the representation of associative structures in the
brain may extend from higher order associative areas to include primary
sensory regions.

THINKING: Development & aging
F148
PATH COMPLEXITY IN VIRTUAL WATER MAZE NAVIGATION: DIFFERENTIAL ASSOCIATIONS WITH AGE, SEX, AND REGIONAL
BRAIN VOLUME Ana Daugherty1, Peng Yuan1, Cheryl Dahle1, Andrew

Bender1, Yiqin Yang1, Naftali Raz1; 1Wayne State University, Detroit, MI — Studies of human navigation in virtual maze environments have consistently
linked advanced age with greater distance traveled between the start and
the goal and longer duration of the search. Observations of the search path
geometry suggests that the routes taken by older adults may be unnecessarily complex, and that excessive path complexity may be an indicator of cognitive difficulties experienced by older navigators. To quantify search path
complexity in a virtual Morris water maze, we developed a novel method
based on fractal dimensionality. We applied the method to a sample of
healthy adults (N=139, mean age 48.52 + 15.85, 66% women). In a two level
hierarchical linear model, we estimated improvement in navigation performance across trials by a decline in route length, shortening of search
time, and reduction in fractal dimensionality of the path. While replicating
commonly reported age and sex differences in time and distance indices
of performance, we observed that reduction in fractal dimension of the
path accounted for improvement across trials, independent of age or sex.
The volumes of brain regions associated with planning (prefrontal cortex),
timing (cerebellum) and establishment of cognitive maps (parahippocampal gyrus) were negatively related to path dimensionality, but not to the
total distance and time. Thus, fractal dimensionality of a navigational path
may present a useful complementary method of quantifying performance
in water maze navigation.

F149
ORIGINS OF NUMERICAL THINKING: RELATING BRAIN SIGNATURES TO BEHAVIORAL DEVELOPMENT USING AN INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES APPROACH WITH PRESCHOOLERS Daniel Hyde1,

Manuela Piazza2, Pierre Pica3, Stan Dehaene2, Elizabeth Spelke4; 1University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2INSERM-CEA, France, 3CRNS, France, 4Harvard University — Research with infants, adults, and many non-human animals suggests two pre-verbal cognitive systems for representing number: a system
for tracking a small number of individual objects and a system for approximating the numerical magnitude of larger sets of objects. The role of these
systems in the initial development of symbolic number concepts, as demon-

226

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
strated by counting ability, remains unclear and highly debated. Here we
used an individual differences approach to test for a relationship between
counting proficiency and the brain correlates (event-related potentials) of
spontaneous object individuation and numerical approximation. We tested
a 3- to 4- year old preschool children on a battery of numerical and non-numerical tasks using both behavioral and brain measures. We observed that
individual differences in early visual-attentional processing of a small
number of objects (N1), a marker of object individuation, correlated with
differences in counting proficiency (n = 40; give-a-number task: r = -.47, p
< .005). This correlation held after accounting for the effects of age, verbal
IQ, and working memory (ps < .05). Individual differences in spontaneous,
mid-latency processing (P2p) of large approximate numerical differences
correlated with active behavioral numerical comparison abilities (n = 32, r
= .45, p < .01), but not with counting proficiency in preschoolers (p > .75).
These results provide further evidence for a distinction between the representation of a small and large number of items. Furthermore, these results
suggest that individual differences in basic, spontaneous, attentional processing of objects may influence the development of higher-level conceptual numerical abilities.

F150
ACCEPTANCE OF TELEOLOGICAL AND MECHANICAL EXPLANATIONS AMONG STUDENTS Hamilton Haddad1, Vivian MC El Dash1, Ingrid

MC El Dash1; 1University of São Paulo — The teleological tendency to assume
that objects and events exist for a particular purpose or goal is a crucial
element of the biological reasoning, although modern science tends to reject
this kind of explanation in favor of a mechanical-causal view of the world.
The present study investigated differences in the acceptance of teleological
and mechanical explanations among undergraduate students in Biological
Sciences at the University of São Paulo. It was presented a set of short statements to 115 students, who were divided in two groups. To the first one, the
sentences were presented for 3.5 seconds. The second group had the time
they considered necessary to analyze the statements (adapted from Keleman & Rosset, Cognition 2009). Under time restriction, the results showed
51.2% of answers endorsing scientifically unwarranted teleological statements, such as Trees produce oxygen so that animals can breathe . Without this time pressure, this percentage was reduced to 26.3% (statistically
different, p < 0.5). This pattern was not observed for the mechanical-causal
statements, which showed over 90% of correct answers in both groups.
These results suggest that the teleological view of natural phenomena is
deeply rooted in the conceptual schema of students throughout development and schooling. The role of the prefrontal cortex in this process is discussed. Instead of being supplanted by a more scientific worldview, this
tenacious bias can be inhibited but possibly never entirely replaced.

Poster Session G
ATTENTION: Development & aging
G1
DOES THE AGE-RELATED “ANTERIOR SHIFT” OF THE P3 REFLECT
AN INABILITY TO HABITUATE THE NOVELTY RESPONSE? Brittany

Alperin1, Katherine Mott1, Eliza Ryan1, Philip Holcomb2, Kirk Daffner1; 1Harvard
Medical School, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 2Tufts University — Older
adults generate larger anterior neural responses than young adults when
carrying out task requirements. A common finding in the ERP literature
is an “anterior shift” of the P3b to targets. Utilizing principal component
analysis (PCA), we recently demonstrated that rather than the P3b moving
anteriorly, older adults generate a large P3a that temporally overlaps with
their P3b. A dominant hypothesis explaining the age-related increase in
anterior P3 is the failure to habituate the brain’s novelty response to rare
targets. We tested this hypothesis in young and old adults by comparing
the amplitude of the PCA factor representing P3a to targets presented in
the first versus last of eight blocks. If, unlike young adults, older adults
are unable to habituate a novelty response, one would expect 1) the P3a
amplitude to decrease between the first and last blocks for young, but not
old subjects and 2) the difference in P3a amplitude between young and old
subjects to be greater in the last than the first block. Our results indicate
the amplitude of the P3a was larger in older adults than younger adults.
However, this effect was not modulated by block. Additionally, there was
no overall effect of block. These findings argue against the hypothesis that
an age-related increase in the P3a to targets reflects an inability of older
subjects to habituate a novelty response. An alternative hypothesis is that
the augmented P3a indexes the increased utilization of frontal executive
functions to provide compensatory scaffolding to carry out a task.

G2
BILINGUAL CHILDREN SHOW GREATER LEFT PREFRONTAL ACTIVATION DURING A NON-VERBAL ATTENTION TASK: AN FNIRS
STUDY Maria Arredondo1, Xiaosu Hu1, Lourdes Delgado Reyes2, Stefanie

Younce1, Jaime Muñoz Velazquez3, Teresa Satterfield1, Ioulia Kovelman1; 1University of Michigan, 2University of Iowa, 3California State University, Fullerton
— How does early bilingual exposure change the language and cognitive
processes in the developing brain? Theories of bilingual development suggest that the necessity to pay selective attention to two competing linguistic inputs fosters an overall improvement of attention in young bilinguals,
improvement likely supported by the prefrontal cortex (Bialystok, 2000).
Nevertheless, while some previous studies have found better cognitive
functioning in bilinguals relative to monolinguals, the degree to which
these differences are related to language experience and sociocultural circumstances unique to bilingual upbringing remain unclear. Moreover, little
is known about the brain basis of attention processing in child bilinguals.
Thus, in the present study we used functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy
(fNIRS) to investigate the brain basis of selective attention in Spanish-English bilingual and English-monolingual children using the Attentional
Network Task (ANT; n=11 per group, ages 7 to 12). The incongruent condition (minus congruent condition) elicited greater left hemisphere prefrontal
activation in young bilinguals relative to monolinguals, including inferior,
middle and superior frontal regions (p < 0.01). The greater recruitment of
the left hemisphere language and verbal working memory regions in bilingual children suggests that early dual language exposure indeed increases
the extent to which the language hemisphere responds to domain-general tasks of attention and possibly working memory. The findings carry
important implications for understanding the development of the prefrontal cortex and how early life experience, especially bilingualism, may
impact the neurodevelopmental basis of higher cognition.

G3
PAYING (FOR) ATTENTION: EFFECTS OF DISTRACTION, TIMEON-TASK, AND MONETARY INCENTIVE IN YOUNGER AND OLDER
ADULTS Ziyong Lin1, Leanne Lasecki2, Cindy Lustig1; 1University of Michigan,

2
University of North Carolina at Wilmington — Adult aging is heuristically
associated with reductions in attentional control, but performance may be
influenced by a number of factors including the type of attention assessed
(e.g. sustaining attention vs resisting distraction) and participants’ motivation. We used the Continuous Temporal Expectancy Task (O’Connell et al.,
2009), a duration-discrimination task that shows rapid time-on-task performance declines, to assess young (n = 32, M age = 18.63 yrs) and older (n
=32; M age = 70.37 yrs) adults’ ability to sustain attention, and manipulated
whether a nearby laptop was silent or playing videos to assess distractor
vulnerability. Older adults performed better than young adults overall and
had less severe time-on-task declines. Debriefing questionnaires suggested
that boredom and lack of engagement by young adults drove this paradoxical age difference. To test this directly, we added an incentive condition
in which participants could earn up to $10, with $.05 deducted for every
error. (Data collection ongoing; n = 18 young adults, M age = 18.71 yrs;
n = 32 older adults, M age = 72.03 yrs.) Preliminary results suggest this
incentive improves young adults’ performance so that they now perform
as well as older adults in the non-incentivized condition, but has no or even
detrimental effects on the performance of older adults. Distraction did not
increase as a function of time-on-task and was not influenced by incentive
condition for either age group. Results suggest that different aspects of
attentional control differ in their sensitivity to age differences in ability and
motivation.

G4
REMEDIATION OF ABNORMAL VISUAL MOTION PROCESSING
SIGNIFICANTLY IMPROVES ATTENTION, READING FLUENCY,
AND WORKING MEMORY IN DYSLEXIA Teri Lawton1,2, Jordan Conway1,

Steven Edland3; 1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UCSD, La
Jolla, California, 2Perception Dynamics Institute, Del Mar, CA, 3Department of
Neurosciences and Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Department of
Family and Preventive Medicine, UCSD, La Jolla, California — Temporal processing deficits resulting from sluggish magnocellular pathways in dorsal
stream cortical areas have been shown to be a key factor limiting reading
performance in dyslexics. To investigate the efficacy of reading interventions designed to improve temporal processing speed, we performed a
randomized trial on 75 dyslexic second graders in six public elementary
schools, comparing interventions targeting the temporal dynamics of
either the auditory and/or visual pathways with the school’s regular reading intervention (control group). Standardized tests of reading fluency,
attention, and working memory were used to evaluate improvements
in cognitive function using ANCOVAs. Most dyslexics in this study had
abnormal visual motion processing, having elevated contrast thresholds
for movement-discrimination on a stationary, textured background. Visual
movement-discrimination training to remediate abnormal motion processing significantly improved reading fluency (both speed and comprehension), attention, phonological processing, and auditory working memory,
whereas auditory training to improve phonological processing did not
significantly improve these skills. The significant improvements in phonological processing, and both sequential and nonsequential auditory working memory demonstrate that visual movement-discrimination training
improves auditory skills even though it is training visual motion discrimination, suggesting that training early in the visual dorsal stream improved
higher levels of processing in the dorsal stream, where convergence of both
auditory and visual inputs in the parietal cortex have been found, suggesting that improving the timing and sensitivity of movement discrimination
improves endogenous attention networks. These results implicate sluggish
magnocellular pathways in dyslexia, and argue against the assumption that
reading deficiencies in dyslexia are only phonologically-based.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

227

Poster Session G	

G5
AN AGE-RELATED INCREASE IN ANTERIOR NEURAL ACTIVITY IS FOUND THROUGHOUT THE INFORMATION PROCESSING
STREAM Eliza Ryan1, Brittany Alperin1, Katherine Mott1, Phillip Holcomb2,

Kirk Daffner1; 1Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
2
Tufts University — Functional imaging and ERP studies often demonstrate
age-related increases in anterior neural activity to carry out task demands.
It remains unclear whether this anterior shift is limited to late cognitive
operations like those indexed by the P3 component, or are evident throughout the information processing stream. The temporal resolution of ERPs
provided an opportunity to address this issue. Temporospatial principal
component analysis (PCA) allowed for the identification of underlying
components that may be obscured by overlapping ERP waveforms. ERPs
were measured during a visual oddball task in 26 young and 29 old subjects
who were well-matched in terms of accuracy, intelligence, and education.
PCA identified an anterior positivity in response to target stimuli suggestive of a P3a component, peaking at 507 ms, which was larger for old than
young subjects. PCA also differentiated three earlier positive anterior factors peaking at 155 ms, 214 ms, and 312 ms, whose amplitudes were larger
in old than young subjects. In old subjects, the size of the 214 ms and 312 ms
factors correlated with accuracy, such that the larger the anterior response,
the higher the accuracy. In contrast, no relationship was observed between
these factors and accuracy in young subjects. Our findings suggest that
compared to their younger counterparts, older adults not only recruit anterior resources during late processing, but also rely more on anterior neural
activity during earlier stages of information processing. Augmentation of
these early anteriorly-mediated operations appears to contribute to better
task performance in old adults.

G6
ENHANCED EARLY SENSORY PROCESSING IN HEALTHY AGING:
EVIDENCE FOR A FRONTAL GATING DEFICIT? Cierra M. Keith1, David

A.S. Kaufman1, William M. Perlstein2,3; 1Saint Louis University, St. Louis, MO,
2
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 3Malcom Randall VAMC, Gainesville, FL —
Event-related potential (ERP) oddball studies examining the performance
of healthy older adults have consistently found decreased amplitudes of P3
potentials to target and distractor stimuli. Scalp topographies of both P3a
and P3b components show frontal shifts with age, suggesting an increased
need for compensatory frontal activity to assist with age-related disruptions
of inhibition and working memory. Compromised frontal lobe function has
also been associated with deficits in sensory gating, which can be explored
using ERPs. However, aging effects on early sensory ERP components are
poorly understood. In this study, 20 young (mean: 22 years) and 10 older
(mean: 71 years) adults completed a three-stimulus visual oddball task
while high-density ERPs were acquired. Colorful, novel distracters were
used to evoke enhanced early sensory processing. Relative to young controls, older participants exhibited elevations in occipital early posterior positivity (EPP) to the colorful distracters. These elevations in EPP were negatively correlated with the number of categories completed on the Wisconsin
Card Sorting Test, indicating that elevations in EPP may be associated with
age-related frontal dysfunction. In particular, enhancements in EPP may
reflect deficits in sensory gating regulated by frontal lobe networks. Despite
their enhanced EPP activity, older adults showed typical age-related frontal
shifts and amplitude reductions in P3 potentials to targets and distracters.
Taken together, these results suggest that healthy aging may be associated
with weakened frontal gating of sensory processes. Deficits in sensory
gating may be indicative of broader dysfunction in frontal lobe structures
that regulate working memory and guide attention.

ATTENTION: Spatial
G7
DOPAMINE SYSTEM GENES ARE ASSOCIATED WITH ORIENTING
BIAS AMONG HEALTHY INDIVIDUALS Polina Zozulinsky1, Lior Green-

baum2, Noa Eilat1, Yair Braun1, Idan Shalev3, Rachel Tomer1; 1University of
Haifa, Haifa, Israel, 2Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel, 3The
Pennsylvania State University, United States — Healthy individuals display
subtle orienting bias, manifested as a tendency to direct greater attention

228

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
toward one hemispace, and evidence suggests that this bias reflects an individual trait. Orienting bias has been shown to reflect asymmetric dopamine
signaling in animals and in patients with Parkinson’s disease, and among
healthy humans, the preferred direction of orienting attention in space has
been recently shown to reflect asymmetric dopamine D2 receptor binding
in striatal and frontal regions. Polymorphic genes coding for elements of
DA neurotransmission partially regulate the available amount of neurotransmitter and receptor number. We therefore examined the hypothesis that polymorphisms of the dopamine D2 receptor TaqIA/ANKK1 gene
contribute to individual differences in orienting bias, as measured by the
greyscales paradigm, in a sample of 197 young healthy Israeli Jewish participants. As predicted, homozygous carriers of the A2 allele displayed
increased leftward orienting bias compared to the carriers of the A1 allele.
Additionally, and as previously reported by others, we found that bias
towards leftward orienting of attention was significantly greater among
carriers of the 9-repeat allele of the DAT1 3’ VNTR as compared to the individuals who were homozygous for the 10-repeat allele. These findings support the suggestion that individual differences in asymmetries in orienting
bias that are associated with asymmetries within dopaminergic system, are
influenced by genetic factors.

G9
THE PRECUNEUS AND NEGLECT: A TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC
STIMULATION STUDY Indra Mahayana1, Daisy Hung1,2, Ovid Tzeng1,2,3, Chi-

Hung Juan1,2, Neil Muggleton1,2,4,5; 1National Central University, 2National YangMing University, 3Academia Sinica Taiwan, 4University College London, 5Goldsmiths University of London — Parietal cortex lesions provide a large body of
evidence for the involvement of this region in orientation and navigation in
space. This has been supplemented by investigation of the contribution of
a number of subregions using transcranial magnetic stimulation. However,
the role of the precuneus area, located in the medial plane of posterior parietal cortex (PPC), in control of visuospatial attention is not well understood.
We investigated the contribution of this area using the landmark task. Participants were asked to do forced-choice judgments of which side of prebisected lines were longer for near and far viewing distances (70 and 180 cm,
respectively). Online 10 Hz, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
(rTMS) was delivered for 500 ms over the right precuneus, rPPC (Talairach
coordinates: 15/-68/37 and 42/-58/52, respectively) and vertex (control),
in separate blocks of trials. The rPPC stimulation was used as a positive
control, having previously resulted in “neglect like” spatial bias effects in
a number of studies. A no-TMS condition showed a leftward spatial bias
(pseudoneglect) for near space judgments but not for far space which used
as the baseline midpoint. Precuneus stimulation resulted in rightward spatial bias from the midpoint in near space similar to the rPPC neglect-like
effect. No significant effects were seen with vertex stimulation. This study
shows that precuneus, like other parietal areas, is involved in visuospatial
attention control. Further work is required to clarify how the contribution
of this area differs from other parietal regions.

G10
IMPROVING MULTIPLE OBJECT TRACKING PERFORMANCE BY
STIMULATING THE ANTERIOR INTRAPARIETAL SULCUS Eric Blum-

berg1,2, Brian Kidwell1,2, Matthew Peterson1,2, Raja Parasuraman1,2; 1George
Mason University, 2Center of Excellence in Neuroergonomics, Technology, and
Cognition (CENTEC) — The anterior intraparietal sulcus (AIPS) is known
to be associated with performance of the multiple object tracking (MOT)
task (Howe et al., 2009). Stimulating this brain region with transcranial
Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) provides a unique method to establish
the causal role of the AIPS and of evaluating the plasticity of MOT performance. Participants in the present study were randomly assigned to one
of three groups while they performed the MOT under two loads: anodal
stimulation at 2mA of the right AIPS, a stimulation control condition (2 mA
of left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, DLPFC), and a sham control condition
(2 mA ramp-up and immediate ramp-down of left DLPFC). Stimulation
for each group lasted 30 minutes. Each participant completed 132 trials (66
trials tracking at each load of 2 and 4 moving circles) during both the preand post- (stimulation) time intervals. There was a significant improvement
in MOT performance from pre- to post-stimulation periods for tracking
four-objects with right AIPS stimulation, compared to the two DLPFC con-

2014 Annual Meeting	
ditions. No stimulation effects were found for the two-object load trials.
The results are consistent with the view that the right AIPS plays a critical
role in multiple object tracking.

G11
NEURAL MECHANISMS BY WHICH ATTENTION MODULATES THE
COMPARISON OF REMEMBERED AND PERCEPTUAL REPRESENTATIONS Bo-Cheng Kuo1, Duncan Astle2; 1National Taiwan University, 2MRC

Cognition and Brain Science Unit — Attention is important for effectively
comparing incoming perceptual information with the contents of visual
short-term memory (VSTM), such that any differences can be detected.
However, how attentional mechanisms operate upon these comparison
processes remains largely unknown. Here we investigate the underlying neural mechanisms by which attention modulates the comparisons
between VSTM and perceptual representations using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). Participants (N = 13) performed a cued change
detection task. Spatial cues were presented to orient their attention either
to the location of an item in VSTM prior to its comparison (retro-cues), or
simultaneously (simultaneous-cues) with the probe array. A no-cue condition was also included. When attention cannot be effectively deployed in
advance (i.e. following the simultaneous-cues), we observed a distributed
and extensive activation pattern in the prefrontal and parietal cortices in
support of successful change detection. This was not the case when participants can deploy their attention in advance (i.e. following the retro-cues).
The region-of-interest analyses confirmed that neural responses for successful change detection versus correct rejection in the visual and parietal
regions were significantly different for simultaneous-cues compared to retro-cues. Importantly, we found enhanced functional connectivity between
prefrontal and parietal cortices when detecting changes on the simultaneous-cue trials. Moreover, we demonstrated a close relationship between
this functional connectivity and d’ scores. Together, our findings elucidate
the attentional and neural mechanisms by which items held in VSTM are
compared with incoming perceptual information.

G12
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN EXOGENOUS AND ENDOGENOUS
ATTENTION ACROSS LEVELS OF SALIENCE AND PREDICTABILITY. Prerna Bholah1, Jonathan Parsons1, Joseph Hopfinger1; 1University of North

Carolina, Chapel Hill — Previous research has suggested that endogenous
and exogenous attention have distinct yet interacting mechanisms (Berger,
Henik & Rafal, 2005; Hopfinger & West, 2006). It is unknown, however, if
the interactions are fixed or malleable, since previous studies have used only
a single level of salience for the exogenous cue and a single level of predictability for the endogenous cue. In this study, event-related potentials were
used to investigate the interactions between exogenous orienting and sustained endogenous attention when the degree of engagement is varied. Participants sustained attention to a specified visual field throughout a block,
while performing a discrimination task in a within-subjects design in two
conditions: (1) strong endogenous-weak exogenous condition (high target
predictability and dim cue) and (2) weak endogenous-strong exogenous
condition (low target predictability and bright cue). Whereas behavioral
results showed interactions between endogenous and exogenous attention
that did not interact with condition, the ERP results revealed that at earlier
levels of processing these interactions differed across condition. Specifically, the P1 component was generally dominated by exogenous attention,
and endogenous attention interacted with exogenous attention only in the
“strong endogenous/weak exogenous” condition. These data provide new
electrophysiological evidence that the interaction between endogenous and
exogenous attention depends on the degree of engagement of each system,
at least at early visual processing levels. In contrast, the later P3 component was mainly influenced by sustained endogenous attention, and the
interaction between endogenous and exogenous attention at this stage of
processing was not dependent on the strength of engagement.

G13
VISUAL ATTENTIONAL DEPLOYMENT IS MODULATED BY
RESPONSE REQUIREMENT AND VISUAL SKILL LEARNING Yulong

Ding1, Yuling Su1, Yan Song2, Zhe Qu1; 1Sun Yat-Sen University, 2Beijing Normal
University — By using N2pc and Pd components as the neural markers of
attentional allocation and attentional suppression respectively, this study

Poster Session G
investigated how attentional deployment is affected by response requirement and visual skill learning. To dissociate the factor of response requirement from perceptual relevancy, a homogeneous array search paradigm
was designed in experiment 1 and 2, in which participants were required
to explicitly respond to the homogenous arrays and not to the heterogeneous arrays containing a shape or orientation singleton. Each subject performed three training sessions over consecutive days. The task-relevant
but no-response-requiring shape/orientation singleton did not elicit any
visible N2pc or Pd component in the first session, but induced an apparent
Pd component (220-270ms) after long-term training over several days. In
experiment 3, we adopted a traditional singleton detection task in which
the stimulus set was identical to that in experiment 2, but participants were
required to explicitly respond only to the heterogeneous arrays containing
an orientation singleton. In this control experiment, the orientation singleton elicited a typical N2pc component (220-270ms) within a single session.
Taken together, our results indicate important roles of response requirement and visual skill learning in attentional deployment on singletons in
visual search arrays.

G14
A COMPENSATION ROLE OF TOP-DOWN ATTENTIONAL CONTROL
IN THE GENERALIZATION OF VISUAL SKILL LEARNING Zhe Qu1,

You Wang1, Yanfeng Zhen1, Yan Song2, Yulong Ding1; 1Sun Yat-Sen University,
2
Beijing Normal University — Specificity and generalization of visual skill
learning have been extensively studied with behavioral measurements,
but the mechanisms remain unclear. The present study used high-density
event-related potentials (ERPs) to investigate the brain mechanisms underlying behavioral specificity and generalization of short-term learning of
texture discrimination task (TDT). Human adults were trained with TDT
for a single session and their ERPs were measured on the following day.
Behavioral performance showed that learning effects were specific to the
trained background orientation but generalized across target locations.
ERP data, however, revealed both target-location and background-orientation specific changes. While the behavioral background-orientation
specificity mainly involved amplitude enhancement of early N2pc over
occipital cortex, behavioral target-location generalization was associated
with modulation of tempo-spatial configurations of the N2pc component
(early-occipital vs. late-parietal/temporal pattern) and decrease of frontal
P2 amplitudes for the trained relative to the untrained condition. The earliest visual component C1 did not show specific effects for either background
orientation or target location. These results indicated different brain mechanisms underlying the behavioral specificity and generalization of TDT
learning. Based on the present findings and literatures, we propose that
visual skill learning may induce not only enhancement of relatively early
visual selection of the trained target among distractors but also decreases
of top-down attention originating from high-level brain centre. The reactivation of top-down attention control in some conditions (e.g., the untrained
target-location condition) may compensate for the specific effect induced
by the early visual selective attention mechanism, leading to generalization
or less specificity of learning in behavioral performance.

G15
SOCIAL ATTENTION IS MODULATED BY EMOTIONS: THE INFLUENCE OF FACIAL EXPRESSION ON THE SPATIAL SPECIFICITY OF
GAZE CUEING Eva Wiese1,2, Agnieszka Wykowska1,3, Hermann J. Mueller1;

1
LMU Munich, Germany, 2George-Mason University, USA, 3TU Munich, Germany
— When interacting with other people, information about their internal
states is communicated explicitly by speech but also implicitly by social
cues, such as gaze direction and facial expression. While gaze direction signals the current focus of attention, facial expression conveys information
about the social significance of the attended events/objects. In two experiments, we investigated whether facial expression (neutral, happy, fearful)
modulates the spatial specificity with which attention is allocated when
being triggered by changes in gaze direction. Gaze cues were followed by a
target stimulus which participants had to localize and/or discriminate. The
allocation of attention was determined by comparing reaction times (RTs)
as a function of the distance between cued position and target position.
Spatially specific cueing effects were found for fearful faces, whereas neutral and happy faces induced equally strong cueing effects for all positions
in the cued hemifield. However, the modulatory effect of fearful faces on

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

229

Poster Session G	
the spatial specificity of gaze cueing depended on the stimulus-onset asynchrony (SOA) between cue and target presentation: specific cueing effects
for fearful faces were present only at longer SOAs indicating that the modulatory effect of facial expression on gaze cueing is not just a mere alertness
effect (which would be present already at short SOAs), but rather seems to
succeed the classification of emotions which takes place at later stages of
information processing.

G16
RAPID EXTRACTION OF CATEGORY-SPECIFIC SHAPE STATISTICS:
EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Bria L. Long1, Viola

S. Stömer1, George A. Alvarez1; 1Harvard University — During visual search,
observers analyze target-distractor similarity rapidly, allocating attention
to the most informative part of the display. The difficulty of target selection
is indexed by the N2pc, an early, lateralized event-related potential (ERP)
component (Luck & Hillyard, 1994). Here, we examined how target selection is modulated by distractor similarity of real-world categories. Observers searched for an object that was presented either among five distractors
of the same category (uniform displays) or of a different category (mixed
displays). Stimuli were either animals or inanimate objects; these categories
were equalized across factors already known to influence visual search for
simple stimuli, including low-level properties (e.g., luminance, contrast,
power at different spatial frequencies and orientations, size, etc.) in addition to familiarity and typicality. Observers’ accuracy was higher on mixed
vs. uniform trials, indicating a more efficient search process on mixed displays. To investigate the neural underpinnings of this performance difference, ERPs were recorded from posterior electrode sites (PO7/PO8), where
an enlarged negativity contralateral to target location was found from 180
to 300ms after display onset the N2pc. The N2pc amplitude was greater for
uniform vs. mixed displays (F(1, 8) = 5.89, p <.05), suggesting that more
attentional resources were allocated on uniform relative to mixed trials,
presumably to resolve the increased similarity between same-category
targets and distractors. As we controlled stimuli for a wide range of lowlevel feature dimensions, these results suggest that differences in mid-level
shape features between animals and inanimate objects can modulate rapid
attentional allocation during search.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Development &
aging
G17
DEVELOPMENT AND NEURAL BASES OF HAPPY FACE PROCESSING IN INFANTS: A STUDY IN FNIRS AND TEMPERAMENT Miranda

Ravicz1, Katherine Perdue1,2, Alissa Westerlund1, Charles A. Nelson1,2; 1Labs
of Cognitive Neuroscience, Division of Developmental Medicine, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston MA, 2Harvard Medical School, Boston MA — Accurate decoding of facial expressions is critical for human communication,
particularly during infancy before formal language has developed. Differentiation of brain responses to different emotional faces develops within
the first months of life. However, there are broad individual differences
in such responses. In the current project we seek to examine such differences by studying the relation between neural response and temperament.
We do so using functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) to measure
oxyHb responses to happy face stimuli. Seven-month-old infants (n=11,
study in progress) were shown images of happy faces, and neural activity was recorded using fNIRS, which measures hemoglobin concentrations
in response to stimulus events. Greater oxyHb response is associated with
greater local brain activation. Temperament data were collected using the
Revised Infant Behavior Questionnaire (Gartstein & Rothbart, 2003), which
assesses three temperament factors: Surgency/Extraversion, Negative
Emotionality, and Orienting/Regulation. Across several channels over the
prefrontal cortex, we found that oxyHb response was correlated with temperament. For three channels over the left prefrontal cortex, there was a
positive correlation between Surgency/Extraversion and oxyHb response
(r=.739, p=.009; r=.705, p=.015; r=.736, p=.015). Over the right prefrontal
cortex, three channels showed negative correlations between Negative
Emotionality and oxyHb activity (r=-.741, p=.009; r=-.715, p=.013; r=-.709,
p=.015). This second effect was driven by negative deflections in oxyHb
concentrations. These results suggest that individual temperament dif-

230

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
ferences are associated with differential oxyHb responses to happy faces,
putatively subserved by the orbitofrontal cortex. Infants with higher Surgency/Extraversion and lower Negative Emotionality characteristics show
greater brain responses to happy faces.

G18
HOW CHILDHOOD PEER ACCEPTANCE AND REJECTION RELATE
TO NEURAL RESPONSES TO SOCIAL EXCLUSION DURING ADOLESCENCE Geert-Jan Will1,2, Pol van Lier3, Eveline A. Crone1,2,4, Berna

Gürolu1,2; 1Leiden University, the Netherlands, 2Leiden Institute for Brain and
Cognition (LIBC), the Netherlands, 3VU University, the Netherlands, 4University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands — This functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) study investigated neural responses to social exclusion in
adolescents (age 12-15) who either experienced chronic acceptance (n =
27) or rejection (n = 19) by their peers during childhood. After first being
included and then excluded in a virtual ball-tossing game (Cyberball) by
two unknown peers, participants reported a rise in emotional distress;
independent of experienced acceptance or rejection during childhood.
Neuroimaging results showed that across the sample social exclusion was
associated with increased activity in brain regions associated with processing affect and emotion regulation, such as ventral anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC), subgenual anterior cingulate cortex/striatum and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (PFC). Chronically rejected adolescents showed: 1) increased
activation in the pre-supplementary motor area/dorsal ACC and anterior
PFC when they did not receive the ball during the inclusion game, suggesting a hypersensitivity to minimal cues of rejection; and 2) decreased activity in the anterior insula during the exclusion game, suggesting blunted
emotional processing during extended periods of social exclusion. Taken
together, our results show that brief episode of social exclusion is highly
distressing for adolescents and that childhood peer relations are associated
with differential neural processing of social exclusion in adolescence.

G19
DEVELOPMENT OF EMOTIONAL FACE PROCESSING IN INFANTS
AS MEASURED WITH NEAR-INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY Katherine

Perdue1,2, Alissa Westerlund1, Miranda Ravicz1, Charles A. Nelson1,2; 1Boston
Children’s Hospital, 2Harvard Medical School — The goal of this work is to
elucidate the neural basis of the development of emotional face processing in infants over the first year of life. Prior work has shown that infants
after but not before 7 months of age show enhanced attention to fearful
faces as opposed to happy faces. Event-related potentials have shown an
increased neural response to fearful faces also for older infants, however
the poor spatial localization capability of EEG has left unanswered questions. In this study, near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) was used to measure
infants’ brain activity during the presentation of happy, angry and fearful
faces. Separate groups of 5- (n = 8), 7- (n = 11), and 12- (n = 7) monthold infants were tested with a 46 channel NIRS system that recorded brain
activity over the frontal, temporal, and parietal cortex. The oxyhemoglobin responses to each emotional condition were calculated. Heart rate was
calculated from the NIRS signals as a measure of attention. Preliminary
analysis indicates that significant differences in oxyhemoglobin responses
were found in the right superior temporal cortex for 5-month-olds (Anger
> Fear, F[2, 14]=8.196, p < 0.01), the left parietal cortex for 7-month-olds
(Happy > Anger, F[2, 20]=3.516, p < 0.05), and in the left parietal cortex
for 12-month-olds (Fear > Anger, F[2, 12]=4.411, p < 0.05). Heart rate for
all ages and conditions decreased with stimulus presentation, indicating
orienting to the stimuli. These findings suggest that the neural architecture
of facial emotion processing is age-dependent.

G20
AN ERP STUDY OF EMOTIONAL FACE PROCESSING IN ADOLESCENTS Danielle Mascarelli1, Elvira Kirilko1, Kevin Constante1, Danielle diFi-

lipo1,2, Amy Medina1,2, Jill Grose-Fifer1,2; 1John Jay College of Criminal Justice,
CUNY, 2The Graduate Center, CUNY — Previous research indicates that face
perception is still developing in adolescents, especially in terms of facial
expression identification. In this study we examined developmental differences in the neural correlates of the face inversion effect for happy and
fearful face stimuli. We hypothesized that immaturities in magnocellular
visual pathways might contribute to less effective face processing in adolescents compared to adults. We recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) in

2014 Annual Meeting	
adolescents (14-17 years old) and adults (25-35 years old) while they looked
at a series of gray-scale images of happy faces, fearful faces, and chairs. The
images were presented either upright or inverted in order to investigate
the face inversion effect on the N170 and P1 components. The images were
also presented at three different filter settings: either unfiltered, or high
pass or low pass filtered, in order to accentuate the relative contributions
of the parvocellular and magnocellular visual pathways. High pass filtered
faces did not elicit face inversion-related ERP effects. However, unfiltered
and low pass filtered stimuli evoked a disproportionately larger amplitude
increase in the N170 and P1 components on face inversion, for the adults
compared to the adolescents. The difference in amplitude between groups
was most pronounced in the low pass filtered condition. These findings
suggest that immaturities in magnocellular pathways may affect configural
face processing in adolescents.

G21
ALTERED AMYGDALA FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY RATHER
THAN STRUCTURAL DECLINE PREDICTS AGE DIFFERENCES IN
SOCIOEMOTIONAL WELLBEING David Clewett1, Michiko Sakaki1, Hyun

Joo Yoo1, Mara Mather1; 1University of Southern California, 2University of Reading, 3University of Southern California, 4University of Southern California — In
spite of widespread structural decline in the brain, older adults exhibit a
paradoxical increase in socioemotional wellbeing. While this phenomenon
has garnered considerable interest in the aging literature, the structural and
functional correlates of this change remain controversial. The “aging-brain
model” posits that age-related structural decline in the amygdala leads to
reduced negative affect. In contrast, the “regulatory” hypothesis posits that
altered patterns of amygdala functional connectivity support older adults’
continued ability to regulate their emotions. To test these competing theories, we conducted complementary amygdala structural and resting-state
functional connectivity analyses across younger adults, middle-aged adults
and older adults. A factor analysis was used to identify shared variance
between behavioral inventories that assessed negative affect, including
depression and anxiety, to produce a socioemotional wellbeing score for
each participant. Whereas amygdala volume significantly declined with
age, this change did not relate to socioemotional wellbeing. Instead, greater
wellbeing in older adults was associated with altered functional connectivity between the amygdala and an area spanning the left middle and inferior frontal gyri. Aging was also characterized by functional decoupling
between the amygdala and catecholaminergic regions, such as the locus
coeruleus and basal ganglia. These findings suggest that altered amygdala
functional connectivity rather than structural decline contributes to greater
socioemotional wellbeing in older adults. Given evidence that dorsolateral
prefrontal regions down-regulate amygdala responsivity during emotion
regulation, this age-related shift may signify more efficient access to cognitive resources at rest and older adults’ retained capacity to regulate their
wellbeing during emotion processing tasks.

G22
INCREASED ALPHA BAND EEG ACTIVITY DUE TO INTERVENTION
IN ASD Bridget K. Dolan1, Amy V. Van Hecke1, Sheryl Stevens1, Ryan J. McK-

indles1; 1Marquette University — This study examined whether the Program
for the Education and Enrichment of Relational Skills (PEERS: Laugeson
et al., 2009) affected neural function via EEG in a randomized control trial
of adolescents with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Delta, theta, alpha,
beta, and gamma frequency bands were examined across frontal and temporoparietal regions, which are implicated in the “social brain” (Volkmar,
2011). Literature also suggests there is overgrowth and hyperactivity of
local neural networks (Kana et al., 2007; Minshew & Williams, 2007). Fifty-seven adolescents (11 to 16 years-old) with ASD (28 in the experimental
group and 29 in the waitlist control group) and 29 typically developing
adolescents who received no treatment were studied. EEG during an eyes
open, resting condition was taken at pre- and post-intervention for the
groups with ASD and on one occasion for the typically developing adolescents. At pre-treatment, there was a significant group by band (alpha)
interaction due to the ASD groups being identical and significantly differing from the typically developing group (F(8, 160) = 2.28, p < .05). At
post-treatment, a group by band (alpha) interaction indicated that all three
groups differed; however, the experimental ASD group was more similar
to the typically developing group while the ASD waitlist group remained

Poster Session G
unchanged at post-treatment (F(8, 162) = 2.76, p < .05). Increased alpha
band activity is associated with inhibition of unnecessary neural activity
(Rippon, 2006). Taken together, these findings suggest that the PEERS program increases alpha band activity, which is conducive for inhibition of
excess neural activity.

G23
ATTENTIONAL MODULATION IN RESPONSE TO EMOTIONAL STIMULI AMONG OLDER AND YOUNGER ADULTS Maryam Ziaei1, Nathalie

Peira2,3, Jonas Persson3,4,5; 1School of Psychology, University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Australia, 2Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, Sweden,
3
Department of Psychology, Stockholm University, Sweden, 4Aging Research
Center, Karolinska institute and stockholm University, 5Umeå Center for Functional Brain Imaging (UFBI), Sweden — Previous studies have demonstrated
that older adults show a positivity effect in attention and memory, with
reduced processing of negative stimuli relative to positive stimuli, compared to young adults. The brain mechanisms involved in age-related differences in attending to relevant emotional information while filtering out
irrelevant emotional information are still largely unknown. The main aim
of this study was to investigate age-differences in neural mechanisms of
attentional modulation in response to emotionally-valenced items. Young
and older adults were scanned with fMRI while performing a working
memory (WM) task in which they were instructed to attend to positive
or negative targets while inhibiting emotional or neutral distractors. We
found an overall reduction in WM performance for older adults compared
to young adults, although both age groups had enhanced WM performance during instructed attention compare to passive fixation. Moreover,
we found that older adults performed better when they were instructed
to attend to positive information while ignoring negative information,
while younger adults showed the opposite pattern. Brain imaging results
revealed increased activity in anterior cingulate and dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (dlPFC), and less activity in the insula during instructed attention
conditions, for older adults compared to young adults. Increased DLPFC
and anterior cingulate in older adults might reflect increased engagement
of dorsal attentional network compared to young adults. These brain and
behavioral results show insights into why older adults preferentially attend
to positive information, and contributes to current literature on attention
and emotion interaction in aging.

G24
HTR1B AND TPH2 GENE EXPRESSION PREDICTS THE CONTINUITY OF BEHAVIORAL DYSREGULATION FROM EARLY CHILDHOOD
TO LATE ADOLESCENCE Sara Levens1, Daniel Shaw2; 1University of North
Carolina at Charlotte, 2University of Pittsburgh — The ability to delay gratification in favor of long-term goals is an essential component of behavior regulation. Beginning in early childhood, behavior of children during
delay of gratification (DoG) tasks appears to assess a stable individual difference in emotional and behavioral control that may be an indicator of
cognitive control and (mal)adaptive behaviors in adulthood. In this study
196 males from the Pitt Mother & Child Project (PMCP; Shaw et al., 2003)
were observed in a DoG task at the age of 3½ followed by repeated assessments of internalizing and externalizing behavior through age 17. Participants were genotyped for 5-HTT, HTR1A, HTR1B and TPH2 serotonin
transporter polymorphisms, which have all been implicated in emotional
reactivity and psychopathology. Analyses were conducted to determine
whether serotonin gene expression moderated the association between
early emotion dysregulation and later adolescent internalizing and externalizing problems. Results reveal that when an individual possesses the
recessive CC allele pair of the HTR1B gene, behavioral dysregulation
during the DoG task predicts high externalizing behavior in adolescence.
Whereas when participants possess the CG allele pair of the HTR1B gene,
behavioral dysregulation during the DoG task predicts low externalizing
behavior in adolescence. In addition, individuals who possess the rare
TT allele pair of the TPH2 gene show a significant relation between anger
expression during the DoG task and externalizing and internalizing behavior in adolescence. Variants of the HTR1B and TPH2 genes therefore appear
to uniquely moderate the continuity of behavioral and emotional regulation from early childhood to late adolescence.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

231

Poster Session G	

G25
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PUBERTAL STATUS AND NEURAL
ACTIVITY DURING RISKY DECISION-MAKING IN MALE ADOLESCENTS USING FMRI Anne-Lise Goddings1, Lara Menzies1, Iroise Dumon-

theil2, Emily Garrett1, Russell Viner1, Sarah-Jayne Blakemore1; 1University College London, London, UK, 2Birkbeck College, University of London, London,
UK — During adolescence, risk-taking emerges as an important behaviour.
One prominent theory postulates that this increased risk-taking results
from a dissociation in maturational timing of the limbic system and the prefrontal cortex. It is hypothesised that the limbic system matures relatively
early in adolescence, in tandem with pubertal maturation, while the prefrontal cortex undergoes protracted development throughout adolescence,
independent of pubertal change. This goal of this study is to explore how
developmental changes in brain function when performing a risk-taking
fMRI (functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging) task are related to puberty,
independently of chronological age. Fifty-six male participants aged 12-14
years underwent fMRI scanning whilst performing a risk-taking task
(BART task, adapted from Lejuez et al., 2002). Participants completed four
six-minute runs of the task. Multiple indicators of pubertal development
were collected including self-reported pubertal status using Tanner stage
diagrams and the Pubertal development scale (Petersen et al., 1988), and
salivary hormone levels for testosterone, oestradiol and dehydroepiandrosterone. Participants also completed validated self-report questionnaires of
risk-taking, impulsivity and sensation-seeking. The analysis focused on a
main effect, across the entire group, of active risky decision-making compared to the control condition in regions including the prefrontal cortex
and limbic system, which are known to be involved in risky decision-making. We also investigated whether this activation was differentially related
to puberty across regions, using both group-wise and regression analyses.
This study adds to our understanding of models of risk-taking during adolescence.

G26
PERSONALITY IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE: RELATION OF HARM
AVOIDANCE TO MOOD AND DISEASE SEVERITY Mirella Diaz-San-

tos1, Gretchen Reynolds1, Patrick McNamara2, Sandy Neargarder1,3, Alice
Cronin-Golomb1; 1Boston University, 2VA Boston Healthcare System, 3Bridgewater State University — Parkinson’s disease (PD) has been associated with
personality traits including elevated harm avoidance (HA). HA is known
to co-occur with mood disorders in general, including in PD, raising the
question of whether HA is actually a trait or instead a clinical manifestation of PD related to disease severity. We examined HA, mood, and disease
severity in 23 non-demented PD patients (12F/11M) using, respectively,
Cloninger’s Temperament and Character Inventory (TCI); Beck Depression
Inventory-II and Beck Anxiety Inventory; and the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale. HA is one subscale of the TCI and comprises the dimensions of fatigability/asthenia, shyness with strangers, anticipatory worry/
pessimism, and fear of uncertainty. Regression analysis revealed that anxiety, depression and disease severity explained 57% of the variance in HA.
Examining HA by dimensions, we found significant correlations of disease
severity, anxiety and depression with fatigability and shyness with strangers but not with worry or fear of uncertainty. Together with recent research
reporting that fatigue in PD is related to reduced serotonergic function in
the basal ganglia and limbic structures, our results suggest that HA is not
a trait but rather may change with disease progression, current mood, and
interpersonal situations (e.g., tremor causing perceived social stigma). Further, fatigability and shyness with strangers are specific dimensions of HA
associated with mood. These results suggest that the dimensions of harm
avoidance may be uniquely related to mood symptoms at various stages of
the disease, which motivates the need for research on the neurobiological
mechanisms underlying mood and personality in PD.

G27
EXAMINING THE LINK BETWEEN PARENT PERCEIVED STRESS
AND CHILDREN’S MENTAL HEALTH SYMPTOMS Abigail Cyr1, Ally-

son Mackey1, Patricia Saxler2, John Gabrieli1; 1McGovern Institute for Brain
Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Harvard Graduate School
of Education — Early life stress has been indicated to have a negative effect
on cognitive development and mental health symptoms. Parental stress can

232

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
increase the negative effect of children’s stress. Here, we examined how
socioeconomic status and parental perceived stress predict mental health
symptoms in a diverse sample of young children. Subjects between the ages
of 4 and 7 participating in a larger neuroimaging study completed measures of cognitive ability and executive function, while parents completed
questionnaires about socioeconomic status (MacArthur), child mental
health symptoms (Child Behavior Checklist [CBCL]), children’s stressful
life events (Life Events Scale for Children, modified), and parental stress
(Perceived Stress Scale). Even after controlling for socioeconomic status
(maternal education), parent perceived stress significantly predicted children’s externalizing mental health symptoms. All mental health symptoms
were on a subclinical level. This finding points to the close relationship
between parental stress and mental health and the mental health of children, particularly in the early childhood, and to the important role parents
play in the early years of cognitive and emotional development.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
G28
DIFFERENTIAL NEURAL ACTIVITY FOR DEMOCRATS AND REPUBLICANS WHILE VIEWING NEGATIVE CAMPAIGN ADVERTISEMENTS John L. Sullivan1, Matthew D. Cravens2, Philip C. Burton1, Katie L.

Galazen1, Brenton W. McMenamin3, Chad J. Marsolek1; 1University of Minnesota, 2Dartmouth College, 3University of Maryland — In presidential election
campaigns, televised advertisements attacking the opposing candidate
are routine. Does brain activation differ between Democrat and Republican participants when they view such negative ads? We used functional
magnetic resonance imaging to examine partisan Democrats’ and partisan
Republicans’ brain responses to (a) negative ads attacking their own party’s
candidate and negative ads attacking the opposing party’s candidate and
(b) “fact-check” videos indicating whether the claims made in the negative ads can be independently corroborated as true or disproved as false.
Beta weights for each condition and for contrasts between conditions were
derived from a general linear model. Region of interest analyses were conducted with anatomically-defined regions of interest. Within left and right
amygdalae, an interaction was observed in which Democrat participants’
BOLD response to the negative ads attacking the Republican candidate was
larger than their BOLD response to the negative ads attacking the Democratic candidate. The opposite pattern was observed in Republican participants, but this difference was not significant. Additionally, in voxel-level
analyses, Democrat participants exhibited a greater BOLD response in
right amygdala for fact check videos that corroborated claims made in the
anti-Republican ads than for fact check videos that undermined claims in
the anti-Republican ads. This difference was not observed in Republican
participants for the analogous contrast.

G29
NEUROCOGNITIVE CORRELATES OF TRAUMA MEMORY RECALL

Geraldine A. Gvozdanovic1,2, Erich Seifritz2, Bjoern Rasch3; 1University of Zuerich, 2Hospital of Psychiatry, University of Zuerich, 3University of Fribourg —
Posttraumatic stress disorder is an anxiety disorder characterized by intrusive events. The encoding of traumatic events involves brain structures
including the amygdala, striatum, thalamus and anterior cingulate cortex.
Activity in these regions was associated with later intrusiveness of memories, as revealed by functional magnetic resonance (fMRI) studies using
the trauma film paradigm (analogue study for intrusion development) in
healthy participants. However, the neural correlates of implicit and explicit
recall of traumatic memories remain rather unclear. Therefore we investigated the neurophysiological factors of recall processes of traumatic memories in 50 healthy participants. We recorded brain activity using fMRI and
simultaneously measured skin conductance response, heart rate, respiratory rate as well as salivary cortisol. Participants watched either a traumaor a control-film. Subsequently, all participants performed a Sternberg
working memory task with emotional distracters (film, scrambled, negative
and neutral pictures) to investigate attention-related biases. Finally, intrusive film memories were directly recalled during a script - driven imagery task. Preliminary analyses reveal that the trauma film group displayed
an attention bias with faster reaction times during the Sternberg task than

2014 Annual Meeting	
the control film group. Additionally, the same neutral film pictures that
served as emotional distracters were rated significantly more negative and
arousing for the trauma group compared to the control group and were
associated with altered activity in emotion-related brain regions. Overall,
results reveal a trauma-memory related modulation of cognitive processes
underlying implicit and explicit memory recall.

G30
EFFECT OF EMOTION ON WORKING MEMORY IN PSYCHOTIC DISORDERS Amri Sabharwal1, Akos Szekely1, Roman Kotov1, Aprajita Mohanty1;

1
Stony Brook University — Working memory (WM) dysfunction and deficits
in emotional processing are prominent impairments in schizophrenia and
their biological correlates have been recommended as viable candidates
for biomarker development by cognitive neuroscience treatment research
to improve cognition in schizophrenia (CNTRICS) initiative. However, it
is unclear whether these potential biomarkers are indicative generally of
psychosis, or specifically of schizophrenia, and whether these neuroscience
measures can explain illness course and real-world functioning. In the present study we examined neural correlates of goal maintenance in WM in
the presence of emotional distractors and its specificity to schizophrenia.
Behavioral and functional magnetic resonance imaging data were recorded
while patients with schizophrenia (N=19), other psychoses (N=28), and
controls (N=29) performed a modified n-back WM task in which threatening and neutral distractors were presented. Preliminary results show that,
compared to neutral distractors, threatening distractors decrease accuracy
and increase reaction time, more so in patients than controls. There were no
significant differences between the two psychoses groups in their decline in
performance on threatening trials, suggesting that these deficits are not specific to schizophrenia. For threatening versus neutral distractors, we expect
to find greater amygdala recruitment, poorer dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
recruitment, decreased amplification of task-relevant stimulus priorities,
and increased distractor processing in relevant sensory cortices, effects that
will be amplified for patients versus controls, with no difference between
patient groups. This research will produce markers that are broadly reflective of psychoses and shed light on specific neural abnormalities underlying some key aspects of cognitive and emotional dysfunction in psychoses.

G31
MAKING DECISIONS WHEN EMOTIONS RUN HIGH: A MODULATORY ROLE FOR TRAIT ANXIETY Caroline J. Charpentier1, Benedetto De

Martino2, Tali Sharot1, Jonathan P. Roiser1; 1University College London, UK,
Royal Holloway University of London, UK — Emotional states can heavily
influence how we choose, judge, or evaluate things around us. However,
it is unclear how economic decisions are affected by incidental emotional
context. To investigate this question, we developed a novel functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) paradigm in which participants (N=28)
completed a decision-making task to assess loss aversion, where each
gamble was preceded by emotional (faces) or control (objects) primes. The
task was embedded in a memory task to avoid participants suspecting the
actual purpose of the study. We found that participants’ loss aversion, i.e.
their tendency to overestimate monetary losses relative to gains, was modulated by emotional context as a function of trait anxiety (negative correlation:, R=-.5, p=.007): emotional face primes, relative to objects, increased
loss aversion in low anxious individuals, and tended to decrease it for high
anxious participants (anxiety group * emotion interaction: F(1,26)=7.06,
p=.013). This result suggests that individual differences based on trait anxiety may influence whether emotional context, by modulating the impact of
potential losses, interferes with or promotes risky decision-making. Functional neuroimaging analyses revealed that trait anxiety modulates amygdala responses to emotional context, as well as emotionally-driven changes
in a prefrontal “loss aversion” signal that mirrored the change in behavior.
These findings shed light on a novel potential mechanism underlying the
modulation of economic decision-making by emotion.
2

G32
VALENCE BASED HEMISPHERIC SPECIALIZATION FOR EMOTIONAL PROCESSING IN A MODIFIED STROOP TASK Denise Evert1,

Mike Coffel1, Renee Schapiro1; 1Skidmore College — The right hemisphere
hypothesis posits that all emotional stimuli are processed more efficiently
within the right hemisphere. The valence hypothesis suggests that each

Poster Session G
hemisphere is specialized for processing specific emotions, the left hemisphere for positive emotions and the right hemisphere for negative emotions. The present study explored the effects of lateralization for emotional
processing using both experimenter- and participant-generated (self-relevant) positive, negative and neutral words in an Emotional Stroop task.
In this divided visual-field task, words in red, green or blue ink were presented vertically to the left (LVF) or right visual field (RVF). According to
the right hemisphere hypothesis, color identification was expected to be
more efficient for stimuli presented to the LVF both for positive and negative words. According to the valence hypothesis color identification was
expected to be more efficient for positive stimuli in the left hemisphere and
for negative stimuli in the right hemisphere. We expected that effects for
self-relevant stimuli would be larger than for experimenter stimuli. The
results indicated that response times to negative stimuli presented in the
LVF were significantly faster than to the RVF, implicating the right hemisphere in the processing of negative emotional information. Furthermore,
significantly faster response times to positive stimuli presented in the RVF
than the LVF were observed for males only, regardless of the source of
the stimuli. These results support a valence-based model for emotional
processing and highlight greater patterns of hemispheric lateralization in
males than females.

G33
EARLY CATEGORICAL AND LATER DIMENSIONAL PERCEPTION
OF FEAR Wen Li1, Emily C Forscher1, Yan Zheng1; 1University of Wiscon-

sin-Madison — How is a fear cue encoded and its intensity evaluated in the
brain? Here, we compared visual processing of neutral faces and fearful
faces that varied in 6 levels of intensity (in increments of 6% from 15% to
45% on a neutral-to-fearful morph continuum). Participants (N=45) viewed
these faces and performed a fear detection task while EEG data were
acquired. Fear detection hit rate showed a strong linear trend according
to fear intensity, t(33)=28.42, p<.001, with means of .13, .21, .42, .62, .76, .87
from 15 to 45%. Fitting a sigmoid curve on the group average hit rate, we
found 45% intensity to be suprathreshold, 21%-39% perithreshold and 15%
subthreshold. The P1 component (85-116 ms) at site Oz showed a strong
categorical fear perception effect: 45% fear was significantly elevated above
the other fear levels or the neutral condition, t(33)=-2.56, p<.05; while those
lower-intensity levels did not differ from the neutral condition or between
each other, p’s>0.12. However, the late positive potential (LPP; 400-600 ms)
at Pz and Cz showed a strong linear trend, parametrically mapping the
fear intensity in the faces, t(33)’s>6.26, p’s<.001. Importantly, we found that
the LPP amplitude closely tracked the fear hit rates across the six intensity
levels, r=0.46, Zr=1.77, p<.001. These findings thus suggest that early visual
perception of fear is highly categorical whereas late visual processing is
dimensional, parametrically evaluating the intensity of fear.

G34
AFFECTIVE BONDING IN BIOLOGICAL KNOWLEDGE

Fabio Gois1,
José Guilherme Brockington1, Hamilton Haddad1; 1University of São Paulo —
In students, misconceptions, or spontaneous conceptions, are comprehensions of natural phenomena forged by daily experience. These non-scientific viewpoints regarding the world are both solid and resistant to change.
Some researchers have proposed that conceptual change is not dependent
on purely rational processes. Evidence has shown that cognitive processes,
such as perception, attention, learning, memory, decision-making, and
problem resolution, are all strongly influenced by both rational aspects
and emotional factors. Furthermore, the latter are accompanied by somatic
markers, namely, corporal (physiological) reactions that act in the construction of emotional perceptive experiences. These markers are extremely
important in the decision-making process, and it is hypothesized that
before rationalizing a decision in terms of value analysis, they are instrumental in the unconscious reduction in the number of options that occurs.
In this study, we recorded the skin conductance responses (SCR) from biologists while responding to a questionnaire with 20 questions about Biology,
each one containing one scientifically correct alternative answer and three
popular misconceptions. Our results showed that in 12 of these questions,
biologists presented a higher SCR when confronted with misconceptions
compared to the SCR when confronted with scientific alternatives, even
choosing the scientifically correct answer in most of time. These results

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

233

Poster Session G	
suggest that the difficulties in promoting a real and long-lasting conceptual
change might be related with the affective bonding of students with their
spontaneous interpretations of the world.

G35
MORAL DOMAINS FROM THE BOTTOM UP: CONVERGENT EVIDENCE FROM BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR Alek Chakroff1, Michael Gravina1,

Theresa Tharakan1, Joshua Greene1; 1Harvard University — Are there different
“kinds” of morality? Attempts to carve the space of morality have settled
on conceptual clusters, such as harm, fairness (Haidt, 2007). However, these
distinctions were crafted a priori and supported by confirmatory analysis,
but do not naturally emerge in a data-driven analyses of moral judgments
(Graham et al., 2011). The present research uses data-driven analyses of
neural and behavioral data to discover structure in morality. 150 participants provided moral permissibility judgments for 90 unique moral violations. A principal components analysis on judgments returned a two
factor solution. The first factor was associated with universally agreed
upon violations, such as murder and theft; the second factor was associated
with “conservative” violations, such as homosexuality and obscenity. In
a separate fMRI experiment, 18 participants were scanned while viewing
the same 90 violations. Item beta images were submitted to a voxel clustering algorithm (Lashkari et al., 2010) to discover brain regions with similar
activation profiles across items. We requested two clusters, and found correspondence between these two clusters and the two behavioral factors.
Regions associated with the first factor (e.g., murder) included the medial
prefrontal cortex, precuneus, and superior temporal gyrus, regions associated with social cognition. In contrast, regions associated with the second
factor (e.g., homosexuality) included the supplemental motor area and left
inferior parietal lobe, regions implicated in action understanding. In sum,
behavioral and brain-based methods suggest that there are two kinds of
morality, each supported by distinct sets of brain regions.

G36
AN IMPLICIT MEASURE OF PRO-SOCIAL ATTITUDES: CAN A LIBERAL FEEL EQUANIMITY TOWARD A CONSERVATIVE? Jessica D.

Creery1, Susan M. Florczak1, Afsara B. Zaheed1, James W. Antony1, Ken A.
Paller1; 1Northwestern University — The attitudes people hold toward others
are not immutable. Through training, people can learn to increase pro-social attitudes. Progress in such training might be apparent in direct measures of pro-social behavior, in implicit attitudes, and/or in measures of
neural function. These three types of measures might provide complementary evidence about different aspects of learning. We developed measures
of implicit attitudes for use in assessing benefits of compassion training.
We capitalized on the fact that people tend to negatively judge those with
opposing political views. A person with strong liberal political ideals, for
example, might have difficulty treating two people equally if one holds
the same liberal views and the other holds opposing conservative views.
To assess degree of implicit equanimity, we administered a novel variant
of the implicit attitude test with concurrent recordings of brain potentials.
Participants (N=32) viewed positive and negative personal qualities (e.g.,
intelligent, rude), responding to each word according to valence (positive/
negative mapped to left/right hands, counterbalanced). Multiple views of
two individuals were intermixed, and participants responded left for one
and right for the other. In Match-Blocks, the same response was required
for positive words and same-view individuals; in Mismatch-Blocks opposite responses were required. Prior to the test, participants selected two
strongly held political issues (e.g., gay rights, healthcare). For each issue,
the same and the opposing view were ascribed to otherwise similar faces.
Predicted reaction-time differences were found as a function of Match/
Mismatch, and these differences declined after a session of compassion
training.

G37
INFORMATION PROCESSING STYLES CONTRIBUTE TO RELIGIOUS BELIEFS AND SPECIAL INTERESTS FOR BOTH NEUROTYPICAL AND AUTISM SPECTRUM CONTINUUM INDIVIDUALS
Chloe Jordan1, Catherine Caldwell-Harris1; 1Boston University — Possession of
systemizing traits (tendency to analyze systems) is negatively correlated
with strength of belief in God, while mentalizing traits are positively correlated with belief. These correlations explain reduced belief among autism

234

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
spectrum individuals. We extended these findings via an online survey of
neurotypical (N=118) and autism spectrum (N=70) individuals’ religious
beliefs and interests. Our goal was to investigate whether cognitive processing styles can explain diverse behaviors such as belief in God and special interests (measured using the Cambridge University Obsessions Questionnaire), and whether these associations are similar for neurotypical and
autistic spectrum individuals. Scores on Reading the Mind in the Eyes task
(measuring mentalizing) correlated positively with active practice of religious beliefs and intensity of belief in a personal God, higher power and
moral pattern to the universe. Autism Quotient scores correlated negatively
with these belief items. Systemizing Quotient scores were unrelated to
beliefs. Large granularity social interests such as food and drink correlated
positively with belief in a higher power and moral pattern to the universe.
Interests in sports and games, people, and nature (interests which allow
systemizing but can also facilitate socializing) correlated positively with
spiritual identity. Small granularity special interests (numerical systems,
sensory fixations) correlated positively with inner contemplation and private beliefs. Interest in numbers correlated positively with belief in a higher
power, moral pattern to the universe, life after death, and literal translation
of religious texts. These findings indicate complex relations between information processing styles, special interests and religious beliefs, across the
neurotypical/autism spectrum continuum.

G38
HUMOR RATINGS AND SKIN CONDUCTANCE RESPONSES TO
NATIVE AND FOREIGN LANGUAGE JOKES Catherine Caldwell-Harris1,

Ayse Aycicegi-Dinn2; 1Boston University, 2Istanbul University — Humor ratings for bilinguals reading native language vs. foreign language jokes were
compared to test the inverted-U theory of humor appreciation. This theory
proposes that jokes are funniest when processing difficulty is at an intermediate level where the ambiguity is resolvable but not too obvious. Jokes
using universal humor were selected from Turkish and English websites
and translated; none of the jokes were difficult for native speakers to understand. Turks studying to be English teachers or translators in Istanbul rated
jokes for funniness while skin conductance was recorded. Processing difficulty was measured using jokes’ reading times using different readers. We
expected skin conductance amplitudes to be reduced in a foreign language,
because joke processing may be more intellectual and less visceral. When
jokes were ranked by processing difficulty, the most difficult of the native
language jokes were rated as the funniest, presumably because their complexity placed them in the sweet spot of manageable processing difficulty.
Conversely, in a foreign language, those jokes with the highest procession
difficulty were rated as the least humorous, and the easiest jokes were rated
as funniest. Together the results support inverted-U theory, since humor
rating depended on manageable difficulty within a language. Skin conductance tracked humor ratings more tightly for native than for foreign language jokes. The implication is that humor in a native language taps bodily
response, but in a foreign language, humor ratings are filtered through
appraisal mechanisms, including an after-the-fact feeling of achievement at
‘getting’ a foreign language joke.

G39
THE INFLUENCE OF INTRANASAL OXYTOCIN IN THE PERCEPTION
AND MEMORY OF PAIN IN HUMANS Ivana Brito1, Jéssica U Silva1,
Gizela AM Zonta1, Ricardo Galhardoni1, Daniel C Andrade1; 1University of São
Paulo — Several studies have demonstrated the role of oxytocin in promoting social interaction in maternal, sexual, and social behavior, as well as in
the processes of memory and learning. Recent papers have also discussed
the influence of oxytocin in the modulation of pain perception. The purpose
of the present study was to investigate the effect of inhaled oxytocin on
the perception and memory of pain in humans. Placebo and experimental groups were subjected to the Quantitative Sensory Testing-QST before
and after oxytocin or placebo administration. These two groups received
intranasal oxytocin (24 IU) or saline 50 min before the second QST application. They received graduated thermal painful stimuli in order to identify
the cold and heat detection thresholds and the pain detection threshold.
Although no significant difference was observed for cold and heat detection
threshold, both groups showed an increase in heat pain detection threshold
in the second QST. This effect was only borderline (p = 0.5) for the placebo
group but strongly significant for the experimental group (p < 0.01). The
memory of perceived pain was accessed by using a visual analogical scale.

2014 Annual Meeting	
The results showed that the placebo group overestimated their memory of
heat painful stimuli (p < 0.01), while the oxytocin group showed no statistical difference. No significant difference between oxytocin and placebo
groups was obtained for the memory of cold painful stimuli. These findings suggest that central oxytocin selectively influences the perception and
memory of pain in humans.

G40
AUTISM SPECTRUM MEASURES PREDICT RESPONSE TO AFFECTIVE LANGUAGE IN HEALTHY YOUNG ADULTS Lesley Sand1, Elizabeth

Redcay1, Donald J. Bolger1; 1University of Maryland — Processing others’
emotional states is a fundamental component of successful social relationships, and language is a primary means by which emotions are conveyed
in daily interactions. The current study examined the relationship between
brain regions associated with inferring emotional content from language
and individuals’ social aptitude measured by scales used to characterize
social traits: the Autism Quotient (AQ) and the Social Responsiveness
Questionnaire (SRS). Functional MRI data was collected from 22 young
adults on an Emotional Inference Task (EIT). Emotionally valent (positive
or negative) and neutral (physical state) scenarios (~1100msec) were presented verbally in an event-related fMRI study, and subjects were made
a congruency (T/F) judgment. Brain responses were measured to the
story context from which the emotional inference was drawn separately
from the congruity judgment. Imaging results revealed that when hearing
affective scenarios, more “social” individuals (as revealed by AQ and SRS
scores) employ brain areas of the “saliency” or “emotion” network, specifically putamen, cingulate and supramarginal gyrus. In contrast, lower
social aptitude ratings predicted activations in the superior temporal gyrus
in emotional conditions. Further, the relationship is different for the AQ
and the SRS with emotional vs. neutral scenarios. These findings may have
important implications for autism, a neurobiological condition marked by
social deficits (Klin et al., 2002), emotional impairments (Begeer et al., 2008)
and pragmatic language weaknesses (Groen et al., 2008). Disentangling the
neural mechanisms underlying affective language processing in individuals with autism may be a useful step in understanding the nature of the
hallmark social disability.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional
responding
G41
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF SOCIAL LEARNING FROM FLEETING PAIN: A DYNAMIC CAUSAL MODELING ANALYSIS Yang-Teng

Fan1, Chenyi Chen2, Yawei Cheng2,3; 1School of Occupational Therapy, College
of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Institute of Neuroscience and Brain Research Center, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan,
3
Department of Research and Education, National Yang-Ming University Hospital, I-lan, Taiwan — Social learning is a primary way for organisms to adapt
and cope with their rapidly changing surroundings. Although the amygdala is central to classic fear conditioning, the neural mechanism of social
learning from fleeting experiences remains unclear. This study scanned
fMRI before and after first-hand experience (FH) as well as indirect experience through social-observational (SO) and verbal-informed (VI) learning of fleeting pain. Results showed that these three learning groups share
common activations in the brain regions implicated in emotional awareness, memory, mentalizing/perspective taking, and emotional regulation.
These included the anterior insula cortex (AIC), anterior cingulate cortex,
hippocampus, temporparietal junction (TPJ), and superior frontal gyrus
(SFG). Importantly, the AIC was recruited across these different ways of
learning procedures. Nevertheless, the amygdala activation was only
observed within the FH learning. Dynamic causal model (DCM) indicated
that SO and VI learning exhibited weaker connectivity strength from the
AIC to SFG than FH. These findings might benefit future studies exploring
the pathological mechanisms associated with socio-emotional disturbances
and help to improve knowledge in the area of socially transmission of emotional learning.

Poster Session G

G42
MISMATCHES BETWEEN SOCIAL OUTCOMES AND GOALS ACTIVATE THE DORSAL ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX Lane Beckes1,

Brenton W. McMenamin2, Chad J. Marsolek3, Angus W. MacDonald III3; 1Bradley
University, 2University of Maryland, 3University of Minnesota — When people
experience the social pain of social rejection, the dorsal anterior cingulate
cortex (dACC) typically is activated. This activation may be specific to
social rejection or it more generally may reflect mismatches between the
social outcomes of acceptance or rejection and the social goals of desiring to
be included or excluded. Here we tested these alternatives using functional
magnetic resonance imaging in a dating context. Participants imagined
being in a date seeking situation, and they viewed photos of the faces of
potential dates. Half of the faces were high in physical attractiveness and
half were low in physical attractiveness, enabling a manipulation of the
social goal of desiring or not desiring social interaction. Participants also
were informed about whether the individual in each photo had accepted or
rejected the participant for a date. Results indicated that dACC activity was
elicited by rejection from people who are high in attractiveness, confirming
previous social rejection results. However, dACC activity also was elicited
by acceptance from people who are low in attractiveness, supporting the
hypothesis that dACC activity reflects mismatches between social outcomes and goals. This activation in the dACC affected subsequent behavior; it predicted higher attractiveness ratings of the faces in a subsequent
task, particularly in the outcome/goal mismatch conditions.

G43
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY STUDY OF EMPATHY FOR PAIN
OF HUMAN AND ROBOT Yutaka Suzuki1, Lisa Galli2, Ayaka Ikeda3, Shoji

Itakura3, Michiteru Kitazaki1; 1Toyohashi University of Technology, 2Freie Universitaet Berlin, 3Kyoto University — Early emotional-sharing and late cognitive-evaluation neural mechanisms involved in empathy for pain of
human others are revealed by an event-related brain potential study (Fan
& Han, Neuropsychologia 2008). We aimed to investigate neural responses
to human other’s and robot’s pain. We measured EEG (10-20 system, right
and left earlobe averaged reference, 1kHz sampling, 0.5-30Hz band-pass)
of fifteen healthy adults observing either human- or robot-hand pictures
in either non-painful or painful situations such as a finger cut by a knife
(1s). Luminance of painful and non-painful pictures were controlled to be
identical. Participants were asked to judge whether the picture was painful
or not though all trials, but their response (mouse-click) was asked only for
random 15.2% trials. The responded trials were excluded from the analysis. We found that a late positive potentials (LPP, 500-550ms) was significantly larger in the painful situations than the non-painful situations
both for human and robot hands (F(1,14)=14.335, p=0.002) at Fz, Cz, and
Pz. Human painful pictures elicited larger LPP than robot painful pictures
at Fz (F(1,112)=5.515, p=0.021). P300 (300-350ms) was larger in the painful robot pictures than the painful human pictures (F(1,28)=7.601, p=0.010)
at Fz, Cz, Pz and Oz. Amplitude difference (painful - non-painful) of P1
(140-190ms) at Fz positively correlated with participants’ empathy scores
(EQ-SQ score) only for human hands (r=0.599, p=0.018). These results suggest that human observers elicit empathic neural responses for robot others
as well as human others, and that particularly the late cognitive-evaluation
neural mechanisms works differently for human and robots.

G44
CHARACTERIZING VALENCE CODING IN THE AMYGDALA Jingwen

Jin1, Aprajita Mohanty1, Christina Zelano2, Jay Gottfried2; 1Stony Brook University, 2Northwestern University — Although the amygdala is a major locus for
hedonic processing, it remains unclear whether it is selectively involved
in encoding positive valence, negative valence, or overall saliency. These
mixed research findings may be attributed to the use of conventional (univariate) functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) techniques, which
may not be sensitive enough to delineate finer-scale differences between
pleasant and unpleasant stimuli. Given the hedonic potency of olfactory stimuli and the amygdala’s anatomical proximity, the present study
combines high-resolution olfactory fMRI with pattern-based (multivariate) techniques to examine whether amygdala encodes an odor’s overall
saliency (valence-independent) or encodes specific information about an
odor’s hedonic tone (valence-dependent). Ten subjects smelled 9 odorants

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

235

Poster Session G	
that systematically varied in perceived valence (including 3 pleasant, 3 neutral, and 3 unpleasant odorants) while fMRI data were recorded. Representational similarity analyses (Kriegeskorte et al., 2008) showed a strong
correspondence between behavioral valence ratings (pair-wise Euclidian
distances across the 9 odors) and the fMRI pattern similarity in the amygdala (pair-wise linear correlations across the 9 odors) (r = 0.39, p <0.05).
Complementary pattern analyses revealed that the categorical representation of positive valence emerged significantly earlier in amygdala than the
categorical representation of negative valence (p <0.05). The present findings underscore the idea that both spatial (pattern) and temporal features
uniquely encode pleasant and unpleasant odor valence in the amygdala,
and help clarify perceptual mechanisms of affective processing in this brain
region.

G45
INTRINSIC CONNECTIVITY IN THE ORBITAL FRONTAL CORTEX
PREDICTS IMPROVED CONTROL OF ANXIETY AFTER NEUROFEEDBACK. Dustin Scheinost1, Teodora Stoica1, John John1, Xenophon Pap-

ademetris1, R. Todd Constable1, Christopher Pittenger1, Michelle Hampson1;
1
Yale University — Anxiety, a basic human emotion, can become pathologically dysregulated. Poorly controlled anxiety reduces the quality of life of
many healthy individuals and is a core component of neuropsychiatric conditions. Treatment of anxiety includes both pharmacological and behavioral
interventions. However, how best to match an individual to an intervention
remains an open question. We used a novel measure of resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI), labeled the intrinsic connectivity distribution (ICD), as a marker to predict improved control over
non-clinical anxiety from real-time fMRI neurofeedback. Rs-fMRI data was
collected from ten subjects before receiving multiple sessions of neurofeedback from the orbital frontal cortex (OFC) and from ten subjects receiving
matched sham feedback. For all subjects, a measure of change in control
of anxiety was collected after the neurofeedback. Voxel-wise connectivity
was estimated using a threshold free approach (ICD) that models the distribution of a voxel’ connectivity to the whole brain. To identify which brain
regions predict control over anxiety, correlation between ICD connectivity
and change in control of anxiety was calculated for each group. Neurofeeback subjects showed a significant increase in control of anxiety. Connectivity in the target OFC region was significantly correlated with these
improvements such that subjects with the highest connectivity in the OFC
gained the most control. Sham subjects showed neither an improvement
in anxiety nor a correlation between connectivity and improvement. These
results suggest that rs-fMRI connectivity could be used to aid in the matching of individuals to intervention and maximize individual treatment.

G46
EVOLUTIONARY MECHANISMS OF SENSATION SEEKING Amanda

Renfro1, Adam Lawson1; 1Eastern Kentucky University — Sensation seeking is
considered a biological based personality trait, in part because our curiosity
and need to seek new environments has been pivotal in the evolution of
our species (Zuckerman, 1994). The current study examined the impact of
sensation seeking (N=40) on the initial preference and subsequent memory
to positive valenced images. For pleasantness ratings, high sensation seekers rated high arousal images as more pleasant than low sensation seekers
(p <.05). For skin conductance responses (SCR) during the familiarity task,
high sensation seekers consistently had higher SCR activation than low
sensation seekers (p < .05). We also found interactions between SS and low
arousal unfamiliar images and high arousal familiar images (p < .05). For
both image types, high sensation seekers had higher SCR reactivity than
low sensation seekers. Both image types are considered moderately unique
since they stand out in either arousal (i.e., having high arousal) or in familiarity (being new), but not both. These results are in agreement with prior
research showing that high sensation seekers like moderately stimulating
items in their environment. Our research furthers this knowledge by showing moderate intensity stimulation is more advantageous than low or high
intensity at differentiating low and high sensation seekers. These results
may reflect a useful adaptation in human evolution, in which certain individuals (high sensation seekers) are drawn toward moderately stimulating,
beneficial resources. Individuals exhibiting such preferences would have
been instrumental in searching for and securing important resources for
survival, while avoiding highly dangerous situations.

236

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Other
G47
FACIAL EMOTION RECOGNITION IN PARKINSON DISEASE AND
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS Marilena Aiello1, Cinzia Cecchetto1, Roberto Eleo-

pra2, Daniela Cargnelutti2, Raffaella Ida Rumiati1; 1SISSA, 2AOU “Santa Maria
della Misericordia” — The grounded theory of emotion assumes that the
mechanism by which emotions of others are recognized critically depends
on the one individuals rely on when they experience and express their own
emotions. It follows that the inability to express or experience emotions
and to be aware of them, could determine a failure in recognizing emotions
experienced by others. This prediction was tested in two neuropsychological studies. In the first study, twelve patients with Parkinson disease (PD),
a neurodegenerative disorder that causes major motor impairments and
a reduction of facial expressivity (amimia), performed a facial emotional
recognition and discrimination task before and after deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus (DBS-STN), a surgery which improve significantly PD motor symptoms. In the second study, the same tasks were
administered to thirty patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), a neurological
disorder frequently associated to high levels of alexithymia, an inability to
describe and identify one owns feelings, and to distinguish feelings from
bodily sensations. In the first study, PD patients were found to be impaired
both at discriminate and recognize facial emotional expressions, in particular disgust. However, such deficit was not associated to the ability to imitate facial expressions or to amimia. Moreover after surgery PD patients
showed a reduction of motor symptoms, but did not show an improvement
of emotion recognition. In the second study, we observed that alexithymia
did not explain emotion recognition deficit observed in MS patients. In conclusion, our results cannot be easily explained within the grounded theory
of emotion.

G48
EFFECT OF TARGETED COGNITIVE TRAINING ON FACIAL EMOTION PROCESSING IN INDIVIDUALS AT HIGH RISK FOR PSYCHOSIS Hong Yin1, Emily Carol1, David Dodell-Feder1, Sarah Hope Lincoln1, Laura

Tully1, Matcheri Keshavan2, Larry Seidman2, Christine Hooker1; 1Harvard University, 2Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center/Harvard Medical School — It
has been reported that individuals at clinical high risk (CHR) for psychosis display impaired functioning in emotion processing. Such impairment
may affect social interaction and contribute to functional disability associated with schizophrenia-spectrum illness. Currently there is no effective
intervention that prevents functional deterioration or reverses the deficit
in CHR individuals. In this study, we investigated the effects of a targeted cognitive training (TCT) intervention that targeted both cognition
and social cognition on facial emotion processing in CHR group. Fourteen
CHR participants went through cognitive and behavioral evaluations and
functional MRI (fMRI) imaging before and after completing 40 hours of
computer aided TCT in 8 weeks. The TCT program was designed to target
specific neural functions, including face identification and emotion recognition, with gradual increase in difficulty that optimizes brain plasticity.
Effects of TCT were assessed for neural activity, cognitive performance and
global functioning. Compared to healthy controls (n=14, demographically
matched), CHR participants before TCT showed task related neural deficits in face processing regions. After training, CHR group demonstrated
improved cognition and altered neural activity in fusiform, supramarginal
and precentral gyri. The observed changes also correlated with improvements in cognition and global functioning in CHR group. Psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analysis indicated that TCT increased neural connectivity between face processing network and executive control regions
among CHR participants. Overall, our study confirmed the feasibility of
computer aided TCT and the initial evidence that it improved emotion processing related neural activity, cognition and functional outcome in CHR
individuals.

G49
EFFECTS OF MAO-A POLYMORPHISM ON BRAIN STRUCTURE:
A VOXEL-BASED MORPHOMETRY ANALYSIS IN HEALTHY SUBJECTS Imis Dogan1,2,3, Bianca Voß4, Martin Klasen4, Jessica Freiherr5, Klaus

Mathiak2,4, Ingo Vernaleken3,4, Florian Zepf2,3,6, Ute Habel3,4, Kathrin Reetz1,2,3;

2014 Annual Meeting	
1

Department of Neurology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, 2Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine, Research Center Jülich, Jülich, Germany,
3
JARA - Translational Brain Medicine, Germany, 4Department of Psychiatry,
Psychotherapy and Psychosomatic, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, 5Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, RWTH Aachen University,
Aachen, Germany, 6Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany —
Introduction: The neurobiological correlates of aggressive behavior and
impulsivity are not entirely understood. In addition to complex environmental and social circumstances, genetic risk factors have also been linked
to the emergence of impulsive aggression. In particular, the low expression
variant of the X-linked monoamine-oxidase-A (MAO-A) coding gene was
shown to be associated with an increased risk for violent behavior. In the
current analysis, we aimed to investigate the impact of functional polymorphism in the MAO-A gene on brain structure in healthy subjects. Methods:
Anatomical 3 Tesla MRI scans were acquired in 141 healthy volunteers (84
male; 19-62 years). Based on the allelic variants of the MAO-A polymorphism subjects were genotyped as hemizygous/homozygous carriers of
high enzyme-expression activity (MAOA-H: males=52; females=27), low
activity (MAOA-L: males=32; females=10) or as heterozygous females with
high/low activity (MAOA-L/H: 20). Voxel-based morphometry was used
to assess the effect of MAO-A genotype on regional gray matter volumes.
Results: In MAOA-L males compared to MAOA-H males, we found volume
reductions in the middle temporal gyrus, putamen and posterior cerebellum. In heterozygous females, gray matter volumes in the orbitofrontal,
medial prefrontal and inferior parietal cortex were increased. Post-hoc correlations with aggression questionnaires showed negative associations with
orbitofrontal volumes in MAOA-L individuals, whereas we found positive
associations in heterozygous females. Conclusion: Increased orbitofrontal
volumes in heterozygous MAOA-L/H females indicate a regulatory role of
the orbitofrontal cortex in emotional control and social adaptation particularly in heterozygous women, for which an intermediate neurobehavioral
response pattern between MAO-A homozygotes has been suggested.

G50
MATERNAL TRAUMATIC STRESS AND INFANT FACIAL EMOTION
PROCESSING: AN ERP STUDY Michelle Bosquet Enlow1,2, Alissa West-

erlund1, Charles A. Nelson1,2, Rosalind J. Wright3; 1Boston Children’s Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, 3Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai — Maternal
traumatic stress may impact early child development, although underlying
mechanisms are poorly understood. The influences of maternal traumatic
stress on child brain development may contribute, albeit research is sparse.
The purpose of the current study was to examine associations of maternal
trauma exposure and symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
and depression with the neural correlates of facial emotion processing in
infants. Participants included 20 sociodemographically diverse mother-infant dyads participating in a longitudinal examination of maternal stress
and infant development. At age 13 months, infants viewed alternating
pictures of neutral, fearful, and happy faces while event-related potentials
(ERPs) were recorded using 62 scalp electrodes. Mean amplitude of the P1
(low level differences in stimuli), N290 (face processing, encoding), P250
(orienting), P400 (face processing), and NC (attention) components were
examined in relation to maternal lifetime exposures to traumatic events
and symptoms of PTSD and depression when the infants were 6 months
of age. Results indicated that greater maternal trauma exposure was associated with larger N290 amplitudes to all emotions and larger P250 amplitudes to neutral and fearful faces. Greater maternal PTSD and depression
symptoms were associated with larger P400 amplitudes to neutral and
happy faces. Greater maternal PTSD symptoms were also associated with
larger NC amplitudes to happy faces. There were no consistent effects for
the P1 component. These findings suggest that maternal lifetime trauma
exposures and related psychiatric symptoms are associated with infant ERP
components related to early face processing and may represent one pathway for intergenerational stress effects.
2

G51
CHARACTERIZATION OF HUMAN DEFENSIVE BEHAVIORS FROM
THREAT DESCRIPTIONS Curie Ahn1, Laura Harrison1, Ralph Adolphs1; 1California Institute of Technology — Human defensive reactions to physically
threatening scenarios strongly parallel evolved rodent defensive behav-

Poster Session G
ior (Blanchard, 2001). These defensive behaviors depend upon situational
factors: for example, in highly dangerous scenarios, given the presence of
an escape route, rodents will choose flight over other defensive behaviors.
The aims of this present study were twofold. First, we sought to determine
whether human defensive behavior is predicted by situational factors in situations of social threat, e.g., blackmail. We also sought to test prior findings
in cases of animal and natural threats in which one cannot communicate
with the source of threat. Second, we aimed to construct a decision tree
characterizing how situational factors determine defensive behaviors. In an
online survey, 110 male and female subjects selected and ranked up to three
defensive behaviors to 29 threatening scenarios. Scenarios differed with
respect to: dangerousness, escapability, ambiguity, distance, and immediacy of threat; the presence of a hiding place; the ability to communicate
with, mitigate, or harm the source of the threat; and the ability of others to
help. Pearson product-moment correlations between external ratings and
defensive behaviors confirmed that situational factors predict defensive
behavior; these predictive patterns mostly generalize between social and
physical threat. A data-driven decision tree successfully organized these
patterns to predict the most common choice for each scenario. Serving as
a general model for the decision processes involved in human defensive
behavior, these results may also serve as a tool for assessing individuals
impaired in detecting threat.

G52
REDUCED MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTICAL VOLUMES ASSOCIATED WITH DEPRESSIVE TRAITS IN HEALTHY INDIVIDUALS Emily

DePetro1, Joshua Maxwell1, Joshua M. Carlson1; 1Northern Michigan University
— Research has shown that patients diagnosed with Major Depressive
Disorder have reduced gray matter volume in a variety of brain regions
including the hippocampus, basal ganglia, and medial prefrontal cortex.
In particular, a number of recent meta-analyses have consistently observed
reduced medial prefrontal cortical volumes in major depression, which has
been hypothesized to be linked to stress-initiated hypercortisolemic glucocorticoid-mediated cell death. In healthy individuals, stress is associated
with lower levels of gray matter volume in the medial prefrontal cortex.
However, it remains unclear as to whether variability in normative levels
of non-clinical depression is related to variability in medial prefrontal
cortex gray matter volume. Therefore, the aim of this study was to examine whether non-clinical levels of depression were related to medial prefrontal cortical volumes. In a sample of 42 normative individuals, we used
T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging to measure brain volume and
assessed participants’ level of depression via a self-report questionnaire.
Voxel-based morphometry was used to identify voxels which correlated
with depressive symptoms. We found a cluster within the medial prefrontal cortex where greater levels of depression were associated with lower
gray matter volumes. This relationship with the medial prefrontal cortex
was not observed for measures of anxiety and stress - suggesting a unique
association between medial prefrontal gray matter volume and depression.
The results of this experiment support the hypothesis, that even within a
non-clinical sample, individuals who have higher levels of depressive traits
tend to have lower levels of gray matter volume in the medial prefrontal
cortex.

G53
WHEN WHITE BEARS AND MONEY INFLUENCE SELF-CONTROL:
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EGO-DEPLETION AND MOTIVATIONAL
COUNTERACTION Matthias Luethi1, Julia Binder1, Malte Friese2, Peter

Boesiger3, Roger Luechinger3, Bjoern Rasch1,4; 1University of Zurich, Switzerland, 2Saarlandes University, Germany, 3Swiss Federal Institue of Technology, Switzerland, 4University of Fribourg, Switzerland — The strength model
of self-control postulates that the ability to control oneself depends on a
limited resource. Repeated acts of self-control can lead to impairments in
performance and associated reductions in prefrontal brain activity. Motivational incentives counteract the ego-depletion effect, while the neural
correlates of this counteraction are still unknown. Here, we used functional
magnetic resonance imaging to identify the neural correlates of motivation-induced benefits on self-control depletion effects. To manipulate
self-control resources, half of the participants initially suppressed thoughts
of white bears (depletion group), whereas the other half did a similar task
without thought suppression (control group). In a subsequent Stroop task,
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

237

Poster Session G	
participants either received a monetary reward for good performance
(high-motivation group) or did not (low-motivation group). In accordance
with the strength model of self-control, participants in the low-motivation
group performed worse in the Stroop task after prior self-control depletion as compared to non-depleted controls. In contrast, in the high-motivation group, the depletion effect was abolished, i.e., highly motivated and
depleted participants performed as well as non-depleted participants. On
the neural level, self-control depletion reduced activity in the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex independent of motivation, whereas boosting motivation
after depletion resulted in activity increases in additional brain areas (secondary visual areas, anterior prefrontal cortex). Our data suggest that motivation-induced benefits after ego-depletion might be due to the recruitment of additional brain areas for task processing, with depletion-induced
decreases in prefrontal brain activity still being present, thereby providing
a first hint that depletion and motivation might be two distinct processes.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development
& aging
G54
THE DEPLETION OF SEX STEROID HORMONES DURING THE
MENOPAUSAL TRANSITION IS RELATED TO ALTERED PREFRONTAL CORTEX SIGNALING DURING WORKING MEMORY Emily

Jacobs1,2, Sue Whitfield-Gabrieli3,4, Blair Weiss1, Anne Klibanski4, Jill Goldstein1,2,4; 1Brigham & Women’s Hospital, 2Harvard Medical School, 3Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 4Massachusetts General Hospital — Historically,
basic neuroscience research on sex steroids focused on their role in reproduction, but a rapidly growing body of work from nonhuman primates
has established estradiol’s influence on synaptic organization within the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). Consistent with these findings,
recent work from our group demonstrated significant estradiol-dependent
effects on DLPFC fMRI BOLD and working memory performance in young
women. Given estradiol’s regulation of memory circuitry, the loss of ovarian estrogens during menopause likely plays a significant role in shaping
age-related neural changes in mid-life. To investigate this, healthy mid-life
men and women (N=114; age range 46-53) who were part of a larger prospective birth cohort were enrolled in a follow-up fMRI study. Detailed
menstrual cycle histories in conjunction with fasting serum samples collected on the morning of the scan day were used to determine pre/peri/
post-menopausal status of women. Participants performed a visual working memory task during fMRI scanning. Results show robust changes in
DLPFC function over the menopausal transition, despite minimal variance
in chronological age. Women exhibited exaggerated DLPFC activity as
estradiol levels declined and FSH levels increased. These results are consistent with our previous work in young women, showing exaggerated
DLPFC activity under low versus high estradiol conditions (despite comparable performance), a putative marker of neural efficiency. We see the
same inefficient DLPFC response in mid-life as women lose ovarian estrogens. These data underscore the importance of studying adults early in the
aging process in order to understand sex-specific mechanisms that shape
cognitive aging trajectories and, ultimately, disease-risk.

G55
HOW HARD IS IT GOING TO BE? ERP EVIDENCE FOR THE ADJUSTMENT OF COGNITIVE CONTROL DURING A FLANKER TASK IN
YOUNG ADULTS, BUT NOT CHILDREN Daniela Czernochowski1,2, Lydia

Schiffmann2; 1Technical University Kaiserslautern, 2Heinrich Heine University
Düsseldorf — According to the conflict monitoring account, cognitive control is up-regulated upon the detection of response conflict. Hence, interference costs are particularly high when incongruent stimuli are unexpected.
Given well-established difficulties in interference control in children, little
is known about the developmental trajectory of regulating cognitive control
according to task context. Specifically, it is unclear if children are unaware
of increased conflict and/or unable to recruit cognitive control. Here, we
focus on the ability to inhibit irrelevant information (flanker stimuli) or
responses (NoGo-Trials). Task context was manipulated by using frequent
or rare incongruent trials and by reversing response rules. Young adults,
older children (aged 10 years) and younger children (aged 7 years) com-

238

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
pleted a flanker task while event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded.
The results confirmed children’s behavioral difficulties, in particular with
inhibiting No-Go responses. RT-interference costs were age invariant. By
contrast, accuracy-interference costs were smaller for non-reversed rules
and frequent incongruent trials for adults only; this pattern was absent for
older children and reversed for younger children. ERPs suggest that conflict detection is functionally mature even in young children; shorter latencies of the error-related negativity for children compared to adults suggest
the delayed execution of a motor response after decision-making. Together,
these results indicate that all age groups were able to detect response conflict and respond more slowly to incongruent flankers. However, increased
conflict did not lead to increased cognitive control on the next trial for children, as younger children in particular were unable to translate conflict into
correct response selection.

G56
THE ROLE OF SLEEP ON NEXT DAY COGNITION Gillian

Cooke1, Jim
Monti , Chelsea Wong , Neal Cohen , Arthur Kramer ; University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign — Sleep spindles have been associated with grey matter
volume in regions of the brain that are involved in cognition, the hippocampus, basal forebrain and orbital frontal cortex. Additionally, sleep spindles have been associated with self-reported measures of sleep. The present
study aimed to investigate the influence of self-reported measures of sleep
on next day cognitive performance. Furthermore, we wanted to examine
the impact that age has on this relationship as aspects of both cognition
and sleep physiology change with age. D-prime scores from a relational
memory task (face-scene) and a cognitive control task (AX continuous performance task (AX-CPT)) of 99 middle aged and older adults (40-81 years)
were used to examine the impact of sleep on next day cognition. Shorter
time to fall asleep and younger age was associated with better relational
memory performance. Furthermore, younger people had less difficulty
falling asleep. Controlling for gender and education, time to fall asleep
explained 5% of the variance in relational memory performance. Adding
age increased this to 11%, and significantly predicted relational memory
performance. In contrast, although AX trial accuracy was associated with
younger age, there was no relationship between AX accuracy or AX-CPT
d-prime and time to fall asleep. These data suggest dissociation between
the types of cognition that are influenced by sleep; this is likely due to influence of sleep on the hippocampus. Since disruptions to sleep physiology
and relational memory performance are evident with aging, interventions
designed to improve age-associated sleep disruptions may positively influence relational memory performance.
1

1

1

1

1

G57
RESTING-STATE MRI IN ADOLESCENTS FROM SOCIOECONOMICALLY DIVERSE BACKGROUNDS: RELATION OF FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY TO COGNITIVE ABILITIES AND EDUCATIONAL
OUTCOMES. Julia Leonard1, Amy S. Finn1, Allyson P. Mackey1, Carlo de

los Angeles1, John Salvatore1, Calvin A. Goetz1, John D.E. Gabrieli1, Susan
Whitefield-Gabrieli1; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology — A fundamental question in developmental cognitive neuroscience is how brain maturation supports the development of cognitive abilities and how the environment shapes this relationship. The present study explored this question
with resting-state functional MRI in a socioeconomically diverse sample
of teenagers. Seventy-six students (mean age = 14.5), from whom we collected standardized test data, participated in a resting state scan and completed working memory, and math tests outside of the scanner. Greater
negative correlations between time-series data in the medial prefrontal
cortex (MPFC, a key node of the default mode network) and left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC, key node of the fronto-parietal network)
were related to superior performance on a working memory test (r(72)=.224 p=.039), a standardized math test (collected in schools, r(76) = -.227, p
= .049) and a separate math test (collected in the lab; r(71)=-.271, p=.022).
Breaking the sample into low-socioeconomic status (SES) and high-SES
groups based on receiving free or reduced lunch from the public school
system, revealed further insights. The groups did not differ on their average correlation between the MPFC and DLPFC. However, the brain-behavior relationships listed above were observed only in the high-SES group.

2014 Annual Meeting	
These findings suggest that while we have a good neural index of cognition
and achievement in high-SES populations, these relationships have yet to
be fully elucidated in low-SES populations.

G58
PROACTIVE CONTROL CAN BE ENCOURAGED DURING CHILDHOOD Nicolas Chevalier1, Shaina Martis2, Tim Curran2, Yuko Munakata2;

1
University of Edinburgh, 2University of Colorado Boulder — Young children
engage cognitive control reactively only after events requiring control have
occurred, even when they could have anticipated and proactively prepared
for upcoming events. The present study examined whether proactive control can be encouraged in children showing this reactive control bias. To
this end, reaction times, EEG and pupil dilation were collected while 36
5- and 28 10-year-old children completed three conditions of a task-switching paradigm, varying in the possibility to process task cues before or after
stimulus onset. Specifically, in the “Impossible” condition, the cue and
target were simultaneously presented, preventing proactive preparation
based on the cue. In the “Possible” condition, the cue was presented early,
allowing proactive preparation, but remained visible after stimulus onset,
hence also allowing reactive control. Finally, early cue presentation was
terminated on target onset in the “Encouraged” condition, hence providing a stronger incentive to prepare proactively. Ten-year-olds engaged in
proactive preparation whenever it was possible, as shown by shorter reaction times, increased cue-related pupil dilation (reflecting greater mental
effort) and more pronounced late posterior positivity (an ERP associated
with proactive task preparation) during the cue-stimulus interval in both
the “Possible” and “Encouraged” condition, relative to the “Impossible”
condition. In contrast, 5-year-olds showed faster RTs, greater pupil dilation and a more pronounced posterior positivity only in the “Encouraged”
condition. These findings suggest that 5-year-olds overreliance on reactive
control results from a meta-cognitive failure to determine which control
mode is most adaptive for the task at hand.

G59
EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING AND ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE: FAMILY
HISTORY PREDICTS PERFORMANCE ON THE WISCONSIN CARD
SORTING TEST Kathleen Hazlett1, Christina Figueroa1, Kristy Nielson1,2;
1

Marquette University, 2Medical College of Wisconsin — Alzheimer’s disease
(AD) research typically focuses on memory; however, executive functioning (EF) deficits are also common among AD patients and are associated
with decreased functionality in activities of daily living, an important criterion in diagnosing AD. Using modified Wisconsin Card Sorting Tests
(WCST), previous research indicates that the number of categories achieved
(CA) and perseverative errors (PE) distinguish AD groups based on disease severity; that CA, unique errors, and total errors (TE) differentiate
patients with AD, vascular dementia, and controls; and that patients with
AD and MCI exhibit more perseveration than controls. Results based on the
traditional WCST corroborate these findings. Given the sensitivity of the
WCST in the context of AD, examining differences in performance among
at-risk cognitively intact individuals (i.e., those with positive family history (FH) of AD) would provide valuable insight into preclinical cognitive
changes. The current study examined WCST performance in 24 FH- and
17 FH+ older adults. Results revealed significant group differences for TE,
PE, non-perseverative errors (NPE), CA, and conceptual level responses,
with the FH+ group consistently exhibiting poorer performance. Moreover,
hierarchical regression analyses indicated that, after accounting for demographic variables, FH significantly predicted TE, PE, NPE, and CA. These
results speak to the potential role of EF in bolstering our understanding of
early cognitive markers of future decline. Expanding our understanding of
the relationship between additional domains of cognitive functioning (i.e.,
EF) and AD may allow for better prediction of cognitive functioning and
potential progression to AD.

G60
INTERACTIVE MENTAL AND PHYSICAL EXERCISE FOR OLDER
ADULTS: EXECUTIVE FUNCTION BENEFITS Cay Anderson-Hanley1,

Nikita Shah1, Katherine Cohen1, Michael Hogan2, Paul Arciero3; 1Union College
(NY), 2National University of Ireland, Galway, 3Skidmore College — Dementia
is on the rise around the world and while a “cure” is elusive, research has
shown that exercise can play a significant role in prevention or amelioration

Poster Session G
of decline (Colcombe et al., 2003). Less is known about the combination of
mental and physical exercise, particularly when intertwined in interactive
exergaming, but one study has reported a greater cognitive benefit among
exergaming older adults than those engaged in traditional exercise (Anderson-Hanley et al., 2012). This study examined the impact of three months
of interactive mental and physical exercise for older adults. Twenty-eight
older adults (mean = 85.1 years old; SD = 5.9) were trained to pedal a stationary bike with an interactive virtual-reality display. Executive function
was measured pre- and post-exercise (Color Trails 2, Stroop C, and Digit
Span Backwards). Twenty-two participants completed the study; of those,
ten participated regularly and vigorously consistent with the ACSM standard and thus were considered to have received an adequate “dose” of
interactive mental and physical exercise. Exercisers meeting criteria for
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) made significantly greater gains on two
of the three tests (Stroop C, p = .02; Digit Span Backwards, p = .05) when
compared with normative older adults. Results suggest interactive mental
and physical exercise can be particularly effective among those older adults
already experiencing some cognitive decline. Future research could further
explore benefits for MCI of various types if interactive mental and physical
exercise.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Other
G61
MOBILE COGNITIVE TRAINING REGIME IS BEST TAILORED BY
AGE GROUP Conny Lin1, Catharine H. Rankin1, Paul D. Nussbaum2; 1Univer-

sity of British Columbia, 2University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine — Consistent cognitive training tasks can potentially produce transferrable cognitive improvement; mobile cognitive training applications such as Fit Brains
enable more frequent access to short cognitive training sessions (3-5mins).
To understand how mobile training regimes influence performance for different age groups, we investigated score performance from twelve cognitive tasks each targeting 1 of 5 categories, logic, memory, concentration,
visual and speed. From 20,660,413 game scores generated by 727,390 unique
Fit Brains users from 20-79 years old, we analyzed the effect of age on the
initial performance, performance improvement over repeated training,
and performance decay as a factor of lower training frequency. Initial performance declined significantly with age, except for logic tasks, for which
30-40 years old initially performed better than 20 years olds. Performance
improvement for memory, concentration and speed significantly interact
with age, and, not surprisingly, performance improvement in memory is
the most negatively affected by age, and logic the least affected. Analysis
for performance decay related to lower training frequency showed that,
for all ages, speed and concentration suffers the most from less frequent
training, and visual suffers the least. As age increases, maintenance of
concentration and memory performance requires the most frequent training compared to other tasks. In conclusion, this study showed that all age
groups would benefit from daily concentration and speed training, and that
a mobile cognitive training regime is best tailored by age group.

G62
WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY FROM OPENNESS TO PSYCHOSIS: SUPPORT FOR A DIMENSIONAL MODEL OF PSYCHOTIC
SPECTRUM ILLNESS Rachael Grazioplene1, Robert S. Chavez2, Colin G.

DeYoung1; 1University of Minnesota, 2Dartmouth University — Diffusion imaging investigations of psychotic-spectrum illnesses have revealed specific
changes in frontal and limbic white matter regions that are associated with
cognitive disregulation; however, similar neural markers appear in both
unaffected relatives and in psychologically healthy individuals with high
levels of personality traits related to psychosis (e.g. Openness to Experience; Nelson et al., 2013 & Jung et al., 2010). Absorption, a trait measured by
the Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire (MPQ), is closely linked
to Openness, and measures individual differences in proneness to altered
states of cognition; Absorption has also been linked to aspects of psychosis
liability, such as perceptual dysregulation and magical thoughts (DeYoung
et al., 2012). We sought to replicate and extend research by Jung et al.
(2010) by examining white matter correlates of MPQ Absorption in a large
nonclinical adult sample (N=229; 109 female) using high quality diffusion
weighted imaging data. Based on previous findings, we hypothesized that
Absorption would be inversely associated with fractional anisotropy in the
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

239

Poster Session G	
Uncinate Fasciculus and the Anterior Thalamic Radiation. These hypotheses were supported: Results of a whole brain regression of fractional anisotropy against MPQ Absorption (controlling for age, sex, and IQ) indicate an
inverse association between FA and trait Absorption in the anterior portions of the left Anterior Thalamic Radiation, the left Uncinate Fasciculus,
and the left Forceps Minor. These findings support the notion that liability
to psychosis is distributed across the population, is evident in brain structure, and manifests as normal personality variation at subclinical levels.

G63
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SENTENCE COMPREHENSION:
EFFECTS OF THE POSITION OF EVENT-STRUCTURE CUES. Jose-

fine Karlsson12, Anne Helder12, Paul van den Broek12, Linda Van Leijenhorst12;
Leiden University, the Netherlands, 2Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition,
the Netherlands — Human language can present consecutive events in
non-chronological order. Linguistic cues, such as “before” and “after”
function as event structure cues (ES-cues), signaling temporal order. Comprehension of non-chronological sentences has been shown to involve
increased activation of prefrontal regions associated with cognitive control. However, previous studies only examined sentence-initial ES-cues,
and recent behavioral findings from our lab suggest that readers use different reading strategies for sentence-initial and sentence-medial ES-cues.
The present study examined the effects of chronology as well as ES-cue
position in young adults (ages 19-27, N=21). We collected fMRI data while
participants read 84 sentences in which chronology and ES-cue position
were manipulated. Sentence reading times did not differ as a function of
sentence chronology, and were significantly slower for sentence-initial
compared to sentence-medial ES-cues. Preliminary fMRI analyses show
that the contrast of Non-chronological > Chronological sentences resulted
in activation in the right Anterior Insula, left Lingual Gyrus and left Frontal
Pole. The contrast of Medial > Initial ES-cue sentences resulted in activation
of a large bilateral cluster in the Occipital Cortex, as well as activation in
the right Postcentral-, left Precentral-, left Superior Temporal-, and right
Inferior Frontal Gyri. Even though these data confirm that comprehension
of non-chronological sentences requires additional processing, they reveal
the importance of ES-cue position for sentence comprehension. Sentences
with initial- and medial ES-cues result in differences at both the behavioral
and neural level. These results suggest that ES-cue position is an important
factor which could influence readers’ comprehension strategies.

1

G64
NEURAL CORRELATES OF INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN COHERENCE MONITORING DURING READING. Anne Helder1,2, Josefine Karls-

son1,2, Paul van den Broek1,2, Linda Van Leijenhorst1,2; 1Leiden University, the
Netherlands, 2Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, the Netherlands — Successful comprehension of texts is a key complex cognitive ability. It requires
the construction of a coherent mental representation of a text by a reader,
which involves continuous coherence monitoring. Individual differences
in reading comprehension ability are related to differences in the ability to
notice when coherence is disrupted. This study examined the neural correlates of individual differences in coherence monitoring during reading.
We collected fMRI data while young adults (N = 31, ages 19-27) read 32
six-sentence narratives that were presented sentence-by-sentence in a slow
self-paced event-related design. Half of the narratives contained a break in
coherence. Behavioral results show increased reading times for inconsistent
compared to consistent target sentences (p = .002). The contrast of Inconsistent > Consistent target sentences resulted in a network of significantly
active clusters (p < .05, cluster corrected) in the bilateral Angular Gyri and
Temporal Poles, Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex (DLPFC), Dorsomedial Prefrontal Cortex (dmPFC), and left Anterior Cingulate Cortex (ACC). Whole
brain regression analyses on this contrast revealed that activation in DLPFC
and ACC was positively correlated with reading ability measured outside
of the scanner: better comprehenders recruited these regions more when
reading an inconsistent target sentence. These results suggest that individual differences in activation patterns in cognitive control regions such as
the DLPFC and ACC during reading are related to individual difference in
reading comprehension abilities. These results help us to gain more insight
in the brain regions involved in coherence building processes that are crucial for successful comprehension of texts.

240

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

G65
FRACTIONATING EXECUTIVE CONTROL IN THE HUMAN BRAIN

Sabrina Lemire-Rodger1, Nathan Spreng2, Dhawal Selarka1, Gary Turner1;
1
York University, 2Cornell University — Executive control processes have
been found to cluster around three factors: updating, inhibition and task
switching. Few neuroimaging studies have directly contrasted two of these
processes. To date, none have examined convergent and divergent patterns
of neural activity for all three using matched tasks to investigate brain
activity during updating, inhibition and task switching in a single scanning protocol. Here, we used a novel paradigm that directly manipulated
executive control demands while keeping all other demands constant to
assess the neural correlates of these three executive processes. Participants
underwent fMRI scanning while performing updating, inhibition and control tasks. A multivariate analysis of the neuroimaging data revealed two
significant patterns of brain activity dissociating (i) task switching from
updating and inhibition, and (ii) executive function from control tasks. The
first pattern included laterality differences in inferior frontal brain regions
(Left hemisphere = task switching; right hemisphere = inhibition & working memory). The second significant pattern of brain activity dissociated
executive control tasks, mediated by the extended frontoparietal control
network from the baseline control task, which showed greater engagement
of the midline structures associated with the default network. This study
represents the first investigation of the fractionation of executive processes
in the human brain examining the full range of executive control processes.
These data suggest a hybrid architecture of executive control representation - lateralized differences in frontal brain regions associated with specific
control processes as well as common recruitment of frontal-parietal brain
regions, common to all executive control demands.

G66
OUTCOME ANTICIPATION AND THE ONLINE CONTROL OF STIMULUS-BASED ACTION - AN FMRI STUDY Steffi Frimmel1, Uta Wolfen-

steller1, Hannes Ruge1; 1Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany
— A fundamental prerequisite of goal-oriented action is to correctly recognize contingencies between a response (R) that produces a specific outcome
(O) in a specific stimulus situation (S). Previous studies have shown that
such triple S-R-O associations can be linked up very fast. The present study
investigated the brain activation dynamics linked to the initial incremental strengthening of S-R-O associations during a short period of incidental
learning using functional magnetic resonance imaging. In order to determine the specific contribution of the full triple S-R-O contingency, we also
realized two control conditions in which the triple contingency was reduced
to R-O contingency and S-R contingency, respectively. We found that learning the triple S-R-O association was specifically linked to enhanced activation in the supplementary motor area (SMA), the anterior caudate and the
central orbitofrontal cortex (OFC). Furthermore, the S-R-O-related caudate
activation was associated with relative response time differences between
the S-R-O condition and the S-R condition. Together, these results suggest
that contingent outcomes are only integrated into action selection when
they can be anticipated based a contingently preceding stimulus. This integration seems to rely on an interplay between brain areas involved in basic
voluntary motor control processes (SMA) and brain areas involved in a
diverse range of outcome-related processes (caudate, OFC).

G67
DAYTIME SLEEPINESS IS ASSOCIATED WITH DECREASED INTEGRATION OF REMOTE OUTCOMES ON THE IGT Elizabeth Olson1,2,

Mareen Weber1,2, Olga Tkachenko1, William D. S. Killgore1,2; 1McLean Hospital, 2Harvard Medical School — Sleep loss is associated with deficits in basic
aspects of attentional control such as processing speed and vigilance, in
both healthy and clinical populations. Recently, deficits in higher-level
aspects of executive functioning and decision-making also have been
described. For instance, multiple research groups have reported impairment in Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) performance, both in healthy controls
experiencing acute sleep deprivation and in individuals with sleep disorders. Traditional metrics of assessing IGT performance such as subtracting good minus bad deck choices do not discriminate between multiple
underlying features that may contribute to changes in task performance.
By using the expectancy valence model, it is possible to fit parameters to
describe attention to gains versus losses, emphasis on recent versus remote

2014 Annual Meeting	
outcomes, and behavioral randomness. In the current study, 32 participants
ages 18 to 45 completed the IGT as well as questionnaires concerning sleep
patterns and fatigue. Individuals who reported greater daytime sleepiness
on the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) had higher values of the updating
parameter, reflecting decreased integration of remote versus recent outcomes in decision-making, Spearman’s r (30) = 0.390, p = 0.027. Results suggest that sleep loss affects IGT performance by shortening the time horizon
over which decisions are integrated. This finding has important implications for healthy individuals experiencing sleep loss, as well as for clinical
populations with sleep disorders.

G68
HOT OR NOT? PERCEIVED ATTRACTIVENESS ACTIVATES
REWARD PROCESSES WITHIN MEDIAL-FRONTAL CORTEX Scott

Whittaker1, Laura MacKenzie1, Cameron Hassall1, Natalie Rosen1, Olave Krigolson1; 1Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Dalhousie University —
Utilitarian theory posits that we are driven by an inherent desire to maximize reward. Not to be superficial - but given this logic when one views
an attractive face the face should be desired and processed as a reward
whereas when one views an unattractive face it should be processed as a
punishment. Indeed, research using functional magnetic resonance imaging supports this hypothesis - in a seminal study Aharon and colleagues
(2001) showed that the viewing of attractive faces activated neural reward
circuitry relative to the viewing of unattractive faces. Here, we sought to
provide electroencephalographic (EEG) support for this hypothesis. Specifically, we recorded electroencephalographic data while participants viewed
and rated faces on a Likert scale for attractiveness. Following data collection we used the participants’ ratings to code faces as either being attractive
or unattractive. Based on these codings, an analysis of our electroencephalographic data revealed that a contrast of “attractive” and “unattractive”
faces revealed an event-related brain potential component with a timing
and scalp topography consistent with the feedback error-related negativity
(fERN) - a component previously shown to be sensitive to reward feedback.
Further, localization of the fERN we observed revealed a source within the
anterior cingulate cortex - a result also consistent with previous accounts of
the fERN. Importantly, our results provide further support for the hypothesis that perceived attractiveness activates reward-processing circuitry
within the medial-frontal cortex.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory
G69
TESTING A DYNAMIC NEURAL FIELD MODEL OF VISUAL WORKING MEMORY WITH FMRI John Spencer1, Aaron Buss1, Vincent Mag-

notta1; 1University of Iowa — Visual working memory (VWM) plays a key
role in visual cognition, comparing percepts that cannot be simultaneously
foveated and identifying changes in the world when they occur. Functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has identified frontal, parietal, and
temporal cortical areas that are selectively activated in VWM tasks; less is
known about how these neural regions work together to encode, maintain,
and compare items in working memory. Here, we push accounts of brain
processes to a new level by using a dynamic neural field (DNF) model to
predict what happens in the brain when people correctly and incorrectly
detect visual changes. We generated a real-time local field potential (LFP)
measure from each component of the DNF model. When convolved with
an impulse response function, the LFPs yielded predicted hemodynamics
from each model component and each trial type. We then simulated predicted hemodynamics from an fMRI paradigm designed to yield abovechance responding, but many correct and incorrect responses for analysis.
Finally, we tested these predictions with 20 adult participants. Results show
a strong correspondence between the model-based neural predictions and
cortical activation measured with fMRI on both correct and incorrect trials,
including a “flip” in the neural signal on incorrect trials across set sizes.
This highlights how model-based fMRI can explain subtle and often surprising differences across conditions that are difficult to explain otherwise.
The model identifies the working memory and comparison processes that
underlie change detection and explains how frontal, parietal, and temporal
regions work together as an integrated network.

Poster Session G

G70
SUCCESSFUL NAVIGATION IN THE ABSENCE OR PRESENCE OF
AN ORIENTING LANDMARK Katherine Sherrill1,2, Ugar M Erdem1, Thack-

ery Brown1,2, Robert Ross1,2, Michael Hasselmo1, Chantal Stern1,2; 1Center
for Memory and Brain, Boston University, Boston, MA, 2Athinoula A. Martinos
Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown,
MA — fMRI was used to examine brain mechanisms related to successful
navigation. Navigation took place in an open field environment with or
without an orienting landmark. Each trial included map presentation (2
sec), delay (4 sec), and navigation (8 sec) components. In the map presentation phase, participants were shown a survey representation of their start
location, heading direction, and goal location. On half the trials, a single
distinguishing landmark was included on the map and in the environment,
which participants could use as an orientation cue. Following the delay,
participants actively navigated to the encoded goal location. Critically, the
goal location marker was only visible during the map encoding phase, but
the landmark was visible in both map and navigation phases. Navigation
occurred in either first person perspective (FPP) or Survey perspective. We
contrasted FPP navigation without a landmark against FPP navigation with
a landmark. During successful FPP navigation in the no-landmark condition compared to the landmark condition, we found increased activation
in brain areas known to be important for spatial navigation including the
parahippocampal cortex, striatum, superior parietal lobule, precuneus, and
orbitofrontal cortex. No areas showed greater activation for the landmark
condition compared to the no-landmark condition. Survey navigation
showed the opposite effect: greater activation was observed in retrosplenial
cortex, dorsal striatum, and orbitofrontal cortex when an orienting landmark was present in the environment. Taken together, the results indicate
recruitment of differential brain regions for successful FPP and Survey perspective navigation in the presence or absence of an orienting landmark.

G71
WORKING MEMORY TRAINING: AN UPDATED META-ANALYSIS
OF TRANSFER TO FLUID INTELLIGENCE MEASURES Samantha

Wootan1, Paul Reber1, Dan Mroczek1; 1Northwestern University — Working
memory (WM) training research has sparked both excitement and skepticism, particularly around the claim that these interventions can result
in improved fluid intelligence. Robust far-transfer effects following training would have significant implications for theories of working memory,
neuroplasticity, and fluid intelligence in addition to applications of these
theories in education, training, and cognitive rehabilitation. Among the
challenges to addressing the reliability of effects is the fact that many interventions studies are underpowered to detect potentially subtle far-transfer
effects. Melby-Lervåg and Hulme (2012; MLH) reported a meta-analysis
of WM training effects that only included studies with substantial training
and a comparison control group. Their analysis suggested that these WM
training paradigms have not produced consistent fluid intelligence gains
across studies. Here we report an updated meta-analysis in which additional recent studies are included. Critically, the addition of new findings
allows for separate examination of participant populations that were combined in the MLH report: young healthy adults, older adults and children
(some with learning or other disabilities). In 13 studies with young healthy
adults, the meta-analytic effect size of working memory training interventions was d=0.238, p<.001, indicating consistent gains in measures of fluid
intelligence and cross-study reliable far transfer. Thus it appears that for
adults, working memory training does produce consistent increases in
performance on tests of fluid intelligence and research efforts should be
directed to better understanding of the interventions and conditions that
lead to the most effective gains.

G72
ENCODING OBJECTS AS A CONFIGURAL REPRESENTATION
INCREASES SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY Laura R. Rab-

bitt1, Craig G. McDonald1, Matthew S. Peterson1; 1George Mason University
— Spatial working memory capacity is limited in the number of items that
can be maintained over time. However, similar to verbal working memory,
previous research has demonstrated that spatial working memory capacity can be increased when stimuli are organized into familiar patterns.
The current study examined whether manipulating the strategy used for

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

241

Poster Session G	
encoding could increase the capacity of spatial working memory. In the
current study, participants performed a spatial working memory change
detection task, where various set sizes of squares were to be encoded and
the location of one square could change during recognition testing. Participants were given one of two instruction types: to remember the location
of the squares or to remember the squares as a constellation. Results of this
study demonstrated that for larger set sizes, instruction type made a significant difference in the number of items that participants recalled. Specifically, participants that were instructed to remember the constellation of
squares, remembered more items than participants that were instructed to
remember the location of squares for larger set sizes. Thus, the configural
representation of the stimulus array significantly impacts spatial working
memory capacity. Ongoing research will further examine the neurophysiological underpinnings of spatial working memory capacity by recording
EEG and investigating the contralateral delay activity (CDA) in this task.

G73
THE EFFECT OF STRESS ON VISUO-SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY
Sarah Cebulski1, Rob Gabrys1, Hymie Anisman1, Chris Herdman1; 1Carleton
University — Stressful events affect a range of cognitive functions, such as
attention, memory formation and memory recall. With regard to working
memory, the relationship is particularly complex. In part, this complexity arises from a tendency to erroneously conflate tasks that actually rely
on separate subcomponents of the working memory system, subcomponents that are themselves differentially affected by stressors. The aim of
the present study was to address this issue by investigating the relationship of cortisol, a stress hormone, to working memory in tasks that independently reflect visual storage and visual processing. The study also
aimed to explore how workload affects performance on these tasks. The
Trier Social Stress Test, a task known to induce social-evaluative stress, was
administered to half of the 24 participants studied. Performance on low
and high workload versions of a visuo-spatial storage task (delayed pattern
matching) and a visual processing task (mental rotation) were compared
between the stressor and control groups. Results reveal a differential stress
influence on working memory tasks, such that performance on the storage
task was significantly impaired in the stressor relative to control condition
at both workloads, while performance on the processing task was significantly enhanced. These results suggest that different mechanisms influence
delayed pattern matching and mental rotation. Genetic analysis of polymorphisms known to be correlated with individual differences in executive
functioning, such as brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), especially
during stressful events, may provide further insight into these differences.

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
G74
CEREBELLAR CONTRIBUTIONS TO LANGUAGE RECOVERY FOLLOWING PRE- OR PERINATAL STROKE Carolina Vias1, Alexarae Bryon1,

Arnaldo Morales1, Anna De Feria1, Jessica Medina1, Anthony Steven Dick1, Ana
Solodkin2, Steven L. Small2; 1Florida International University, 2University of California, Irvine — This study focuses on the contribution of the cerebellum to
language recovery following pre- or perinatal stroke. Language function is
resistant to lesions that destroy classical speech areas of the brain, provided
these lesions occur early in development. Research suggests that cortical
changes in interhemispheric connectivity relate to syntactic, expressive, and
receptive language outcome following early stroke. However, less is known
regarding the recovery of the broader language network that includes subcortical structures, particularly the cerebellum. Indeed, through its connections with the cortex, the cerebellum is associated with higher cognitive
functions, including language. Perinatal stroke is associated with cerebellar
atrophy, suggesting early degeneration of cortico-ponto-cerebellar connections, and increased understanding of cerebellar function may clarify how
the developing brain recovers language function following early stroke.
To gain greater clarification on this issue, we assessed 42 individuals who
sustained pre- and perinatal stroke and 28 of their typical siblings using
behavioral and neuro-imaging techniques. Structural magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) was used to investigate region-specific atrophy of the cerebellum, while functional MRI was used to investigate cortico-cerebellar
connectivity during receptive and expressive language fMRI tasks. These
measures were correlated with behavioral measures of syntactic, expres-

242

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
sive, and receptive language outcome. We found that greater cerebellar
atrophy predicts poorer receptive and expressive language outcomes. We
also found that right cerebellar functional connectivity with left frontal
and temporal cortical regions predicts receptive language outcomes. These
findings enhance our understanding of cerebellar function, which has the
potential to inform therapeutic strategies for language recovery following
early stroke.

G75
THE DEVELOPMENT OF PHONOLOGICAL PROCESSING FROM
THE PRE-READING TO THE BEGINNING-READING STAGE IN
CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT A FAMILIAL RISK FOR DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA Maria R Dauvermann1,2, Nora M Raschle1,2, Danielle D

Sliva1, Bryce Becker1, Ola Ozranov-Palchik1, Barbara Peysakhovich1, Sara A
Smith1, Michael Figuccio1, Jennifer Zuk1, Nadine Gaab1,2,3; 1Boston Children’s
Hospital, Laboratories of Cognitive Neuroscience, Developmental Medicine
Center, 2Harvard Medical School, 3Harvard Graduate School of Education —
Developmental Dyslexia (DD) is characterized by difficulties with accurate
and/or fluent word/text recognition with a strong genetic basis. Research
has suggested that individuals with DD show functional alterations in
left-hemispheric inferior frontal and posterior regions during phonological processing (PP), an early key predictor of DD. However, to date no
study has examined PP during development from the pre-reading to the
beginning-reading stage in children with (FHD+) and without (FHD-) a
familial risk for DD. FHD+ and FHD- children were examined three times
using psychometric measures and a PP fMRI task: At the pre-school age
(42 FHD-/34 FHD+), after one year of reading instruction and again in
elementary school. At the pre-school age, FHD+ compared to FHD- children showed reduced behavioral performance in PP, receptive/expressive
language and rapid automatized naming. Furthermore, reduced activation
in left occipital-temporal and parieto-temporal regions were observed for
FHD+ compared to FHD- children. After one year of reading instruction,
FHD+ children showed additional deficits in reading fluency and the hypoactivation in left-hemispheric posterior regions persisted. At elementary
school, behavioral deficits in FHD+ compared to FHD- children remained
unchanged. However, FHD+ now exhibited additional hypoactivation in
left inferior frontal regions, one additional key component of the reading
network. Our results suggest that the development of the reading network
is fundamentally different in the majority of FHD+ compared to FHDchildren and that the various components of the reading network seem
to follow different developmental trajectories. Our results have important
implications for the development of early intervention programs.

G76
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF
THE VENTRAL STREAM DURING CONTINUOUS READING W. Einar

Mencl1,2, Jason Zevin1, Stephen Frost1, Peter Molfese1, Laura Mesite3,1, Daniel
Sharoh1, Jay Rueckl4,1, Kenneth Pugh1,2,4; 1Haskins Laboratories, 2Yale University, 3Harvard University, 4University of Connecticut — The putative “Visual
Word Form Area”, or VWFA, is important in skilled reading, although
its precise function is not understood. Using fMRI, we investigated functional connectivity, operationalized as time-course correlations, among the
VWFA and other brain regions in subjects who vary on reading skill. 31
healthy young adult subjects were scanned in two protocols. First, a localizer task employing real printed words and false font stimuli was used to
functionally define the VWFA in each subject. Second, a continuous stimulation paradigm was run, where subjects read and listened to sections of
a continuous story in long blocks. For each subject, we computed a brainwide connectivity map to the independently-defined VWFA during continuous reading. Finally, we used a measure of subjects’ reading skill as a
predictor to these connectivity maps (TOWRE Sight Word Efficiency raw
score). Initial results indicate that in general, subjects with higher reading
skill showed reduced connectivity between the VWFA and other brain
regions, including early bilateral visual areas. One interpretation of this
finding is that in more skilled readers, the VWFA has reduced connections
to ancillary brain regions outside the primary language system. Further
analyses will investigate connectivity of other primary regions in the reading circuit, and verify these initial results.

2014 Annual Meeting	

G77
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SENTENCE REPETITION IN THE
LOGOPENIC VARIANT OF PRIMARY PROGRESSIVE APHASIA Anna
Lisette Isenberg1, Drew Goldberg1, Murray Grossman1; 1University of Pennsylvania — The logopenic variant of Primary Progressive Aphasia (lvPPA) is
typified by progressive impairment in two core behavioral deficits: word
retrieval and sentence repetition. It has been hypothesized that reduced
repetition accuracy in lvPPA is due to degradation in the phonological working memory network, prompting a heavier reliance on lexical/
semantic representations for repetition tasks (Gorno-Tempini et al, 2008).
However, characterization of sentence level repetition has been primarily
qualitative to date. Here we quantitatively examine error types in lvPPA
sentence repetition and relate these to regions of grey matter (GM) atrophy. Patients (N=12) were diagnosed using current published criteria.
Senior controls were demographically comparable. Participants performed
a five item sentence repetition task. Changes in lvPPA cortical GM were
quantified relative to seniors using aMRI and regression analyses related
atrophy to repetition performance. Patients were significantly impaired in
repetition accuracy, word substitutions, insertions and omissions (p<.05).
Regions of atrophy were observed throughout left pSTG, IPL, and middle
and posterior temporal cortex. Atrophy in pSTG and neighboring temporal
regions correlated with accuracy measures of overall sentence repetition,
omitted words and substituted words. Together, results suggest deficits in
sentence repetition may stem, in part, from impairments in auditory verbal
short term working memory as well as lexical retrieval. Additional work
is needed to tease apart the specific contribution of working memory and
lexical retrieval to the types of errors observed. Results suggest some contribution of temporal regions, beyond the pSTG/inferior parietal network
traditionally associated with phonological working memory, to the repetition deficit observed in lvPPA.

G78
STRUCTURAL NEUROBIOLOGICAL DIFFERENCES IN CHILDREN
WITH DYSLEXIA AND SPECIFIC READING COMPREHENSION
DEFICITS Katherine Swett1, Stephen Bailey1, Fumiko Hoeft2, Angela Sefcik1,

Scott Burns1, Laurie Cutting1; 1Peabody College of Education and Human
Development, Vanderbilt University, 2Department of Psychiatry, University of
California San Francisco — Specific reading comprehension deficits (S-RCD),
characterized by adequate word-level decoding skills but below-average
reading comprehension, is a behaviorally distinct condition from developmental dyslexia (DYS). Recently, neurofunctional differences between
S-RCD and DYS were described for the first time in fMRI (Cutting et al.,
Brain Connectivity 2013). The goal of this study was to examine neuroanatomical differences between S-RCD, DYS and typically developing
(TD) readers using multivariate pattern analysis. Specifically, we applied
a linear support vector machine (SVM) algorithm to gray matter volumes
generated by voxel-based morphometry (VBM). The resulting classifiers
achieved significant accuracy, and their validity was tested using leaveone-out cross-validation. First, and as expected from the previous literature
of dyslexia, DYS was best differentiated from TD by negative weights in
occipito-temporal regions, including left fusiform gyrus, as well as left precentral, supramarginal gyri and bilateral thalamus (classification accuracy:
80%). Similar differences were found when classifying DYS compared to
S-RCD (accuracy: 88%; p<0.05 permutation based correction). Second, and
more importantly, subjects with S-RCD were best classified using negative
weights in bilateral prefrontal cortex when compared to TD (accuracy:
93%) and DYS (accuracy: 88%; p<0.05 permutation based correction). The
weighting was most prominent in the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
an area associated with executive processes like monitoring and manipulating mental representations (Barbey et al., Cortex 2013). Taken altogether,
these findings provide further evidence for distinct neurobiological differences between S-RCD and DYS adolescents.

G79
THE IMPACT OF SEMANTIC CATEGORIES AND IMAGEABILITY
ON LANGUAGE PROCESSING IN ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE AND
HEALTHY AGING Jet M.J. Vonk1, Roel Jonkers2, Loraine K. Obler1; 1The

Graduate Center of the City University of New York, 2University of Groningen
— Conflicting results have been reported regarding noun and verb process-

Poster Session G
ing, both with respect to the role of semantic categories and the influence of
imageability in healthy aging and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). In this study
we addressed the relation of these categories to neuroanatomical regions
that could account for the inconsistent results. We hypothesized that specific semantic features/categories (e.g., animacy, motion, but not furniture)
would be impaired due to their association with frontal and temporal
regions linked to AD. In addition, we tested nouns and verbs with varying
degrees of imageability to determine how these would impact word processing. We tested 13 Dutch-speaking individuals with AD and 16 matched
healthy controls on a semantic-similarity judgment task, measuring both
accuracy and response time. Results show significant differences among
both the semantic categories and the imageability ones. For example, the
AD group responded significantly slower on animal nouns than furniture
nouns, consistent with previous studies that propose the involvement of
the posterior superior temporal sulcus in processing animal nouns. As well,
both groups showed a significant progressive improvement in accuracy
and in response time from very low-imageable nouns and verbs to high-imageable ones. In sum, the results support an anatomical-behavioral correlation between language deficits in AD and brain regions most vulnerable to
the disease. In addition, the feature of imageability is differently processed
along a continuum. These findings argue that semantic subcategories and
imageability must be taken into account in future neurolinguistic studies.

LANGUAGE: Lexicon
G80
A NEUROCOGNITIVE INVESTIGATION OF INHIBITORY PROCESSES DURING SPEECH PLANNING Rhonda McClain1, Eleonora

Rossi1, Judith Kroll1; 1Penn State University — Recent event-related potential
(ERP) studies have shown that bilinguals inhibit their native language (L1)
when they produce their second language (L2) (Misra et al., 2012; Strijkers
et al., 2013). It is not clear whether inhibition of the L1 is a general consequence of bilingualism, occurring whenever bilinguals are required to
speak their L1, or restricted to contexts in which they must speak both languages. It is not known whether only bilinguals who are highly proficient
in two languages inhibit their L1. In the present study, we examined consequences of bilingualism for L2 learners. Two groups of L2 Spanish learners
and English monolinguals performed a blocked picture naming task, in
which a series of pictures were initially named and then later repeated. One
group of Spanish learners named pictures in an L1-L2-L1 order. Another
group of learners and English monolinguals named in an L1-L1-L1 order.
We expected repetition priming for learners performing the L1-L1-L1 order,
but evidence of inhibition in the L1-L2-L1 group. Learners’ and monolinguals’ ERPs diverged in the first block, in which only the L1 was produced.
This early difference occurred within the N400 window (300-600 ms post
picture onset). ERPs also revealed that learners were more sensitive to item
repetition than the monolinguals, as indexed by the late positive component (LPC). This pattern suggests facilitation rather than inhibition of the
L1. The results suggest that there are general consequences of L2 use that
differentiate learners from monolinguals even when L2 speakers are only
moderately proficient in the L2.

G81
TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF SEMANTIC AND LANGUAGE MEMBERSHIP INFORMATION DURING BILINGUAL WORD RECOGNITION Liv J. Hoversten1, Trevor Brothers1, Tamara Y. Swaab1, Matthew J.

Traxler1; 1University of California, Davis — Previous research has suggested
that bilingual comprehenders access lexical representations of words in
both languages non-selectively. Results from other studies suggest that,
under certain conditions, bilinguals may be able to selectively access a
single target language. To help clarify the issue, the present study examined the relative timing of activation of language membership and word
meaning. Spanish-English bilinguals performed simultaneous semantic
and language membership classification tasks on single words during
event-related potential (ERP) recording. In one half of the experiment, participants performed a Go/No-Go animacy judgment on each word and differentiated Spanish and English words with a Left/Right response hand
decision. These tasks were reversed in the other half of the experiment and
counterbalanced across participants. Lateralized readiness potential (LRP)
and Go/No-Go ERP latencies were examined to assess the timing of access
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

243

Poster Session G	
of the two types of information. N400 frequency effects were also analyzed
to determine the degree of semantic processing in target and nontarget categories. We found behavioral and electrophysiological evidence that language membership information was accessed before semantic information.
Furthermore, the depth of processing of words in the nontarget language
was reduced. This data suggests that the bilingual brain can rapidly identify the language to which a word belongs and use this information to selectively modulate the degree of processing in each language.

G82
LOCATION OF VIOLATION IN THE WORD STRUCTURE IS ASSOCIATED WITH DISTINCT PATTERNS OF GAZE TRAJECTORIES
AND OCCIPITAL SOURCE ACTIVATION: COMBINED EEG AND
EYE-TRACKING STUDY Otto Loberg1, Jarkko Hautala1, Jarmo A.

Hämääinen1, Paavo H.T. Leppänen1; 1University of Jyväskylä, Finland — In
our previous study, we found that the location of the violations in word
structure attracts fixational eye movements. These anomalies in the beginning of the word attract the movements earlier than the anomalies in the
end during a lexical decision task. This faster orientation to the beginning
of the word could indicate serial or serial-like processing of letters during
word recognition. In order to investigate the neural basis of this preference for word beginning, we combined EEG and eye-tracking in 16 typical
adult readers. We found, as in the previous study, that gaze trajectories at
225-250 ms were oriented towards the anomalies in the beginning of the
words, whereas at 400-425 ms they were oriented towards the violations
at the stimulus end. The early (0-300ms) fusiform source activation for the
anomalies in the beginning of the words showed clearly distinct pattern
from the activation exhibited by the normal words. Source localized at the
approximate location of the left fusiform gyrus displayed long lasting (100
ms) attenuation of activity centered around 200 ms, whereas the source
localized at the approximate location of the right fusiform gyrus displayed
enhanced activity at the same time window. In comparison, the stimuli
with the anomalies in the end showed enhanced activity in the left fusiform
source centered at 200 ms lasting 50 ms with no distinct response from the
right fusiform source. The location of violations in the word structure generates clearly distinct activation patterns in the left and right fusiform gyri.

G83
IMPLICIT SEMANTIC PRIMING ON SENTENCE LEVEL IN YOUNG
AND ELDERLY ADULTS: AN EEG PILOT STUDY Katrin Wrede1, Christo-

pher Gundlach2, Anika Stockert1, Till Nierhaus2, Dorothee Saur1; 1Language and
Aphasia Laboratory, Department of Neurology, University Hospital, Leipzig, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Department of Neurology — We are planning a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study to
investigate language reorganisation in aphasic stroke patients. Here we
present the results of an EEG pilot study in young (n=13, 24 years) and
elderly adults (n=12, 66,8 years) on auditory semantic priming on sentence
level. We implemented three conditions: 1.COR_Expected (“[The cook
oversalts] the soup”), 2.INC_Semantic incorrect (“ [&] the school , 3.PSEU_
Pseudoword ( [&] the pause”). Subjects were instructed to focus on the sentence final word to perform a lexical decision task. We hypothesized that
increasing demands in lexical access will result in increasing reaction times
(RTs) and N400 amplitudes in the EEG. Results showed a larger N400 for
INC vs. COR and PSEU vs. COR over all electrodes (p< .001) and longer
RTs for INC and PSEU (p> .001) irrespective of age. Both groups showed
larger N400 amplitudes for INC versus PSEU (young: left posterior electrodes (p=.033); elderly: central electrodes (p= .021)). However the younger
group didn´t differentiate between INC and PSEU in respect to RTs
(p=.769) whereas elderly subjects showed longer RTs for PSEU in contrast
to a smaller amplitude in the EEG (p= .026). In summary, implicit semantic
priming on sentence level can be described through the N400 effect in both
age groups. The N400 component has been seen in almost every single subject. This demonstrates the robustness of the N400 effect in our paradigm
even in elderly subjects as prerequisite for application in stroke patients
with aphasia. Furthermore it will be possible to use individual performance
for EEG-fMRI informed analysis.

244

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting

G84
CROSS-LANGUAGE PHONOLOGICAL PRIMING IN ONE LANGUAGE ALONE THROUGH TRANSLATION Susan C. Bobb1, Julien

Mayor2, Katie Von Holzen3, Nivedita Mani3, Manuel Carreiras4; 1Northwestern
University, 2University of Geneva, 3University of Göttingen, 4Basque Center on
Cognition, Brain and Language — Several studies have shown that unbalanced bilinguals activate both of their languages simultaneously during
language processing (e.g., Spivey & Marian, 1999; Wu & Thierry, 2009).
However, they were tested either in their non-dominant language environment or were required to use both languages, potentially artificially
increasing co-activation. We tested balanced Spanish-Basque bilinguals
on an ERP picture prime task where only Spanish was overtly presented
without ever presenting Basque. Participants saw a picture in silence and
then heard a word in Spanish under five conditions (SPANISH/BASQUE
picture prime labels respectively presented in capital letters; Spanish auditory words/Basque translations in lower case): 1) the Spanish label of the
picture was identical to the auditory target, (CASA/ETXE-casa/etxe) 2) the
Spanish label of the picture rhymed with the Basque translation of the auditory target, (MANO/ESKU-aguila/arrano) 3) the Basque label of the picture rhymed with the auditory target, (GAVIOTA/KAIO-rayo/tximista) 4)
the Basque label of the picture rhymed with the Basque translation of the
auditory target, (AGUJA/ORRATZ-lápiz/arkatz) or 5) there was no relationship between the label in either language and the target (CAMA/OHEguante/eskularru). We recorded ERPs to the onset of Spanish auditory
targets. To evaluate priming effects, we compared conditions 1 through 4
with condition 5. Our results suggest that participants activated prime picture labels in both Spanish and Basque, activating Basque translations of
Spanish auditory targets even though the experimental environment was
Spanish and did not require activation of Basque. We therefore provide
the strongest evidence yet for the non-selectivity of bilingual lexical access.

G85
HOW PROPERTIES OF THE WRITING SYSTEM DETERMINE THE
CONVERGENCE OF THE SPEECH AND READING SYSTEMS IN
THE BRAIN Jay Rueckl1,2, Stephen J. Frost1, Peter J. Molfese1, Pedro M.

Paz-Alonso3, Wen-Jui Kuo4, Atira Bick5, W. Einar Mencl1, Denise H. Wu4, Ovid
J. Tzeng4, Ram Frost1,3,5, Manuel Carreiras2, Kenneth R. Pugh1,2; 1Haskins
Laboratories, USA, 2University of Connecticut, USA, 3Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language (BCBL), Spain, 4National Central University, Taiwan,
5
Hebrew University, Israel — Reading involves mapping between visual
forms and the speech sounds of the language that they represent. Indeed,
studies in English have shown that reading skill can be indexed by the
degree of convergence between the reading and speech systems in both
emergent readers (Frost et al. 2009) and adults (Shankweiler et al. 2008). In
this fMRI experiment, we examined whether reading-speech convergence
in skilled adult readers depends on the properties of the writing system.
Native speakers of Spanish, English, Hebrew, and Mandarin Chinese (N
= 70 in total) made animacy judgments about printed and spoken words.
These languages vary in orthographic depth: the ambiguity of the mapping
from spelling to phonology. This mapping is largely unambiguous in Spanish and highly ambiguous in Chinese, with English and Hebrew falling in
between. The results revealed that (a) reading (considered independently of
speech) engages a largely similar cortical network in each language, including fusiform, temporal-parietal and inferior frontal regions; (b) the neural
convergence of speech and reading is substantial and largely similar across
languages; although (c) there is somewhat less reading-speech convergence
in Chinese than in the alphabetic languages, and (d) for the alphabetic writing systems, reading-speech convergence in certain regions of interest (e.g.,
LH superior temporal gyrus) was modulated by orthographic depth.

G86
DIFFERENTIAL FUNCTIONAL ACTIVATION IN SPEECH/ LANGUAGE AREAS ASSOCIATED WITH AUDITORY LEXICAL LEARNING
AS A FUNCTION OF SLEEP CONSOLIDATION Stephen Frost1, Nicole

Landi1,2,4, Peter Molfese1, James Magnuson1,2, Daniel Sharoh1, Jay Rueckl1,2,
Jonathan Preston1,3, W.E. Mencl1, Kenneth Pugh1,2,3; 1Haskins Laboratories,
2
University of Connecticut, 3Southern Connecticut State University, 4Yale University — Previous research has identified both procedural and declara-

2014 Annual Meeting	
tive learning mechanisms at the level of brain and behavior as potentially
causal factors in reading and language disorders. We investigated learning
with behavioral (extensive phenotypic classification via behavioral testing
in multiple linguistic and cognitive domains) and neuroimaging methods
(fMRI). 26 Participants (ages 15- 25) completed a behavioral assessment battery of reading, language and general cognitive ability. Participants then
learned associations between 24 novel spoken words and pictures (unusual
fish or minerals) over the course of ~1.5 hour of training until they met a
criterion of 90% correct. On the following day, they returned for a refresher
period, seeing all trained stimuli twice, and a second learning period,
during which participants learned a new set of novel word-picture pairs
to criterion. After the second behavioral learning session, participants were
scanned using fMRI. During scanning they heard the trained consolidated
words from Day 1, the trained unconsolidated words from Day 2, and a set
of completely novel non-words. fMRI results revealed stronger activation
of language regions surrounding the perisylvian fissure (inferior, superior
and middle temporal), as well as posterior cingulate for consolidated vs.
trained unconsolidated and novel non-words; larger and more bilateral
differences emerged for comparisons between consolidated and novel nonwords. Covariate analyses indicated that reading and language skills modulated these findings, such that skill in reading was associated with greater
effects of consolidation above and beyond training.

G87
ACCESSING MEANING OF L2 WORDS IN BEGINNING AND
ADVANCED LEARNERS: AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL AND
BEHAVIORAL INVESTIGATION Fengyang Ma1, Judith F. Kroll1, Taomei

Guo2, Peiyao Chen3; 1Pennsylvania State University, 2Beijing Normal University,
Northwestern University — According to the Revised Hierarchical Model
(Kroll & Stewart, 1994), second language (L2) learners initially access
meaning of L2 words via the L1 whereas advanced learners access meaning directly. We tested this hypothesis with English learners of Spanish in
a translation recognition task, in which participants were asked to judge
whether English words were the correct translations of Spanish words. In
each case, we gathered data on behavior and on the earliest time course
of processing using ERPs. The critical conditions compared the ability of
learners to reject distractors that were related to the translation in form or
meaning when a long (750 ms) or short (300 ms) SOA separated the two
words. For advanced learners, there were effects for semantic and form distractors in both measures at the long SOA, but at the short SOA, there were
behavioral effects but only an N400 effect in the ERP record for semantic
distractors. These results replicate Guo et al. (2012), suggesting that relatively proficient L2 speakers access the meaning of L2 words directly. For
beginning learners, at the long SOA, there were semantic and form effects
in both measures. At the short SOA, behavioral data were sensitive to distractor type, but the ERPs only revealed larger N400 and smaller LPC for
translation distractors and no effect for semantic distractors. Overall, these
data suggest that at early stages of L2 learning there is reliance on the L1
translation equivalent. Once proficient, they are able to retrieve the meanings of the words directly.
3

LANGUAGE: Other
G88
REPETITION SUPPRESSION IN THE LEFT INFERIOR FRONTAL
GYRUS IS ASSOCIATED WITH NON-NATIVE SOUND LEARNING
SUCCESS. Salomi S. Asaridou1,2, Atsuko Takashima2,3, Dan Dediu1, Peter

Hagoort1,2, James M. McQueen2,3; 1Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics,
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, 3Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen — Individuals differ greatly in their ability to learn non-native linguistic sounds. However, it is unknown whether
this variation stems from individual differences in the acuity of the neural
representations of non-native sounds. In this study, we used an fMRI adaptation paradigm to investigate this possibility. Assuming that the magnitude of repetition suppression to a repeated non-native sound will depend
on the acuity of its representation, adaptation effects should differ between
successful and less successful learners after training. We trained 40 Dutch
native speakers in a non-native sound contrast (Mandarin tones) by means
of a lexical task. Participants learned to match 24 auditory-presented words

2

Poster Session G
to pictures of items over the course of five training sessions. Participants’
repetition suppression to Mandarin tones was measured before and after
training completion using fMRI. All participants showed significant learning effects with training; however, there was substantial variation in their
learning curves. Whole brain fMRI analyses revealed significant repetition
suppression to tone in the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) bilaterally. Furthermore, the size of the repetition suppression effect in the left IFG, before
and after training, correlated significantly with learning attainment. Our
results demonstrate that individuals who show larger repetition suppression to non-native sounds in the left IFG are also better at learning these
sounds. This is true even before training initiation and argues in favor of
pre-existing differences at the level of neural encoding of sounds. These
findings offer further support for the important role of the left IFG in phonetic learning.

G89
DIFFERENTIAL DYNAMICS OF CORTICAL REORGANIZATION
IN THE LANGUAGE NETWORK AFTER LEFT FRONTAL OR TEMPORAL STROKE - A LONGITUDINAL FMRI STUDY Anika Stockert1,

Kümmerer Dorothee2, Wrede Katrin1, Hartwigsen Gesa3, Mader Irina4, Weiller
Cornelius2, Saur Dorothee1; 1Leipzig University Hospital, Germany, 2Freiburg
University Hospital, Germany, 3Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Germany,
4
Bernstein Center Freiburg, Germany — Language recovery after stroke
has been attributed to reorganization processes within a bilateral temporofrontal language network. Previous work in stroke patients with heterogeneous lesion sites demonstrated that functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) blood-oxygenation-level depended (BOLD) response was
diminished, increased and subsequently normalized from acute to chronic
stages. Yet, it is unknown whether frontal and temporoparietal lesions contribute differently to the described dynamics. We compared fMRI BOLD
response to speech (SP) and reversed speech (REV) using an auditory
comprehension paradigm administered repeatedly (acute (t1) d” 1 week,
subacute (t2) = 1-2 weeks, chronic phase (t3) > 6 months) to patients with
stroke affecting left frontal (FC, N = 14) or temporoparietal cortex (TPC, N
= 14). A mixed-design ANOVA revealed that BOLD response in left and
right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and middle temporal gyrus (MTG) was
modulated by the factors condition (SP/REV), time (t1-t3) and group (FC/
TPC). Language specific response (SP>REV) in TPC patients conforms to
the previously described pattern with overall downregulation in the language network ( diaschisis , t1), early increase in bifrontal and perilesional
tissue (t2) and normalization of right IFG response (t3). Conversely, in FC
patients, right temporofrontal response was not modulated by time, however normalization of left MTG and perilesional response (t3) was observed
during recovery. These patterns point towards differential involvement of
right hemisphere homologues, ipsilesional IFG and MTG in the course of
recovery depending on frontal or temporoparietal lesion sites.

G90
SONG FAMILIARITY IN LYRICS PROCESSING: AN ERP STUDY

Pei-Ju Chien1, Shiao-hui Chan1; 1National Taiwan Normal University — This
study explores whether song familiarity affects lyrics processing with
the ERP technique. Nineteen right-handed Mandarin-speaking subjects
first heard a Chinese pop song excerpt, containing 1-2 sentences and lasting 5-18 seconds, followed by a visual target word related or unrelated to
the final word of the lyrics. ERPs were synchronized to the onset of the
songs to examine the familiarity effect, and to the target word to test if
the lyrics were processed semantically. Topographically, the subjects processed familiar and unfamiliar songs differently. A left lateralized negativity lasted throughout the epoch (-200-5000ms) for unfamiliar songs,
while for familiar songs, similar pattern was observed first, but about 3
seconds, two negative components at the central electrodes and two positive components at the bilateral temporo-occipital sites appeared. As for
the meaning of the lyrics, larger N400 was elicited by the unrelated targets,
suggesting that the subjects processed lyrics semantically. Interestingly, the
hemispheric distribution of N400 was different regarding song familiarity:
N400 was stronger in the midline and the left hemisphere for familiar songs
but stronger in the midline and the right hemisphere for unfamiliar songs.
For this discrepancy, two processing strategies, prediction and integration
(Federmeier et al., 2007), were considered. “Prediction” was in processing
familiar lyrics possibly because the subjects had high word expectancy,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

245

Poster Session G	
while “integration” in processing unfamiliar lyrics was possibly due to the
low word expectancy and the obscure tonal feature of the Chinese lyrics
in songs, which might force subjects to rely more on the context for word
recognition.

G91
WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY PREDICTS ADULT SECOND LANGUAGE LEARNING OUTCOMES Michelle Han1, Zhenghan Qi1, Jack

Murtagh1, Keri Garel1, Ee San Chen1, John Gabrieli1; 1Massachusetts Institute
of Technology — While second language learning becomes increasingly difficult with age, some adult learners find more success than others in this
elusive endeavor. In this study, we studied whether measures of white
matter integrity in specific white matter pathways would predict Mandarin-learning outcomes in adults. 23 native English-speakers were scanned
in an MRI scanner before participating in an intensive 4-week Mandarin
course. During the scan, diffusion-weighted images (DWI) with 60 directions were acquired from which individual subjects’ white matter tracts
were reconstructed. At the end of the Mandarin course, participants’ proficiency was assessed using a final exam with both written and oral components. The written component tested vocabulary, grammar, sentence
comprehension, and discourse comprehension, while the oral component
tested accuracy of pronunciation, vocabulary and grammar in speech production. The particular tract of interest here was the left arcuate fasciculus
(AF), which is commonly characterized as an integral element of the dorsal
language-processing stream. The average fractional anisotropy, a key measure of white matter integrity, of the left AF were significantly correlated
with the participants’ final oral exam score (p=0.015) as well as the participants’ written exam score (p=0.003). That white matter structure is closely
linked to real-life learning outcomes underscores the link between structure and function while also revealing aspects of adult second language
learning mechanisms.

G92
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THE EFFECTS OF REFERENTIAL
CONTEXT ON SYNTACTIC AMBIGUITY RESOLUTION Shruti Dave1,

Megan Boudewyn1, Tamara Swaab1; 1University of California, Davis — Individuals differ in the relative influence of global discourse context and local
word meaning information on the processing of incoming words during
spoken discourse comprehension (Boudewyn et al, 2013). In the present
study, we examined whether individuals differ in sensitivity to referential
discourse context during the processing of syntactic ambiguities, as a function of working memory span. Outside of context, syntactically ambiguous
phrases such as “cut down the oak with the ___” are more readily attached
to the preceding verb phrase (VP; chainsaw) than to a noun phrase (NP;
mushroom). This finding has been explained by assuming that the most
economic syntactic structure is always attached first, regardless of contextual information. However, previous research suggests that the syntactic
processing costs associated with NP-attachment can be modulated by discourse context, such that NP-attachment is facilitated when prior context
contains more than one plausible referent (e.g. two oaks). To investigate
this, we recorded ERPs as participants listened to short stories in which referential context (one or two plausible referents) and sentence type (VP- or
NP-attached) were manipulated. The results show that high-span participants selected a VP-attached parse when supported by referential context,
but maintained activation of both syntactic structures when referential context supported NP-attachment. In contrast, low span participants showed
evidence of parallel activation of both preferred and non-preferred syntactic structures, regardless of referential context. The results indicate that
working memory span affects the relative influence of referential context
and syntactic preference during syntactic ambiguity resolution.

G93
MODULATING INHIBITORY CONTROL IN IMMERSED LANGUAGE
LEARNERS: AN ERP STUDY Daniel W. Bloodgood1, Rhonda McClain1,

Eleonora Rossi1, Judith F. Kroll1; 1The Pennsylvania State University — Previous studies have shown that language learners have increased difficulty
speaking their native language (L1) when immersed in their second language (L2) environment (Linck et al., 2009). This suggests that immersion
is an effective language learning technique precisely because access to the
L1 is gradually lost, at least temporarily. Inhibitory effects have also been

246

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
seen more generally in picture naming studies in which participants had to
switch between naming in L1 and L2 (Misra et al., 2012). Previous studies
have been able to capture the neural signature of inhibition of the L1 due to
immediate consequences of using two languages, but little is known about
the neural signature of gradual loss of the L1 due to extended immersion
in the L2. In the present study we use Event Related Potentials (ERPs) to
examine the neural consequences of study abroad. Here we test the same
picture naming paradigm in learners before, during, and after immersion
and find that learners display this inhibitory effect in all phases of the
study. We also confirm that increased L2 proficiency comes at the cost of
reduced access to the native language. Critically, we find that these effects
are modulated by the duration of the study abroad experience with the
greatest cost to the native language occurring during the first few months of
immersion. The implications of the modulation in language activity found
in this study are considered for the way in which the neural networks for
language processing are adjusted by context and experience.

G94
EFFECTS OF GESTURE RESTRICTION ON QUALITY OF NARRATIVE
DISCOURSE Theodore Jenkins1, Carl Coelho1, Marie Coppola1; 1University

of Connecticut — This study examines the effects of the free use of hand
gestures on the length, complexity, and organization of discourse. We
manipulated participants’ freedom to gesture in a narrative task in the
following within-participant conditions: i. Restricted gesture (speaker’s
hands restrained, effectively stopping free gesture); ii. Unrestricted gesture
(no mention of the hands). Ten participants (3 males) produced a narrative sample by verbally describing a picture book that contained no words.
Each participant produced the narrative twice, once in each condition, and
each time to an unfamiliar listener. Condition order was counterbalanced
to control for potential order differences (e.g., gesture restriction first may
produce different outcomes vs. no gesture restriction first). Discourse samples were coded for length (T-Units), organization (story grammar, or total
number of complete events or episodes in the narrative), and syntactic
complexity (total number of subordinate clauses). A significantly higher
number of complete episodes were produced in the Unrestricted condition
(Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test, p = .0117). Additionally, participants consistently produced higher numbers of subordinate clauses in the Unrestricted
condition and more incomplete episodes in the Restricted condition, while
finding no differences in the narrative length. These same trends were preserved when condition order was considered. These patterns suggest that
while gesture restriction does not dramatically affect narrative length or
content, the ability to produce gesture promotes production of more complete episodes in a narrative sample and higher syntactic complexity. We
conclude that the freedom to use gesture in discourse production may cognitively facilitate better discourse production.

G95
DISTINGUISHING GESTURE PROCESSING FROM SIGN LANGUAGE PROCESSING: THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE SUPERIOR
TEMPORAL LOBE Shane Blau1,2, Laurie Lawyer2, Michelle Cohn2, David

Corina1,2; 1Center for Mind and Brain, Davis, CA, 2University of California, Davis
— Goal: Studies of spoken language processing have observed differentiation of speech from non-speech sounds in the bilateral posterior superior temporal lobes. Here we examined whether similar temporal lobe
regions were modulated by linguistic and non-linguistic gestures in deaf
signers. Method: Subjects included 18 deaf signers (14 native) and 18 hearing non-signers, who during fMRI scanning (3T Trio Siemens, 3.63mm, TR
3000 ms.,TE 30 ms.) monitored video-clips of ASL signs and self-grooming gestures. For each exemplar, they indicated whether one or two hands
were active during the gestures by means of a key press. This paradigm
allows each group to attend and respond to all stimuli even though the
hearing subjects were sign-naive. Results: Deaf subjects relative to hearing subjects showed activation in the left hemisphere STG for signs (MNI
coordinates: -67, -36, 8), and bilateral STG for gestures (-53, -36, 8; 66, -40,
11) (each contrast relative to fixation). Closer examination of data from deaf
subjects showed bilateral STG activation for sign language (-67, -36, 8; 59,
-36, 0) with activations for gestures that lie nearly adjacent but typically
more posterior (-56, -44, 4; 66, -44, 8) to sign language peaks (all p’s < .001).
These bilateral regions lay well within published regions of interest that
differentiate speech from non-speech signals (e.g. -58 (+/-4.8), -33(+/-10.3),

2014 Annual Meeting	
-10(+/- 4.1) (Vouloumanos et al 2001, Narin et al 2003). Conclusion: These
data provide evidence for a linguistic specification of the posterior superior
temporal lobe that is agnostic to language modality.

LANGUAGE: Syntax
G96
PREDICTABILITY AND GAP-FILLER ORDERING IN DEPENDENCY
FORMATION: AN MEG STUDY Kimberly Leiken1, Liina Pylkkänen1,2,3; 1New
York University, Department of Linguistics, 2New York University, Department of
Psychology, 3New York University, NYU Abu Dhabi Institute — One of the most
replicated findings in the cognitive neuroscience of syntax is increased
activity in the left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) in response to object relative clauses (ORs, e.g. The fireman who the deputy called saved the sailor.)
as compared to subject relatives. However, behavioral research has shown
that ORs are only costly when involving stimulus material eliciting similarity-based interference (Lewis, 1996; Gordon, Hendrick, & Johnson, 2001;
Gordon, Hendrick, & Levine, 2002; Lee et al., 2007, Van Dyke & McElree,
2006), and we recently showed that the LIFG increase is also dependent
on such interference, i.e., no effects were obtained for the sheer presence
of a dependency (Leiken & Pylkkänen, LCP, in press). In contrast with
ORs, which always involve a cue indicating an upcoming dependency, the
present study uses MEG to test dependencies that are not predictable, i.e.
Verb Phrase Ellipsis (VPE, e.g. The husband hogged the blankets and Jane
did too.) Additionally, we included a construction in which the so-called
filler-gap order is reverse to that of ORs (e.g., The husband hogged the
blankets that Jane grabbed __ afterward.) and VPEs, namely Right node
raising (RNR, e.g. The husband hogged __ and Jane grabbed the pillows),
to investigate whether potential dependency effects in the LIFG may be
sensitive to filler-gap ordering. Our results show a sheer dependency effect
(i.e., not dependent on similarity-based interference) for VPE and RNR, but
not for ORs. Thus, our findings show that both predictability and filler-gap
ordering matter for LIFG dependency effects.

G97
GRAMMAR TESTS FOR CLINICAL FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING IN PRE-SURGICAL CANDIDATES Monika Pol-

czynska1,2, Mike Jones1, Teena Moody1, Susan Curtiss1, Christopher Benjamin1, Celia Vigil1, Andrew Cho1, Patricia Walshaw1, Susan Bookheimer1; 1UCLA,
2
Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznan — Evaluation of functional language
areas with functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) is a reliable
tool for pre-surgical planning in patients with brain tumors and medically
refractory epilepsy (Kundu et al. 2013; Rosazza et al. 2013). Though clinical
fMRI is used routinely, there is no standardized language mapping protocol. Most centers apply lexical-semantic tasks (Wang 2012), thus accounting for “meaning” but not “form” (grammar) of language. Grammar is a
left-hemisphere lateralized language function that is one of the most complex components of cognition. Our goal was to add grammar items to a
presurgical fMRI battery to increase the reliability of language mapping.
Thirty-three individuals with epilepsy and 15 individuals with brain tumor
participated in the study. Subjects performed a set of seven grammar items
added to a standard presurgical fMRI battery (auditory naming, visual
naming, word reading) administered at our center on a 3T Allegra scanner (epi bold: TE/TR = 35ms/2.5sec). Tasks included runs of syntactic and
morphological stimuli subdivided into language comprehension and production items. Analysis of the fMRI data revealed activation in (1) classical language regions (Broca’s and Wernicke’s) seen on standard tasks and
additional language sites known to support grammar, e.g., middle temporal gyrus; (2) significant right hemisphere activation in fronto-temporal
areas in both patient groups; (3) more significant activation of functional
language in grammar comprehension as compared with production tasks,
suggesting that the former may be a more useful language mapping tool.
To conclude, adding tasks testing grammar may help increase the precision
of clinical language mapping.

Poster Session G

G98
A ROLE FOR LEFT INFERIOR FRONTAL AND POSTERIOR SUPERIOR TEMPORAL CORTEX IN EXTRACTING A SYNTACTIC TREE
FROM A SENTENCE Chotiga Pattamadilok1,2, Stanislas Dehaene3,4, Chris-

tophe Pallier3,5; 1Laboratoire Parole et Langage (LPL), CNRS: UMR 7309,
Aix-Marseille Université, Aix-en-Provence, France, 2Institut National de la Sante´
et de la Recherche Médicale, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, UMRS
975, Paris, France, 3Institut National de la Santé de la Recherche Médicale,
U992, Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, F-91191 Gif/Yvette, France, 4Collège de
France, F-75005 Paris, France, 5Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
F-75794 Paris, France — Upon hearing the sentence “Trees whose branches
fall eventually die”, how do we decide that it is the trees that die, and not
the branches? The present behavioral and fMRI study explored the processes underlying the extraction of syntactically organized information
from sentences. Participants were presented with sentences whose syntactic complexity was manipulated using either a center-embedded or an
adjunct structure. The goal was to vary separately the hierarchical and the
linear distance between the main verb and its subject. Each sentence was
followed by a short subject + verb probe, and the participants had to check
whether or not it matched a proposition expressed in the sentence. Behavioral and fMRI data showed a significant cost and enhanced activity within
left inferior frontal and posterior superior temporal cortex whenever participants processed center-embedded sentences, which required extracting a
non-trivial sub-tree formed by non-adjacent words. This syntactic complexity effect was not observed during online sentence processing but rather
during the processing of the probe, and only when the verification could
not rely upon a superficial lexical analysis. Moreover, the manipulation of
linear distance affected performance and brain activity mainly when the
sentences did not have a center embedded structure. Our findings suggest
that tree extraction is a fundamental operation of a core syntax network that
does not necessarily take place during sentence comprehension, but may be
flexibly deployed later on, whenever we need to extract hierarchical information not obvious in the superficial sequence of words.

G99
REFERENTIAL AMBIGUITY AND REFERENTIAL FAILURE IN MANDARIN CHINESE - AN ERP STUDY Chia-Ho Lai1, Chia-Lin Lee1; 1National

Taiwan University — Unlike Indo-European languages, almost no morpho-syntactic markings for tense, case, and syntactic gender are used in
Mandarin Chinese. Hence, whether and when maintaining referential
coherence in Mandarin Chinese involves syntactic processing has been a
matter of debate. The present study aimed to use event-related potentials
(ERP) to examine a fundamental aspect of pronoun resolution in Mandarin
Chinese by manipulating the number of possible antecedents. All experimental sentences contained two persons (denoted by proper names or
nouns) and one third person singular pronoun (“TA”, a homophone written
differently for he/she/it). Stereotypical biological genders associated with
the proper names and nouns were manipulated such that the pronoun has
either (1) two possible antecedents and thus referentially ambiguous, (2)
one possible antecedent and referentially unambiguous, or (3) zero possible
antecedents and referentially failing. In view of the contextual influence on
referential ambiguity resolution, degrees of contextual bias in ambiguous
sentences were assessed with an offline referent selection task and divided
into strong, moderate, and weak. Our results showed that, consistent with
findings from Dutch (Nieuwland & Van Berkum, 2006), relative to unambiguous pronouns, ambiguous pronouns elicited a sustained anterior negativity (150-600ms). However, this ambiguity effect was not modulated by
the degree of contextual bias, suggesting that the anterior negativity may
reflect an all-or-none process. In addition, compared to unambiguous pronouns, referentially failing ones elicited a posterior P600 effect (500-700ms),
suggesting the involvement of syntactic processing in pronoun resolution
in Mandarin Chinese in this case.

G100
MUSIC AND LANGUAGE: FAMILIARITY EFFECTS ON (SHARED)
PROCESSING Nicole E. Calma1, Laura Staum-Casasanto2, Dan Finer1, Robbin

Miranda3, Michael T. Ullman4, John E. Drury1; 1Stony Brook University, 2University of Chicago, 3Infinimetrics Corporation, 4Georgetown University — Language and music plausibly involve distinct representational systems that
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

247

Poster Session G	
make use of shared syntactic/combinatorial mechanisms (Patel, 2003). This
is consistent with subadditive anterior negativities in ERP studies when linguistic/musical syntax are simultaneously disrupted (Koelsch et al., 2005).
However, open questions remain regarding other ERP responses, including
P600 and N400 effects. Though similar P600-effects across domains have
been found (Patel et al., 1998), such positivities have not previously been
elicited in double language/music violation paradigms. Further, we are
unaware of attempts to probe linguistic N400-effects and plausibly parallel
responses in music. Miranda & Ullman (2007) report an N400-like effect for
unexpected/violation notes in familiar/known (but not unfamiliar/novel)
melodies (argued to reflect memory access/retrieval). Using the same stimuli, we presented participants with familiar/novel melodies with/without out-of-key notes, while presenting sentences visually/word-by-word.
Sentences were either correct or semantically deviant ( & the ball John
will KICK/#BAKE& ), with target words time-locked to critical musical
notes. The linguistic violations elicited a biphasic N400/P600 pattern and
a late anterior negativity. Out-of-key notes in both the familiar/novel melodies elicited anterior negativities and P600s but an N400-like effect was
found only for the familiar melodies. Double violations yielded non-additive response patterns for the anterior negativities for both melody types.
Strikingly, N400/P600 effects were both found to be sub-additive for the
familiar melodies, while the same time-windows showed completely additive responses for the unfamiliar melodies. These data suggest that the two
domains may (also) involve shared access/retrieval mechanisms, but that
the P600-effects across domains otherwise correspond to distinct underlying neural generators.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
G101
THE “TESTING EFFECT”: RETRIEVAL RELATED FUNCTIONAL
NEUROIMAGING DIFFERENCES AFTER A WEEK DELAY Eugenia

Marin-Garcia1,2,3, Aaron T. Mattfeld1, Kathleen C. Candon1, John D.E. Gabrieli1;
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and
Language, 3Ikerbasque — The “testing effect” is a robust memory phenomenon in which retrieval practice has a beneficial influence on behavioral performance compared to study alone. Understanding the neurobiology of the
“testing effect” has important implications for educational practices. However, the neural basis related to better behavioral performance during the
final test is unknown. In the present study participants were instructed to
learn Swahili-English vocabulary word pairs. During the encoding phase,
which occurred outside of the scanner, they were randomly assigned to one
of two groups: “study/study” group, which only studied the word pairs
and the “study/test” group, which had study/test runs with the word
pairs. After a week delay, all participants returned for a final cued recall
test in the scanner. The “study/test” group showed greater activation of
the left putamen than the “study/study” group for correctly remembered
words compared with words pairs that were forgotten. In contrast, activation throughout the prefrontal cortex and insula was greater for the
“study/study” group when compared to the “study/test.” These results
may reflect the use of alternative strategies between the groups when participants are recalling cued words during the final test. The observed group
differences suggest that testing during the learning phase recruits reward
related brain regions that confer a lasting behavioral advantage during the
final test, while traditional study alone recruits regions related to retrieval
in the prefrontal cortex.

G102
NEURAL CORRELATES OF TEMPORAL CONTEXT RETRIEVAL Fang

Wang1, Rachel A. Diana1; 1Virginia Tech — Temporal context memory is
memory for the timing of events. People can make temporal judgments
based on strategies such as assessing the relative familiarity of events or
inferring temporal order from the semantic associations among events. The
purpose of present study is to investigate the brain regions that support
temporal context retrieval in the absence of such non-temporal strategies.
We used three words familiar phrases (triplets) as stimuli. In study phase,
three words were presented quickly one after another in either familiar or
scrambled order. Participants were instructed to read aloud each word and
try to remember the order of the words. Then they were tested on their
memory for the order of the words in each triplet. We propose that memory

248

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
for the scrambled triplets reflects primarily temporal retrieval for two reasons. First, participants were prevented from using semantic strategies
during encoding. Second, the relative familiarity of the words in each triplet was similar and not diagnostic of the order of the words during encoding. Neuroimaging results indicate that temporal context retrieval, memory
for the order of scrambled triplets, was associated with ventromedial prefrontal cortex and superior parietal cortex activation.

G103
RETROACTIVE MODULATION OF MEMORY BY REWARD

Erin Kendall Braun1, G. Elliott Wimmer2, Anuya Patil3, Blair Vail1, Daphna Shohamy1;
1
Columbia University, 2University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 3New
York University — Memory is fundamental to adaptive behavior, because
it allows past experience to guide future choices. Extensive research has
demonstrated that reward feedback can retroactively reinforce preceding
actions via dopaminergic projections to the striatum. Reward feedback
may also retroactively modulate memory for preceding episodic experiences encoded by the hippocampus. While reward cues presented during
or before encoding are related to enhanced episodic memory, much less
is known about how reward modulates memory for prior experiences. To
investigate this question, we developed a novel exploration paradigm. Participants navigated through a series of grid “mazes”, one space at a time,
to find a hidden “gold coin” worth a bonus $1. In each space, an incidental,
trial-unique object picture was presented for 2s before participants moved
forward. We manipulated the outcomes during exploration so that half
of the mazes ended in reward. Afterwards, we administered a surprise
memory test. To measure the effect of reward on memory over time, this
test was administered either 15-minutes or 24-hours after encoding. Results
show that immediately after encoding, participants exhibited enhanced
memory for pictures from rewarded mazes; surprisingly, after consolidation, this main effect disappeared. Instead, after 24-hours we found a selective enhancement of memory for objects that were sequentially closer to
the reward. Our results show that rewards retroactively enhance memory,
but after consolidation this enhancement is selective for experiences proximal to the reward. Future research will explore how this retroactive reward
modulation of memory facilitates the use of reward-related memory for
subsequent decision making.

G104
TRANSFER OF “TESTING EFFECT”: GENERALIZATION OF
MEMORY BENEFITS DERIVED FROM TESTING PRACTICE TO
STUDIED ONLY ITEMS Aaron T. Mattfeld1, Eugenia Marin-Garcia1,2,3, Kath-

leen C. Candon1, John D.E. Gabrieli1; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, 3Ikerbasque — We examined the transfer of the “testing-effect” - the memory benefit conferred by
testing during encoding - to studied-only items using 3 different studytest schedules during training with Swahili-English vocabulary pairs. In
the “between” experiment participants either only studied or studied and
tested all pairs during training. In the “within mixed” experiment, training
consisted of participants studying all pairs during study runs, and then
intermixed within each study-test run, restudied half of the words while
the other half were tested. Participants were never explicitly told which
pairs would be only studied versus studied-tested. Training in the “within
blocked” experiment consisted of participants studying half of the words
during a block of study only runs and then studying and testing the other
half of the words during a block of study/test runs. After a week, a final
cued-recall test was administered. The magnitude of the “testing-effect”
(difference in memory performance between study only and study/
test pairs) was compared between the three experiments with a one-way
ANOVA. We identified a significant main effect of experiment. Post hoc
comparisons showed that the “testing-effect” in the within mixed experiment was smaller than in the other two and that this was due to an increase
in the correct performance of the study items. These results suggest that
having a context in which it is not clear which information is going to be
tested during training generalizes the benefits of the “testing effect”.
2

2014 Annual Meeting	

G105
ACTIVITY PATTERNS IN THE HIPPOCAMPUS MEDIATE PRIOR
KNOWLEDGE INFLUENCES ON THE ENCODING OF NEW EVENTS

Oded Bein1, Anat Maril1; 1The Hebrew University of Jerusalem — Recent years
have brought a surge of interest in the neuronal mechanisms underlying
prior knowledge (schema) influences on the encoding of new events. Since
prior knowledge effects inherently involve activation of existing representations, we sought to investigate how neural patterns of activation in
the hippocampus mediate prior knowledge influences on the encoding of
new events. Subjects were scanned while presented with target items (e.g.,
CHICKEN) encoded with a schema-related noun (e.g., ‘egg’; schema condition) or with a schema-unrelated noun (e.g., ‘earrings’; no-schema condition), and were later tested on their memory for these target items. A
within-ROI between-conditions correlation analysis conducted in the hippocampus revealed a higher dissimilarity (lower correlation) between activation-patterns of later-remembered vs. later-forgotten items in the schema
compared to the no-schema condition. Moreover, the degree of dissimilarity was positively correlated with memory performance in the schema condition only. We suggest that patterns’ dissimilarity might reflect retrieval
of existing knowledge (by reactivation of representational patterns) which
supports later memory of schema items. Alternatively, schema items may
be remembered by the allocation of a better-defined representational pattern in the hippocampus.

G106
ROLE OF THE VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN IMAGINING FUTURE AND FICTITIOUS EXPERIENCES Elisa Ciaramelli1,

Elena Bertossi1, Fabio Aleo2; 1Dipartimento di Psicologia, Università di Bologna,
Italy, 2Centro studi e ricerche in Neuroscienze Cognitive, Cesena, Italy — The
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) is part of a network supporting
remembering the past and imagining the future (Buckner and Carroll,
2007). Consistently, patients with damage to the vmPFC (vmPFC patients)
appear “stuck in the present moment”, and may discount future rewards
more steeply than healthy individuals (Sellitto et al., 2010). To date, however, it is unclear whether the vmPFC is crucially implicated in the imagination of future events. Here, vmPFC patients, control patients with lesions
outside the vmPFC, and healthy controls imagined future as well as fictitious (atemporal) scenarios (Hassabis et al., 2007). A measure of the richness of imagined scenes was computed (Experiential Index) based on the
assessment of patients’ reports and qualitative ratings. The results show
a reduced Experiential Index in vmPFC compared to the control groups
in both future and fictitious scenarios. Interestingly, vmPFC patients rated
their simulated experiences as less spatially coherent than did controls.
These results indicate that the vmPFC is necessary for the simulation of
new experiences, possibly by supporting the generation and maintenance
of qualitative details in a coherent scene.

G107
A NAP RICH IN SLOW WAVE SLEEP SELECTIVELY PRESERVES
EMOTIONAL SCENE COMPONENTS Sara E. Alger1, Alexis Chambers1,

Jessica D. Payne1; 1University of Notre Dame — Sleep selectively preserves
aspects of memory most valuable to remember, such as emotionally salient
information, over less relevant details. The emotional tradeoff effect,
in which memory for the emotional focus of a scene is preserved at the
expense of surrounding neutral information, is amplified by a period of
sleep. However, the ideal composition of sleep involved in increasing the
magnitude of this tradeoff is unclear. Here, subjects viewed scenes containing an emotional or neutral foreground object placed on a neutral background. A baseline recognition test assessed immediate memory for half
the encoded objects and backgrounds, presented separately, to ensure all
groups encoded similarly. We then compared a period of wakefulness to
a 90-min nap either early (11am) or late (3pm) in the day, with naps naturally differing in sleep stage composition. Retest on the remaining images
occurred 7 hours after encoding. While both nap groups performed better
than the Wake group, a greater tradeoff emerged in the Late-Nap group
compared to the Wake group (t26=-2.47, p=.021). The Late-Nap group also
achieved significantly more slow wave sleep (SWS) than the Early-Nap
group (minutes, t28=-3.02, p=.005; percentage, t28=-3.40, p=.002), while the
Early-Nap group obtained a higher percentage of Stage 2 sleep (t28=2.59,

Poster Session G
p=.015). Correspondingly, and in-line with behavioral findings, tradeoff
scores correlated positively with SWS across both nap groups (minutes,
r=.38, p=.043; percentage, r=.44, p=.017). Taken together, this provides
strong evidence that, for daytime naps, a greater period of SWS-rich sleep is
necessary for the selective preservation of emotionally salient information.

G108
ADOPTING LOCAL OR GLOBAL PROCESSING ORIENTATION
PRIOR TO FACE RECOGNITION MODULATES EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL (ERP) OLD/NEW EFFECTS Susanna Bernstrup1, Mikael

Johansson1; 1Lund University — Previous research has demonstrated that
face recognition memory can be impaired after conducting perceptual tasks
with a focus on details. Based on the principle of transfer-appropriate processing and the idea that faces typically are processed holistically, it has
been argued that orientation towards local features diminishes the overlap
between processes engaged at study and test, with worsened recognition
memory as a result. The aim of the present experiment was to further elucidate how orientation affects face recognition memory, and to what extent
global and local processing influence well-established ERP old/new effects.
EEG was recorded while participants (N = 32) studied unfamiliar faces and
conducted an ensuing recognition memory test. Orientation was manipulated between subjects, whereby participants preceding the test phase
engaged in a task in which they processed either Local letters or Global
letters of Navon figures. The two groups demonstrated qualitative differences in their pattern of behavioral and electrophysiological measures of
memory, although old/new discrimination was unaffected by orientation.
The Global group showed early mid-frontal and late parietal old/new
effects, the putative indices of familiarity and recollection, respectively. An
additional late and right-frontally distributed old/new effect was present,
presumably reflecting post-retrieval monitoring. While the local group
exhibited robust early mid-frontal and late parietal old/new effect, the late
right frontal effect was absent. The local group also demonstrated a more
liberal response criterion, suggesting that local processing affects memory
control processes. The present results are discussed in light of face-related
expertise effects on memory and the principle of transfer-appropriate processing.

G109
MEMORIES IN AND OUT OF CONTEXT: CONSEQUENCES OF CORTISOL Vanessa A. van Ast1,2, Sandra Cornelisse3, Martijn Meeter4, Marian

Joëls3, Merel Kindt1; 1Radboud University Nijmegen, 2University of Amsterdam, 3Utrecht University, 4VU University Amsterdam — Stress is known to
exert considerable impact on learning and memory processes. Typically,
stress effects are investigated for single items (e.g., pictures, words), but
it remains unresolved how exactly stress may alter the storage of memories into their original encoding context (i.e., memory contextualization).
This most likely involves effects of the stress hormone cortisol, acting via
receptors located in the memory neurocircuitry. Cortisol via these receptors induces rapid non-genomic effects followed by slower genomic effects,
which are thought to modulate cognitive function in opposite, complementary ways. In a first study we targeted these time-dependent effects of
cortisol during memory encoding, and tested subsequent contextualization
of emotional and neutral memories. Cortisol’s rapid effects impaired emotional memory contextualization, while cortisol’s slow effects enhanced it.
In a second study we manipulated endogenous cortisol levels by means of
a social stressor prior to encoding. Cortisol, but no other indices of stress,
uniquely mediated the effects of stress on contextualization of neutral and
negative memories. These results suggest that there is a specific role for cortisol in the way memories are integrated in their surrounding context. Since
the inability to store fearful memories into their original encoding context
is considered to be an important vulnerability factor for the development
of anxiety disorders like posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), these results
furthermore suggest that stress-induced cortisol responses and slow effects
of cortisol serve a protective function against memory generalization, while
high doses of cortisol may contribute to increased emotional memory generalization.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

249

Poster Session G	

G110
REINSTATEMENT OF NEURAL PATTERNS DURING NARRATIVE
FREE RECALL Janice Chen1, Yuan Chang Leong1, Uri Hasson1; 1Princeton
University — When we perceive the external world, we encode part of that
experience into memory. During subsequent recall, some states of the brain
supporting the initial perception of that experience are reinstated. Reinstatement can be measured by comparing the spatial patterns of neural activity
during encoding against those observed during recall; this method can illuminate what networks in the brain are involved in representation of the
encoded/recalled material. Previous studies have relied on simple stimuli
and multiple encoding exposures to amplify effects. In this study, we present robust encoding-recall neural pattern similarity in a naturalistic task:
watching a movie and freely recalling the plot. Twelve subjects watched
a 50-minute movie (BBC’s “Sherlock”), and then verbally recounted the
movie, all while their brain activity was recorded using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Recall sessions lasted 15 minutes on average. Neural data from the movie scans were divided into 50 segments, and
data from the recall scans were divided into matching segments. Data were
averaged across time within segments, and similarity between encoding/
recall scene pairs was calculated (correlation across voxels). A searchlight
analysis revealed a network of regions in which encoding/recall similarity
was statistically significant, including retrosplenial, precuneus, lateral prefrontal, and lateral temporal cortices, and angular gyrus. This network corresponded closely to regions that were functionally correlated with retrosplenial cortex; the same network exhibited sensitivity to information over
long timescales in previous studies. Our results suggest that these regions
support representation of complex narrative information during encoding
that is reinstated during verbal recall.

G111
NEURAL CORRELATES OF NARRATIVE REINSTATEMENT USING
INTERLEAVED AUDITORY STORIES Michael Chow1, Janice Chen1, Chris-

topher Honey2, Uri Hasson1; 1Princeton University, 2University of Toronto —
In everyday activities, we are often interrupted mid-task and must later
return to the task. This ability to “pick up where you left off” requires a
representation of the former state to be stored or maintained during the distraction, then reintroduced to active awareness when the task is resumed.
We investigated how the brain supports the reintroduction of former states
when processing complex natural stimuli. Thirty-six subjects listened to
two auditory stories (30 minutes) while their brain activity was recorded
using functional magnetic resonance imaging. Half of subjects heard the
stories sequentially (“intact”); the other half switched between stories every
minute (“interleaved”). Data from the “interleaved” condition were divided
by story and concatenated, thus reconstructing the order of the “intact” stories. We focused on a network of brain regions known to be active during
episodic retrieval: precuneus, retrosplenial, and medial prefrontal cortex,
and angular gyrus. First, we observed that reconstructed timecourses in
the “interleaved” condition were strongly correlated (R > 0.5) with timecourses from the “intact” condition. This suggests that the context of each
story is rapidly reinstated when needed. Second, we observed a short-lived
increase in response amplitude following the switches, which may be associated with retrieval of the relevant context. Finally, we observed that the
multi-voxel pattern was similar within each story, but not across stories,
suggesting that the stories were represented by two different sub-populations of neurons. Together, these results illuminate how the brain is capable
of tracking and switching between multiple contexts.

G112
UNCERTAINTY INFLUENCES ITEM-LEVEL PERCEPTUAL PROCESSING FOR SCENES Matthew Gillespie1, Dylan Nielson1, Troy Smith1,

Emily Weichart1, Per Sederberg1; 1Ohio State University — Prior work has
demonstrated that increasing the probability of a stimulus leads to
decreased neural processing of that item when it is repeated, a phenomenon known as repetition attenuation (RA). Summerfield et al. (2008)
demonstrated this in the fusiform face area (FFA) by presenting subjects
with pairs of faces under two conditions of differing stimulus repetition
probability (75% or 25%). However, it remains unclear whether decreased
neural processing of items with a high probability of repetition is the result
of item-specific predictions or a general reduction in uncertainty, as the
findings with faces were not replicated with objects as the visual stimuli

250

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
(Kovacs et al. 2013). The present event-related fMRI study sought to test the
extent to which uncertainty alone could shape the perceptual processing
of scenes. We varied (on a trial level) the pre-stimulus onset information
such that subjects knew they were certain to see a novel item, certain to see
a repeated item, or were uncertain whether the next presentation would
be of a new or old item. Critically, we held constant the overall probability of item repetition, so each item was seen the same number of times.
Our results show a significant increase in neural activity during processing
of uncertain item repetitions in right hippocampus, bilateral cuneus, and
bilateral anterior cingulate. These results lend support to the hypothesis
that uncertainty plays a role in perceptual processing, even in the absence
of item-specific predictions.

G113
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN NEURAL AND EYE MOVEMENT
REPETITION EFFECTS Rosanna Olsen1, Bradley Buchsbaum1,2, Douglas

McQuiggan1, Jennifer Ryan1,2,3; 1Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, 2University of Toronto, Department of Psychology, 3University of Toronto, Department
of Psychiatry — It is well established that the fixation patterns elicited by
repeated items is distinct from the viewing patterns to novel items. While
this behavioral effect is thought to reflect experience-dependent memory
processes, little is known about which brain regions support this type of
learning. Furthermore, neuropsychological evidence is mixed as to whether
the hippocampus is required for the manifestation of eye movement repetition effects for items. To address this question a concurrent functional
magnetic resonance imaging and eye-tracking study of face repetition was
conducted. Twenty participants were scanned while viewing faces and
eye movements were simultaneously collected while the participants performed an age judgment on each face. A given face was presented one, two,
three, or four times within a scan and a general linear model was used to
model the brain response. Three parametric regressors were used as covariates of interest: 1) effect of repetition 2) response time and 3) number of
fixations directed to the face. Areas within the medial temporal lobe (MTL;
perirhinal cortex, amygdala, anterior hippocampus) and the fusiform gyrus
demonstrated repetition suppression (a linear decrease with repetition)
and these same regions also demonstrated a linear relationship with the
number of fixations. The magnitude of the eye movement repetition effect
was also significantly related to the amount of repetition suppression in
the MTL across subjects. The regions that covaried with response time did
not overlap with those elicited by the eye movement repetition effect, suggesting a dissociation between behavioral priming and the eye movement
repetition effect.

G114
INTER-INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN SLEEP PARAMETERS AND
EPISODIC MEMORY CONSOLIDATION DURING SLEEP Sandra Ack-

ermann1,2,3, Francina Hartmann3, Andreas Papassotiropoulos3,4, Dominique J.-F.
de Quervain3,4, Bjoern Rasch1,5; 1University of Zurich, 2Clinic of Affective Disorders and General Psychiatry, Psychiatric University Hospital Zurich, 3University
of Basel, 4Psychiatric University Clinics, Basel, 5University of Fribourg — Sleep
and memory are stable and heritable traits that strongly differ between
individuals. Sleep has been shown to benefit memory consolidation. While
consolidation of declarative, hippocampus-dependent memories benefit
from slow wave sleep, processing of emotional memory has been predominantly associated with REM sleep. Here we tested in a large sample of
healthy young individuals whether inter-individual differences in sleep are
predictive for individual differences in memory formation. The Memory
task consisted of encoding and recalling emotional and neutral pictures. To
test the sleep-dependency of the task, we conducted a pilot study in which
subjects either slept between encoding and recall (n=28) or stayed awake
(n=28). Subjects, who slept between encoding and recall showed better
recall performance than subjects who stayed awake between encoding and
recall. 929 subjects aged 18 to 35 years took part in the main study. Subjects
encoded and recalled emotional and neutral pictures the evening before
and the day after sleep was recorded at home using a portable EEG-recording device. Contrary to our expectations, we did not find any significant correlations between sleep and memory consolidation, except for a
weak negative correlation between percentage of REM-sleep and overnight memory retention of pictures, independent of picture valence. Our
results indicate that inter-individual differences in sleep are less predictive

2014 Annual Meeting	
for memory processes than previously assumed. Rather intra-individual
than inter-individual differences seem to contribute to effects of sleep on
memory consolidation.

G115
THE NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF LOCATION IN REMEMBERED
EXPERIENCE Vishnu Sreekumar1, Troy Smith1, Simon Dennis2, Dylan Niel-

son1, Per Sederberg1; 1Ohio State University, 2University of Newcastle — In
a series of studies, we track the neural correlates of remembered personal
experience in an attempt to understand the representation of autobiographical memory in the brain. In the current study, we focus on the location in
which events occur as a key element of experience. Five participants used
android phones equipped with custom lifelogging software to collect data
about their everyday events for a period of 4 weeks. The phone automatically captured images, obfuscated audio, GPS, orientation, accelerometry, gyroscopic and time information. Participants were brought into the
lab 7-14 days after the data collection phase for a reminiscence task in an
fMRI scanner. Each participant viewed his/her own images and mentally
relived the corresponding events. In order to track the neural correlates of
location, we employed representational similarity analysis (RSA) to identify the regions where the pattern of neural activity during retrieval was
more similar for events that occurred in nearby locations (smaller distance
between the corresponding GPS coordinates) than for events that occurred
further apart. Patterns of neural activity correlate with location patterns
in regions that are involved in manipulation of spatial attention (e.g. right
superior parietal lobule), storage of spatial information (e.g. right middle
frontal gyrus), representation of affect-laden autobiographical information
(e.g. right middle temporal gyrus) and other language processing regions
(e.g. left inferior frontal gyrus). Together these regions provide participants
with a way to reconstruct the location and other related aspects of events
in a narrative manner.

G116
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE AND PREFRONTAL CORTEX USING A CONTEXT-DEPENDENT RELATIONAL
LOAD TASK Justine E. Cohen1,2, Robert S. Ross3, Chantal E. Stern1,2; 1Boston

University, 2Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, 3University of New Hampshire — We designed a context-dependent relational load task to explore medial temporal lobe (MTL)
and prefrontal (PFC) contributions to context-dependent retrieval. In the
task, picture frames were presented as a contextual cue (2 sec), followed by
a face within the frame (2 sec), and then a scene (4 sec). In the low relational
load (two context) condition, two of the frames were paired with two faces
and two scenes and the correct response was dependent on which frame
was presented. The high relational load (four context) condition was identical except that four frames were paired with four faces and four scenes. In
the control condition, one frame and face were associated with one scene.
One day after training, participants (N=19) were tested on the retrieval of
the context-dependent associations during fMRI scanning. Results demonstrate significantly more activation in the hippocampus, caudate, and orbitofrontal cortex in both the 2 and 4 context conditions compared to the control condition. We used functional connectivity methods to further explore
MTL-PFC interactions with seed regions in the hippocampal head, body,
and tail and in the orbitofrontal cortex. The results indicate that PFC areas
work in concert with MTL regions during context-dependent retrieval.

G117
ERP CORRELATES OF THE MAINTENANCE OF RECOLLECTED
INFORMATION Leslie J Lewis1, Kaia L Vilberg1, Michael D Rugg1; 1University
of Texas at Dallas — Successful recollection is consistently associated with
more positive-going ERP waveforms over left parietal scalp sites (“left parietal effect”). fMRI studies have reported a parallel effect: successful recollection is associated with enhanced activity in the left angular gyrus (LAG).
In two recent fMRI studies, it was reported that LAG activity persists when
recollected information is maintained across a delay period. Here, we investigated whether the left parietal ERP effect is similarly sustained over a
delay interval following recollection. Participants (N=20) studied a series of
word-picture pairs. In the subsequent test phase, both studied and unstudied words were presented under the requirement to judge whether the test
item was old or new and, if old, to retrieve the associated study picture and

Poster Session G
maintain it across a variable delay interval (three or seven seconds after
item onset). A cue at the end of the interval prompted one of three judgments to be made about the recollected image. Separate responses were
made for words judged new or when item recognition was successful but
recollection failed. ERPs elicited by recognized test items were contrasted
over a 3 second epoch according to whether recollection was successful or
unsuccessful. A recollection-sensitive left parietal effect was identified, and
this effect was sustained across the epoch. Sustained recollection effects
were also observed at frontal and central sites. The findings support the
proposal that the left parietal ERP effect may be generated in the left angular gyrus, and provide further insight into the mechanisms underlying the
maintenance of recollected information.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Other
G118
THE NEURAL RESPONSE TO ISOLATED TONAL AND RHYTHMIC
FEATURES FROM FAMILIAR SONGS WHEN RETRIEVAL FAILS Alex-

ander Claxton1, Anne Cleary1, Carol Seger1, Michael Thaut1; 1Colorado State
University — Research with visual feature-based cues has shown dissociable activation in the hippocampus and the perirhinal cortex depending on
whether target retrieval in response to the cue succeeds or fails. Our study
investigated the neural response to familiar auditory musical features (tone
or rhythm) during retrieval failure. Participants heard brief piano clips
of known songs at study. At test, they heard isolated tones and isolated
rhythms, some from studied and some from unstudied song clips. Participants were asked to judge the familiarity of the song features as well as
to identify the song. Our interest was in song retrieval failure. When song
retrieval failed, the hippocampus showed no significant differences. However, the parahippocampal area showed greater activity for familiarized
than unfamiliarized song features when retrieval failed (p = .0013). Additionally, areas of the left inferior frontal gyrus showed greater activation for
familiarized than unfamiliarized song features during retrieval failure (p =
.0002), as did the posterior superior temporal lobe (p = .0002). Finally, this
comparison also revealed differential activation of areas of the basal ganglia (p < .0001). Overall the basal ganglia difference was carried largely by
the isolated rhythm features, as when the data were separated according to
feature-type, basal ganglia activation was greater for familiarized than for
unfamiliarized isolated rhythms (p = .0013), but no differences were found
for isolated tones. We also compared the study list to the isolated tones at
test and found greater activation in the right hippocampus during study
relative to test (p = .0006).

G119
IMPAIRED DETAILED AND PRESERVED SCHEMATIC REPRESENTATIONS IN REMOTE SPATIAL MEMORY Katherine A. Herdman1, Asaf

Gilboa2,3, Morris Moscovitch2,3, Gordon Winocur2,3,4, R. Shayna Rosenbaum1,2;
1
York University, 2Baycrest Hospital, 3University of Toronto, 4Trent University
— It is commonly thought that spatial memory relies on the hippocampus
(HC), a structure in the medial temporal lobe (MTL), but it is becoming clear
that some aspects of spatial memory can be spared following HC damage.
Findings in patients with extensive MTL damage indicate that the HC is not
necessary for remote spatial memory of the gist or schematic aspects that
are sufficient for navigating within environments learned long ago, though
it may be necessary for representing spatial details contained within those
same environments (Rosenbaum et al., 2000). We tested whether a similar
pattern of intact schematic representations but impaired detailed representations would appear in patients with less extensive damage to the MTL
or that is restricted to the fornix, a major output of the HC. Three patients
with bilateral MTL damage, two patients with bilateral fornix lesions, and
controls with experience navigating the same environments as the patients
completed mental navigation tasks for multiple remote environments
that assess identity and location of landmarks, distances and directions
between them, and representations of routes. Patients’ sketch maps and
route descriptions that were lacking in detail suggest that the HC may be
needed to represent details of environments, even following selective fornix
damage, and might relate to the patients’ episodic memory impairment.
This contrasts with our findings of preserved schematic representations,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

251

Poster Session G	
with some evidence of temporally graded impairment (worse performance
on tests based on more recent vs. remote environments), consistent with
patterns of remote semantic memory loss in the patients.

G120
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN OSCILLATORY NEURAL ACTIVITY
IN VISUOSPATIAL MEMORY BINDING Renante Rondina II1,2, Rosanna

Olsen2, Lily Riggs3, Jed Meltzer1,2, Jennifer Ryan1,2; 1University of Toronto,
Rotman Research Institute, 3Hospital for Sick Children — This study examined differences in oscillatory neural activity between older and younger
adults performing a visuospatial short-term relational memory task. We
used magnetoencephalography (MEG) to quantify theta and alpha oscillations in the hippocampus and cortex in 12 younger and 12 older adults. On
each trial, three objects were sequentially presented, and participants had
to bind the spatial relations between objects to form a spatial configuration.
After a two second delay, the objects were simultaneously re-presented and
participants were asked whether the spatial configuration had changed.
We used synthetic aperture magnetometry (SAM) to assess oscillatory
neural activity in brain source space. Critically, there were no differences
between groups in memory performance. However, preliminary analyses
found that younger adults showed incremental theta power increases in
the hippocampus during the encoding phase when they had to bind the
spatial relations between objects, which correlated with task performance,
whereas older adults showed incremental alpha power decreases in widespread cortical areas, particularly in the parietal lobe. This suggests that
younger and older adults relied on different neural systems to perform the
task, with young adults employing a hippocampal-dependent relational
binding strategy, whereas older adults relied more on a parietal attentional
mechanism. A comparison of prestimulus activity revealed greater baseline
alpha power for older adults than younger adults, which may account for
the larger modulation of alpha power induced by the task in older adults.
These findings illuminate the role of hippocampal oscillatory activity in
relational binding over short delays, and compensatory mechanisms in
aging.

2

G121
FRONTO-TEMPORAL WHITE MATTER CONNECTIVITY PREDICTS
LEARNING FROM REWARDS AND PUNISHMENTS Kylie H. Hower1,

Tyler M. Rolheiser2, Ingrid R. Olson1; 1Temple University, 2University of Alberta
— Stimulus associations are frequently learned through the slow accrual
of contingencies shaped by rewards and punishments. Successful performance on these tasks likely relies on mnemonic capabilities of the anterior
and medial temporal lobes, as well as reward contingencies and valence
information coded by the orbitofrontal cortex. These neural regions are
structurally interconnected via an association fiber pathway called the
uncinate fasciculus (UF). Here, we used diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)
and behavioral paradigms to examine the relationship between behavioral
performance on a name-face associative learning task and microstructural
integrity of the UF. In addition, we examined indices linked to orbitofrontal
cortex function: self-report measures of sensitivity to reward and punishment. In the associative learning task, participants (N=17, ages 18-27, M =
21.00, SD = 2.55) learned 30 name-face pairs over the course of 600 trials.
During each trial, a face was presented along with two name options. Participants were trained to learn the correct name-face pairings as associative units based on the positive (correct) or negative (incorrect) feedback
given after each trial. DTI data was collected on a 3T scanner (64 directions) and analyzed using FSL and TrackVis. Deterministic tractography
was performed to compute the mean fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean
diffusivity (MD) of bilateral UF. Regression analyses revealed a strong relationship between learning rate and microstructural properties of the UF, as
well as a relationship with reward sensitivity. These findings suggest that
the UF plays a role in encoding and updating feedback history with respect
to learning associated reward contingencies.

G122
AUDITORY CLOSED-LOOP STIMULATION OF SLOW OSCILLATIONS TO ENHANCE MEMORY Hong-Viet Ngo1,2, Thomas Martinetz2, Jan

Born1, Matthias Mölle2; 1University of Tübingen, 2University of Lübeck — The
sleep slow oscillation is a distinct event in the human electroencephalogram with a characteristic peak frequency <1 Hz and amplitudes greater

252

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
than 75 µV hallmarking slow-wave sleep. There is compelling evidence that
these slow oscillations group thalamic-cortical spindle activity, the second
unique feature found during sleep EEG, and hippocampal ripple activity
and therefore plays a critical role in the interaction of the neocortex and
subcortical structures involved in the consolidation of memory during
sleep. Here we show in sleeping humans that brief auditory stimulation
applied in synchrony with the endogenous slow oscillation rhythm with
a closed-loop control approach reliably induces further slow oscillations
and, consequently, the consolidation of declarative word pair memory.
Furthermore, we will demonstrate that an auditory targeting an inducing
of SO activity is in particular paralleled by a striking global response of
spindle activity, which however also introduces a limitation to this stimulation approach. Nonetheless, closed-loop stimulation is a useful tool to
investigate specific brain rhythms and their functional role.

G123
VERBAL CUEING OF ASSOCIATED EMOTIONAL MEMORIES
DURING SLEEP Mick Lehmann1,2,3, Erich Seifritz1,3, Björn Rasch3,4; 1Psychi-

atric University Hospital Zurich, Switzerland, 2University of Zurich, Switzerland,
Clinical Research Priority Program Sleep and Health, Switzerland, 4University of
Fribourg, Switzerland — Sleep is known to promote consolidation of memories, and the beneficial effect of sleep on memory relies on spontaneous
reactivation of memories during sleep (Rasch & Born, 2013). Experimentally inducing memory reactivations during NonREM sleep by re-exposure
to associated odors or sounds boosts sleep-dependent memory consolidation and improves later retrieval (Rasch et al., 2007; Diekelmann et al., 2011;
Rudoy et al., 2009). In contrast for emotional fear memories, a recent study
shows that odor-induced reactivation during NonREM sleep promotes fear
extinction (Hauner et al., 2013), possibly suggesting a differential role of
reactivation during sleep on the content of memories as compared to the
memory-associated emotional arousal. Here we investigated whether reactivation of emotional memories during sleep affects memory content and
emotional arousal differentially or not. Thirty participants learned associations between neutral spoken words with negative and neutral pictures.
During the subsequent retention interval, half of the words were repeatedly replayed either during sleep or during wakefulness. Retrieval testing
included tests for memory content (e.g. cued recall), associated emotional
arousal (e.g. skin conductance response) as well as expectancy ratings (e.g.
confidence whether a word was followed by a negative or neutral picture).
Sleep was recorded using high density EEG (128 channels). Preliminary
analysis showed that participants remembered more pictures after a retention interval followed by sleep as compared to wakefulness, which was
more pronounced for cued word-pictures pairs.

3

G124
REPRESENTATION OF VISUAL INFORMATION FROM LONG-TERM
MEMORY Sue-Hyun Lee1, Dwight Kravitz1, Chris Baker1; 1National Institute of

Mental Health, National Institutes of Health — Long-term memory processes
allow humans to store learned information, and recall that information
later. Although prior studies have suggested that short-term (or working) memory retrieval generates object-specific representations in visual
cortex, it remains unclear how specific the representations recalled from
long-term memory are. To test whether the visual cortex as well as hippocampus represents object-specific activation during recall of information
from long-term memory, we performed an event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiment, comprising separate perception, learning and recall sessions. During the perception session, participants were presented fixed pairings of 14 auditory psuedowords and object
images (e.g. “tenire” - striped chair) inside scanner. During the learning
session, on a separate day outside the scanner, participants were trained
to memorize the pseudoword-object associations. Finally, one day after
the learning, participants were scanned and instructed to recall each object
image in response to the paired pseudoword. To test the veracity of the
recalled visual information, participants were asked to draw detailed pictures of the object images after the retrieval scan session. We focused on
two primary regions-of-interest: object-selective cortex and hippocampus.
Both object-selective cortex and hippocampus were significantly activated
during the recall of paired object images. Moreover, the response of both
object-selective cortex and hippocampus areas could be used to decode
the identity of individual remembered objects, and there was close correspondence between the representations during perception and retrieval in

2014 Annual Meeting	
object-selective cortex. These results suggest that recall of visual information from long-term memory activates a fine-grained representation in both
hippocampal and cortical areas.

G125
INVESTIGATING INTERACTIONS BETWEEN WORKING MEMORY
AND LONG-TERM MEMORY SYSTEMS USING THE HEBB REPETITION EFFECT Kathryn Gigler1, Paul Reber1; 1Northwestern University

— Long-term working memory (LTWM) reflects an interaction between
working memory (WM) and long-term memory (LTM) systems in which
effective WM capacity is expanded for experts due to knowledge representations in LTM. In the laboratory, this interaction can be studied with
the Hebb repetition effect, where performance on a span-based WM task
improves when a target sequence is presented repeatedly. Here the Hebb
effect was examined using a visuospatial WM task in which cues were
presented in four different spatial locations and participants attempted
to reproduce presented sequences, with one target sequence presented
repeatedly. Across three experiments, participants with explicit knowledge
of the repeating sequence exhibited higher effective span for the repeated
sequences. When the presented sequence started at the beginning of the
sequence, the repetitions were obvious and the Hebb effect was obtained.
When repetitions started from varying points within the sequence, only a
subset of participants recognized the sequence. Participants who explicitly recognized the repeating sequence exhibited the Hebb WM expansion
effect. Participants with higher WM capacity were more likely to recognize
the sequence. Neuroimaging results highlight the interactions between
LTM and WM systems. These results indicate the operation of a feedback
loop whereby higher initial WM leads to increased knowledge in LTM,
enhancing effective WM via LTWM, as seen with the Hebb effect. These
results provide insight into why high WM capacity may lead to faster
acquisition of expertise in complex domains.

G126
THE COGNITIVE AND NEURAL BASES OF FACE MEMORABILITY

Wilma A. Bainbridge1, Aude Oliva1; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology —
We encounter a constant stream of faces in our lives, and while we forever remember faces we have seen for only a minute, we also forget faces
we see everyday. These faces differ in their memorability, a predictive
value of whether a novel stimulus will be later remembered or forgotten.
Memorability is often equated to the conceptual or perceptual atypicality
of faces. We conducted a large-scale study to examine how an exhaustive
set of 20 face attributes, including typicality, is predictive of memorability.
Memorability scores (hit rate and false alarm rate from an online memory
game) and attribute ratings were collected for 2,222 faces from a new publicly-available dataset (10k US Adult Faces Database). Using multiple linear
regression models, we find that a subset of these attributes (e.g., irresponsible, kind) significantly predict memorability scores (p < 10^-115), that atypicality is not the sole predictor of memorability, and that there is still a large
amount (54%) of unexplained yet consistent variance in memorability. In
addition, we conducted an fMRI block-design study (N=14) using a perceptual paradigm and find several significant perceptual (e.g., occipital face
area, parahippocampal place area) and memory regions (e.g., perirhinal
cortex) in the brain with preferential activity for novel memorable versus
forgettable images of faces and scenes, even with only single exposures.
These results suggest that memorability can be used as a singular attribute
to examine signatures of memory during the perception of an image.

G127
NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS UNDERLYING REAL-WORLD SPATIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL Lindsay K. Vass1, Russell A. Epstein1; 1Univer-

sity of Pennsylvania — When navigating within a real-world environment,
one must often determine the direction to a distant goal based on one’s
current location and orientation. What are the neural representations that
underlie this ability? We scanned university students with fMRI while
they performed two versions of a judgment of relative direction task that
required them to imagine themselves facing a particular direction at a particular campus location and then report whether a target building would be
to their left or right. In version 1, the starting location and facing direction
were indicated by word cues (“you are at X facing Y”). In version 2, the
starting location and direction were indicated by a photograph depicting

Poster Session G
the view from X facing Y. The target was indicated verbally in both cases.
We examined similarities between multivoxel patterns across the two versions of the experiment to test for representations of starting location, facing
direction, and goal direction that were independent of stimulus modality.
Preliminary results suggest that scene-selective retrosplenial complex
(RSC) codes for both the facing direction and goal direction using an allocentric code that abstracts across different campus locations. In contrast, the
parahippocampal place area (PPA) represents the individual views that can
be observed from a given location. These results show that abstract directional information is represented in RSC when subjects retrieve information from spatial memory. Furthermore, these representations are elicited
irrespective of whether the spatial memory system is driven by top-down
imagery processes or bottom-up perceptual processes.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition
G128
A MULTIGENERATIONAL STUDY: CLASSICAL CONDITIONING
AND ASSOCIATIVE LEARNING WITH AUDITORY STIMULI AND
3RD INSTAR DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTER Jessyka Venchkoski1,

Alexa Gammo1, Adrianna Krul1, Julian Keenan1; 1Montclair State University —
Previous research indicates that Drosophila melanogaster 3rd instar larvae
have the capacity to learn association through classical conditioning with
visual and olfactory cues. The current study was conducted to further
extend the understanding of 3rd instar larvae associative learning with
auditory cues. Preliminary findings suggest that the use of auditory stimuli
with gustatory UCS (unconditioned stimuli) can result in successful associative learning. To determine potential genetic mechanisms, we conducted
a generational experiment to test whether auditory associative learning
capacities could spread to successive offspring. A 250 hertz tone was used
as the conditioned stimulus, (CS). Fructose served as the gustatory UCS.
Conditioning assays were performed in petri dishes on half agar-only, half
agar and fructose. We ran 30 larvae through five, 3 minute conditioning
trials where the UCS+ and CS were paired. Testing involved agar-only petri
dishes in which only the tone was presented. One-third of the larvae that
spent a significant amount of the three minutes on the positive zone (tone
side) were separated and bred. Three separate assays were performed for
the 33% of each of subsequent generations. The results are thus far mixed. It
appears that conditioning occurs, and that under some conditions (eg, specific tones) conditioning can be achieved. However, the generational data
demonstrate that while there are indicators of a genetic influence, more sensitive measures are required to determine any allele differences between
those successfully conditioned and those that were not.

G129
EXPERT AND NON-EXPERT ATHLETES DIFFER IN PROCESSING
OF AUDITORY STIMULI Madeleine Warner1, Victoria Wagner1, Elizabeth

Woods1, Sian Beilock2, Arturo Hernandez1; 1University of Houston, 2University
of Chicago — Previous functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have shown that expertise in a sport can modulate neural responses
(Beilock et al, 2008). However, these studies have only examined differences in the visual modality. The present study investigated the impact of
athletic expertise on auditory processing. Participants were members of collegiate basketball and tennis teams (experts) and college-aged recreational
players (non-experts). During the fMRI task, participants heard basketball
and tennis sounds as well as environmental sounds. Following each sound,
participants were asked to replay the sound or imagine doing the action
associated with the sound. Significant differences were found between
the two groups when imagining the actions associated with familiar sport
sounds. Non-experts recruited a large region including the bilateral cerebellar vermis, thalamus, lingual gyrus and hippocampus. Non-experts
showed greater activation for familiar environmental sounds recruiting
regions including BA 3, superior parietal lobule and cingulate gyrus as well
as a region in right inferior parietal lobule. Non-experts showed greater
activation in right hippocampus when asked to use auditory imagery for
unfamiliar environmental sounds. These results suggest that experts are
more efficient at processing familiar sounds and better at tuning out irrelevant sounds. In the sports familiar tasks non-experts displayed greater
activation in the primary visual cortex and bilateral hippocampus while
experts displayed increased activation in regions associated with auditory
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

253

Poster Session G	
and motor planning. This suggests that non-experts may have used more
visual imagery whereas experts may be better at linking the sound directly
to the action.

G130
AUDITORY PROCESSES ON DIFFERENT TEMPORAL SCALES
REVEALED BY PHASE AND POWER OF NEURAL OSCILLATIONS

Xiangbin Teng1, David Poeppel1; 1Department of Psychology, New York University — The auditory system operates on different timescales to extract
acoustic information. The neural mechanisms underlying this multi-scale
processing remain unclear. We investigated this question by using acoustic
stimuli with temporal structures at three scales (~200, ~100 and ~30 ms).
Participants were asked to identify different stimuli embedded in white
noise at varying signal-to-noise ratios while undergoing magnetoencephalographic recording. MEG results showed that phase coherence across
trials in the theta band (4 - 7 Hz) positively correlated with behavioral performance for the stimulus of timescale at ~ 200 ms but not for the stimuli of timescale 100 or 30 ms. Induced power in the gamma band (31 - 45
Hz) negatively correlated with behavioral performance for the stimulus of
timescale at ~ 30 ms, but not for the stimuli of timescale 200 or 30 ms. For all
stimuli, power in the alpha band (8 - 12 Hz) increased as behavioral performance decreased. The results suggest that the auditory system can employ
a robust phase coding at the timescale of ~ 200 ms and power coding of ~
30 ms, and that auditory processing generally correlates with desynchronization at the alpha band. The study sheds light on the mechanism of multiscale processing in audition by determining distinct temporal processing
regimes.

G131
CORTICAL CONTROL OF VOCAL PITCH FEEDBACK

H. Charles Li1,
Psyche Loui2, Gus F. Halwani1, Frank H. Guenther3, Gottfried Schlaug1; 1Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical School / Harvard Medical School, 2Wesleyan University, 3Boston University — Speaking and singing require rapid and automatic
coupling between feedforward and feedback processes of the auditory-motor system, but how the neural sensitivity to auditory feedback facilitates
pitch production remains unclear. Here we investigated neural sensitivity
to pitch-shifted auditory feedback in a combined behavioral and functional
MRI study using 19 non-musicians. During the fMRI task, auditory feedback was randomly perturbed by shifting the participants’ fundamental
frequency (F0) 1 and 2 semitones (ST) in either direction across trials during
a sparse-temporal sampled fMRI study. Behavioral recordings of vocal
pitch production showed that participants compensated for the ±1ST perturbations by varying their F0 production in the direction opposite to the
experimental manipulation, and appeared to follow the ±2ST perturbations
(i.e., they varied their production in the same direction as the perturbation).
Functional MRI for all production compared to no production conditions
showed a vocal-motor network including feedback and feedforward sensorimotor integration and control regions, while the 1ST vs. non-perturbed
contrast revealed a network that included left superior temporal sulcus
(STS), planum temporale (PT), premotor cortex (PMC), ventral motor cortex
(vMC), supplementary motor area (SMA), and right Heschl’s gyrus (HG).
The 2ST vs. non-perturbed contrast, however, only showed activation in
the SMA. This network of auditory, motor, and auditory-motor mapping
regions seems to play a critical role in auditory feedback control. The integration of sensory and motor information in the posterior ventral premotor
cortex establishes it as one of the critical control regions of this network.

G132
COVERT VOICES AFFECT HOW LOUD YOU HEAR OVERT SOUNDS
Xing Tian1, Xiangbin Teng1, Nai Ding1, David Poeppel1; 1New York University —
How do thoughts affect perception? We investigate the interaction between
mental representation and perception in the auditory domain. In a behavioral and a Magnetoencephalography (MEG) experiment, participants
were asked to imagine speaking the syllable /da/ loudly (loud condition)
or softly (soft condition) before they heard the playback of their own voice
of the same syllable. Behavioral results showed that the loudness rating of
the playback was smaller in the loud condition than that in soft condition.
MEG results demonstrated that the magnitude of neural responses to the
overt auditory stimuli was smaller in the loud condition compared to those
elicited in the soft condition. These consistent behavioral and electrophys-

254

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
iological results suggest that the top-down induced neural representation
converges to the same representational format as the neural representation established during perception, even for basic sensory features such as
loudness. Such a coordinate transformation in a top-down process forms
the neurocomputational foundation that enables the interaction with a bottom-up process.

G133
MAPPING THE AUDITORY SENSORY MEMORY WITH FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING Raffaele Cacciaglia1,2,

Sabine Grimm1,2, Jordi Costa-Faidella1,2, Katarzyna Zarnowiec1,2, Carles
Escera1,2; 1Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior (IR3C), University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia-Spain., 2Cognitive Neuroscience Research Group,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia-Spain. — Auditory deviance
detection has been related to the mismatch negativity (MMN), a component
of the human event-related potentials (ERPs) peaking when an infrequent
sound, referred as deviant (DEV), is embedded within repeatedly presented sounds, referred as standards (STD). MMN represents an indirect
marker of auditory sensory memory, as its amplitude positively relates to
the number of sounds that precede DEV stimuli. A putative direct signature of auditory sensory memory is the repetition positivity (RP), a positive
wave of the human ERPs spanning between 50-200-ms, whose amplitude
increases along with stimulus repetition. The goal of this study was to characterize the functional neuroanatomy of stimulus repetition effects in the
auditory system, in order to uncover the neural correlates of the echoic
memory trace formation. Fifteen participants underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging while presented with a roving standard paradigm.
Stimuli were 100-ms pure tones delivered at 500-ms presentation rate, and
were arranged in trains of different frequency and length. When contrasting DEV>STD trials, we found robust activation in the superior temporal
gyrus and Heschl’s gyrus. Activity in these two regions was modulated
by DEV probability, being stronger for DEV stimuli preceded by a higher
number of STDs. Further, low probable DEV sounds engaged a more distributed network, including subcortical stages of processing, such as the
medial geniculate body and the inferior colliculus. Our results provide a
hemodynamic correlate of the human auditory sensory memory and match
emerging views of auditory deviance detection accounting for hierarchical
predictive coding during perceptual learning.

G134
USING MUSIC TO INVESTIGATE THE NATURE OF NEURAL OSCILLATIONS IN AUDITORY CORTEX Keith Doelling1, David Poeppel1,2; 1New

York University, 2NYU Abu Dhabi — The presence and role of neural oscillations in auditory cortex in the context of auditory perception has elicited controversy. A growing body of data supports the hypothesis that
delta-theta oscillations track the envelope of an auditory input in order to
parse the stimulus. An alternative hypothesis suggests oscillatory activity
merely reflects onset responses to quasi-rhythmic stimuli. One prediction
stemming only from the oscillatory model of tracking is the presence of a
lower limit to the frequency range at which this oscillatory tracking mechanism breaks down. Here we test - using MEG - the ability of delta and
theta oscillations to track stimuli whose envelopes maintained modal frequencies at ~8, ~5 and ~0.5 Hz using ecologically valid stimuli - classical
music with carefully selected properties. Inter-trial coherence (ITC) analysis shows phase consistency for each clip in the fast- and mid-tempo pieces
at their respective modulation rates (8 Hz, 5 Hz). For the slow piece, ITC
is considerably lower at 0.5 Hz, the modal modulation rate of this condition. The experiment was repeated with stimuli at modulation rates of 1.5,
1 and .7 Hz. While ITC again showed phase consistency at 1.5 and 1 Hz,
no such consistency was found at .7 Hz. The data thus suggest a boundary
near 1 Hz. We hypothesize that the system compensates for slow inputs by
tracking the envelope using oscillations at harmonic frequencies within the
possible range of the system. Thus, the findings support an active role of
delta-theta oscillations in auditory perception.

G135
BRAIN-NETWORK RECONFIGURATION AND PERCEPTUAL
DECOUPLING DURING TRANCE Michael J Hove1,2, Johannes Stelzer1, Till

Nierhaus1, Sabrina Thiel1, Christopher Gundlach1, Daniel S Margulies1, Koene
RA Van Dijk2, Robert Turner1, Peter E Keller3,1, Bjorn Merker4; 1Max Planck Insti-

2014 Annual Meeting	
tute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 2Harvard Medical School,
3
University of Western Sydney, 4Kristianstad, Sweden — Trance is a state of
consciousness characterized by narrowed awareness of external surroundings and long used by shamans to gain valued insight. Shamans often
induce trance by listening to rhythmic drumming. However, little is known
about the underlying brain mechanisms. Using fMRI, we examined the
brain networks associated with trance. Experienced shamanic practitioners
(n=15; average shamanic experience = 9.3 years) listened to rhythmic drumming with their eyes closed, and either entered a trance state or remained
in a non-trance state, during 8-minute runs. We analyzed network functional connectivity using a data-driven approach called eigenvector centrality mapping, and a seed-based approach with seeds placed in the default
network and the auditory pathway. Participants reported a robust trance
state in the scanner. fMRI results revealed that trance was associated with
higher Eigenvector Centrality (i.e., stronger hubs) in three distinct regions:
posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and left
insula/operculum. Seed-based analysis revealed co-activation of the PCC
seed (a key “default” network hub involved in internally-oriented states)
and ACC and insula (key regions of the “salience” network important for
selecting and amplifying relevant neural streams). Thus an internally-oriented neural stream could be amplified by the salience network. Additionally, during trance, seeds in the auditory brainstem and auditory cortex
were less connected, suggesting perceptual decoupling and suppression of
the monotonous auditory stimuli. In sum, trance involved co-active default
and salience networks, and dampened sensory processing, perhaps allowing an extended internal train of thought wherein integration and moments
of insight can occur.

THINKING: Decision making
G136
PARSING SELF-CONTROL IN INCARCERATED CRIMINALS:
SELECTIVE MAPPING OF PSYCHOPATHY AND EXTERNALIZING
TO FUNCTIONAL CIRCUITS FOR RESPONSE INHIBITION AND
INTERFERENCE SUPPRESSION Alexandra Rodman1, Erik Kastman1,

Hayley Dorfman1, Arielle Baskin-Sommers2,3, Kent Kiehl4,5, Joseph Newman3,
Joshua Buckholtz1,6; 1Harvard University, 2McLean Hospital, 3University of Wisconsin-Madison, 4University of New Mexico, 5Mind Research Network, 6Massachusetts General Hospital — Econometric estimates indicate that crime costs
this country over $2 trillion per year, underscoring the need to understand
individual variability in risk for criminal behavior. Externalizing (e.g.,
disinhibition, aggression) and psychopathy (e.g., instrumental antisocial
behavior, callousness) are vastly over-represented in criminal offenders,
yet their causal neurobiology remain unknown. Despite a final common
behavioral endpoint (i.e. crime), recent work suggests that distinct cognitive deficits predispose poor self-control in externalizing and psychopathy.
While externalizing has been linked to weak executive control, psychopaths
actually exhibit enhanced selective attention in many contexts. To uncover
selective mappings between circuit function, cognitive process, and antisocial behavior, we studied 49 male inmates at two medium-security
prisons using a mobile 1.5 Tesla MRI scanner. During fMRI, participants
performed a modified Eriksen flanker go/no-go task. In order to estimate
brain activity related to interference suppression and response inhibition,
we subtracted signal in “incongruent” trials from “congruent” trials and
“no go” trials from that in “congruent” trials, respectively. Externalizing,
but not psychopathy, was associated with reduced dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex activity during response inhibition. By contrast, while psychopaths
had enhanced activity in anterior medial prefrontal cortex during interference suppression, externalizing was unrelated. These selective associations
persisted even after controlling for shared variance between these traits. In
sum, we used functional imaging in incarcerated offenders to demonstrate
a double dissociation between externalizing and psychopathy. The current
data validate clinical and forensic distinctions between externalizing and
psychopathy, and provide insight into the specific cognitive mechanisms
predisposing poor self-control and antisocial behavior in each.

Poster Session G

G137
ADVANTAGEOUS DECISION MAKING LINKED WITH INCREASED
GRAY MATTER IN THE VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX

Shreya Divatia1, Mareen Weber1, Lauren A. Demers1, Lily Preer1, William Killgore1; 1McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School — The Iowa Gambling Task
(IGT) is a decision making task that involves adaptive and implicit learning.
Advantageous performance requires individuals to determine which decks
will allow them to avoid losses and maximize potential long-term reward.
Behavioral and neuroimaging studies have shown that individuals with
lesions to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) often are impaired
in these capacities and show lower scores on personality traits of conscientiousness and higher impulsiveness. However, little is known about the
association between gray matter volume of the VMPFC and IGT performance in healthy individuals. Fifty-three healthy right-handed adults (26
males) between the ages of 18 and 45 (M=30.8, SD=8.0) completed structural neuroimaging at 3T, the IGT, and the NEO PI-R (NEO), a multidimensional measure of personality. A voxel-based morphometric multiple
regression analysis was conducted in VBM8 to explore the gray matter correlates of IGT hunch performance. Age and gender were used as covariates.
As hypothesized, the ability to implicitly learn which decks were advantageous more quickly was positively correlated with increased gray matter
volume in the VMPFC (57 voxels, p=.03, FWE corrected). Furthermore, IGT
performance was correlated with personality variables on the NEO PI-R,
including lower scores on Conscientiousness (p=.022) and higher Openness
to experience (p=.002). These results suggest that decision-making ability,
particularly the capacity to forgo short-term gains in the service of longterm goals, was associated with greater gray matter volume in the VMPFC
and a personality style of greater openness to experience.

G138
IMPACT OF EMOTIONAL CONTEXT CONGRUENCY ON DECISION
MAKING UNDER AMBIGUITY Ania Aite1, Grégoire Borst1, Sylvain Mout-

ier1, Isabelle Varescon2, Ingi Brown3, Olivier Houdé1, Mathieu Cassotti1; 1CNRS
Unit 3521, Laboratory for the Psychology of Child Development and Education,
Paris Descartes University and Caen University, France, 2Laboratoire de Psychopathologie et Processus de Santé, Paris Descartes University, 3Centre de
Gestion Scientifique, Mines ParisTech — Thanks to the study of emotional
processes, the decision making field has known substantial advances the
past two decades. Especially researches on decision abilities under ambiguity using the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT), an ecological task presumed
to mimic daily-life decisions, led to posit the somatic marker hypothesis
(SMH). According to this theory, the development of an integral emotional
signal, in response to positive and negative feedbacks, lead participants
towards advantageous choices in ambiguous situations. To determine
whether the ability to choose advantageously in ambiguous situations is
driven by an emotional signal, we manipulated the emotional context associated with feedbacks in the IGT. In this modified version of the IGT, a
picture of either a happy face or a fearful face was presented after each
feedback resulting in either a congruent or an incongruent emotional context with the feedback delivered. Critically, emotional context congruency
affected participants’ choices on the IGT: the congruent emotional context
with the feedback (i.e., happy faces after rewards and fearful ones after
punishments) improved participants’ performances (i.e., happy faces after
rewards and fearful ones after punishments), whereas the incongruent
emotional context with the feedback (i.e., fearful faces after rewards and
happy faces after punishments) impaired participants’ performances. In
line with the SMH, we provide additional evidence that decision making
under ambiguity is driven by an integral emotional signal. Thus, decision
making under ambiguity could be improved in patients with ventromedial
prefrontal cortex lesions by reinforcing somatic markers by the presentation of a congruent emotional context with feedbacks.

G139
SENSORIMOTOR DYNAMICS OF FOOD CHOICES REVEALED BY
REACHING Kassandra Kelly1, Jeff Moher1, Alison Harris2, Joo-Hyun Song1;
1

Brown University, 2Claremont McKenna College — Despite a growing consensus on the neural representation of value, the relationship between
sensorimotor action plans and preference-based decision-making remains
unclear. Because most studies utilize discrete methods of response collection

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

255

Poster Session G	
(e.g., keypress), little is known about the evolution of the decision process
over time. Here we examined the sensorimotor correlates of the decision
process using continuous reaching dynamics. In Experiment 1, participants
were presented with two images of appetitive foods side-by-side, and
asked to reach to the image that they preferred. As the difference in taste
ratings (measured via Likert scale) between the two foods decreased, reach
movements were initiated more slowly and showed greater curvature in
their trajectory, reflecting greater attraction towards the competing item. In
Experiment 2, we further investigated the effects of competition between
action plans on preferential choice. Participants first performed a forcedchoice task, in which they were repeatedly cued to reach towards items
taken from a previously rated set of neutral-valence foods. On a subsequent
free-choice preference task, we demonstrated that when previously cued
foods were present, participants’ reaching trajectories displayed decreased
curvature when selecting those foods and increased curvature when selecting alternative foods of the same valence. This pattern was not seen for
uncued foods. Thus, cued foods were not only subject to less interference
from alternative items, but also produced stronger competition even when
unselected. Together, these results shed light on the connection between
action and decision-making, and highlight the utility of reaching data in the
study of the evolution of choice.

G140
WHEN YOUR HONESTY FAILS TO BE MY BEST POLICY: TEASING
APART PROPENSITY TO LIE UNDER VARYING INCENTIVE STRUCTURES Neil Garrett1, Stephanie Lazzaro1, Dan Ariely2, Tali Sharot1; 1University

College London, 2Duke University — Objective: In this study we examine how
lying changes when incentives to self and others are manipulated and the
neural computations that underlie this behaviour. Methods: While in the
MRI scanner, subjects viewed images of jars filled with one penny coins
and were tasked with advising another participant on how much money
was in the jar. Unbeknownst to the other participant, the subject in the scanner learns that the payoff structure of the task changes in some blocks. Our
task enables us to manipulate the incentives to examine how the propensity
to lie changes when lying benefits neither party, both parties, or one party
at the expense of the other. Results and Conclusions: Surprisingly, subjects
did not simply maximize their own monetary rewards. Rather, they adopt
a policy that also incorporates a cost for lying and a cost for anti-social
behaviour. Specifically, when lying benefits only themselves and reduces
the other’s earnings they forgo potential earnings and lie less than when
lying benefits both. However, they do not lie to increase the other participant’s earnings if there is any monetary cost to themselves. The results
suggest that the act of lying in and of itself is computed as a cost and that
subjects engage in a cost-benefit analysis that takes into account (1) monetary rewards (2) pro-social behaviour and (3) social norms. fMRI results
illuminate the underlying neural mechanisms involved in these computations, revealing both commonalities and differences in how these elements
are tracked in the brain.

G141
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IN INDIVIDUALS AT RISK FOR ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Christina M. Figueroa1, Kathleen E. Hazlett1, Riley Mari-

nelli1, Kristy A. Nielson1,2; 1Marquette University, 2Medical College of Wisconsin
— Explicit memory (EM) is the hallmark of impairment in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) while implicit memory (IM) has mixed task-dependent results.
Models of memory processes have posited that hippocampal function is
sensitive to reinforcement learning (RL). The hippocampus has also been
found to be vital for the transfer of learned associations to novel situations.
RL paradigms have been underutilized in assessing memory processes in
individuals at risk for AD, which may aid in early identification of cognitive decline. Thirty-six apolipoprotein-E (APOE Îµ4) genotyped older
adults (Male n=8; Mage=80; Meducation=15 years) performed word stem
completion, word recognition, and RL tasks. The RL task was comprised of
an RL phase, an implicit testing phase, and explicit recognition component.
Group comparisons were made based on low risk (APOE Îµ4-; n=16) vs.
high risk (APOE Îµ4+; n=20) for AD. A series of mixed ANOVAs based
on task performance indicated that risk groups did not differ on RL or EM
measures (word and RL recognition tasks). However, high risk participants
exhibited significantly poorer IM performance (RL testing and word stem)
than the low risk group, p = .03. The pattern of results in the present study

256

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
was counter to prediction in that risk groups did not differ on EM measures, which was strongly supported by existing literature. However, the
performance of poorer IM exhibited by the high risk group is consistent
with results implicating the hippocampus in the application learned associations to novel environments. RL paradigms may offer high sensitivity for
assessing preclinical decline.

G142
BIASED INPUT REGULATION OF STRIATAL REACTIVITY COMPRISES A CIRCUIT-LEVEL MECHANISM FOR HUMAN SELF-CONTROL. Joshua Buckholtz1,2,3, Erik Kastman1, Hayley Dorfman1; 1Department

of Psychology, Harvard University, 2Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, 3Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital — Deficient
self-control contributes to dysfunction and impairment across a wide range
of psychiatric disorders and is notoriously difficult to treat, in part because
we know little about the neurobiology of impulsive decision-making. Preclinical findings suggest that a circuit comprising midbrain DA nuclei, striatum, and lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC) is crucial for regulating phasic DA
transmission and adaptive choice behavior. We hypothesize that ascending
(midbrain) and descending (LPFC) striatal inputs play opposing roles in
regulating VS phasic DA response to reward cues during choice behavior.
Specifically, we predict that relatively greater ascending control leads to
larger phasic reward responses and more impulsive choices, while greater
descending control results in weaker phasic responses and more adaptive
decisions. To test this hypothesis, we measured striatal connectivity with
LPFC and midbrain at rest and phasic striatal activity in two independent
samples. Individual “input bias” scores were created by comparing participants’ corticostriatal and mesostriatal connectivity coefficients (Higher = >
LPFC input strength). We found that mesocorticostriatal “input bias” predicted subjective value-related striatal BOLD signal during an inter-temporal choice task (sample 1; 49 incarcerated criminal offenders) and reward
feedback-related striatal BOLD during a gambling paradigm (sample 2; 68
healthy adults from the Human Connectome Project Q1 release). Specifically, ascending input bias (i.e. greater connectivity between midbrain and
striatum than between LPFC and striatum) was linked to higher magnitude
striatal BOLD responses in both tasks. These data indicate that individual
variability in mesocorticolimbic circuit connectivity predisposes variability
in self-control by modulating phasic reward responses in striatum.

G143
AN FMRI STUDY ON CHANGING PRICE RELATIONS EFFECTS

Fabian Simmank1, Kai Fehse1; 1LMU Munich — While gain and loss, brand
preference, and price premium have effects on buying decisions, we were
interested in changing price relations in products presented at the same
time depending on whether a reference article is cheaper, intermediate, or
more expensive than two other articles, or suspiciously cheap. Several sets
of articles where presented with a reference article in the middle and two
similar articles left and right. Those articles were associated with different, changing price relations. Subjects had to answer whether they would
buy the reference article or not. Whole brain analysis revealed clusters in
right superior and inferior parietal lobules covering horizontal intraparietal sulcus. A region-of-interest analysis revealed a linear progression in
parietal lobules activation from cheaper reference to intermediate to more
expensive, activation also increased when becoming too cheap. Dorsolateral prefrontal deactivation was found to behave analogous to this trend.
Results suggest that different price relations are perceived quickly and the
relation is reflected in areas found to be involved in number and quantity processing according to potential benefits. Suspicious relations (“too
cheap”) have an effect contradictory to a positive bargain buy. Revealing a
deactivation in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex for the most convenient price
relation, results show that there is a position of the most effortless buying
experience in the price continuum. Representations of social status hierarchy and numbers share certain key properties. Thus, apart from mere
numbers, effects of social status might also be implicated considering bandwagon, snob, or Veblen effect.

2014 Annual Meeting	

THINKING: Development & aging
G144
UNUSUAL DEVELOPMENTAL PATTERN OF BRAIN LATERALIZATION IN YOUNG BOYS WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER: A
CUSTOMIZED CHILD-SIZED MEG STUDY Hirotoshi Hiraishi1, Mitsuru

Kikuchi1,2, Yuko Yoshimura1, Sachiko Kitagawa1, Chiaki Hasegawa1, Toshio
Munesue1,2, Hideo Nakatani2, Gerard B. Remijn3, Tsunehisa Tsubokawa4, Michio
Suzuki5, Haruhiro Higashida1, Yoshio Minabe1,2; 1Research Center for Child
Mental Development, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan, 2Department of
Psychiatry and Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa
University, Kanazawa, Japan, 3International Education Center, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, 4Department of Anesthesiology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan, 5Department of Neuropsychiatry, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan — Background: Although
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is often described as comprising an
unusual brain growth pattern and aberrant brain lateralization, physiological brain lateralization and its developmental trajectory in young children
with ASD have yet to be examined thoroughly. Methods: Brain activity was
measured non-invasively during consciousness in 38 young ASDs (3 to 7
years old) and 38 typically developing (TD) young boys (3 to 8 years old).
We employed a customized child-sized magnetoencephalography (MEG)
system in which the sensors were located as close to the brain as possible
for optimal recording in young children. Between the right and left hemispheres, the use of widely spaced clusters of MEG sensors was a simple
and effective method for minimizing field spread effects. We focused on the
laterality index ((left - right) / (left + right)) of the relative power band in
seven frequency bands. Results: The TDs displayed significantly rightward
lateralized brain oscillations in the delta, theta-1 and alpha-1 frequency
bands compared to the ASDs. When we investigated the developmental
changes in brain lateralization, TD children exhibited significant age-dependent increases in the leftward lateralization of the theta-1, theta-2 and
alpha-2 bands and a significant age-dependent decrease in the leftward lateralization of the gamma band. However, in the ASDs, there were no significant developmental changes in any frequency band. Conclusions: This
is the first study to demonstrate unusual brain lateralization and aberrant
developmental patterns of brain oscillations in young children with ASD
using a novel and MEG approach.

THINKING: Other
G145
THE NEURAL BASIS OF PARALLEL INDIVIDUATION AND NUMERICAL ESTIMATION Peter Gordon1, Sungbong Kim1, Mary Llenell Banzuela

Paz1, Erin Reddick1, Nancy Freedman1, Adriel Brown1, Michael Small1, Lucy
Owen1; 1Teachers College, Columbia University — Research on numerical cognition with infants, children, adults, cross-cultural studies and animal studies converge on the conclusion that there are two distinct systems for the
perception of numerical quantity: A small-number system (1~3) invoking
parallel individuation, or “subitizing”, and a large-number system (4+) that
is based on Weberian magnitude estimation. The present study employed
high density EEG to investigate the neural basis of differentiation between
small-number (1~3), and large-number (4~6) perception. During EEG data
collection, participants were presented with dot pattern stimuli containing
1 to 6 dots of varying size. They were instructed to press a key when they
detected a change in the number of dots presented and were rewarded for
correctly detecting changes. ERP analyses were conducted over the left and
right occipital-temporal-parietal junction. For the early ERP component
(N1; 160~180 ms), we observed that there was separation of ERPs within
the subitizing range (1~3) but not beyond (4~6). A second later positivity
(P3) was found in Cz and neighboring electrodes, that was associated with
change detection. Numerical changes were categorized as “within small”
(1~2, 2~1, 2~3, 3~2), “within large” (4~5,5~4,5~6,6~5). Changes that crossed
the small to large boundary were labeled “small-to-large” and “large-tosmall”. The P3 was observed for all change categories except for “within
large.” These data, taken together, suggest a neural basis for the differen-

Poster Session G
tiation of small vs. large number perception at early stages of processing,
and a later stage that involves more semantic numerical processing that is
employed in change detection task.

G146
ONE THOUGHT, TWO THOUGHTS: INVESTIGATING THE LINKING
OF SPONTANEOUS THOUGHTS WITH FMRI AND MINDFULNESS
MEDITATION Melissa Ellamil1, Sean Pritchard2, Evan Thompson1, Kalina Chris-

toff1; 1University of British Columbia, 2Fielding Graduate University — Existing
neuroscientific studies of spontaneous thought (e.g., mind wandering, daydreaming, stimulus-independent thought) lack direct and reliable methods
for its observation and measurement, meaning its neural correlates and
their contributions remain unclear. Vipassana or mindfulness meditation,
which trains non-reactive, introspective observation of moment-to-moment mental processes, allows the collection of more precise information
about the timing and nature of spontaneous thoughts. Thus, the present
study employed an experience sampling procedure informed by extensive
meditation practice to better examine the neural correlates of the linking or
flow of spontaneous thoughts. Highly experienced Vipassana meditators
practiced mindfulness while in the fMRI scanner, and reported via button
presses whether a single thought or two consecutive thoughts arose and
whether a single word or two consecutive words appeared onscreen (i.e.,
the control condition). Relative to consecutive thoughts, single thoughts
were associated with enhanced activation of the hippocampus. In contrast,
relative to single thoughts, consecutive thoughts were associated with
increased activation of the medial prefrontal cortex and posterior cingulate
cortex. The results suggest a generative function for the hippocampus and
an elaborative function for the midline default network during spontaneous
thought flow. Thus, integrating subjective reports informed by meditation
with objective neuroimaging measures helped to reveal a more direct and
fine-grained characterization of the contributions of various brain regions
consistently implicated in spontaneous thought and resting state studies.

G148
BIAS TOWARD CONTINUOUS MAGNITUDE AFFECTS MEASUREMENT OF CHILDREN’S APPROXIMATE NUMBER SENSE Narae

Kim1, Selim Jang1, Yunji Park1, Junghyun Kweon1, Joo Hyung Chun1, Soohyun
Cho1; 1Chung-Ang University — Approximate number sense (hereafter, ANS)
refers to the acuity for numerosity discrimination. ANS is commonly measured by comparing the numerosity between a pair of dot arrays. However,
performance on this task is often influenced by cues from salient continuous magnitude. We aimed to investigate whether individual difference in
the dependence on continuous magnitude affects measurements of ANS.
Our numerosity comparison task was designed with four conditions; 1)
area (AR) and 2) size (SZ) controlled conditions, in which the total area
of dots (AR) and dot size (SZ) were equivalent between the two arrays of
dots. Note, in the SZ condition, the total area of dots can serve as a salient
continuous cue. Thus, AR condition provides a purer measure of ANS. 3)
a congruent (CON) and 4) incongruent (IN) condition in which the total
area of dots was larger in the more (CON) or less (IN) numerous array.
n Children s performance was significantly better in the SZ compared to
the AR condition and in the CON compared to the IN condition. The ”RT
between IN and CON conditions (i.e., bias toward continuous magnitude)
was correlated with ”RT between AR and SZ control conditions and performance efficiency on the AR condition. There was a significant correlation
between math achievement and ”ACC for children who had greater bias
toward continuous magnitude (in terms of ”ACC between IN and CON
conditions). Our results indicate that bias toward continuous magnitude
can affect measures of ANS and its relation to math achievement.

G149
ACUITY FOR CONTINUOUS MAGNITUDE BUT NOT PURE NUMEROSITY CORRELATES WITH CHILDREN’S MATH ACHIEVEMENT

Yunji Park1, Selim Jang1, Soohyun Cho1; 1Chung-Ang University — Approximate number sense (hereafter, ANS) enables instant recognition of numerosity. Individuals with more sensitive ANS have been reported to have
higher mathematical achievement. The present study aimed to compare the
sensitivity for continuous and discontinuous magnitude (ANS) and their
respective correlations with math achievement in children. We measured
ANS using the numerosity comparison task with two conditions; one conCognitive Neuroscience Society

257

Poster Session G	
trolling for total area of dots in each array (hereafter AR condition), and
the other controlling for average dot size in each array (hereafter SZ condition). Note, in the SZ condition, the total area of dots serves as a salient continuous visual cue positively correlated with numerosity. In contrast, the
AR condition can be thought to be a purer measure of ANS excluding the
influence of continuous visual magnitude. To measure acuity for continuous magnitude, we used a line length comparison task, in which subjects
chose the longer between a pair of lines. There were significant differences
between acuities measured from the aforementioned tasks (p< .001). Acuity
was highest for length, and lowest for ANS measured without the influence
of continuous visual magnitude (AR condition) (length acuity=.15, ANS
from SZ =.19, ANS from AR=.27). In addition, length acuity and ANS only
from the SZ (but not AR) condition were significantly correlated with mathematical achievement. Our results indicate that in children (at least for the
age tested), the acuity for continuous magnitude and ANS measured under
the influence of continuous magnitude (rather than a purer ANS) correlate
with mathematical achievement.

G150
A PURER MEASURE OF APPROXIMATE NUMBER SENSE BETTER
CORRELATES WITH MATHEMATICAL ACHIEVEMENT Selim Jang1,

Yunji Park1, Soohyun Cho1; 1Chung-Ang University — Approximate number
sense (hereafter ANS) refers to the ability to instantly recognize numerosity.
ANS is found to be correlated with mathematical achievement. However,
issues have been raised about the influence of continuous visual cues or the
requirement for cognitive inhibition in measurements of ANS. The present study aimed to verify whether the relationship between ANS and math
achievement still holds when the influence of salient visual magnitude and
need for inhibition is controlled. We measured ANS using two tasks; Dots
vs. Number (DN) and Dots vs. Dots (DD) tasks. In the DN task, participants
compared between the numerosity of a dot array and a symbolic number.
The DN task ensures that numerosity judgment can be carried out without
the influence of continuous magnitude or the need for inhibition. In the DD
task, subjects compared the numerosity between a pair of dot arrays. The
DD task was administered with two conditions, which controlled for individual dot SIZE (SZ) and total AREA (AR) of dots across arrays. The total
area is positively correlated with numerosity in the SZ (but not AR) controlled condition. The correlations between mathematical reasoning and
ANS measured from the AR (but not SZ) controlled condition and the DN
task were significant. In a stepwise regression analysis, the ANS from the
DN task solely predicted mathematical reasoning while ANS from both DD
conditions were left out. These results demonstrate a strong relationship
between a purer measure of ANS and mathematical achievement.

G151
MIND WANDERING ON THE GOOD, THE BAD, AND THE USEFUL:
DISTINCTIVE NEURAL CORRELATES OF SPONTANEOUS
THOUGHTS DIFFERENTIATED BY EMOTIONAL VALENCE, UTILITY,
AND SPONTANEITY Kieran C. R. Fox1, Melissa Ellamil1, Matthew L. Dixon1,

Mara L. Puertolas1, Alexander Rauscher1, Kalina Christoff1; 1University of British
Columbia — “Mind wandering” (MW) has been most famously tied to activity in brain regions of the default mode network (DMN). However, studies
to date have aimed at delineating a general, undifferentiated picture of the
neural correlates of MW. We sought to refine this understanding by examining the neural correlates of different kinds of thoughts, specifically investigating the spontaneity, utility, and emotionality of spontaneous thoughts.
During an fMRI scan, we allowed subjects to rest and think freely, interrupting their thinking at random intervals with occasional thought probes.
Probes asked subjects about whether their thoughts arose spontaneously,
or whether they were intentionally directing them; whether thoughts were
related to their current concerns and goals in life, or not; and whether they
were emotionally pleasant, unpleasant or neutral. We used an event-related
design to examine neural activity during MW (just prior to the thought
probe) according to subjects’ responses. We found distinctive neural activity, as well as functional connectivity, underlying spontaneously arising vs.
intentionally directed thoughts; thoughts related vs. unrelated to current
concerns and goals; and emotionally pleasant vs. unpleasant thoughts.
Counter to the prevailing view, thoughts were mostly emotionally positive
and related to concerns and goals, suggesting an adaptive function. Our
results refine the current understanding of “the” neural correlates of MW,

258

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2014 Annual Meeting
suggesting that distinctive forms of spontaneous thinking recruit distinctive sets of brain regions. They also speak to clinical disorders involving
dysfunctional forms of spontaneous thought, e.g. depressive rumination,
by showing that negative, non-useful thoughts are neurally distinct from
positive, useful thinking.

Poster Topic Index
ATTENTION: Auditory

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Self perception

ATTENTION: Development & aging

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development & aging

D1 – D6, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E1 – E6, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
D7 – D12, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
G1 – G6, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

ATTENTION: Multisensory

B1 – B9, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am

ATTENTION: Nonspatial

A1 – A6, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

ATTENTION: Other

C1 – C9, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
F1 – F9, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am

ATTENTION: Spatial

A7 – A15, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
C10 – C13, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
E7 – E14, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
G7 – G16, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Development & aging

A34 – A40, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
F31 – F37, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am
B39 – B45, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am
D40 – D45, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E42 – E47, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
F38 – F42, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am
G54 – G60, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Goal maintenance &
switching
A41 – A46, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
D46 – D51, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
F43 – F49, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring & inhibitory
control
A47 – A54, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
B46 – B54, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C43 – C51, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
E48 – E53, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

B10 – B17, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am
D13 – D21, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
F10 – F17, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am
G17 – G27, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Other

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition interactions

A55 – A60, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
B55 – B64, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C60 – C66, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
D52 – D57, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E54 – E60, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
F50 – F56, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am
G69 – G73, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

A16 – A25, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
B18 – B28, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C14 – C24, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
D22 – D31, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E15 – E23, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
F18 – F30, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am
G28 – G40, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional responding
A26 – A33, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
C25 – C32, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
E24 – E31, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
G41 – G46, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Other

C33 – C42, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
G47 – G53, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Person perception
B29 – B38, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am
D32 – D39, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E32 – E41, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

C52 – C59, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
G61 – G68, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working memory

LANGUAGE: Development & aging

A61 – A71, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
D58 – D63, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E61 – E66, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
F57 – F61, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am
G74 – G79, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

LANGUAGE: Lexicon

C67 – C73, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
D64 – D70, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E67 – E73, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
F62 – F68, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am
G80 – G87, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

LANGUAGE: Other

A72 – A79, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
B65 – B72, B151, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C74 – C81, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

259

Poster Topic Index	

D71 – D75, D77, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E74 – E80, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
F69 – F75, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am
G88 – G95, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

LANGUAGE: Semantic

A80 – A86, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
B73 – B79, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C82 – C87, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
D78 – D84, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
F76 – F83, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am

LANGUAGE: Syntax

B80 – B86, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E81 – E87, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
G96 – G100, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Development & aging
B87 – B95, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am
D85 – D95, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic

A87 – A101, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
B96 – B110, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C89 – C104, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
D96 – D113, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E88 – E103, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
F84 – F98, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am
G101 – G117, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Other

E104 – E112, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
G118 – G127, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Priming

C105 – C108, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Semantic

A102 – A111, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
F99 – F108, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am

2014 Annual Meeting

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition

A119 – A126, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
D121 – D130, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E123 – E129, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
G128 – G135, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Development & aging
A127 – A135, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control

B118 – B125, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C124 – C129, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
F123 – F127, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Multisensory

B126 – B132, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E130 – E135, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Other

C130 – C135, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
D131 – D136, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
F128 – F131, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision

A136 – A141, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
B133 – B139, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C136 – C141, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
D137 – D142, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E136 – E141, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
F132 – F140, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am

THINKING: Decision making

A142 – A149, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
B140 – B146, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C143 – C148, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
D143 – D149, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E142 – E148, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
F141 – F147, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am
G136 – G143, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Skill learning

THINKING: Development & aging

METHODS: Electrophysiology

THINKING: Other

C109 – C115, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
E113 – E117, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
F109 – F114, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am
A112 – A115, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

METHODS: Neuroimaging

C116 – C123, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
D114 – D120, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
F115 – F122, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am

METHODS: Other

A116 – A118, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

NEUROANATOMY

B111 – B117, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E118 – E122, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
260

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

C149 – C151, Sunday, April 6, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
D76, D150 – D152, Monday, April 7, 8:00 - 10:00 am
F148 – F150, Tuesday, April 8, 8:00 - 10:00 am
G144, Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
G145 – G146, G148 – G151 Tuesday, April 8, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

THINKING: Problem solving

B147 – B150, Sunday, April 6, 8:00 - 10:00 am

THINKING: Reasoning

A150 – A152, Saturday, April 5, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
E149 – E151, Monday, April 7, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

Author Index
A
Aazcueta, R 54
Abbott-Frey, A 36
Abdi, H 53
Abdul Rahman, A 75
Abellanoza, C 152
Abel, MK 189
Abram, S 171
Ackermann, S 250
Adam, G 194
Adams, Jr., RB 118, 170
Adams, R 22, 95
Adda-Decker, M 114
Addante, RJ 51
Addington, J 133
Addis, DR 152
Aderka, I 160
Adluru, N 103
Admon, R 134
Adnan, A 138
Adolphs, R 170, 237
Agam, Y 107, 187
Aguila, E 221
Ahadi, S 203
Ahmad, F 151
Ahmed Wick, F 217
Ahn, C 237
Ahrens, LM 169
Ahuja, S 118
Ahveninen, J 106, 107, 163,
164
Aiello, M 236
Aite, A 255
Akabane, A 180
Åkerstedt, T 103
Alain, C 98
Aldera, M 80
Aleo, F 249
Alexander, AL 103
Alexander, K 193
Alexander, P 111
Alexander, W 44
Alger, SE 213, 249
Al-Haj, M 95
AlKaabi, M 210
Allard, E 69
Ally, B 149, 203
Ally, BA 172
Aloysi, A 37
Alperin, B 33, 131, 227, 228
Alston, L 36
Altman, N 176
Alvarez, GA 34, 192, 205,
230
Amariglio, R 41
Amsel, BD 145
Anderson, B 166
Anderson-Hanley, C 239
Anderson, I 198
Anderson, ND 189
Anderson, NE 131
Andersson, A 84
Andrade, DC 234
Andreasen, N 64
Andrews-Hanna, J 41, 201
Andrick, G 35, 200

Anguera, JA 61
Anisman, H 242
Antenor-Dorsey, JAV 117
Anticevic, A 154
Antony, J 88
Antony, JW 234
Anzuoni, K 108
Arbelaez, AM 117
Archambault, KB 120
Archila-Suerte, P 210
Archila-Suerte, PM 80
Arciero, P 239
Arduino, LS 126
Argiris, G 215
Ariely, D 256
Ariza, A 80
Arizpe, J 218
Armbruster-Genc, DJN 41
Arnold, AEGF 185
Aron, A 17
Arredondo, M 227
Arredondo, MM 180
Arsenault, J 156
Asaridou, SS 245
Aselcioglu, I 205
Ashby, FG 110
Aslin, RN 94
Asp, E 64, 194
Aspell, JE 41
Asplund, CL 67
Assaf, M 70
Astle, D 229
Astur, R 225
Atherton, K 185
Atkins, SM 172
Atri, A 57, 149
Attali, E 84
Auerbach, L 43
Avants, BB 217
Avanzini, P 222
Avery, T 83
Avi, K 218
Avramenko, A 161
Awasthi, B 71
Aycicegi-Dinn, A 234
Aziz-Zadeh, L 222

B
Babcock, L 205
Bacigalupo, F 63
Backer, KC 98
Badre, D 9, 42, 111, 140,
220
Bae, J 88
Baek, H 195
Bagattini, C 223
Bageac, D 120
Bai, C-h 183
Bailey, S 144, 243
Bailey, Z 35
Bainbridge, WA 253
Bai, X-M 37
Baker, C 191, 218, 222, 224,
252
Bakker, I 178
Bak, Y 202

Balasubramanian, V 80
Baldo, J 48
Baldwin, C 58
Banich, M 41, 109
Banissy, M 72
Banzuela Paz, ML 257
Bao, S 109
Bao, V 192
Baran, B 148, 181
Barber, H 144, 180
Barbosa, L 114
Barch, D 101
Barclay, S 185
Bardolph, MD 115
Bardouille, T 154
Barense, MD 85, 185
Baron, K 94
Barrett, L 39
Barrett, LF 23, 40, 134
Barry, A 135
Barsalou, L 38
Bartlett, N 36
Bartsch, MV 34
Bashivan, P 45
Baskin-Sommers, A 64,
224, 225, 255
Basnakova, J 134
Basten, U 194
Bastidas, S 69, 102
Bastin, C 100
Bates, S 40
Batterink, L 119, 186
Bauer, M 21
Bauer, P 167
Baumann, C 197
Baum, S 176
Bayer, JB 23
Beach, SD 46, 114
Beal, DS 145
Bearden, C 133
Bearman, P 73
Beattie, BL 74
Beaucousin, V 35, 142
Bech-Hansen, TN 185
Beck, DM 147
Becker, A 84, 176
Becker, B 47, 154, 188, 242
Beckes, L 235
Beck, JM 160
Bedo, N 62
Beeman, M 130
Beevers, C 66
Beevers, CG 128
Behrmann, M 5
Beilock, S 157, 253
Bein, O 249
Beischel, WJ 217
Bekkering, H 108, 137, 222
Belfi, AM 150
Belger, A 44
Bellebaum, C 96, 166
Bellesi, G 166
Belleville, S 202
Belliard, S 183
Belliveau, J 163
Belliveau, JW 106, 164
Bell, JC 117

Bellono, R 91, 92
Bell, T 131
Bellugi, U 48, 175, 200
Beltzer, M 201
Bendell, A 52
Bender, A 226
Bender, AR 146
Bengson, J 164
Benjamin, C 79, 247
Bennett, C 85
Bennion, K 101
Benn, Y 107
Benoit, RG 53
Ben-Zeev, A 73
Berens, M 175
Berens, SC 183
Bergmann, TO 30
Berken, JA 176
Berkman, ET 135
Berkum, Jv 134
Berman, M 169, 191
Berman, MD 99
Bernal, B 176
Bernard, JA 91
Bernstrup, S 249
Berryhill, M 52, 78
Bertenthal, B 61
Berthier, N 97
Bertone, A 56, 132, 192,
196, 223
Bertossi, E 249
Bertsch, S 195
Besedovsky, L 215
Bestelmeyer, PE 189
Betz, N 39
Beversdorf, DQ 70, 123
Bezdek, M 164
Bhandari, A 220
Bhanji, J 37
Bhatoa, R 134
Bholah, P 229
Bick, A 113, 244
Bickart, KC 23
Bidelman, GM 45
Bidet-Ildei, C 71
Bilger, E 191
Binder, J 237
Bind, R 37
Birbaumer, N 159, 201
Bird, CM 183
Bird, G 72
Bireley, JD 165
Bish, J 193
Bitan, T 143
Blacker, KJ 110
Black, JM 37
Black, S 172
Blagrove, M 212
Blakemore, S-J 197, 198,
232
Blankenburg, F 175
Blankenship, S 69
Blanke, O 16
Blaser, E 196
Blau, S 246
Blomeke, K 90
Blommel, J 54

Bloodgood, DW 246
Blumberg, E 228
Blumberg, EJ 205
Blundon, L 156
Boakye, M 60
Bobb, SC 244
Boddy, P 216
Boduroglu, A 201
Boehm-Davis, DA 205
Boesiger, P 237
Boets, B 126
Bogaerts, L 114
Bogner, J 174
Bohnen, N 98
Bohnen, NI 91
Bo, J 79, 91, 92, 124
Bojinov, H 121
Bola, L 93
Boldt, A 128
Bolger, DJ 172, 211, 235
Bolger, N 73
Boller, B 202
Bollinger, J 195
Bolognini, N 71, 93, 190
Boly, M 16
Boms, H 161
Bond, M 80
Boneh, D 121
Bonn, C 113
Bonnelle, V 193
Bonner, M 55, 212
Bookheimer, S 79, 247
Booth, J 46, 81, 113
Born, J 215, 252
Borroni, P 124
Borst, G 139, 187, 255
Bortfeld, H 190
Bosquet Enlow, M 237
Boswell, R 166
Botezatu, MR 79
Bottini, R 191
Boudelaa, S 208, 209
Boudewyn, M 246
Boudewyn, MA 49
Bourguignon, M 142
Bourne, S 96
Bousquet, K 54
Bove, J 193
Bowden, HW 83
Bowen, H 139
Bowman, A 220
Bowman, CR 118, 170
Bowman, EM 174
Boxer, A 138
Boyd, LA 98
Boyd-Meredith, JT 51
Boyd, R 90
Boy, F 212
Boynton, GM 67
Bozic, M 180, 208, 209
Braams, BR 132
Bradford, EEF 198
Bradley, K 55
Brady, TF 205
Brandmaier, AM 59
Brandstatt, K 87, 118
Brandstatt, KL 99, 214

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

261

Author Index	
Brannon, E 61
Brashier, N 153
Brass, M 91
Braun, EK 248
Braunlich, K 192
Braun, Y 228
Braver, T 107
Braymiller, J 43
Braze, D 48
Brazil, IA 140
Brennan, C 81
Bridge, DJ 119
Bridger, E 184
Bridger, EK 183
Brigante, R 59
Brisson, RJ 64
Brito, I 234
Broce, I 176
Brocke, S 70
Brockington, JG 233
Brothers, T 243
Brothers, TA 177
Brown, A 257
Brown, I 255
Brown, JW 44
Brown, M 109
Brown, T 241
Brown, TI 185
Brown, TT 175
Brown, VJ 174
Bruett, H 193
Bruneau, E 70
Brüne, M 201
Bruno, M-A 202
Bruss, J 29, 69, 125
Bryon, A 242
Brysbaert, M 178
Buchsbaum, B 156, 250
Buchsbaum, BR 53, 98
Buckholtz, J 64, 224, 225,
255, 256
Buckner, RL 75
Buczkowski, P 130
Budson, A 203
Budson, AE 51, 172
Buhle, JT 103
Bulkes, NZ 116
Bultitude, J 189
Bunge, S 14, 193
Bunting, MF 172
Burgund, ED 206
Burianova, H 60
Burke, D 212
Burles, CF 185
Burns, S 144, 243
Burton, P 219
Burton, PC 206, 232
Bush, W 66, 100
Buss, A 76, 241
Butler, A 91
Butler, C 185
Buzzell, G 58
Buzzell, GA 33, 43
Byrge, L 170
Byrne, K 128

C
Cabanban, R 38
Cabeza, R 40, 131, 149, 152,
153, 161, 184
Cacciaglia, R 254

262

2014 Annual Meeting
Cachia, A 139, 187
Cadden, M 153
Cadenhead, K 133
Caffarra, S 180
Cai, Q 177, 178
Cai, Y 76
Calcott, RD 135
Caldwell-Harris, C 234
Calhoun, VD 204
Callaghan, E 134
Calma, NE 247
Cameron, L 109
Campanella, C 69
Campbell, A 44
Campbell, J 93, 163
Campbell, KL 98
Candon, KC 248
Cannon, T 133
Cant, JS 34
Cantlon, J 128
Cao, F 143
Caplan, J 92
Caplan, JB 116
Cappelletti, M 74
Caramazza, A 125
Cardenas-Iniguez, C 114
Cardenas, RA 170
Cardillo, E 82
Cardinali, L 124
Cardon, G 190
Carew, A 225
Carey, C 135
Cargnelutti, D 236
Caria, A 159, 201
Carlos, B 194
Carlson, J 38, 141
Carlson, JM 237
Carol, E 236
Carota, F 208, 209
Carrasco, M 95
Carrasco-Ortiz, H 144
Carreiras, M 92, 113, 142,
244
Carroll, DJ 75
Carter, C 49
Casasanto, D 191
Cascio, CN 23
Casey, B 68, 197, 225
Casey, BJ 67, 173, 198
Cason, S 81
Caspers, J 207
Cassidy, B 171
Cassotti, M 35, 255
Castel, AD 75
Castellanos, FX 122
Castelluccio, B 206
Catmur, C 72
Caudle, K 197
Cavanagh, P 34
Ceballos, N 195
Cebulski, S 76, 242
Cecchetto, C 236
Censi, S 56
Cerri, G 124
Cervantes, SN 86
Cevallos, C 222
Chaffin, R 145
Cha, J 76
Chakrabarti, B 135
Chakroff, A 234
Chambers, A 119, 249
Champoux, F 90

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Chan, A 74, 191
Chanes, L 127, 191
Chang, B 107
Chang, C-F 108
Chang, E 63
Chang, H-C 223
Chang, L 104, 122
Chang, LJ 137
Chang, P 46
Chang, T 62
Chang, W-T 106, 163
Chang, Y-N 144, 176
Channon, S 166, 167
Chan, S-h 245
Chan, S-H 146
Chan, W-H 143
Chao, P-C 176, 207
Chapman, CS 127
Chapman, S 127
Charpentier, CJ 233
Chase, EA 174
Chatham, C 16, 111, 220
Chatham, CH 42
Chatterjee, A 81, 82
Chavez, R 102
Chavez, RS 239
Chee, MWL 67
Chein, J 169
Chen, AJW 138
Chen, C 210, 235
Chen, C-Y 37
Chen, ES 115, 246
Cheng, K 97
Cheng, LL 115, 179
Cheng, S-k 88, 118
Cheng, Y 235
Chen, H-L 124, 125, 220,
221
Chen, H-Y 177
Chen, J 106, 250
Chen, J-K 176
Chen, L 55, 85
Chen, LP 209
Chen, N-F 118
Chen, N-k 131
Chen, P 182, 245
Chen, P-M 125, 220
Chen, Q 211
Chen, S 95
Chen, SHY 177
Chen, W-F 176, 207
Chen, Y 208
Chen, Y-T 124, 125, 220
Chen, YY 116
Chernyak, S 220
Chevalier, N 239
Chiang, H-S 61, 212
Chiang, M-C 121
Chiang, TM 209
Chiaravalloti, N 77, 96,
204, 206
Chiarello, C 82, 89
Chia, TTY 67
Chien, P-J 245
Chiong, W 127
Chiu, JY-C 119
Chiu, KC 55
Chiu, Y-C 108
Cho, A 247
Cho, E 128
Choi, J 128
Choi, JJ 122

Choi Perrachione, A 178
Cho, K 128
Choles, JR 135
Chong, TT-J 193
Cho, R 42
Cho, S 257, 258
Chou, KL 91
Chou, Y-h 131
Chow, D 67
Chow, M 250
Chrastil, ER 205
Christianson, K 143
Christodoulou, J 46
Christoff, K 257, 258
Christ, SE 70, 123
Chrysikou, EG 105, 216
Chua, EF 184
Chung, YS 101
Chun, JH 257
Ciaramelli, E 249
Ciaramitaro, V 67
Cicerone, K 99
Claassen, D 95
Clarck, A 74
Clark, IB 172
Claxton, A 251
Cleary, A 251
Clementz, B 77
Clementz, BA 77
Clewett, D 231
Cloutman, L 55
Coch, D 45
Cocjin, S 131
Coderre, E 50
Coelho, C 246
Coffel, M 233
Cohen, AO 197
Cohen, BP 135
Cohen, JD 224
Cohen, JE 251
Cohen, K 239
Cohen Kadosh, R 161
Cohen, M 192
Cohen, MS 75
Cohen, N 18, 118, 119, 152,
238
Cohen, NJ 153
Cohen, R 132
Cohen Sherman, J 47
Cohn, M 246
Cohn, N 94
Colbert, A 91, 92
Cole, D 94
Colella, B 216
Cole, MW 154
Collazo, AE 141
Collier, A 86
Collins, A 77
Collins, B 109
Collins, J 73
Colzato, L 42
Connors, K 193
Constable, R 220
Constable, RT 219, 236
Constante, K 133, 168, 230
Conte, MM 99
Contreras, JM 138
Convento, S 71, 93
Conway, CM 180, 209
Conway, J 227
Cooke, G 152, 238
Cooke, GE 153

Cook, K 70
Cookson, S 139
Cope, L 102
Cope, LM 204
Coppola, M 246
Corbera, S 70
Cordella, C 47
Corey-Bloom, J 141
Corina, D 48, 246
Corkin, S 5
Cornblatt, B 133
Cornelisse, S 249
Cornelius, W 245
Corrigan, JD 174
Cortesa, CS 163
Cosand, L 108
Coslett, HB 92
Costa-Faidella, J 254
Costa, RE 135
Costello, L 215
Costello, M 80
Coulson, S 115
Couperus, J 33
Courtney, S 132
Courtney, SM 110
Cousins, J 218
Coutanche, MN 55
Coutinho, J 154
Cowell, R 85, 191
Cox, C 57, 123
Craig, K 45
Cravens, MD 232
Creery, JD 234
Crehan, ET 172
Cremers, C 115
Cremone, A 68
Crone, EA 132, 230
Cronin-Golomb, A 232
Crosson, B 91
Crowell, A 39
Cruikshank, L 92
Cui, D 90
Cui, J 199
Cunningham, AB 214
Cunningham, EC 56
Cunningham, T 90, 119
Cunningham, W 22
Cuppini, C 190
Curran, T 239
Curtis, C 31
Curtiss, K 50
Curtiss, S 247
Cusack, R 185
Cusmano, A 136
Cutler, D 193
Cutting, L 144, 243
Cyr, A 46, 232
Cyr, AB 46
Czernochowski, D 238

D
Daffner, K 33, 131, 227, 228
Daher, Q 143
Dahle, C 146, 226
Dahl, R 193
Dai, B 179
Daily, A 89
Daini, R 126
Dal Monte, O 42
Daltrozzo, J 180
Daltrozzo, JC 209

2014 Annual Meeting	
Daly, H 35, 200
Danehower, S 212
Daniel L, S 53
Daniel, R 140
Danielson, S 39
D'Arcy, R 154
Darling, W 171
Darmani, Y 139
Darrow, J 76
Datko, M 124
Datta, H 97
Daugherty, A 226
Dauvermann, MR 207, 242
Davachi, L 87
Dave, S 49, 246
Davidesco, I 156
Davidow, JY 129
Davidson, C 200
Davidson, R 105
Davidson, RJ 103
Davis, A 35
Davis, FC 105
Davis, K 104
Davis, MH 26
Davis, SW 149
Davis, T 122
Dayalu, P 91
Deason, R 203
Deason, RG 51, 172
Deaton, B 225
Debruille, JB 73, 81, 115,
116
de Chastelaine, M 54, 182
Decker, A 189
Decker, J 225
Deckert, J 197
de Dios, C 158
Dediu, D 245
de Dreu, C 170
De Feria, A 242
DeFreese, JD 112
de Gardelle, V 128
DeGutis, J 100
Dehaene, S 83, 223, 226,
247
Delaney-Busch, N 38, 178
de Lange, FP 137
de La Sayette, V 183
De La Vega, A 109, 122
Delgado, M 37
Delgado Reyes, L 227
Delgado Reyes, LM 180
Dellarco, D 67
DeLong, KA 145
de los Angeles, C 238
Del Tufo, S 80
Del Tufo, SN 145
DeLuca, J 77, 96
De Luca, M 126
De Martino, B 233
Demers, L 199
Demers, LA 171, 255
Demertzi, A 202
Demeter, E 33
Demeyer, M 126
Demiralp, E 191
Demos, AP 145
De Mulder, H 134
Denburg, N 29, 69
Denburg, NL 96
Deng, Y 128
Dennis, N 215

Author Index
Dennis, NA 118, 151
Dennis, S 251
Denny, BT 38
den Ouden, DB 49
Deocampo, J 180
Deocampo, JA 209
Deouell, L 224
DePetro, E 237
de Quervain, DJ-F 250
Derrfuss, J 101
Desgranges, B 183
Desko, A 49
Desmet, C 91
D'Esposito, M 44, 94, 138
Desrochers, P 108
Desrochers, TM 42
Desroches, A 113
Deupree, K 59
Devaney, KJ 66, 100, 195
Devinsky, O 156
De Visser, E 220
Devitt, A 152
DeVolder, I 60
DeVos, B 130
DeWind, N 61
Dew, ITZ 184
Dey, A 172
DeYoung, C 171
DeYoung, CG 239
Diana, R 181
Diana, RA 215, 248
Dias, M 200
Dias, NR 44
Diaz, M 131, 212
Diaz-Santos, M 232
Dick, AS 176, 242
Dickerson, BC 23
Diehl, JJ 209
Diekelmann, S 27, 28
diFilipo, D 133, 168, 230
Dillon, D 36
Dillon, M 222
Dilmore, T 178
DiMartino, A 122
Dimotsantos, G 78
Ding, N 181, 254
Ding, Y 217, 229
Dinse, HR 158
Divatia, S 171, 199, 255
Dixon, ML 258
Doan, S 173
Dobbins, I 36
Dobbins, IG 76
Dobryakova, E 77, 96
Dodd, J 57, 149
Dodds, C 174
Dodell-Feder, D 135, 236
Dodson, C 214
Doelling, K 254
Doerschuk, PC 155
Doetjes, J 179
Dogan, I 236
Doherty, S 160
Doidge, AN 213
Do, K 161
Dokucu, M 87, 118
Dolan, BK 231
Dolan, RJ 95
Donaldson, DI 88
Donaldson, L 200
d'Onofrio, P 103
Donohue, SE 34, 98

Doobay, VM 192
Doran, S 103
Dorfberger, S 218
Dorfman, H 64, 224, 225,
255, 256
Dorn, B 195
Dorothee, K 245
Dorothee, S 245
Dougherty, L 69
Dougherty, MR 172
Douglas, S 134
Dowd, EW 167
Doyle, W 156
Drew, AR 126
Dreyfuss, M 197
Drollette, ES 138, 141
Dronkers, N 48
Drottar, M 154
Drury, JE 247
Drysdale, AT 197
Duan, LH 140
Duarte, A 89, 214
Dube, C 30
Dubois, J 170
DuBrow, S 87
Duff, M 18, 53, 118
Duff, MC 56
Duffy, A 57
Dulas, M 89
Dumontheil, I 198, 232
Duñabeitia, JA 92
Dungan, J 137
Dunn, S 70
DuPre, E 45, 161
Durgerian, S 188
Durkee, L 163
Duta, M 161
Dwivedi, V 50
Dyke, F 196
Dyson, B 127

E
Eberhard-Moscicka, AK 47
Ebner, N 132
Ebner, NC 106
Eddy, M 38, 144
Eddy, MD 114
Edland, S 227
Edward, F 194
Eggermann, T 103
Eghbalzad, L 209
Egner, T 36, 43, 108, 110,
160
Eichenbaum, A 78
Eichenbaum, H 19
Eichenlaub, J-B 212
Eicher, JF 61
Eickhoff, SB 205
Eigsti, I-M 206
Eilat, N 160, 228
Eisenbarth, H 104
Eisenberger, N 39
Ekman, M 41
Eldar, E 199
El Dash, IM 226
El Dash, VM 226
El-Deredy, W 218
Eleopra, R 236
El-Haddad, RW 50
Elif, I 132
Elke, S 133

Elkin-Frankston, S 127
Elkis, V 191
Ellamil, M 257, 258
Elliott, JC 182
Ellis, LK 135
Ell, SW 79
Elward, R 54
Emberson, LL 94
Emmorey, K 59
Emrich, S 20
Emrich, SM 78
Endrass, T 43, 107
Engel, AK 29
Engel, S 219
Eng, V 146
Enns, JT 127
Enticott, P 39
Eppinger, B 203
Epstein, RA 253
Erb, M 72
Erdem, UM 241
Erez, J 185
Erhart, M 175
Eric, P 132
Erlewine, MY 82
Eroh, J 127, 212
Escera, C 254
Eskandar, E 96
Eskes, G 92
Espy, KA 75
Esterman, M 100
Etkin, A 68
Euhus, B 195
Eustache, F 183
Evans, LH 53, 213
Evelyn, G-S 98
Evert, D 233
Ewen, JB 110
Ewing, G 182
Eyler, L 123
Ezzati, A 149
Ezzyat, Y 87

F
Fabbri-Destro, M 222
Fabiani, M 90, 189
Falcone, B 139
Falk, EB 23
Fang, M-c 55
Fan, J 38, 67, 110, 167
Fan, Y-T 235
Farah, MJ 14
Farah, R 156
Farb, N 54
Farnady, C 48
Farnè, A 124, 158
Farrow, TFD 107
Faseyitan, O 92
Faubert, J 196, 223
Fauser, M 51
Fausett, JS 122, 174
Federmeier, KD 26, 143,
147
Fede, S 102
Fedota, JR 43
Fehlbaum, LV 47
Fehse, K 256
Fei-Fei, L 147
Feld, GB 215
Feldman Barrett, L 38
FeldmanHall, O 202

Felix, S 135
Fellows, L 73, 105
Felton, A 82, 89
Feng, G 211
Feng, SF 224
Feng, W 67
Feola, B 172
Ferber, S 196
Feren, L 104
Ferguson, BJ 70
Fernandez Cruz, AL 73,
115, 116
Ferrari, S 160
Festini, SB 91
Fettich, K 169
Ficco, L 97
Fiebach, CJ 41, 101, 142,
194
Figner, B 225
Figuccio, M 242
Figuccio, MJ 207
Figueroa, C 239
Figueroa, CM 74, 188, 256
Filippini, N 185
Filkowski, M 198
Filseth, J 121
Finer, D 247
Finger, E 104
Fink, GR 155, 158
Finn, A 115, 120, 147, 203,
218
Finn, AS 238
Finn, E 220
Finnerty, C 193
Finos, L 124
Fiore, VG 95
Fischer, A 170
Fischer, C 187
Fischer, H 103, 106, 132
Fiser, J 94
Fisher, C 139
Fitch, RH 206
Fitzgerald, P 39
Fitzgibbon, B 39
Flaherty, A 96
Flannery, S 51, 172, 203
Flax, S 80
Fleck, S 175
Fletcher, M 90
Florczak, SM 234
Flores Barrios, A 215
Flynn, S 47
Foerde, K 129
Folyi, T 163
Fonteneau, E 177
Forbes, C 201
Forbes, CE 72
Ford, C 165
Ford, J 150
Foroni, F 50, 215
Foroughi, CK 205
Forscher, EC 233
Fortier, CB 188
Foster, BL 158
Foster, C 112
Foti, D 38
Foundas, AL 46
Fox, A 105
Fox, KCR 258
Frackowiak, R 72
Frank, M 77, 140
Frank, SM 126

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

263

Author Index	
Franz, P 67, 168
Fraser, P 60
Fraticelli Torres, A 68
Freedman, N 257
Freeman, A 105
Freeman, J 21, 22, 137
Freiherr, J 236
Frenck-Mestre, C 146
Freund, J 59
Frey, J 29
Freyman, RL 188
Friederici, AD 82
Friedman, RB 48
Friedrich, C 176
Friedrich, CK 179
Friese, M 237
Frimmel, S 240
Frith, CD 137
Frithsen, A 86
Frost, R 113, 244
Frost, S 114, 143, 242, 244
Frost, SJ 80, 113, 155, 208,
209, 244
Froud, K 58
Frustace, B 203
Frydman, C 62
Fujiwara, E 36
Fukao, K 68
Fukuyama, H 211
Fulbright, RK 80
Fuller, R 149
Fuller, RL 187
Fuller, S 95
Funabiki, Y 68
Furber, S 144
Furtak, SC 164
Fusaro, M 93

G
Gaab, N 46, 47, 90, 154,
188, 207, 242
Gabbay, V 40
Gabrieli, J 46, 85, 115, 120,
147, 232, 246
Gabrieli, JDE 14, 46, 114,
136, 218, 238, 248
Gabrys, R 242
Gaffin-Cahn, E 95
Gagne, C 220
Gagnon, S 119
Gair, J 47
Galazen, KL 120, 232
Galhardoni, R 234
Gallagher, N 194
Galli, A 101
Galli, G 151
Galli, L 235
Gallo, DA 86
Galván, A 129, 161, 197
Gamble, M 34
Gammo, A 189, 253
Gandy, KC 183
Gansler, D 154
Gao, D 113
Garcea, F 56, 113
Garcia, AC 140
Garcia, F 83
Garcia, J 45
Garcia, P 58
Garel, K 115, 246
Garlow, S 39

264

2014 Annual Meeting
Garnett, EO 49
Garnsey, SM 189
Garrett, E 197, 232
Garrett, N 256
Garrido, CO 170
Garr, KM 121
Garza, J 66
Gaskell, G 212
Gaston, P 82
Gazzaley, A 61, 111, 117,
195
Gazzaniga, M 94
Geary, D 121
Geddes, MR 136
Gee, DG 133
Geisler, MW 73, 140
Gendron, M 39
Genesee, F 179
Genova, H 96
Genova, HM 206
Georges, C 165
Gerrig, R 164
Gesa, H 245
Gesche, W 159
Gess, JL 122, 174
Geukes, S 208
Ghisletta, P 146
Ghitza, O 156
Ghosh, SS 46
Ghosh, V 216
Giavazzi, M 114
Gibson, R 50
Gidengil, E 105
Giebl, S 75
Giedd, J 187
Giesbrecht, B 182
Gigler, K 253
Gijssels, T 191
Gilbert, PE 141
Gilboa, A 84, 212, 216, 251
Gillespie, M 250
Gilmer, H 191
Giovanello, K 112
Glahn, DC 154
Glasser, M 154
Glassner, A 182
Glazier, S 139
Glerean, E 107
Glick, H 163
Gloston, GF 120
Glover, G 60
Glynn, P 116
Goatz, D 186
Gobel, EW 121
Goddings, A-L 197, 232
Godwin, M 196
Goebel, SM 114
Goer, F 201
Goetz, C 147, 218
Goetz, CA 238
Gogel, H 158
Gogtay, N 187
Gois, F 233
Gojkovic, S 45
Goksun, T 81
Goldberg, D 243
Goldfine, AM 99
Goldin, Y 99
Gold, J 77
Goldstein, J 238
Goldstein, M 37
Golob, E 130

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Gomez, J-C 198
Gómez, P 112
Gomez, R 153
Gómez, RL 28
Gonçalves, O 200
Gong, K 115
Gonsalves, B 181
Gonzales, O 154
Gonzalez, A 119
Goodman, M 38
Goodwin, A 114
Goodyear, K 220
Gopinath, K 38
Gordon, B 50
Gordon, P 81, 257
Gorlick, M 66
Gorsuch, A 90
Goshen-Gottstein, Y 212
Gosman, D 154
Gosseries, O 78, 94, 202
Gotlib, I 117
Gotlib, IH 161
Gottfried, J 226, 235
Grabowecky, M 185
Gracco, VL 176
Grady, C 88, 139
Grafman, J 42
Graf, P 74
Graham, R 195
Grainger, J 144
Grande, L 110, 172
Grand, K 196
Grant, PE 90, 154, 188
Gratton, G 90, 189
Gravina, M 234
Gray, SJ 86
Grazioplene, R 171, 239
Green, A 39
Greenbaum, L 228
Green, E 220
Greene, A 54, 120
Greene, J 234
Green, J 34
Greenwood, P 139
Grefkes, C 205
Gregory, M 187
Grent-'t-Jong, T 221
Grey, S 50, 80
Griffin, S 191
Grigorenko, E 148, 207
Grigorenko, EL 80
Grigutsch, M 82
Grillon, C 44
Grill-Spector, K 158
Grimm, S 254
Grindrod, CM 49, 116
Grodd, W 72
Gronau, N 87
Grose-Fifer, J 129, 133, 168,
230
Gross, E 87, 118
Grossman, M 55, 150, 212,
217, 243
Grossman, Y 170
Grosso, M 157
Grosz, M 37
Groth, TJ 69
Grulke, Z 146
Grützmann, R 107
Gu, C 142
Guenther, FH 145, 219, 254
Guerra, E 145

Guerreri, S 38
Gullapalli, R 221
Gullick, MM 46
Gundlach, C 244, 254
Guo, T 245
Gürolu, B 132, 230
Gur, R 86
Guskiewicz, K 112
Gutchess, A 171, 201
Gutierrez, E 81
Guty, E 135
Guy, J 132
Guzman-Martinez, E 185
Gvozdanovic, GA 232

H
Haas, B 198
Habel, U 103, 236
Hach, S 152
Haddad, H 226, 233
Haegens, S 31
Hagelweide, K 155
Hagerman, R 85
Hagmann, C 192
Hagoort, P 245
Hale, K 79
Halfmann, K 69, 96
Halgren, E 175
Hall, M 189
Halme, H-L 107
Halverson, K 46
Halverson, KK 46
Halverson, T 169
Halwani, GF 254
Hämääinen, JA 244
Hämääinen, M 163
Hamann, S 39, 69, 102
Hambrook, DA 130
Hämmerer, D 132
Hampson, M 236
Hampton Wray, A 131, 132
Handy, T 74
Handy, TC 98
Han, M 115, 246
Hannula, D 18
Han, S 76
Hanson, C 193
Hanson, GK 105, 216
Hanson, SJ 193
Han, Y-J 88
Harel, A 222, 224
Harenski, C 102
Hare, T 68
Hare, TA 197
Harmon-Jones, E 38
Harris, A 62, 255
Harris, JA 98
Harrison, L 237
Harrison, M 47
Hart, Jr., J 61, 212
Hartman, A 182
Hartmann, F 250
Hartmann, T 29
Hasegawa, C 257
Hasinski, AE 117
Hasni, A 214
Hassall, C 63, 92, 160, 241
Hassall, CD 161
Hasselmo, M 241
Hasson, U 106, 145, 156,
250

Hauck, T 112
Hauser, M 146
Hautala, J 244
Hawellek, DJ 29
Hawthorne, L 79
Hayden, S 98
Haynes, J-D 64
Hayward, D 35
Hayward, W 48
Hazeltine, E 76
Hazeltine, R 139
Hazlett, K 239
Hazlett, KE 74, 188, 256
Heatherton, T 102
Heath, M 204
Hedden, T 41, 75, 84
Hedgcock, W 96
Heekeren, HR 203
Heffernan, P 54
Hegarty, II, JP 70
Hehman, E 137, 201
Heidi, B 37
Heil, L 222
Heinisch, C 201
Heinze, H-J 34, 98
Heisz, JJ 84, 172
Helder, A 48, 240
Helen, N 132
Helie, S 110
Helion, C 67, 173
Heller, A 68
Hellerstedt, R 216
Heller, W 200
Helminger, H 35
Henderson, A 154, 200
Henderson, C 47
Henderson, S 40
Hennies, N 218
Henry, M 157
Henry, MJ 59, 111
Herbert, C 40
Herdman, C 76, 242
Herdman, KA 251
Herlitz, A 117, 186
Hermes, A 167
Hermes, D 158
Hermiller, M 118
Hernandez, A 204, 210, 253
Hernandez, AE 80
Hernández, JA 144
Hernandez, K 35, 154, 200
Herrmann, B 59, 111, 141,
157
Herron, JE 53
Hershaw, JN 56
Hershey, T 117
Heuer, H 138
Heusser, A 87
Heydari, P 222
Hickok, G 48, 83
Higashida, H 257
Higgins, A 133
Hilger, K 194
Hill, M 189
Hillman, C 173
Hillman, CH 138, 141
Hill, PF 215
Hillsburg, D 68
Hillyard, S 67
Hines, T 97
Hipp, J 29
Hiraishi, H 257

2014 Annual Meeting	
Hiraki, K 66, 166, 180
Hisagi, M 82
Hiser, J 93
Hitchner, E 219
Hoagey, D 131
Hockley, W 151
Hoeft, F 80, 243
Hoffmann, D 165
Hoffmann, S 33
Hogan, M 239
Hogeveen, J 72
Holcomb, P 33, 131, 227,
228
Holcomb, PJ 144
Holland, SK 156
Holtgraves, T 35
Homes, S 52
Honey, C 145, 250
Honey, CJ 106, 156
Hong, LY 209
Hong, X 164
Honkanen, R 29
Honzel, N 63
Hooker, C 236
Hooker, CI 135
Hook, P 46
Hook, PE 46
Hopfinger, J 165, 229
Hopf, J-M 34
Horne, ED 182
Houde, JF 92
Houdé, O 35, 139, 142, 187,
255
Hove, MJ 254
Hoversten, LJ 243
Howard, D 149
Howard, DV 187
Howard, J 226
Howard Jr, JH 187
Howard Jr., JH 149
Howard, M 187, 213
Howard, MA 125
Hower, K 52
Hower, KH 252
Howse, A 160
Howse, AD 161
Hsiao, S 199
Hsiao, Y-T 125, 220
Hsieh, J-J 63
Hsieh, MH 160
Hsu, C-H 176
Hsu, CL 74
Hsu, CY 209
Hsu, KC-H 179
Hsu, W-C 124, 125, 220,
221
Hsu, Y-F 160
Huang, E 161
Huang, F 97
Huang, I-W 108
Huang, J 165, 211
Huang, S 106, 163, 164
Huang, S-tT 70, 103, 199,
200
Huang, TS-T 127
Huang, W 217
Huang, W-F 124
Huang, Y-H 177
Hubbard, R 181
Huettel, S 161
Huettel, SA 128
Hughes, AJ 57

Author Index

J

Jensen, O 30, 221
Jentzsch, I 198
Jeong, Y-H 195
Jerram, M 40, 154
Jesse, A 59
Jesso, M 58
Jeye, B 214
Jha, A 109, 138, 206
Jhong, Y-C 221
Jiang, J 43, 179
Jiménez, M 112
Jing, H 38
Jin, J 235
Joanisse, M 113
Jobert, A 223
Joëls, M 249
Johansson, D 106
Johansson, M 88, 216, 249
John, J 236
Johns, CL 48
Johnson, A 40
Johnson, CE 151
Johnson, D 198
Johnson, H 76
Johnson, J 182, 215
Johnson, JD 70, 123, 181
Johnson, JS 20
Johnson, K 84
Johnson, KA 41, 75
Johnson, M 212
Johnson, S 39
Johnston, NE 197
Jones, BJ 148
Jones, J 201
Jones, K 78
Jones, M 247
Jonides, J 191
Jonkers, R 243
Jordan, C 234
Jordan, KA 72
Josef, A 149
Joseph, G 134
Jost, K 174, 175
Jost, LB 47
Jouen, F 202
Jouffrais, C 124
Juan, C-H 108, 118, 228
Juckel, G 106, 166
Julian, W 98
Justen, C 40
Justus, T 48

Jääskeläinen, IP 106, 107
Jackson, AF 211
Jacobs, E 238
Jacobson, A 220
Jacquemot, C 114
Jacques, C 158
Jaeger, TF 25
Jahfari, S 17
Jameel, L 166, 167
James, GA 122, 174
Jamieson, K 57
Jana, S 57
Jang, S 257, 258
Janssen, D 108
Janssen, N 144
Janzen, G 178
Jarbo, K 35
Jaroslawska, A 114
Jasinska, K 148, 175
Jenkins, T 246

Kaas, J 6
Kable, J 96, 193
Kacinik, NA 50
Kahnt, T 64, 226
Kaida, K 215
Kaiser, R 201
Kallman, S 101
Kalra, P 120
Kam, J 98
Kamowski-Shakibai, M
184
Kamps, J 46
Kanayama, N 180
Kandah, CD 188
Kane, K 172
Kaneria, D 41
Kantner, J 182
Kanwisher, N 62

Hughes, K 191
Huijbers, W 41, 84
Hung, A-Y 106
Hung, D 228
Hung, DL 70, 83, 177, 210
Hung, K-T 221
Hung, Y-h 83
Hunt, R 123, 196
Hurley, K 186
Hu, S 173
Husain, M 193
Hussey-Anderson, L 191
Hussey, EP 172
Hutchinson, S 79
Hutchison, J 59
Hu, X 160, 180, 227
Hwang, B-W 159
Hyde, D 222, 226
Hymers, M 114
Hyun, J 58, 184

I
Iacoboni, M 121
Iacono, W 196
Ianni, G 82
Iaria, G 185
Ide, J 173
Ikeda, A 235
Ikkai, A 110
Ille, S 112
Im, K 90
Inagaki, K 168
Ingram, RE 105
Inman, C 39
Inomata, T 211
Insel, C 67
Insel, CS 173
Iribarne, G 176
Irina, M 245
Isenberg, AL 243
Ishibashi, R 55
Ishigami, Y 92
Itakura, S 235
Itier, R 199
Iuculano, T 97
Iversen, J 59
Iyengar, V 152
Iyer, N 58

K

Kapasi, A 133
Kapse, K 116
Karanian, JM 151
Kardan, O 191
Karen, F 83
Karhson, D 130
Kark, SM 214
Karl K, S 53
Karlsson, J 48, 240
Karni, A 218
Karns, C 84
Karosevica, I 119
Karuza, EA 94
Kastman, E 64, 224, 225,
255, 256
Kastman, EK 36
Kastner, AK 169
Kathmann, N 43, 107
Kato, S 82
Katrin, W 245
Kaufman, DAS 100, 228
Kawasaki, M 68
Kay, C 188
Kayser, A 193
Keane, M 54
Keane, MM 86
Kearney-Ramos, T 174
Kearney-Ramos, TE 122
Kecklund, G 103
Keenan, J 189, 253
Kehayes, I-L 39
Keil, A 72
Keillor, J 76
Keith, CM 228
Keith, RW 156
Kellermann, TS 205
Keller, P 125
Keller, PE 254
Kelly, C 122
Kelly, K 255
Kempermann, G 59
Kennedy, DP 170
Kensinger, E 69, 101, 133,
150, 166
Kensinger, EA 214
Kenworthy, L 194
Kepinska, O 207
Kerr, Z 112
Keshavan, M 236
Khan, AJ 154
Khodaparast, N 55
Kidwell, B 228
Kieffaber, PD 56
Kiehl, K 64, 102, 224, 225,
255
Kiehl, KA 131, 204
Kikuchi, M 257
Killgore, W 158, 171, 199,
240, 255
Kilts, C 174
Kilts, CD 122
Kim, E 37
Kim, H 125, 159
Kim, HJ 159, 202
Kim, I 195
Kim, J 80, 95
Kim, K 98
Kimmich, S 123
Kim, M-S 159
Kim, N 257
Kim, S 81, 95, 257
Kim, SY 143

Kindt, M 249
Kinealy, B 213
King, D 54
King, DR 182
King, M 222
Kingstone, A 75, 125
Kiran, S 116
Kirchgessner, M 164
Kirchhoff, BA 117
Kirilko, E 129, 133, 168, 230
Kirkovski, M 39
Kirste, I 59
Kiselev, S 207
Kiser, S 149
Kiser, SA 187
Kitagawa, S 257
Kitajo, K 68
Kitazaki, M 235
Kiyonaga, A 110
Klasen, M 103, 236
Klawohn, J 107
Kleber, KT 51
Kleckner, I 40
Kleeman, N 135
Klein, D 176
Kleinschmidt, DF 25
Klibanski, A 238
Klooster, NB 56
Kluftinger, J 57
Kmiecik, M 169
Kmiecik, MJ 64
Knaus, TA 46
Knight, R 223
Knoeferle, P 145
Knopik, V 66
Knopik, VS 128
Knopp, MV 174
Knowlton, B 121
Knowlton, BJ 75, 122
Knutson, K 42, 120
Koban, L 70
Kober, H 166
Kochiyama, T 104
Koenigsberg, HW 38
Koizumi, M 82
Koller, JM 117
Kolody, BC 117
Kong, D 67
Kong, L 66, 100, 195
Konkle, T 192
Kontra, C 157
Kopec, JB 134
Kopp, F 59
Korb, FM 132
Koren, O 160
Kornilov, S 148, 207
Kotek, H 82
Kotov, R 233
Kotz, SA 130, 190
Kouider, S 114
Kounios, J 109
Kovacevic, S 123
Kovelman, I 175, 180, 227
Kramer, A 152, 173, 238
Kramer, AF 153, 186
Kranjec, A 178
Kraus, N 156
Kraut, MA 212
Kravitz, D 222, 224, 252
Krawczyk, DC 55
Krebs, M-O 187
Krebs, RM 99

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

265

Author Index	
Krenzer, WLD 73
Kret, M 170
Kreutzer, S 158
Kriegsfeld, L 193
Krieg, SM 112
Krigolson, O 63, 92, 109,
160, 241
Krigolson, OE 161
Krimsky, M 44
Krishnan, L 67
Kritzler, M 59
Krizman, J 156
Kroll, J 243
Kroll, JF 82, 245, 246
Kross, E 70
Krowel, A 154
Krueger, F 42, 220
Krueger, R 196
Krüger, A 59
Krüger, JK 141
Krul, A 189, 253
Kruse, A 56
Kryklywy, J 71
Krystal, JH 154
Ksander, J 166
Kuehnel, A 159
Kuhney, F 225
Kumar, A 164
Kumaran, D 23
Kumar, M 147
Kundu, B 20
Kuo, B-C 229
Kuo, LW 209
Kuo, W-J 113, 210, 244
Kuperberg, G 25, 178
Kuperberg, GR 26
Küper, K 89
Kurczek, J 118
Kurdziel, L 216
Kurian, AM 209
Kurkela, K 45
Kurth, F 205
Kurylo, DD 62
Kutas, M 85, 143, 145
Ku, Y 93
Kveraga, K 22
Kwak, Y 91, 128
Kweon, J 257
Kwiatkowski, J 202
Kwisthout, J 222

L
LaBar, KS 102, 167
Lacadie, C 219
Lachmann, T 142
Lahnakoski, JM 107
Lai, C-H 247
Lai, H-Y 120
Lai, M 83
Lai, P 200
Lai, W-S 160
Lake, JI 102
Lakshmanan, BM 110
Lallier, M 142
Lambon Ralph, M 144
Lambon Ralph, MA 55
Lam, M 80
Lamme, VAF 15
Lamy, JC 60
Landi, N 80, 114, 143, 148,
207, 244

266

2014 Annual Meeting
Lane, SD 44
Langer, N 154
Langeslag, SJE 69
Langner, R 205
Lapate, RC 103
LaRocque, JJ 78
LaRocque, K 122
LaRocque, KF 185
Larsen, J 63
Lars, M 159
Larson, A 94
Lasecki, L 227
Lasko, NB 105
Lau, E 178
Laureys, S 202
Lavie, N 99
Lawrence, C 197
Lawson, A 55, 236
Lawton, T 227
Lawyer, L 246
Layman, C 193
Lazar, M 122
Lazzaro, S 256
Leclerc, C 133
Ledoux, K 50
Lee, CH 193
Lee, C-L 247
Lee, C-M 79, 124
Lee, C-Y 176, 207
Lee, J-Y 125
Lee, L 199, 200
Lee, M 148
Lee, M-C 70, 103, 200
Lee, RR-W 179
Lee, S 193
Lee, S-H 252
Lehmann, M 252
Leiken, K 247
Leiker, A 196
Leiker, EK 181
Leitner, J 201
Lei, Y 109
Lejeune, C 35
Lekander, M 103
Lemire-Rodger, S 240
Leonard, G 197
Leonard, J 238
Leonetti, A 124
Leong, YC 140, 250
Leppänen, PHT 244
Leritz, E 172
Lertiz, E 110
Leshinskaya, A 125
Leske, S 29
Levenberg, K 143
Levens, S 231
Levine, B 54, 172
Levin, EJ 195
Levinson, H 81
Levrini, V 135
Levy, B 117, 184
Levy, D 87
Levy, RM 185
Lewejohann, L 59
Lewis, BJ 97
Lewis, G 112
Lewis, LJ 251
Lewis, P 212, 218
Leynes, A 193
Leynes, PA 51
Liaci, E 50
Liang, G 187

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Liang, P 116
Liao, C-H 146
Liao, Y-C 210
Li, C-s 173
Li, C-T 160
Lieberman, L 44
Liederman, J 114
Lien, C-H 120
Lighthall, N 161
Lighthall, NR 149
Light, M 195
Ligouri, L 201
Li, H 165
Li, HC 189, 254
Li, J 75
Li, K 116
Lim, J 161
Li, MYC 210
Lin, C 239
Lin, C-HJ 121
Lin, CM 209
Lincoln, P 121
Lincoln, SH 135, 236
Lin, C-Y 120
Lindau, B 58
Lindenberger, U 59
Lingnau, A 62
Lin, SH 209
Lin, S-K 179
Linsley, D 224
Lin, Y-J 221
Lin, Z 227
Liotti, M 34
Li, S 76
Lisanby, SH 149
Li, S-C 51, 132, 203
Litcofsky, K 49
Liu-Ambrose, T 74, 98
Liu, H 111, 183
Liu, H-H 160
Liu, H-L 199
Liu, I 185
Liu, L 113
Liu, T-L 88
Liu, X 38, 116
Liu, Y-H 125, 220, 221
Liu, Z 192
Li, W 71, 93, 233
Li, Y 76
Li, Y-C 221
Lizarazu, M 142
Lobach, I 138
Loberg, O 244
Lobmaier, JS 150
Lo, C-M 118
Long, B 216
Long, BL 230
Long, D 49
Longoria, ZN 131
Looi, CY 161
Lopez, BA 85
Lopez-Sola, M 103
Lorist, MM 99
Losin, ER 137
Loui, P 58, 189, 254
Lovén, J 106
Low, K 90
Luber, B 149
Lu, C 179
Luciana, M 169
Lu, E 161
Luechinger, R 237

Lueken, U 51
Luethi, M 237
Lugar, HM 117
Lujan, C 73
Luo, J 97
Lust, B 47
Lustig, C 45, 98, 227
Lutkenhoff, ES 187
Lynn, SK 134

M
Maaravi, R 218
Maby, E 212
MacDonald III, A 123, 171,
235
MacEvoy, S 224
Machizawa, M 157
MacKenzie, G 88
MacKenzie, J 109
MacKenzie, L 241
Mackey, A 232
Mackey, AP 238
Mackie, M-A 110
MacLean, S 92
MacSweeney, M 81
Madden, D 131, 212
Maddox, WT 66, 128
Madore, KP 213
Ma, F 245
Magerman, A 72
Magierska, ME 121
Magnotta, V 60, 76, 171,
241
Magnuson, J 143, 207, 244
Magnuson, JS 48, 155
Magosso, E 190
Mahayana, I 228
Maher, S 94
Mahon, B 56, 95, 113, 211
Maia, L 154
Main, K 60
Maksimovskiy, A 188
Ma, L 76
Malekshahi, R 159, 201
Malhotra, S 182
Malins, J 113
Malone, S 123, 196
Malyutina, S 49
Ma, M 179
Mandel, N 217
Mangin, J-F 139, 187
Mangun, G 164
Mangun, GR 49
Mani, N 244
Manoach, D 187
Manoach, DS 107
Manohar, S 193
Mantua, J 148, 181
Mareckova, K 197
Margulies, DS 254
Mariano, L 56
Maril, A 249
Marinelli, R 256
Marin-Garcia, E 248
Marinsek, N 64
Marshall, PJ 126
Marshall, T 30
Marsh, E 153
Marsh, KL 145
Marslen-Wilson, W 177,
209

Marslen-Wilson, WD 177,
180, 208
Marsolek, CJ 120, 206, 232,
235
Marstaller, L 60
Marta, A 98
Martelli, M 126
Martel, M 124
Martin, B 58
Martin Braunstein, L 37
Martin, C 66, 92
Martinetz, T 252
Martinez, A 67
Martin, LE 105
Martin, R 168
Martis, S 239
Marusak, HA 161
Mascarelli, D 230
Mason, GF 80
Masters, S 140
Mast, FW 150
Matchin, W 83
Matell, M 157
Mather, M 231
Matheson, H 39
Mathews, Z 159
Mathiak, K 103, 236
Matsuda, G 66, 166
Mattfeld, A 85
Mattfeld, AT 248
Matthias, W 98
Maurer, JM 131, 204
Maurer, U 47
Maxwell, J 237
Maya, M 194
Mayberg, H 39
Mayes, A 52
Mayor, J 244
Mayr, U 174, 175
Mayson, SJ 38
Mazaheri, A 20
Mazzi, C 223
McCandliss, B 142
McCardel, B 42
McClain, R 243, 246
McCloskey, M 169
McCormick, S 197
McCoy, SK 79
McCoy, T 60
McDaniel, M 107
McDermott, J 68, 108
McDonald, C 196
McDonald, CG 33, 43, 241
McDonald, J 34, 67
McDonough, IM 86
McDonough Lebois, L 38
McDowell, J 42, 77
McDowell, JE 77
McEwen, S 133
McGarry, L 155
McGeary, J 66
McGeary, JE 128
McGlashan, T 133
McGlinchey, R 100, 110,
172
McGlinchey, RE 188
McGregor, K 91
McIntosh, AR 84
McIntosh, E 220
McKendrick, R 139
McKindles, RJ 231
McKinley, RA 139

2014 Annual Meeting	
McLaren, D 57, 84, 149
McLaughlin, K 74, 203
McLaughlin, ME 212
McMenamin, BW 206, 232,
235
McMillan, CT 217
McNamara, P 232
McPherson, E 139
McQueen, JM 178, 245
McQuiggan, D 250
McQuire, M 82
McWhinney, S 154, 175
Meade, G 45
Mecklinger, A 87, 88, 183,
184
Meck, WH 102
Medendorp, WP 221
Medina, A 133, 168, 230
Medina, J 92, 242
Meehl, C 136
Meeter, M 249
Mehta, N 164
Mejias, S 60
Mellah, S 202
Melloni, L 156, 181
Melrose, A 108
Meltzer, J 252
Mencl, E 114
Mencl, WE 48, 80, 143, 148,
155, 208, 209, 242, 244
Mendelsohn, A 170
Meneide, T-F 41
Mengotti, P 215
Menon, V 97, 121
Menzies, L 197, 232
Meredith, C 57
Merker, B 254
Mesite, L 242
Mesulam, M 7
Meulemans, T 35, 100
Meyer, B 112
Meyer, L 82
Mian, M 96
Michalka, SW 66, 100, 195
Michaud, CC 161
Midgley, KJ 144
Migo, E 52
Milberg, W 100, 110, 172,
188
Milding, J 106
Mildner, J 45
Milham, M 40, 122
Miller, CA 79
Miller, E 24, 25
Miller, GA 200
Miller, M 64, 75, 86, 196
Miller, MB 85, 182
Miller, NS 91
Miller, R 182
Millner, A 64
Mill, RD 183
Minabe, Y 257
Minas, J 147, 218
Min, B-K 128, 195
Miranda, R 247
Mischel, W 67, 173
Miskovic, V 72
Misra, M 79
Mitchell, D 71, 104
Mitchell, JP 138
Mitchell, M 57, 149
Mithal, PS 172

Author Index
Mitroff, SR 167
Miyagawa, S 82
Moadi, H 218
Moeller, FG 44
Mohamed Ali, O 73, 81,
116
Mohanty, A 167, 200, 233,
235
Moher, J 157, 255
Molfese, DL 163
Molfese, P 80, 114, 143,
148, 242, 244
Molfese, PJ 48, 113, 155,
244
Molinaro, N 142
Mölle, M 252
Molnar, M 66
Monroe, DM 167
Montaldi, D 52
Monterosso, J 108
Montgomery, D 148, 182
Monti, J 119, 152, 238
Monti, JM 153
Monti, MM 187
Montoya, L 197
Moodie, C 123
Moody, T 247
Moore, DL 208
Moore, RD 138, 141
Moraczewski, D 176
Morales, A 242
Morell, A 117, 186
Moreno, G 69
Morgan, C 174
Morgan-Short, K 80
Morgenstern, J 37
Mormino, E 84
Mormino, EC 75
Morris, J 133
Morrison, A 109, 138
Morrison, RG 64, 169, 217
Morsella, E 140
Morseth, BK 206
Moscovitch, M 88, 150, 151,
216, 251
Moseley, M 219
Moses, P 175
Mott, K 33, 131, 227, 228
Mottron, L 56, 132
Moulson, MC 127
Moutier, S 255
Mozolic, JL 202
Mroczek, D 241
Mudar, R 127
Mudar, RA 61, 212
Mueller, HJ 229
Muente, TF 215
Muggleton, N 228
Muggleton, NG 118
Muhammed, K 193
Mühlberger, A 169
Muise-Hennessey, A 175
Mulder, HD 134
Müller, M 98
Muller, MLTM 91
Müller, MLTM 91
Mumford, J 122
Munakata, Y 16, 17, 109,
239
Munesue, T 257
Muñoz Velazquez, J 227
Munson, B 120

Murai, T 68
Muret, D 158
Murphy, A 57
Murphy, C 220
Murphy, D 149
Murray, JD 154
Murtagh, J 46, 246
Murty, V 87
Mysiw, WJ 174

N
Nadel, L 153
Nadkarni, N 203
Nagamatsu, L 74
Nagar, N 66
Nagy, A 187
Naidech, AM 99
Nakamura, K 211, 223
Nakamura, S 213
Nakano, H 158, 179, 180
Nakatani, H 257
Nakayama, K 192
Navarrete, E 211
Nayak, S 173
Neargarder, S 232
Neath, K 199
Nee, D 44
Neelon, MF 202
Negreira, A 154
Neill, R 124
Neilson, E 88
Nelson, C 176, 197
Nelson, CA 14, 230, 237
Neufeld, J 135
Nevat, M 143
Neville, H 119, 130, 131
Neville, HJ 15, 84
New, AS 38
Newman, A 39, 154
Newman, AJ 146, 175
Newman, J 64, 224, 225,
255
Newman-Smith, K 153
Newsome, RN 85
Ng, J 166
Ngo, H-V 252
Nicodemus, B 59
Nicoll, DR 141
Niedeggen, M 159
Nielson, D 250, 251
Nielson, DM 174
Nielson, K 239
Nielson, KA 74, 188, 256
Niemi, L 137
Nierhaus, T 244, 254
Nieto-Castanon, A 219
Niezrecki, R 225
Nikolaidis, A 186
Nilsonne, G 103
Nimm, J 54
Nisbet, A 86
Niu, Y-Q 85
Niv, Y 140, 199
Niziolek, CA 92
Nizzi, M-C 202
Nobre, AC 185
Noens, I 126
Nomi, JS 69
Nopoulos, P 60
Nordin, K 151, 186
Norman, AL 188

Norman, K 52, 122
Norra, C 166
Northrup, E 90
Norton, ES 46
Notebaert, W 42
Novak, L 71
Novakovic-Agopian, T 138
Novembre, G 125
Nowak, R 57, 123
Noyce, A 79
Nu, CS 135
Nussbaum, PD 239
Nusslock, R 43, 160
Nyalakanti, P 102
Nyhus, E 140

O
Obermeier, C 130
Obhi, S 72
Obler, LK 243
Obleser, J 59, 111, 141, 157
Ochsner, K 23, 37, 73, 101,
168
Ochsner, KN 24, 173
O'Connor, AR 183
O'Connor, MK 51
O'Donell, MB 23
Oechsner, J 197
O'Hara, R 68
Oh, H 160
Oksanen, K 107
Olichney, J 85
Oliva, A 253
Oliver, M 113
O'Loughlin, C 200
Olsen, R 250, 252
Olson, D 134
Olson, E 171, 199, 240
Olson, I 52, 73, 200
Olson, IR 252
O'Malley, D 184
Ondobaka, S 137, 222
O'Neil, K 146, 166
O'Neil, KM 187
Ong, JL 67
Onoda, K 168
Oostenveld, R 221
Op de Macks, Z 193
Orfali, N 103
Orr, S 105
Oscar-Berman, M 188
Oshima-Takane, Y 179, 180
Ostrowski, FK 121
Oswald, K 91, 92
Otten, LJ 118, 151
Oudiette, D 185
Owen, A 187
Owen, L 81, 257
O'Young, D 214
Ozawa, S 166
Ozernov-Palchik, O 46, 47
Ozranov-Palchik, O 242
Ozubko, J 88

P
Paap, K 76
Pablos, L 112, 179
Paczynski, M 206
Pais-Vieira, C 40, 152
Pa, J 138

Pak, H 195
Pakulak, E 131
Paller, K 88, 119
Paller, KA 27, 185, 186, 234
Pallier, C 83, 223, 247
Palmisano, A 225
Palombo, DJ 86
Palumbo, R 169
Palva, JM 29
Palva, S 28, 29
Pamment, J 41
Pani, E 58
Pan, P 111
Pantazis, D 82
Papademetris, X 220, 236
Papanikolaou, A 159
Papasavas, P 166
Papassotiropoulos, A 250
Papies, E 38
Paplińska, M 93
Parafita Couto, MdC 112
Parasuraman, R 43, 139,
205, 220, 228
Pardilla-Delgado, E 90, 213
Parelman, JM 103
Parikh, N 66
Parker, S 138
Parkes, L 218
Park, H 152, 183
Park, J 61
Park, S 64
Parks, E 131
Park, Y 257, 258
Parsons, J 229
Parvizi, J 158
Pasquina, P 191
Patel, A 48, 59
Patel, K 217
Patel, S 96
Patil, A 248
Pattamadilok, C 247
Patzelt, E 64
Pauli, P 169, 197
Paul, P 98
Pausova, Z 197
Paus, T 197
Pavlidou, E 208
Pavlova, M 71, 72
Pavlova, MA 61
Pavlov, YG 168
Paxton, J 204
Payne, H 81
Payne, J 90, 101, 119
Payne, JD 27, 213, 249
Payne, L 30, 79
Paz-Alonso, PM 113, 244
Paz, MLB 81
Pearlson, G 166
Pearlson, GD 154
Pearson, J 128
Pedersen, G 67
Pedersen, S 48
Peelle, J 55, 212
Peira, N 231
Pejovic, J 66
Pell, MD 105
Peloquin, M 160
Peltier, S 91
Pelzer, EA 155
Peng, G 155
Peper, JS 132
Peperkamp, S 114

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

267

Author Index	
Peraza, J 174
Perdue, K 230
Perea, M 112
Perez, A 127
Pérez Gay Juárez, F 73
Pergola, G 50, 215
Pergolizzi, D 184
Perico, C 223
Perkins, D 133
Perlstein, WM 100, 228
Perotti, K 223
Perrachione, T 46, 115, 147
Perrachione, TK 46, 114
Perrone-McGovern, K 154,
200
Perron, M 197
Persson, J 117, 151, 186, 231
Persson, N 146
Petersen, S 29
Peterson, D 78
Peterson, J 163, 193
Peterson, M 228
Peterson, MS 205, 241
Peters, S 132
Petitto, L-A 175
Petrovic, P 103
Peverill, M 203
Peysakhovich, B 154, 188,
242
Pfeifer, K 73
Pfenninger, SE 47
Phelps, E 202
Phillips, JS 217
Phuong, J 175
Piazza, M 226
Pica, P 226
Pickat, H 74
Pienaar, R 188
Pierce, GL 171
Pierce, J 42, 77
Pierce, JE 77
Pierce, L 179
Pindus, DM 138
Pineau, A 35, 139, 142
Pineda, J 124
Pineda, JA 155
Pinheiro, AP 200
Pinns, M 209
Piolino, P 183
Pirogovsky, E 141
Pirog Revill, K 164
Pitman, RK 105
Pittenger, C 236
Pizzagalli, D 36, 134, 201
Plass, JC 185
Plaze, M 187
Pluta, J 150
Poeppel, D 112, 156, 181,
254
Poirel, N 35, 139, 142
Polczynska, M 79, 247
Poldrack, R 122
Poliva, O 189
Polizzotto, N 42
Poljac, E 108, 140
Pomerantz, I 134
Pomplun, M 217
Pontifex, MB 141
Poore, J 56, 57
Poortman, EB 146
Pornpattananangkul, N
43, 160

268

2014 Annual Meeting
Postle, BR 20, 78, 94
Potter, G 131
Potter, M 192
Power, J 29
Powers, A 57, 67, 173, 198
Powers, L 190
Praamstra, P 221
Prasad, G 219
Preer, L 171, 199, 255
Press, C 72
Preston, A 19
Preston, AR 52
Preston, J 143, 244
Preston, JL 80
Preuss, J 107
Price, A 55
Price, AR 212
Price, M 215
Primativo, S 126
Pritchard, S 257
Proudfit, G 38
Proudfit, GH 167
Pudhiyidath, A 61
Puertolas, ML 258
Pugh, K 114, 143, 148, 242,
244
Pugh, KR 80, 113, 155, 208,
209, 244
Puglisi, G 124
Pu, H 38, 144
Pylkkänen, L 147, 210, 247

Q
Qin, S 121
Qi, Z 115, 218, 246
Quamme, J 52
Quandt, L 81
Quentin, R 127, 191
Quigley, K 38, 40
Quirk, C 33
Qu, Z 217, 229

R
Rabbitt, LR 241
Race, L 153
Rackley, A 61, 127
Radulescu, A 140
Rafal, RD 189
Rafie, K 160
Ragole, T 163
Rahnev, D 94
Raine, L 173
Raine, LB 141
Rain, LB 138
Rakhlin, N 207
Ralph, H 149
Ramachandran, V 94
Ramamurthy, M 196
Ramanathan, J 195
Ramey, CH 105
Ramirez, E 167
Ramos, A 204
Rana, S 45
Ranasinghe, O 89
Rand, K 161
Rangarajan, V 158
Rankin, CH 239
Rao, N 123
Rao, SM 188
Rao, V 102

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Rasch, B 186, 232, 237, 250,
252
Raschle, N 47, 90
Raschle, NM 47, 188, 207,
242
Rathnayaka, N 44
Rauber, A 200
Rauscher, A 258
Rausch, S 72
Ravicz, M 230
Ravid, M 204
Rawding, J 90
Raz, N 146, 226
Raznahan, A 187
Reavis, EA 126
Reber, P 119, 241, 253
Reber, PJ 121, 186
Redcay, E 51, 136, 235
Redden, RS 161
Reddick, E 257
Reder, L 116
Red, S 44, 164
Reeck, C 36
Reed, C 66
Reed, RK 133
Reem, K-D 83
Reetz, K 236
Regev, M 145
Reggente, N 186, 187
Reif, A 197
Reilly, J 175, 200
Reilly, K 158
Reineberg, A 41
Reiss, AL 37
Reite, M 163
Reiter, KE 188
Remijn, GB 257
Reminger, S 141
Remington, A 99
Rendall, A 206
Renfro, A 55, 236
Reno, A 174
Rentz, D 41
Repovs, G 154
Repple, J 103
Reschke, E 141
Reynolds, G 232
Rezai, AR 174
Rice, K 136
Rich, A 60
Richer, L 197
Ridderinkhof, R 17
Ridge, J 200
Rieckmann, A 75
Ries, C 54
Riesel, A 43, 107
Rietschel, J 196
Riggall, AC 78
Riggins, T 69, 85, 148
Riggs, L 252
Rigoli, F 95
Rigotti, M 25
Rigoulot, S 105
Rimsky, L 38
Ringel, F 112
Risko, E 75
Rissman, J 51, 75
Ristic, J 35
Riva Posse, P 39
Rivest, J 150
Rizio, A 215
Rizzolatti, G 222

Roberts, D 58
Roberts, H 139
Robertson, E 187
Roberts, V 166
Robey, A 148
Robin, J 88, 150
Robinson, M 100
Robinson, O 44
Rodman, A 255
Rodrigue, A 77
Rodrigue, AL 77
Rogers, L 87, 118
Rogers, T 57, 123
Roghers, TT 55
Roiser, JP 233
Rojas, D 163
Rokers, B 103
Rolheiser, TM 252
Rolle, CE 61
Rollins, L 85
Romanos, M 197
Rondina II, R 252
Root, N 94
Rosario, M-A 158
Rosburg, T 88
Rosen, A 60, 219
Rosenbaum, RS 88, 251
Rosenberg, J 221
Rosen, ML 66, 100, 165, 195
Rosen, N 241
Rose, NS 78
Roser, ME 94
Roser, P 106, 201
Rossetti, A 71
Rossi, E 243, 246
Rossion, B 60
Rossi, P 50
Rossi, S 106, 164
Ross, R 241
Ross, RS 251
Ro, T 50
Rotblatt, LJ 141
Rothman, DL 80
Rouhinen, S 29
Rowe, G 85
Rowe, M 51
Roy, AC 124
RoyChoudhury, A 58
Rudy, B 200
Rueckl, J 114, 143, 242, 244
Rueckl, JG 113
Rueschemeyer, S-A 191
Ruge, H 157, 203, 240
Rugg, M 54
Rugg, MD 53, 182, 251
Ruhnau, P 29
Ruijgrok, B 115, 179
Rui, M 149
Rumiati, R 50
Rumiati, RI 215, 236
Rusk, N 63
Russo, FA 155
Russo, K 200
Rustemeier, M 96
Rutherford, BJ 57
Ruzic, L 70, 103
Ryals, A 87, 118
Ryals, AJ 214
Ryan, E 33, 131, 227, 228
Ryan, J 19, 250, 252
Ryan, JD 84
Rymut, I 217

Rypma, B 59

S
Sabharwal, A 233
Sacchetti, D 182
Sachser, N 59
Sadeh, T 212
Sadr, J 224
Saint-Amour, D 56
Sakaki, M 231
Salat, D 100, 188
Saliba, B 173
Salvatore, J 238
Samaha, J 94
Sam, E 80
Sammler, D 125
Sampaio, A 154
Sams, M 107
Sanchez, DJ 121
Sancho, L 114
Sandbank, M 142
Sanders, LD 84, 188
Sandhu, R 127
Sand, L 235
San Martín, R 128
Santander, T 85
Santiesteban, I 72
Santillan, J 130, 131
Santos, M 225
Sanz, C 80, 83
Sarter, M 98
Sasse, SF 36
Sato, T 93
Sato, W 104
Satpute, A 39
Satterfield, T 180, 227
Saura, L 217
Saur, D 244
Savage, G 60
Savazzi, S 223
Savic, A 154
Sawada, R 104
Sawi, O 76
Saxe, R 70
Saxler, P 232
Saygin, Z 62
Scalf, P 153
Schacter, D 38
Schacter, DL 148, 152, 213
Schaeffer, D 77
Schaeffer, DJ 77
Schaeffer, JD 183
Schafer, S 106
Schaffert, J 124
Schaich Borg, J 102
Schall, J 16
Schapiro, R 233
Scharinger, M 59
Scheinost, D 219, 220, 236
Scheldrup, M 139
Scheldrup, MR 205
Schelenz, P 103
Scherling, C 109
Scheuplein, A-L 87
Schiele, MA 197
Schiffmann, L 238
Schiff, ND 99
Schild, U 176, 179
Schiller, D 170
Schiller, N 112
Schiller, NO 115, 207, 208

2014 Annual Meeting	
Schiltz, C 60, 113, 165
Schintu, S 42
Schipul, S 44
Schlaug, G 58, 189, 254
Schlegel, A 111
Schmidt, T 106
Schmithorst, VJ 156
Schmitz, JM 44
Schmuck, N 82
Schneider, D 33
Schneider, F 205
Schneider-Garces, N 90
Schoenfeld, MA 34, 98
Scholte, S 17
Schönberger, AR 155
Schon, K 52
Schreiner, T 186
Schriewer, E 159
Schroeder, CE 156
Schubert, M 85
Schubert, ML 182
Schubert, T 203
Schubotz, RI 155
Schuck, NW 51
Schultz, A 75, 84
Schultz, AP 41
Schultz, KS 148
Schumacher, E 139, 164
Schwarb, H 152, 153
Schwartz, J 56
Schwarz, J 103
Schwarzkopp, T 174
Scott, SE 117
Scudder, M 173
Scudder, MR 138, 141
Seagraves, B 56
Sederberg, P 250, 251
Sederberg, PB 117, 174
Seery, A 176
Sefcik, A 144, 243
Segawa, JA 145
Seger, C 192, 251
Seidenberg, M 188
Seidler, RD 91
Seidman, L 133, 236
Seifert, E 180
Seifritz, E 232, 252
Sekuler, R 30, 79, 190
Selarka, D 45, 240
Selvadurai, C 187
Semph, B 54
Serences, J 191
Sereno, A 164
Sereno, AB 44
Seth, A 201
Shafer, A 36
Shafer, VL 45, 58, 184
Shah, N 239
Shah, SA 99
Shah, Z 94
Shalev, I 228
Shamloo, F 110
Shander, C 152, 153
Shankweiler, DP 48
Shannon, K 105
Sharma, A 93, 163, 190
Sharoh, D 143, 242, 244
Sharot, T 233, 256
Sharp, E 110
Shaw, D 231
Shaw, EE 75
Shaw, EP 33

Author Index
Shaw, K 190
Shaw, M 196
Shears, C 80
Sheffield, M 176
Sheikh, N 113
Sheldon, S 54
Shenhav, A 224
Shen, J 196
Shen, X 220
Sheridan, M 14, 74, 203
Shermohammed, M 85
Sherrill, K 241
Sherrill, KR 205
Sheth, S 96
Shi, D 133
Shiell, MM 90
Shi, G 179
Shih, P 140, 220
Shimizu, RE 122
Shin, J 164
Shin, LM 105
Shinn-Cunningham, B 66,
190
Shinohara, M 214
Shirk, S 57, 149
Shirley, K 35
Shi, Y 203
Shohamy, D 8, 129, 248
Shrotri, M 218
Shtyrov, Y 147
Shu, H 113, 142
Siegel, M 29
Siever, LJ 38
Silton, RL 169
Silva, JU 234
Silveri, MC 50
Silverman, M 37, 196
Silvers, J 67
Silvers, JA 173
Silvetti, M 42, 95
Simard, M 56
Simmank, F 256
Simon-Dack, S 35, 154, 200
Simon, G 35, 139, 142
Simony, E 106, 145
Simpson, B 58
Sims, JA 116
Sin, B-S 58
Singel, D 109
Singer, W 15
Singhal, A 36, 92
Singh, I 187, 213
Singh, S 180
Singleton, O 100
Sinha, R 219
Sinnott-Armstrong, W 102
Siuda, K 93
Skoe, E 156
Skudlarski, P 166
Skwara, AC 36
Slagter, HA 19, 20
Slason, E 163
Sliva, DD 154, 188, 242
Slone, E 185
Slotnick, S 214
Slotnick, SD 151
Small, M 81, 257
Small, SL 242
Smith, A 109
Smith, JC 188
Smith, S 47, 90, 154
Smith, SA 188, 207, 242

Smith, T 250, 251
Smith, TA 117
Smith, VC 69
Snider, SF 48
Snowling, MJ 114
Snur, A 63
Snyder, H 109
Sobhani, M 222
Söderlund, H 117, 151, 186
Sokol-Hessner, P 202
Sokolov, A 71, 72
Sokolov, AN 61
Sollmann, N 112
Solman, G 125
Solodkin, A 242
Somandepalli, K 122
Soman, S 219
Somers, D 190
Somers, DC 66, 100, 165,
195
Somerville, L 68
Somerville, LH 36, 197
Sommer, M 160
Sommer, T 63
Song, J-H 157, 255
Song, S 120
Song, Y 165, 229
Sorenson, J 117
Soria Bauser, DA 159
Sours, C 221
South, ME 161
Spagna, A 67
Spaniol, J 139
Spector, F 146
Speekenbrink, M 74
Speer, M 37
Speer, MF 206
Spelke, E 222, 226
Spence, J 61
Spencer, J 76, 241
Spencer, R 68, 216
Spencer, RMC 148, 181
Sperling, R 84
Sperling, RA 41, 75
Spicer, J 104
Spitzer, B 175
Spitzer, E 156
Spotorno, N 134
Spratt, S 139
Spreng, N 117, 240
Spreng, RN 45, 155, 161,
213
Sreekumar, V 251
Staffaroni, A 77
Stamenova, V 172
Staples, LK 105
Stark, C 117
Starrett, MJ 78
Stasenko, A 113
Staum-Casasanto, L 247
Steel, A 120
Steele, VR 131, 204
Steinbrink, C 142
Steiner, D 117
Steinglass, J 225
Steinhauer, K 83
Steinmetz, K 166
Steinschneider, M 58
Stelzer, J 254
Stening, E 117, 151, 186
Stenson, A 102
Stepanovic, M 137

Stephens, J 60
Stern, C 52, 241
Stern, CE 100, 205, 251
Sternkopf, MA 205
Stets, M 61
Stettler, B 35
Stevens, C 63
Stevens, M 166, 178
Stevens, S 231
Steyaert, J 126
Stickgold, R 187
Stites, MC 143
St. Jacques, PL 148
St. John, A 173
St-Laurent, M 53
Stockdale, L 169
Stockert, A 244, 245
Stoica, T 236
Stolle, D 105
Stömer, VS 230
Stone, A 166
Stoodley, C 49
Storch, A 51
Störmer, VS 34, 205
Stroup, ML 100, 117
Struiksma, M 134
Studte, S 184
Suchan, B 106, 141, 159,
166
Su, C-IE 179
Sudhyadhom, A 91
Sugarman, MA 188
Sugawara, A 82
Sugden, NA 127
Sullivan, JL 232
Sullivan, KL 48
Sumera, E 93
Summerfield, C 128
Sunaert, S 126
Sung, J 128
Sung, W-H 210
Sun, H 29
Sun, J 164
Sun, L 165
Sun, M 165
Sun, SZ 196
Sun, X 51
Sun, Y 114, 190
Sun, Y-H 107
Supekar, K 97
Sussman, E 184
Sussman, TJ 167
Suthana, NA 75
Sutherland, ME 190
Sutterer, M 69
Sutterer, MJ 125
Su, Y 229
Suzuki, M 257
Suzuki, S 185
Suzuki, Y 235
Svärd, J 106
Swaab, T 49, 246
Swaab, TY 177, 243
Swears, M 49
Sweeny, T 170
Sweis, AS 64
Swett, K 144, 243
Swick, D 63
Szalkowski, G 139
Szekely, A 167, 200, 233
Szpunar, K 38
Szwed, M 93

Szymula, L 79

T
Tabor, W 48
Tager-Flusberg, H 176
Tait, DS 174
Takashima, A 178, 245
Tamamiya, Y 66
Tamir, DI 138
Tamm, S 103
Tan, C-H 90
Tanigawa, N 112
Tanner, D 50
Tannock, R 95
Tao, R 113
Tapani, K 107
Tark, K-j 202
Tarullo, A 173
Tatagiba, M 72
Tata, MS 130
Tat, MJ 51
Tavares, R 170
Teale, P 163
Teghipco, A 113, 211
Teickner, C 176, 179
Teng, X 254
Tervo-Clemmens, B 157
Teslovich, T 173
Thakral, PP 53
Thapar, A 182
Tharakan, T 234
Thaut, M 251
Theodore, B 132
Theodore, RM 145
Thesen, T 156
Thiel, S 254
Thierry, G 209
Thoma, P 106, 166
Thomas, C 35, 221
Thomas, K 123, 196
Thomason, ME 161
Thomas, T 212
Thompson, A 196
Thompson, E 257
Thompson, JC 43
Thompson, KR 186
Thompson-Schill, SL 43, 55
Thompson, WJ 105
Thornhill, D 115
Thornton, MA 138
Thorsten, P 149
Thuné, H 103
Thurin, K 195
Thurm, F 51, 132
Tian, F 183
Tian, X 181, 254
Tibon, R 87
Tierney, SM 141
Tiganj, Z 213
Tilak, A 206
Tillmann, B 48
Tippett, LJ 152
Tishler, D 166
Tissier, C 187
Titone, D 113
Tkachenko, O 158, 171,
199, 240
Toba, M 127
Tobia, MJ 63
Tobler, P 64
Toichi, M 104

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

269

Author Index	
Tokoglu, F 220
Tomer, R 160, 228
Tomoschuk, B 209
Tong, S 164
Tong, TT 69
Torgrimson, SJ 108
Torrence, R 141
Toscano, JC 189
Tottenham, N 197
Tourville, J 219
Tourville, JA 145
Towers, D 141
Tranel, D 29, 53, 64, 118,
125, 150, 194
Traxler, M 49
Traxler, MJ 177, 243
Treadway, M 134
Trefler, A 221
Trelle, AN 85
Troiani, V 200
Tromp, D 103
Troup, LJ 69, 102
Troyer, M 145
Truong, D 206
Truong, G 127
Tsai, P-S 70
Tsai, P-Y 210
Tsai, YL 209
Tsao, J 191
Tseng, L-W 221
Tseng, LY 209
Tse, P 111
Tse, PU 126
Tsoi, L 136
Tsubokawa, T 257
Tucker, M 187
Tu, H-W 181
Tullo, D 192, 196, 223
Tully, L 236
Turkeltaub, P 49
Turkeltaub, PE 48
Turner, B 64, 75, 86
Turner, BO 182
Turner, G 45, 117, 172, 240
Turner, GR 138
Turner, R 254
Turney, IC 118, 151
Ty, A 104
Tyszka, JM 170
Tzeng, O 210, 228
Tzeng, OJ 113, 244
Tzeng, OJ-L 70, 83, 179, 210
Tzeng, OJL 177
Tzeng, Y-L 176

U
Ueltzhöfer, K 41
Ugen, S 113
Ullman, MT 80, 83, 247
Ulytska, B 142
Uncapher, M 51
Uncapher, MR 185
Uno, A 211
Uono, S 104
Upstill, E 74
Urbach, TP 143, 145
Urosevic, S 169
Ursino, M 190
Urushihara, M 66
Ustine, C 178
Uta, W 157

270

2014 Annual Meeting
Uyeji, L 169

V
Vack, N 105
Vaidya, A 73
Vail, B 248
Valdez, J 86
Valero-Cabre, A 127
Valero-Cabré, A 191
Vallar, G 71, 93, 190
Vallesi, A 205
van Ast, VA 249
Van Bavel, J 21, 202
Van Benthem, K 76
van Berkum, J 134
Van Bochove, M 42
Vance, J 139
van de Kamp, F 207
van den Berg, B 99
van den Broek, P 48, 240
Van der Haegen, L 178
Vander Hyde, M 141
van der Meij, M 144
Vandermorris, S 84
Van Dijk, KR 254
Van Dijk, KRA 41
van Duijvenvoorde, ACK
132
Van Dyke, JA 48
VanElzakker, MB 105
Van Eylen, L 126
Van Hecke, AV 231
Van Heeringen, K 42
van Hell, JG 49, 50, 82,
178, 209
Van Leijenhorst, L 48, 240
van Lier, P 230
Vannini, P 41, 84
van Pelt, S 222
Van Petten, C 115
van Rijn, E 212
Van Rinsveld, A 113
van Rooij, I 222
van 't Hoff, V 140
Varangis, E 112
Varescon, I 255
Varma, S 177
Vasconcelos, M 200
Vass, LK 253
Vatterott, D 100
Vaughn, K 204
Vazquez, D 89
Vecera, S 66, 100
Veillette, S 197
Velnoskey, K 51, 136
Venchkoski, J 189, 253
Ventrella, C 90
Venza, E 61, 127
Verfaellie, M 54, 86, 153
Vergara-Martinez, M 112
Verguts, T 42, 95
Vernaleken, I 236
Vernet, M 127, 191
Veromann, K-R 193
Verschur, PFMJ 159
Verstynen, T 35
Vettel, JM 182
Viard, A 183
Vias, C 242
Vidal, J 139
Vigil, C 247

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Vilberg, KL 251
Villanueva, Y 168
Viner, R 197, 232
Vitaliano, G 134
Voina, D 224
Von Holzen, K 244
Vonk, JMJ 243
Vorberg, D 208
Voß, B 236
Voss, J 87, 118
Voss, JL 99, 119, 214
Voss, M 69, 74
Voss, MW 125, 171
Vrticka, P 37
Vukovic, N 147
Vyas, K 166, 167

W
Wagemans, J 126
Wager, T 70, 104
Wager, TD 103, 106, 137
Wagner, A 51, 119, 122, 140
Wagner, AD 185
Wagner, M 45, 58
Wagner, V 80, 253
Wagshal, D 138
Wahlund, L-O 117, 186
Wais, P 117
Waldorp, L 17
Waldum, E 107
Walker, A 73, 116
Walker, C 42
Walker, E 133
Walker, M 212
Walker, MR 136
Wallace, S 178
Wallis, J 24
Walshaw, P 79, 247
Walsh, T 225
Walsh, V 74, 218
Walter, L 206
Waltz, J 77
Wang, D 118
Wang, E 165
Wang, F 165, 248
Wang, J 109, 118
Wang, M 208
Wang, S 29, 211
Wang, T 54
Wang, W-C 153
Wang, WS-Y 155
Wang, X-J 154
Wang, Y 229
Wank, A 54
Wansard, M 35, 100
Wantz, AL 150
Ward, A 41, 84
Ward, L 156
Ward, LM 62
Waring, JD 68
Warner, K 64, 194
Warner, M 253
Warn, S 206
Warren, D 29, 53
Wascher, E 33
Waskom, M 140
Wassermann, E 42, 120
Watkins, KE 176
Watson, P 152
Watson, PD 153
Wattenberger, AM 52

Weaver, SM 206
Webb, A 56, 57
Webb, TL 107
Weber, J 67, 73
Weber, K 178
Weber, M 43, 158, 171, 199,
240, 255
Wechsler, E 118
Weeks, S 191
Wehe, H 192
Weichart, E 250
Weidner, R 158
Weierich, MR 136
Wei, L 127
Weiler, J 204
Weinberg, A 167
Weinberg, L 214
Weiner, K 158
Weiss, B 238
Weisz, N 29
Welbourne, S 144
Wells, B 217
Weng, H-H 199
Weng, TB 171
Wentura, D 163
Wenzel, W 164
Werner, JM 222
Westberg, L 106
Westerlund, A 197, 230,
237
Westlake, K 221
Westphal, A 186
Wexler, B 70
Whitefield-Gabrieli, S 238
Whiteman, A 52
Whitfield-Gabrieli, S 238
Whiting, C 177
Whiting, CM 177
Whitlock, J 47
Whitney, D 170
Whittaker, S 241
Wiebe, SA 75, 133
Wiese, E 229
Wieser, MJ 72, 169
Wigman, S 41, 84
Wijeakumar, S 76
Wikström, J 117, 151, 186
Wilding, EL 53, 213
Wilkinson, ID 107
Wilkinson, L 120
Will, G-J 230
Williams, AN 213
Williams, C 170
Williams, M 60
Wilsch, A 111, 141
Wilson-Mendenhall, C 39
Wimmer, GE 248
Wing, E 40, 153
Wing, EA 184
Win, K 150
Winocur, G 88, 251
Wirth, M 90
Wisner, K 171
Wittmann, M 137
Wixted, J 52
Wolde, M 191
Woldorff, M 33, 34, 61
Woldorff, MG 34, 98, 99,
128
Wolf, D 86, 103
Wolfensteller, U 203, 240
Wolf, LK 198

Wolk, D 150
Wong, C 238
Wong, J 168
Woo, C-W 70
Woodall, K 35
Woodard, JL 188
Woodcock, K 134
Woods, E 253
Woods, S 133
Wootan, S 241
Woo, TT 67
Worthy, D 66
Worthy, DA 128
Wöstmann, M 141
Woyke, I 108
Woytowicz, E 221
Wrede, K 244
Wright, RJ 237
Wu, A 121
Wu, AD 122
Wu, C-C 217
Wu, C-T 124, 125, 168, 220
Wu, DH 70, 83, 113, 177,
179, 210, 244
Wu, H 142
Wu, J 84
Wu, JJ 81
Wurm, MF 62
Wu, S-W 63, 225
Wu, Y 209
Wu, YH 209
Wykowska, A 229
Wylie, G 77, 96, 204, 206
Wylie, S 95

X
Xia, C 105
Xia, J 151
Xu, A 167
Xu, N 155
Xu, Q 76

Y
Yadon, C 189
Yamaguchi, S 168
Yamaguchi, Y 68
Yang, F-p 55, 209
Yang, G 154
Yang, J 96
Yang, J-C 85
Yang, L 76
Yang, Y 120, 146, 226
Yao, G 123
Yardley, H 104
Yarkoni, T 122
Yarosh, H 166
Yasunaga, D 82
Yeasin, M 45
Yee, E 216
Yee Lee, S 149
Yeh, C-F 124, 125, 220, 221
Yeh, M-J 225
Yeh, M-Y 199
Yeh, T-C 210
Yennu, AS 183
Yerys, B 194
Yeshurun, Y 106
Yeung, N 128
Ye, W 180
Yi, D-J 125, 202

2014 Annual Meeting	

Author Index

Ying, X 97
Yin, H 236
Yip, BS 209
Yoncheva, Y 122
Yoo, HJ 231
Yoon, SA 136
Yoshimura, Y 257
Younce, S 227
Young, L 136, 137, 154
You, Y 71
Yu, A 173
Yuan, P 146, 226
Yu, L 193
Yung, M 135
Yushkevich, P 150
Yu, Y 184
Yu, YH 45

Z
Zabelina, D 130
Zaheed, AB 234
Zakiniaeiz, Y 219
Zald, D 95
Zamzow, RM 123
Zanto, T 111
Zarnowiec, K 254
Zatorre, RJ 90, 190
Zeithamova, D( 52
Zelano, C 235
Zeman, A 185
Zepf, F 103, 236
Zerres, K 103
Zerubavel, N 73, 101
Zettergren, A 106
Zevin, J 80, 97, 242
Zhang, C 155
Zhang, F 185
Zhang, H 181
Zhang, J 76
Zhang, L 147
Zhang, S 173
Zhao, D 93
Zhao, X 76, 165
Zheng, Y 76, 233
Zheng, ZA 187
Zhen, Y 229
Zhou, W 219
Zhou, Y-D 93
Zhuang, J 212
Zhu, P 160
Ziaei, M 231
Zilles, K 205
Zimmer, HD 89
Zimmerman, B 90
Zirnstein, M 82
Zobel, BH 188
Zonta, GA 234
Zottoli, T 129
Zozulinsky, P 228
Zuk, J 154, 188, 207, 242
Zulfiqar, I 177
Zulkiewicz, B 34
Zwitserlood, P 208
Zwosta, K 157

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

271

Boston Marriott Copley Place
Floorplan
Third Floor: Back Bay Conference and Exhibition Hall

Fourth Floor: CNS Registration Desk

272

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

