
Invited Symposium Session 1
FRONTAL CORTEX CONTRIBUTIONS TO DECISION
MAKING
Sunday, March 26, 10:00 am - Noon, Ballroom A
Chair: Elisabeth A (Betsy) Murray, National Institute of Mental
Health
Speakers: Betsy Murray, Erin Rich, Paul Cisek, Joseph Kable
There is broad interest in the neural mechanisms underlying rewardbased decision making. The four speakers will provide an update on
different aspects of decision making in macaques and humans. Murray
and Rich will unravel the neural substrates and neural mechanisms
underlying object choices in macaque monkeys. Murray will discuss
the causal contributions of different frontal cortex areas to object
choices, focusing on the complementary roles for orbital and ventral
prefrontal regions. Rich will discuss a novel approach to decode value
representations from orbitofrontal cortex during individual choices with
high temporal resolution. Cisek will present the novel hypothesis that
decisions about actions unfold as a biased competition, and then will
test that idea using neurophysiological approaches in macaques.
Based on findings from both functional imaging and effects of brain
damage, Kable will discuss the separable contributions of
ventromedial prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex to decision
making in humans.
TALK 1: FROM KNOWLEDGE TO ACTION: THE ROLE OF THE
PRIMATE ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX
Betsy Murray1; 1National Institute of Mental Health
The orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), traditionally defined as Walker’s areas
11, 13 and 14, has long been thought to play a critical role in behavioral
flexibility, including behavioral inhibition and the regulation of emotion.
Recent evidence has overturned these ideas by showing that
inadvertent damage to fiber pathways account for the reported deficits.
The use of a more selective lesion method in macaque monkeys has
shown that OFC has a more specific and different function:
representing and updating the value of specific expected outcomes,
based on current biological states. These updated valuations, in turn,
guide choice behavior. Recent studies have identified functional
subdivisions within OFC and helped to differentiate it from nearby
20

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

areas. In one study we found that the posterior part of OFC, area 13,
is necessary for its value updating function, while the anterior part,
area 11, translates this knowledge into adaptive actions. In a second
study we contrasted the contributions of OFC and the neighboring
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC; Walker’s area 12) to value
updating. We found that OFC and VLPFC play complementary roles
in value updating and—by extension—decision making. The former
depends on dynamic internal states; the latter depends on dynamic
external contingencies. Given that granular OFC and VLPFC emerged
during the evolution of primates, a comparative analysis suggests that
these capacities built on OFC functions inherited from early mammals.
TALK 2: DYNAMIC ENCODING OF CHOICE IN THE
ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX
Erin Rich1,2; 1University of California Berkeley, 2University of
California San Francisco
When making a subjective decision, it is believed that the brain
computes a value for each option and compares these values to arrive
at a choice. Evidence suggests that the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) is
critically involved in this process, however the neural mechanisms
involved remain largely obscure. One reason is that preferences are
frequently driven by knowledge and states internal to the organism,
and far removed from externally observable sensory inputs or motor
outputs. Furthermore, subjective decisions are not stereotyped. They
may evolve differently even if the same decision is made multiple
times, so that averaging neural responses over repeated trials can
obscure critical detail. With this in mind, we used a novel approach to
decode value representations from OFC during individual choices with
high temporal resolution. Ensembles of OFC neurons and field
potentials were recorded while non-human primate subjects chose
between images that predicted rewards of different value. We used a
classification algorithm to decode patterns of activity associated with
each image, and found that OFC alternated between states
representing the value of two choice options. The decoded patterns
varied trial-by-trial, but the strength and frequency of the recovered
states predicted whether a subject would decide quickly or vacillate
between the two alternatives. Multiple neural features contributed to
these representations, and individual neurons were found to shift their
firing rates as the network evaluated each option. Overall, dynamic

2017 Annual M eeting

representations of value in OFC are likely a fundamental feature of
large-scale brain networks that underlie value-based decision-making.
TALK 3: NEURAL MECHANISMS OF REAL-TIME EMBODIED
DECISIONS
Paul Cisek1; 1University of Montreal
Psychological and neurophysiological studies of decision-making have
focused primarily on scenarios in which subjects are faced with
discrete options that are stable in time, permitting a serial process of
representing the relevant information, careful deliberation about the
choice, followed by action planning and execution. However, the brain
evolved to guide interactions with a dynamic and constantly changing
world, in which the choices themselves as well as their relative costs
and benefits are defined by the momentary geometry of the immediate
environment and are continuously changing during ongoing activity.
Such “embodied decisions” still dominate our lives, whether we’re
playing a sport or walking through a crowd, and they pose challenges
that are very different than the demands of economic choice. To deal
with these challenges, animals require a neural architecture in which
the sensorimotor specification of potential actions, their valuation,
selection, and even execution can all take place in parallel. I will
describe a general hypothesis for how the brain deals with the
challenges of such dynamic and embodied behavior, and present a
series of neurophysiological recording experiments in rhesus monkeys
aimed at testing the predictions of this hypothesis. These experiments
suggest that decisions about actions unfold as a biased competition
taking place within a map of potential actions and that the resolution
of this competition, in the sensorimotor system, is what determines the
volitional commitment to an action choice.
TALK 4: VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX PLAYS A
SIMILAR ROLE IN TEMPORALLY-EXTENDED FORAGING-STYLE
DECISIONS AND BINARY CHOICES
Joseph Kable1; 1University of Pennsylvania
Many decisions involve choosing whether to continue pursuing a
current goal or abandon this course of action in favor of an alternative
one. Foraging is a classic example of such sequential, temporallyextended decision making. There has been much debate about
whether the neural mechanisms of temporally-extended decisions,
such as foraging, are fundamentally similar to those of choices from a
fixed menu of options. To address this question, we performed a series
of studies using a willingness-to-wait paradigm, in which people
continually reassess whether they want to keep waiting for a
temporally uncertain delayed reward. We find that waiting behavior in
this task is well described by formal models of optimal foraging. Using
fMRI, we find that neural activity in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex
tracks the value of the awaited reward as it dynamically changes
through time, akin to the static value signal previously observed in this
region during discrete choices from a fixed menu. Damage to the

I nvit ed Sym pos ium

ventromedial prefrontal cortex in humans also impairs the calibration
of waiting, in the same way that damage to this region impairs the
consistency of binary choices. In contrast to the results in ventromedial
prefrontal cortex, we find that anterior cingulate cortex and anterior
insula exhibit increased activity right before decisions to abandon the
current option, and interpretation of this as a signal to shift strategy is
bolstered by the finding that lesions here enhance waiting. These
results argue for a continuity in the role of frontal cortex across different
forms of decision-making.
Q&A PERIOD
The speakers will take questions from the audience.

Invited Symposium Session 2
CORTICAL OSCILLATIONS IN HEARING, SPEECH, AND
LANGUAGE
Sunday, March 26, 10:00 am - Noon, Ballroom B/C
Chair: David Poeppel, Max-Planck-Institute, NYU
Speakers: Saskia Haegens, Virginie van Wassenhove, Nai Ding,
David Poeppel
Neural activity of an oscillatory nature is observed in a range of studies
investigating perception and cognition. There is legitimate debate
about the role of oscillations, but on balance there is emerging
consensus that cortical oscillations play a critical role in shaping the
temporal structure of perceptual experience. One area of research in
which new theories and approaches are being explored concerns their
potential causal role for hearing speech, and language processing.
From selecting information in auditory streams to recognizing the
elements of speech to constructing abstract linguistic representations,
oscillations across timescales (from low-frequency delta to activity in
the high-gamma band) have been implicated in functionally specific
ways. The symposium addresses major new phenomena and their
potential explanations by drawing on psychophysics and
neurophysiology (MEG, ECoG, EEG). Linking hypotheses are
developed between basic computational properties underlying
hearing, speech, and language and how rhythmic brain activity might
form the implementational basis underlying these operations.
TALK 1: OSCILLATORY DYNAMICS OF AUDITORY ATTENTION
Saskia Haegens1; 1Columbia University
In daily life our brains receive a continuous stream of sensory input.
Effective processing in a complex natural environment requires
attention: selection of relevant input and suppression of irrelevant
information. Here I will talk about the oscillatory dynamics thought to
be instrumental in directing attention, specifically, (1) the alpha rhythm,
and (2) neuronal entrainment to slow frequency rhythms. The alpha
rhythm has been proposed as a mechanism of functional inhibition. In
a series of spatial attention studies we showed that decreased alpha
facilitates processing whereas increased alpha functions to suppress
C ognit iv e N eurosc ienc e Society

21

I nv ited Sym posium

distracting input. I will here discuss the evidence for this mechanism in
the auditory system. In addition, I will present a series of
psychophysics experiments on auditory temporal attention, showing
rhythmic entrainment as a mechanism of focusing attention on relevant
input. Subjects performed an auditory discrimination task, in which
they received a temporal visual cue, which was either informative
(rhythmic condition) or not informative about the specific timing of the
target (random condition). We showed that when a target is presented
in-phase with the cued rhythm, performance improves as compared to
both the random-mode (no precise temporal information) and the outof-phase (unexpected) condition. In an accompanying MEG study we
looked into the neural correlate of this effect, and found increased delta
coherence, in the rhythmic condition, which was sustained after the
cue, confirming the entrainment prediction.
TALK 2: TIMING SPEECH CONTENT
Virginie van Wassenhove1; 1CEA/NeuroSpin, France
Neuronal oscillations have been implicated in various cognitive
functions including time and speech processing. Non-stationarities in
the phase and in the power of entrained brain responses are not only
critical to index the endogenous control of information processing but
also to capture an individual’s subjective perception of time or speech
content. For instance, using a temporal recalibration paradigm in which
participants adapted to audiovisual asynchronies while being recorded
with magnetoencephalography (MEG) revealed that changes in the
phase of the auditory entrained responses could predict an individual’s
conscious event timing. In the speech domain, neuronal oscillations
have been hypothesized to segment the acoustic stream into
computational units (e.g. syllables or words). To test whether parsing
was driven by bottom-up acoustic cues or modulated by top-down
representational availability, participants listened to speech streams
that would yield two possible percepts. Two markers of neural-speech
tracking were found under endogenous control: small modulations in
low-frequency oscillations and variable latencies of high-frequency
neural activity (sp. beta and gamma bands). While changes in lowfrequency neural oscillations were compatible with the encoding of
pre-lexical segmentation cues, high-frequency activity informed on an
individual’s conscious speech percept. Altogether, these results are
consistent with the notion of neural oscillations as cortical framing of
information processing in time.
TALK 3: CORTICAL TRACKING OF HIERARCHICAL LINGUISTIC
STRUCTURES IN CONNECTED SPEECH
Nai Ding1; 1Zhejiang University, China
Language is hierarchically organized into syllables, words, phrases,
and sentences. For spoken language, online building of these
hierarchical linguistic structures is a fundamental yet challenging task.
Although the boundaries between syllables generally have clear
acoustic signatures, determining the boundaries between words and

22

C ognitiv e N eurosc ience Society

2017 Annual M eet ing

phrases critically relies on the listener's linguistic knowledge. During
speech listening, it has been well characterized that auditory cortical
activity is entrained to the syllabic rhythm of speech. However, how
larger linguistic structures, such as words and phrases, are
represented in the brain remains elusive and is investigated in this
study. We designed speech materials in which the hierarchical
linguistic structure of speech is dissociated from low level acoustic
features,
and
measured
cortical
activity
using
magnetoencephalography (MEG) from listeners listening to such
materials. It is demonstrated that cortical activity is concurrently
entrained to the rhythms of syllables, phrases, and sentences,
unconfounded by the tracking of acoustic properties of speech.
Furthermore, entrainment to larger linguistic structures such as
phrases and sentences is demonstrated to be associated with the
syntactic structure of speech rather than the predictability of each
incoming word. In summary, cortical circuits can generate slow
rhythms matching the time scales of larger linguistic structures, even
when such rhythms are not present in the speech input, which provides
a plausible mechanism for online building of large linguistic structures.
TALK 4: CORTICAL RHYTHMS IN HEARING, SPEECH, AND
LANGUAGE: A TAXONOMY
David Poeppel1,2; 1Max-Planck-Institute, 2NYU
Oscillations have been observed in a wide range of phenomena in
cognition, in general, and language processing, in particular. The
rumors about oscillations range from ‘they are causally crucial’ to ‘they
are at most the exhaust fumes of cortical computation.’ Can the
wilderness of oscillation-based phenomena be tamed? On the view
that brain rhythms are not merely epiphenomenal but play some role,
an attempt at a taxonomic model is made. I argue that oscillations
across rates can be argued to sample, predict, and attend to the world.
Most broadly speaking, the pairing of theta and gamma underlies
sampling, the pairing of delta and beta underlies predicting, and alpha
splits the low and high rhythm regimes and underlies attending and
inhibiting the inputs that confront our perceptual and cognitive
systems.
Q&A PERIOD
The speakers will take questions from the audience.

Invited Symposium Session 3
THE LAPSING BRAIN: HOW ATTENTIONAL
FLUCTUATIONS IMPACT COGNITION
Tuesday, March 28, 1:30 - 3:30 pm, Ballroom A
Chair: Edward Vogel, University of Chicago
Speakers: Kirsten C. S. Adam, Mariam Aly, Michael Esterman,
Kalina Christoff
Attention is well known to play a pivotal role in controlling the operation
of many cognitive mechanisms such as perception, memory,

2017 Annual Meeting

Invited Symposium

