Cognitive Neuroscience Society
Annual Meeting Program 2008
A supplement of the Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience

ISSN 1096-8857
© CNS
Cognitive Neuroscience Society
c/o Center for Mind and Brain
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
www.cogneurosociety.org

Cognitive Neuroscience Society 2008 Committees
Governing Board
Carol Colby, Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh
Marta Kutas, Ph.D., University of California, San Diego
Helen Neville, Ph.D., University of Oregon
Michael I. Posner, Ph.D., University of Oregon
Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University
Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D., University of California, Santa Barbara (ex officio)
George R. Mangun, Ph.D., University of California, Davis (ex officio)
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan (ex officio)

Program Committee 2008 Meeting
Chair: Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan
Randy L. Buckner, Ph.D., Harvard University
Peter Hagoort, Ph.D., University of Nijmegen
Liz Phelps, Ph.D., New York University
Lorraine K. Tyler, Ph.D., University of Cambridge

Poster Committee 2008 Meeting
Chair: Reiko Graham, Ph.D., Texas State University
Nadine Gaab, Ph.D., Harvard Medical School
Kelly S. Giovanello, Ph.D.,University of North Carolina Chapel Hill
Markus Kiefer, Ph.D., University of Ulm
Jonathan Fugelsang, Ph.D., University of Waterloo
Chris Westbury, Ph.D., University of Alberta
Stephanie Ortigue, Ph.D., University of California, Santa Barbara

Young Investigator Awards Committee 2008
Co-Chair: Marlene Behrmann, Ph.D., Carnegie Mellon
Co-Chair: Silvia Bunge, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley
Roberto Cabeza, Ph.D., Duke University
Karl Friston, Ph.D.,University College London
Steve Petersen, Ph.D., Washington University

Founding Committee (1994)
Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D., University of California, Santa Barbara
George R. Mangun, Ph.D., University of California, Davis
Steve Pinker, Ph.D., MIT
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan
Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University
Art Shimamura, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley

Society Staff
Cathy Harding, Executive Director

TM Events Meeting Staff
Tara Miller, Event Director
Renee Smith, Registration Manager
Brenna Miller, Monitoring Manager
Linda Hacker, On-Site Manager
Shauney Wilson, Submissions Manager
Joan Carole, Exhibits Manager
Jeff Wilson, Cover Design
Cover Photo © Arlene Gee. Image from BigStockPhoto.com

Table of Contents
Exhibitors

iv

Schedule

1

George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive
Neuroscience

3

Young Investigator Award in Cognitive
Neuroscience

3

Symposia

5

Graduate Students Present

19

Poster Abstracts

23

Session A

25

Session B

55

Session C

85

Session D

115

Session E

145

Session F

175

Session G

205

Session H

235

Session I

265

Index

295
iii

Exhibitors

4-D Neuroimaging
ANT - Advanced Neuro Technology
American Psychological Association
BIOPAC Systems, Inc.
Cambridge University Press
Cedrus Corporation
Electrical Geodesics, Inc.
Electrode Arrays
Elsevier
Millisecond Software
NordicNeuroLab
Northern Digital, Inc.
Oxford University Press
Psychology Press
Psychology Software Tools, Inc.
Rogue Research, Inc.
Sinauer Associates, Inc.
The MIT Press
Wiley-Blackwell
Worth Publishing

iv

Schedule of Events

S a t u r d ay, A p r i l 1 2
9:00 am - 5:00 pm

Satellites

12:00 - 5:00 pm

Exhibitor Check-In, Pacific Concourse

2:30 - 7:30 pm

On-site Registration & Pre-Reg Check In, Grand Ballroom Foyer

5:00 - 6:00 pm

Cake Reception

5:00 - 7:30 pm

Exhibits on Display, Pacific Concourse

5:30 - 7:30 pm

Poster Session A, Pacific Concourse

S u n d a y, A p ri l 13
7:30 am - 7:00 pm

On-site Registration & Pre-Reg Check In, Grand Ballroom Foyer

8:00 am

Coffee Service, Pacific Concourse

8:00 - 10:00 am

Poster Session B, Pacific Concourse

8:00 am - 7:00 pm

Exhibits on Display, Pacific Concourse

10:00 am - 12:00 pm

Symposium Session 1, Grand Ballroom A
Symposium Session 2, Grand Ballroom B

12:00 - 1:00 pm

Lunch Break

1:00 - 3:00 pm

Poster Session C, Pacific Concourse

2:30 pm

Coffee Service, Pacific Concourse

3:00 - 4:00 pm

14th Annual George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience
Announcement of the Young Investigator Awards,
Grand Ballroom

4:00 - 5:00 pm

GAM Reception

5:00 - 7:00 pm

Poster Session D, Pacific Concourse

M o n d ay, A p r i l 1 4
8:00 am - 7:00 pm

On-site Registration & Pre-Reg Check-In, Grand Ballroom Foyer

8:00 am

Coffee Service, Pacific Concourse

8:00 - 10:00 am

Poster Session E, Pacific Concourse

8:00 am - 7:00 pm

Exhibits on Display, Pacific Concourse

10:00 am - 12:00 pm

Symposium Session 3, Grand Ballroom A
Symposium Session 4, Grand Ballroom B

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

1

Schedule of Events

12:00 - 1:00 pm

Lunch Break

1:00 - 3:00 pm

Poster Session F, Pacific Concourse

2:30 pm

Coffee Service, Pacific Concourse

3:00 - 5:00 pm

Symposium Session 5, Grand Ballroom A
Graduate Students Present Session, Grand Ballroom B

5:00 - 7:00 pm

Poster Session G, Pacific Concourse

T u e s d ay , A p r i l 1 5
8:00 am - 5:00 pm

On-site Registration & Pre-Reg Check-In, Grand Ballroom Foyer

8:00 am

Coffee Service, Pacific Concourse

8:00 - 10:00 am

Poster Session H, Pacific Concourse

8:00 am - 7:00 pm

Exhibits on Display, Pacific Concourse

10:00 am - 12:00 pm

Symposium Session 6, Grand Ballroom A
Symposium Session 7, Grand Ballroom B

12:00 - 1:00 pm

Lunch Break

1:00 - 3:00 pm

Symposium Session 8, Grand Ballroom A
Symposium Session 9, Grand Ballroom B

3:00 pm

Coffee Service, Pacific Concourse

3:00 - 5:00 pm

Poster Session I, Pacific Concourse

Mark your calendars now...
the 16th Annual Cognitive Neuroscience
Society Meeting will be held at the
Hyatt Regency San Francisco
March 21 - 24, 2009

2

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive
Neuroscience
Sunday, April 13, 2008
3:00 - 4:00 pm, Grand Ballroom
Award Winner:
Anne Treisman, Ph.D., Princeton University
The George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience was established in 1995 by the Cognitive Neuroscience Society and the James S. McDonnell Foundation to honor the career contributions of George A.
Miller to cognitive neuroscience. The first 10 years of the prize were funded by generous support from
the James S. McDonnell Foundation.
The prize is awarded to the nominee whose career is characterized by distinguished and sustained
scholarship and research at the cutting-edge of cognitive neuroscience. Extraordinary innovation and
high impact on international scientific thinking should be a hallmark of the recipient's work.
Each year a call for nominations for the George A. Miller Prize is made to the membership of the society.
The recipient is selected by a committee with the approval of the society. The prize winner attends the
annual meeting of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society and delivers the George A. Miller Lecture.

Young Investigator Award in Cognitive
Neuroscience 2008
Sunday, April 13, 2008
3:00 - 4:00 pm, Grand Ballroom
The Young Investigator Awards in Cognitive Neuroscience recognize outstanding contributions by scientists early in their careers. Two awardees are named each year by the Award Committee, and are honored at the Annual meeting of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society. Each award includes $500 to be used
by the awardees toward travel costs to the meeting, or for any other purpose.

2008 Winners of the Young Investigator Award:
Charan Ranganath Ph.D., University of California Davis
Kevin Ochsner Ph.D, Columbia University and Rebecca Saxe Ph.D,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Reception to follow, 4:00 - 5:00 pm

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

3

4

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

CNS Symposia

session one

The Power of Expectancy in the Human Brain
Sunday, April 13
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Grand Ballroom A
Chair
Jack B. Nitschke, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Speakers
Brian Knutson, Daniela Schiller, Jack B. Nitschke, Jon-Kar Zubieta
Summary: Our expectations have an impact on our lives in multiple ways, including our perception of
external events and our emotional responses to them. The impact can be positive, such as enhancing the
pleasant emotions followig success or mitigating the negative emotional consequences following adversity.
The placebo effect is a prime example of the positive effects that expectations can impart. The impact of
expectancy can also be negative, as seen in individuals with anxiety disorders. For them, expectations
about possible negative events in the future can result in debilitating levels of worry and distress. This
symposium covers seminal research investigating the neural instantiation of such expectancy effects. The
speakers address a wide range of topics where expectancy plays an important role, including financial risk,
fear learning, anxiety disorders, and placebo. One emerging theme is that the anticipation of emotional
events activates the same brain areas that are recruited when those events are experienced. In addition, the
research showcased here indicates overlap in the brain areas recruited by anticipatory function across the
various domains of investigation covered. Discovering the brain mechanisms for these expectancy effects is
enhancing our understanding of the power of expectancy, which in turn may inform clinical applications.
A B S T R A C T S
NUCLEUS ACCUMBENS ACTIVATION MEDIATES THE INFLUENCE OF INCIDENTAL REWARD CUES ON
FINANCIAL RISK-TAKING Brian Knutson, Stanford University — Increases in endogenous nucleus accumbens (NAcc) activity precede switches from financially risk-averse to risk seeking strategies (Kuhnen and
Knutson, 2005), but exogenous control over this process has not yet been demonstrated. We used eventrelated functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI; GE 1.5 T scanner, voxel size = 4 mm cubic, TR =
2000 msec, spiral in/out pulse sequence) to determine whether anticipation of viewing erotic pictures
would increase subsequent financial risk seeking in heterosexual males (n=15), and whether this effect
would be mediated by increased NAcc activation. Anticipation of viewing erotic pictures increased subsequent financial risk taking, and this behavioral effect was mediated by anticipatory increases in NAcc activation. These results indicate that that exogenously-induced reward anticipation can increase financial risk
taking, in part by increasing NAcc activation. The findings are consistent with the notion that incidental
cues can influence financial decision-making by altering anticipatory affect.
OVERLAPPING NEURAL SYSTEMS MEDIATING EXTINCTION, REVERSAL AND REGULATION OF FEAR
Daniela Schiller, New York University — Fear learning is one of the most rapid and persistent emotional
learning processes. These characteristics are evolutionary beneficial in preventing the need to relearn about
danger, as well as in promoting ways to escape and avoid threats. However, when circumstances change, it
is also advantageous to flexibly readjust behavior, and a failure to do so might be the cause of anxiety disorders. We investigated 3 ways to modify fear learning: 1) Extinction - a process by which learned fear
responses are no longer expressed after repeated exposure to the conditioned stimuli with no aversive consequences; 2) Reversal - fear responses are switched between two stimuli following a reversal of reinforcement contingencies; 3) Regulation - fear responses are diminished using a cognitive strategy of reevaluation of the conditioned stimuli. In these studies, the fear measure was skin conductance responding,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

5

Sunday, April 13, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm

CNS Symposia

and we examined the underlying neural activation using fMRI. We observed two neural systems showing
striking overlapping activation in the 3 tasks: a system learning responses to external stimuli that are predictive of aversive consequences, while another system readjusts these learned responses when environmental circumstances change. We will discuss differences and similarities in the neural mechanisms
underlying these fear expectancy paradigms.
ANTICIPATING THE WORST: INVESTIGATING BRAIN MECHANISMS OF ANXIETY Jack
B.
Nitschke,
University of Wisconsin-Madison — A common feature extending across all the anxiety disorders is the concern about something bad happening in the future. When extreme, this future-oriented concern or worry
can have debilitating consequences for daily functioning and mental health. My laboratory has been developing and refining experimental paradigms for examining the neural concomitants of anticipating negative events. In our fMRI research with nonclinical healthy populations, we have shown how expectancy
modulates neural responses to emotional events and influences perception and subsequent memory of
those events. Our most recent studies have also investigated the impact of uncertainty and uncontrollability, because they are central to anticipatory anxiety. The primary areas implicated in this work with healthy
volunteers include the amygdala, hippocampus, insula, and anterior cingulate. Finally, having determined
the normative patterns of brain activation in anticipation of aversive events, we have begun to search for
neural abnormalities of anticipatory processing in individuals with anxiety disorders, with differences thus
far localized to the amygdala. This line of research on anxiety reflects a new approach in the study of psychopathology - one that emphasizes a focus on core constituent features, such as the anticipatory processes
emphasized in our work - while along the way providing important lessons about how expectancy operates in the brain.
NEUROBIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS OF PLACEBO EFFECTS Jon-Kar Zubieta, University of Michigan — Expectations, positive or negative, are modulating factors influencing behavior. They are also thought to underlie placebo effects, additionally impacting perceptions and biological processes. Over the last decade we
have been able to acquire biological evidence for the activation of specific circuits during placebo administration. In the cases studied so far (e.g., pain, affective regulation, Parkinson's disease, Major Depression),
some overlap in the brain regions involved is becoming evident. We have utilized a sustained pain model
to determine the development of both analgesia and affective changes with placebo administration in
healthy humans. Subjects were informed that they could receive either an active agent or an inactive compound, creating some uncertainty in the subjects. Across studies, these instructions were associated with
expectation of analgesia in the 50% range. Using three different samples and pain paradigms, we demonstrate the activation of endogenous opioid neurotransmission as measured with PET and the µ-opioid
selective radiotracer [11C]carfentanil in anterior cingulate and prefrontal areas, insula, nucleus accumbens,
amygdala, thalamus, hypothalamus and periaqueductal grey. These opioid data showed associations with
reductions in pain report and negative affective state. Additional studies with the radiotracer [11C] raclopride, labeling dopamine D2/3 receptors, also demonstrate the activation of nucleus accumbens dopamine
during placebo administration under expectation of analgesia, in a manner similar to data acquired in Parkinson's disease. Both dopamine and opioid neurotransmission were related to expectations of analgesia
and deviations from those initial expectations. When the activity of the nucleus accumbens was probed
with fMRI using a monetary reward expectation paradigm, its activation was correlated with both dopamine, opioid responses to placebo in this region and the formation of placebo analgesia. These data confirm
that specific neural circuits and neurotransmitter systems respond to the expectation of benefit during placebo administration, inducing measurable physiological changes.

6

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

CNS Symposia

session two

Sunday, April 13, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm

Pattern-based fMRI analyses as a route to revealing neural
representations
Sunday, April 13
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Grand Ballroom B
Chair
Rajeev Raizada, University of Washington
Speakers
Jim Haxby, Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Rajeev Raizada, Geoff Boynton
Summary: Within any active brain region, many neural representations are intermingled. Because these
representations are spatially colocalised, they may elicit the same levels of local average activation, with
the result that neuroimaging studies have difficulty telling them apart. Recent studies analysing multivoxel spatial patterns of fMRI activity are starting to provide new methods for accessing such neural
representations, and for relating them to behaviour. This symposium presents examples of such research,
from diverse cognitive domains. Jim Haxby will describe how pattern-based analyses reveal distributed
representations of objects in visual cortex. Drawing parallels between human and monkey studies,
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte will show how information-based fMRI can reveal the structure of categorical
representations of faces and objects in inferotemporal cortex. In the domain of speech perception, Rajeev
Raizada will show how the distinctness of phonetic representations in the brain can predict people's ability
to hear non-native speech contrasts. Moving beyond stimulus-driven neural responses, Geoff Boynton will
describe how feature-based attentional signals can be decoded from distributed cortical activity.

A B S T R A C T S
DISTRIBUTED NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF FACES AND OBJECTS IN VENTRAL TEMPORAL CORTEX
Jim Haxby, Princeton — Functional brain imaging has revealed a complex, macroscopic organization in the
functional architecture of the ventral object vision pathway. Numerous studies have found regions of ventral temporal cortex that consistently demonstrate category-related response preferences, most notably a
region that responds maximally during face perception, the fusiform face area (FFA). Faces and numerous
other object categories, however, also evoke distinct patterns of response across wider expanses of ventral
temporal cortex, including distinct patterns of response in cortical regions that respond submaximally to
the category being viewed, suggesting that the representations of faces and other objects extend beyond
the regions defined by category preference. Methods for analyzing these patterns of response, which we
call multi-voxel pattern analysis, represent a major departure from previous, standard methods for analyzing functional neuroimaging data. Whereas previous methods were designed to find clusters of voxels
with similar response properties, topographic pattern analysis is designed to detect reliable patterns of differences among the responses of voxels. The information-carrying capacity of submaximal responses suggests that these patterns may reflect spatially distributed population responses in which both strong and
weak responses play an integral role in the representation of complex percepts. Furthermore, the similarity
of patterns of response to visual stimuli is correlated with psychological similarity, suggesting that these
methods now allow us to use fMRI to investigate how neural representations of visual stimuli are structured.
EXPLOITING HI-RES FMRI AND RELATING MEASUREMENT MODALITIES WITH REPRESENTATIONAL
SIMILARITY ANALYSIS Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, NIH — High-resolution functional magnetic resonance
imaging (hi-res fMRI) promises to help bridge the gap of spatial scales between human low-resolution neuroimaging and animal invasive electrophysiology. I will discuss how the fine-scale neuronal-pattern information present in hi-res fMRI data can be exploited for neuroscientific insight by means of multivariate
analysis. In particular, I will focus on the novel approach of "representational similarity analysis", which
allows us (1) to combine evidence across brain space and experimental conditions to sensitively detect neuronal pattern information and (2) to relate results (a) between different modalities of brain-activity measurement, (b) between different species, and (c) between brain-activity data and computational models of
brain information processing. I will illustrate this approach with a study combining human and monkey

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

7

Monday, April 14, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm

CNS Symposia

data from hi-res fMRI and single-cell recordings, respectively. We investigated response patterns elicited
by the same 92 photographs of isolated natural objects in inferotemporal (IT) cortex of both species. Within
each species, we compute a matrix of response-pattern similarities (one similarity value for each pair of
images). We find a striking match of the resulting similarity matrices for man and monkey. This finding
suggests very similar categorical IT representations and provides some hope that data from single-cell
recording and fMRI, for all their differences, may consistently reveal neuronal representations when subjected to massively multivariate analyses of response-pattern information.
PREDICTING INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN SPEECH PERCEPTION USING PATTERN-BASED FMRI
ANALYSIS OF PHONEMIC REPRESENTATIONS Rajeev Raizada, University of Washington — The
brain's
ability to discriminate stimuli depends on how fine-grained its stimulus representations are. This representational granularity can vary across individuals, as a function of factors such as sensory environment and
learning history. A key goal of cognitive neuroscience has been to relate the properties of such representations in individuals' brains to their levels of behavioural performance. However, because the neural representations of different but related stimuli are typically colocalised within the same brain area, their
distinctness from each other has been difficult for fMRI to measure. This problem has been overcome in
low-level sensory cortices, where the representational grain can be calculated from well-defined spatiotopic maps, or from direct mappings between stimulus-energy and levels of neural activation. However,
for all but the simplest stimuli, no such mappings are available. For example, different phonemes such as /
ra/ and /la/ activate the same areas of cortex, but there is no known "phonotopic map" that might allow
the distinctness of the evoked neural representations to be measured. I will describe how, by analysing the
multi-voxel spatial fMRI patterns elicited by these stimuli in English and Japanese speakers, the statistical
separability of such neural representations can be directly quantified. Moreover, in right primary auditory
cortex, the separability of these fMRI patterns strongly predicted the degree to which subjects could behaviourally discriminate the stimuli that gave rise to them. This opens up a new method, which may have
broad applicability, for relating neural representations in the human brain to levels of behavioural performance, and also reveals a hitherto unknown role played by right auditory cortex in processing speech.
PATTERN-BASED DECODING OF FEATURE-SPECIFIC VISUAL ATTENTION Geoff Boynton, University of
Washington — When faced with a crowded visual scene, observers must selectively attend to behaviorally
relevant objects to avoid sensory overload. Often this selection process is guided by prior knowledge of a
target-defining feature (e.g., the color red when looking for an apple), which enhances the firing rate of
visual neurons that are selective for the attended feature. Here, we used functional magnetic resonance
imaging and a pattern classification algorithm to predict the attentional state of human observers as they
monitored a visual feature (one of two directions of motion). We find that feature-specific attention effects
spread across the visual field - even to regions of the scene that do not contain a stimulus. This spread of
feature-based attention to empty regions of space may facilitate the perception of behaviorally relevant
stimuli by increasing sensitivity to attended features at all locations in the visual field.

se s s i o n t h r e e

A Common Role of Anterior Insula in Feelings, Empathy, and
Risk?
Monday, April 14
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Grand Ballroom A
Chair
Tania Singer, University of Zurich
Speakers
A. D. (Bud) Craig, Tania Singer, Christian Keysers, Kerstin Preuschoff
Summary: Recent studies in the emerging fields of social neuroscience and neuroeconomics have
supported the view that anterior insula (AI) plays a crucial role in the processing of subjective feelings,
empathy, and risk. The symposium provides an overview of different lines of research and suggests a
common underlying role of insular cortex for these seemingly different capacities. Bud Craig reviews

8

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

CNS Symposia

Monday, April 14, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm

structural and functional evidence for a role of AI in interoceptive awareness, bodily states, and subjective
feelings. Christian Keysers and Tania Singer then link this stream of research to recent empathy research in
social neuroscience that suggests that AI plays an important role in the processing of pain, taste, and
disgust in oneself as well as when one is empathizing with other people experiencing pain, taste, or
disgust. Finally, Kerstin Preuschoff summarizes the latest findings of fMRI studies on risk in the context of
economic decision making which indicate that AI plays an important role in the processing of subjective
risk. The speakers discuss their findings in light of a common underlying function of AI as interoceptive
cortex, in other words, as cortex serving to integrate information about contextual and internal bodily
states into representations of subjective feeling states.

A B S T R A C T S
THE NEUROANATOMICAL BASIS FOR HUMAN AWARENESS OF INTEROCEPTIVE FEELINGS FROM THE
BODY A. D. (Bud) Craig, University of Arizona — Experimental anatomical and physiological evidence
will be presented that identifies a phylogenetically unique homeostatic afferent pathway to the insular cortex of humanoid primates representing the interoceptive sense of the condition of the body. Evidence in
humans will be described supporting the view that multiple re-representations of this interoceptive pathway in an integrative progression culminating in the anterior insula seem to form the basis for human feelings, music, and time. These findings provide an anatomical basis for bidirectional interactions between
emotions and bodily feelings that could underlie somatisation. The insula, as the limbic sensory cortex, is
integral for subjective feelings and acts in concert with the anterior cingulate, or limbic motor cortex, which
is integral for volition and agency. This view fits with recent work on the "Von Economo neurons" that are
uniquely present in the fronto-insular and anterior cingulate cortices of humanoid primates, which may
provide the interconnections between these two regions that were vital for the evolution of advanced emotional communication. Finally, this interoceptive view of awareness also leads to a new proposal for the
forebrain asymmetry of emotion in the anterior insula and anterior cingulate cortices of the left and right
sides of the human brain.
THE ROLE OF ANTERIOR INSULA IN EMPATHY IN HEALTHY ADULTS, PATIENTS WITH AUTISTIC SPECTRUM
DISORDER AND ALEXITHYMIA, AND BUDDHIST COMPASSION MEDITATORS Tania Singer, University of
Zürich — I will summarize results from functional imaging studies suggesting an important role of anterior insula (AI) for the representation of one's own as well as others' feelings. I will focus on fMRI studies
on empathy for pain that suggest an important role of AI when one shares the suffering of others. I will
then show results of two studies exploring the relationship between interoceptive awareness and empathy
in patients with alexithymia and autistic spectrum disorder (ASD). These results provide evidence supporting the suggestion that deficits in understanding one's own emotions - a symptom observed in
alexithymia - are associated with hypoactivation in AI and impaired empathy, but not impaired cognitive
perspective taking, the latter frequently being observed in patients with ASD. Finally, I will present initial
results from real-time fMRI studies in which we are exploring AI functions by asking a long-term meditation practitioner (a Buddhist monk) to up- and down-regulate activation in AI using online feedback based
on activation in AI while he is engaging in different mental techniques, in specific different forms of empathy and compassion meditation.
THE INSULA'S FUNCTION AND CONNECTIVITY DURING EMPATHIC OBSERVATION, IMAGINATION,
AND EXPERIENCE OF EMOTIONS Christian Keysers, University Medical Center Groningen, The
Netherlands — The anterior insula and the adjacent frontal operculum (IFO) appear to play a critical role
both in our experience of emotions and in our understanding of other individuals' emotions. To further our
understanding of this function, I will present data showing that the IFO is involved in the experience and
observation of other individuals' emotions and in our voluntary imagination of similar emotions and that
not only negative, but also positive emotions recruit the IFO. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and effective
connectivity reveal that this convergent function appears to be achieved using distinct networks. During
emotion observation, connections with BA45 involved in facial motor control dominate, confirming a functional link between emotional contagion and facial mimicry. During imagination and experience, much
broader networks involving basal ganglia, SMA, and somatosensory areas were effectively connected with
the IFO. Together, this data suggests that the IFO may be essential for adding "gut feelings" to our facial
mimicry of other individuals' facial expressions, to our own emotional experiences, and to the imaginary
scenarios words can conjure.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

9

Monday, April 14, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm

CNS Symposia

THE ROLE OF ANTERIOR INSULA IN DECISION MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY Kerstin
Preuschoff,
California Institute of Technology — In addition to its role in processing emotions, anterior insula has
recently been implied in processing uncertainty and risk. In economic decision making risk is a crucial factor in determining the value of an outcome or action. Organisms must therefore track the level of risk associated with predictions of probabilistic reward, monitor the errors in those risk predictions, and update
these in light of new information. I will explore the neural basis of such risk predictions by applying a
quantitative framework provided by financial decision theory. Using behavioral and functional imaging
data from simple gambling tasks, I will show that activation in the human insula correlates significantly
with risk prediction and risk prediction errors and that these signals are consistent with a role in anticipation of upcoming probabilistic rewards and reward learning. Together with previous studies involving
complexity, ambiguity, and uncertainty, these findings indicate that our understanding of the role of anterior insula needs to be expanded to include processing of risk.

session four

Temporally Selective Attention
Monday, April 14
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Grand Ballroom B
Chair
Lisa D. Sanders,University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Speakers
Anna Christina Nobre, Angel Correa, Kathrin Lange, Lisa D. Sanders
Summary: Decades of research have culminated in highly accurate and detailed models of the neural
mechanisms that support spatially selective attention. However, selecting stimuli for preferential
processing based on location is useful when more information than can be processed in detail is presented
simultaneously and spread out in space. Much less is known about how perceptual systems deal with
overwhelming amounts of information presented rapidly at a single location. Recent evidence indicates
that temporally selective attention plays an important role in perception under these conditions. In this
symposium, the effects of temporally selective attention on visual and auditory processing will be
discussed. Further, data that detail the relationship between temporal and spatial expectations and
compare the effects of endogenous and exogenous attention will be presented. The session will end with
evidence that listeners employ temporally selective attention during speech processing. Overall, this
research indicates that temporally selective attention plays a critical role in perception and comprehension
of complex environments and suggests the extent to which temporally and spatially selective attention rely
on shared neural systems.

A B S T R A C T S
THE EFFECTS OF TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL EXPECTATIONS ON BRAIN ACTIVITY Anna Christina Nobre,
University of Oxford — Temporal expectations are a vital ingredient to how the brain anticipates events that
are relevant to the current task goal and motivational state of the individual, to tune the relevant perceptual and motor machinery accordingly. Temporal predictions are continuously formed and updated, both
implicitly and explicitly. These interact with expectations about other relevant attributes of events, in order
to optimize our interaction with unfolding sensory stimulation. We have shown that temporal and spatial
expectations operating in isolation modulate evoked potentials linked to different stages of perceptual and
motor analysis. However, when these expectations are combined synergistic effects are obtained during
perceptual analysis. Analysis of the frequencies of neural activity induced during the anticipation of temporally predictable versus unpredictable events now reveals clear modulation of the time-course of oscillatory activity linked to perceptual and motor functions according to the specific intervals predicted.
TEMPORAL ORIENTING OF ATTENTION ENHANCES PERCEPTUAL SENSITIVITY AND STEADY-STATE
VISUAL EVOKED POTENTIALS Angel Correa, University of Granada and University of Oxford — Pioneer research
assigned motor preparation as the main effect of temporal orienting on stimulus processing. Later studies
challenged this conclusion by showing that temporal orienting can also produce perceptual preparation

10

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

CNS Symposia

Monday, April 14, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

under conditions of high perceptual demands. By using a perceptually-demanding unspeeded task, in
which stimuli appeared in rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP), we found that temporal orienting
enhanced visual processing as indexed by amplifications of both perceptual sensitivity (d') and steadystate visual evoked potentials (SSVEPs) recorded at occipital electrodes. The findings provide converging
psychophysical and electrophysiological evidence that temporal orienting enhances perceptual processing.
STIMULUS-DRIVEN TEMPORAL ATTENTION ATTENUATES EARLY BRAIN CORRELATES OF AUDITORY
PROCESSING Kathrin Lange, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf — Event-related potential (ERP) studies have shown that orienting attention voluntarily to a point in time enhances both early and late auditory
brain responses. The present study used ERPs to investigate how auditory processing is modulated when
attention is driven by temporal regularities of the presented stimuli. A tone sequence with either a regular
or an irregular time structure was presented prior to a critical tone, which had to be evaluated for the presence of a short gap. It was assumed that the regular but not the irregular time structure would guide attention to the time of the critical tone. Participants responded faster when the time of the critical tone was
attended compared to when it was unattended. Contrary to findings from voluntary temporal attention,
the N1 to the critical tone was attenuated rather than enhanced by attention. Consistent with findings from
voluntary temporal attention, a late positivity was enhanced by attention. It thus seems that temporal
attention can be both under voluntary control and driven by stimulus properties. Evidently, voluntary and
stimulus-driven processes have opponent effects on early ERP correlates of auditory processing, while
they exert comparable effects on ERP signs corresponding to later processing steps.
LISTENERS DIRECT SELECTIVE ATTENTION TO TIME SCALES AND TIME POINTS DURING SPEECH
PERCEPTION. Lisa D. Sanders, University of Massachusetts, Amherst — Listeners can attend to relatively
fast (40 ms) or slow (500 ms) time scales and doing so modulates auditory evoked potentials (AEPs) elicited by physically identical sounds. Further, listeners can attend to specific time points (500, 1000, or 1500
ms after cue onset) resulting in a larger amplitude auditory onset component (N1) for sounds presented at
attended times. Directing selective attention to time scales and time points also plays an important role in
speech perception. Specifically, asking listeners to respond to the change in pitch (fast scale) or the average
pitch (slow scale) of a syllable affects AEPS. Native speakers of a tone language in which pitch change is a
lexical attribute show larger amplitude differences when attending to the fast time scale. When native
English speakers are asked to listen to a narrative in English for comprehension, attention probes that
occur at or shortly after word onsets elicit larger N1s. This finding indicates listeners are selectively attending to the times during which beginnings of words are presented. Directing temporally selective attention
to word onsets may reflect the relative unpredictability and importance of the initial portions of words.

session five

The rise and fall of cognitive control: Lifespan development
Monday, April 14
3:00 - 5:00 pm
Grand Ballroom A
Chairs
Denise Head, Washington University and Cindy Lustig, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor
Speakers
Cindy Lustig, Adele Diamond, Ulman Lindenberger, Bradley L. Schlaggar
Summary: Increases in the power and sophistication of cognitive control and executive function are a
critical part of intellectual and social development as children move through infancy, adolescence and
early adulthood. On the other end of the age spectrum, breakdowns in these control functions are often
blamed for older adults' difficulties in memory, attention and other domains. This symposium brings
together leading researchers who have examined the development of cognitive control throughout the
lifespan. A question of specific interest is how the brain deals with challenges to control at all stages of
development. The heuristic "last in, first out" has been used to describe the development of cognitive
control and its putative substrate, the prefrontal cortex. Does this heuristic hold true when applied to more
specific executive functions (orienting, inhibition, task-switching) and their associated brain networks?

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

11

Monday, April 14, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

CNS Symposia

Children and older adults sometimes show similar behavioral patterns on tests of cognitive control - how
similar is the underlying brain function? These questions are of interest both from a lifespan perspective,
and for understanding the basic taxonomy and functional anatomy of cognitive control.

A B S T R A C T S
AGE IN THE BALANCE: INTERACTIONS BETWEEN LIFESPAN DEVELOPMENT AND CONTROL DEMAND
ON FRONTAL ACTIVATIONS AND DEFAULT-NETWORK DEACTIVATIONS Cindy Lustig, PhD, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor — In young adults, demands for cognitive and executive control generally result in
increased frontal activations, accompanied by more pronounced deactivation of default-network regions
associated with task-unrelated processing. How does the balance between frontal and default-network
activity, and the response to control demands, change across the lifespan? We addressed this question in a
large lifespan fMRI study (n = 239, age 9-97 yrs) of controlled semantic retrieval, episodic memory, and a
task-switching procedure that varied control demands. The relationship between frontal activations and
default-network deactivations differed depending on whether it was examined from the perspective of
demand or development. Increases in task-related control demand were associated with increases in frontal activation and (for children and young adults) more pronounced default-network deactivation. By contrast, across tasks, increasing age was associated with frontal activations that were greater and more
sensitive to control demand, whereas default-network deactivations were generally smaller and less sensitive to control demand. Speculatively, development from childhood into young adulthood may be characterized by an increased ability to engage frontal regions associated with cognitive control, whereas
development from young adulthood through old age may be associated with an increased need to exert
control in order to compensate for default-network dysfunction.
DIFFERENTIAL DIFFICULTY OF INHIBITORY CONTROL AND MEMORY LOAD AT DIFFERENT PERIODS OF
LIFE Adele Diamond, PhD, University of British Columbia, BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver — Increasing
demands on inhibition are disproportionately more difficult for children aged 4-9 than are increasing
demands on how much information they need hold in mind (2 to 6 items). The reverse is true for young
adults; increasing memory load is disproportionately more difficult for adults than increasing inhibitory
demands. Adults may not appreciate how inordinately difficult inhibition is for children because it is less
taxing for adults. Also, adults have little difficulty exercising inhibition in single-task blocks, but children
show a cost of doing so. For example, adults perform comparably on spatially compatible and incompatible single-task blocks. Only when these trials are intermixed do adults show a significant Simon effect. For
children under age 10, however, exercising inhibition, even in steady state, is sufficiently difficult to elicit a
cost. In mixed blocks, taxing cognitive flexibility and inhibition is not that hard for adults if memory
demands are minimal. For children, that is difficult even if memory demands are minimal.
EPISODIC MEMORY ACROSS THE LIFESPAN: DISSOCIATING STRATEGIC AND ASSOCIATIVE
COMPONENTS Ulman Lindenberger, PhD, Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human
Development — We propose to distinguish between strategic and associative components to capture the
reorganization of episodic memory from middle childhood to old age. The associative component refers to
mechanisms that bind features into compound episodes. The strategic component refers to control processes selecting, manipulating, and elaborating these features. Based on available neuronal and behavioral
evidence, we predict (a) that the development of the associative component precedes the development of
the strategic component in children and adolescents, reflecting the progression of maturation from mediotemporal to prefrontal brain regions; (b) that both components undergo decline in late adulthood. To test
these predictions, we conducted a recognition-memory study assessing item and pair recognition memory
by associative demand (German-German vs. German-Malay word pairs) and strategy instructions (item,
pair, or elaborative imagery) in 171 participants aged 10-11, 13-14, 20-25 and 70-75 years. Children's difficulties in episodic memory were primarily due to initially lower levels of strategic functioning. In contrast,
older adults' deficits in episodic memory not only reflected impaired strategic functioning, but also deficits
in the associative component, such as high false alarm rates for rearranged pairs. Results support the
hypothesis of a lifespan dissociation between associative and strategic components of episodic memory.
MATURATION OF CONTROL AND DEFAULT NETWORKS THROUGH SEGREGATION AND INTEGRATION
Bradley L. Schlaggar, MD PhD, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis Children's Hospital —
Recent evidence suggests that adults depend on distinct frontoparietal and cinguloopercular networks for
adaptive online task control versus more stable set control, respectively. Several perspectives exist regarding the role of the brain's default network in cognition including, but not limited to: self-referential
thought, episodic memory, and theory of mind. During development, both experience dependent evoked

12

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

CNS Symposia

Tuesday, April 15, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm

activity and spontaneous waves of synchronized activity are thought to support the formation and maintenance of neural networks. Such mechanisms may encourage tighter "integration" of some regions into networks over time while "segregating" other sets of regions into separate networks. To investigate the
maturation of distinct control and default networks we used resting state functional connectivity MRI,
which measures correlations in spontaneous BOLD signal fluctuations between brain regions, to compare
network architecture between children and adults. We find that development of the proposed adult control
networks involves both segregation (i.e., decreased short-range connections) and integration (i.e.,
increased long-range connections) of the brain regions that comprise them. At early school age, the brain's
default regions are only sparsely functionally interconnected; over development, these regions integrated
into a cohesive network. Delay/disruption in the processes of segregation and integration may play a role
in developmental disorders of cognition.

session six

Cognitive neuroscience of visual short-term memory
Tuesday, April 15
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Grand Ballroom A
Chairs
Pierre Jolicouer, University of Montreal
Speakers
Edward K. Vogel, René Marois, Yaoda Xu, Pierre Jolicoeur
Summary: We examine recent results from behavioral and neuroimaging studies that elucidate the
functional and neural basis of visual short-term memory (VSTM). Although the storage capacity of VSTM
is limited to about three objects, passage of information into this system appears critical for conscious
awareness and cognitive control from visual input. We review research using a variety of methods
including psychophysics, electrophysiology (EEG) and event-related potentials (ERPs),
magnetoencephalography (MEG), wavelet analysis, and fMRI, that reveal the nature of the representations
in VSTM and their role in cognition. Speakers in the symposium will address issues such as the basic unit
of storage in VSTM, individual differences in storage capacity and attentional control, the neural loci and
temporal dynamics of regions partcipating in the VSTM network, the involvement of VSTM in the
attentional blink, memory for colours, shapes, letters, and words, and memory for content versus memory
for spatial location (what vs.where). We will also examine encoding, retention, and retrieval using
behavioral and neuroimaging methods.

A B S T R A C T S
SHORT-TERM MEMORY CAPACITY AS AN INDEX OF ATTENTIONAL CONTROL: A NEURALLY-BASED
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES APPROACH Edward K. Vogel, University of Oregon — The capacity of visual
working memory is well known to be highly limited, but it is also known to vary considerably across individuals. Individual differences in memory capacity appear to be a stable trait of the observer and are often
positively correlated with many high-level aptitude measures such as fluid intelligence and reasoning. In
this presentation, I will describe recent work from my laboratory in which we examine the relationship
between an individual's visual working memory capacity and their ability to control the focus of selective
attention. In particular, we use a new event-related potential technique that allows us to measure the active
representations of objects within the focus of attention across different task conditions and is highly sensitive to individual differences in memory capacity. In general, we have found that low memory capacity
individuals are substantially poorer than high capacity individuals across several tasks in which they must
exert attentional control over what information is stored in memory. These results suggest a tight relationship between the constructs of memory capacity and the control of attention.
THE NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF VISUAL SHORT-TERM MEMORY René Marois, Vanderbilt University — Visual
short-term memory (VSTM) is thought to be essential for conscious perception and coherent interaction
with the visual world. Yet, despite a ubiquitous role in cognition, VSTM is severely capacity-limited. This
capacity limit is not only apparent in the amount of information that can be held in VSTM, but also in the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

13

Tuesday, April 15, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm

CNS Symposia

rate of encoding information in VSTM. In this talk, I will describe experiments comparing and contrasting
the neural basis of encoding and maintening information in VSTM with standard and time-resolved fMRI
studies. I will also present studies describing the interdependence of attention and VSTM during encoding
and maintenance of information in VSTM.
DISSOCIABLE PARIETAL MECHANISMS SUPPORTING VISUAL SHORT-TERM MEMORY FOR OBJECTS.
Yaoda Xu, Yale University — Using visual information to guide behavior requires storage in a temporary
buffer, known as visual short-term memory (VSTM), that sustains attended information across saccades
and other visual interruptions. I will present fMRI data showing that VSTM storage is mediated by distinctive posterior brain mechanisms, such that VSTM capacity is determined both by a fixed number of objects
and by object complexity. Specifically, while the inferior intra-parietal sulcus (IPS) selects a fixed number
of about 4 objects via their spatial locations, the superior IPS encodes the features of a subset of the selected
objects in great detail. Thus the inferior IPS selects visual object by individuating them, and the superior
IPS participates in subsequent object identification. Consistent with this idea, object individuation in the
inferior IPS is sensitive to perceptual grouping cues between objects, and object representations in the
superior IPS may play a key role in the binding of multiple independent object features. These findings not
only advance our understanding of the neural mechanisms underlying VSTM, but also have interesting
implications for cognitive theories and brain mechanisms supporting visual object perception.
ELECTROMAGNETIC EXPLORATIONS OF THE TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF VISUAL SHORT-TERM
MEMORY Pierre Jolicoeur, University of Montreal — By combining and contrasting results using behavioral, ERPs, MEG, and fMRI, under single-task and dual-task conditions, members of my laboratory are
piecing together various aspects of the functional and neuronal basis of VSTM. In this talk I will focus on
induced alpha-band oscillatory activity observed in MEG recordings during retention in VSTM. Bilateral
alpha power, in parietal cortex, increased with increasing memory load, but without clear lateralization to
the hemisphere contralateral to the encoded stimuli in contrast with observed event-related magnetic(and
electric) fields. Changes in alpha activity associated with VSTM retention was also found in frontal areas.
Even-related magnetic fields also showed a load-related bilateral decrease in field amplitudes, which I will
compare with observed decreases in BOLD signal change in companion fMRI experiments.

session seven

The anterior temporal lobes and semantic memory: Putting
everything together
Tuesday, April 15
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
Grand Ballroom B
Chair
Timothy T. Rogers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Speakers
Matthew Lambon Ralph, Eric Halgren, Timothy T. Rogers, Richard Wise
Summary: Essentially all current theories about the neural basis of semantic knowledge agree that much
of the content of our semantic memory is represented in brain regions that overlap with, or even
correspond to, the regions responsible for perceiving and acting. The more global neuroanatomical
organization of the semantic system remains, however, something of a mystery. One position holds that
anterior temporal lobe (ATL) regions play a critical role in mapping between different sensory, motor, and
linguistic representations distributed widely in cortex. This view originated with studies of patients with
semantic dementia (SD), a disorder in which progressive impairment to semantic knowledge across all
modalities of reception and expression is accompanied by progressive gray-matter loss and
hypometabolism localized within anterior temporal regions. This view from neuropsychology seemingly
contrasts, however, with findings from functional neuroimaging studies of healthy individuals, which
routinely report semantic activation in posterior temporal, temporo-parietal, and prefrontal regions, but
only rarely in ATL regions. This symposium aims to reconcile the apparent contradiction, through
presentation of new evidence from converging methods, including rTMS, intracranial EEG, anatomically

14

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

CNS Symposia

Tuesday, April 15, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm

constrained MEG, functional and metabolic neuroimaging, comparative patient studies, and
computational modeling.

A B S T R A C T S
THE CONTRASTIVE ROLES OF THE ANTERIOR TEMPORAL LOBES AND OTHER REGIONS IN SEMANTIC
COGNITION. Matthew Lambon Ralph, University of Manchester — While semantic dementia (SD) apparently implicates bilateral anterior temporal lobes in amodal semantic representation, the case for the critical
role of this region is still in doubt. fMRI studies of semantic processes only highlight ATL activation in a
handful of studies, but consistently activate prefrontal and temporoparietal areas. Such regions align with
the lesions found in patients with transcortical sensory aphasia (TSA), a fluent aphasia characterized by
poor comprehension and preserved repetition. Using a convergence of neuroscience techniques, it becomes
apparent that there is a solution for this apparent discordance. We propose that semantic cognition is made
up of two interactive components: semantic representations (the database of semantic knowledge) and
semantic control (attentional-executive mechanisms that shape or manipulate semantic knowledge to
make verbal and nonverbal behaviour task- and time-appropriate). Converging evidence for the role of the
ATL in normal semantic processing comes in the form of i) new fMRI studies utilizing a correction for the
field inhomogeneities that plague the inferior aspects of the ATL, and ii) novel rTMS studies in normal participants. In addition, direct comparisons between SD and TSA suggest that SD patients have a degradation of core amodal representations while TSA patients have impaired semantic control.
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY OF SEMANTIC RESPONSES IN THE ANTERIOR TEMPORAL LOBE (ATL) Eric
Halgren, University of California, San Diego — The ATL is a common target of intracranial electrodes placed
for pre-surgical localization of the seizure focus. The most prominent responses during tasks that invoke
semantic processing peak at ~400 and 600ms after stimulus onset. In some ATL sites, the N400/P600 represents an entrained theta-delta rhythm that envelopes gamma activity and information-specific firing, and
becomes phase-locked with other cortical regions during tasks. The laminar distribution of transmembrane
currents during the N400/P600 suggests alternating feedforward/feedback processing. Within a given
location, responses are typically highly similar to words presented in the auditory versus visual modalities,
or to faces versus words. Lateralization is weak. Across such manipulations as repetition and cloze probability, the 400ms response changes in a manner similar to the scalp N400 event-related potential component, which appears to index semantic contextual integration. Distributed anatomically-constrained MEG
source estimation places the N400m in the ATL. Although both MEG and intracranial recordings indicate
that the ATL is not unique in generating N400/P600 activity, nor in showing similar responses across sensory modalities and semantic systems, ATL responses are generally stronger and more reliable than elsewhere. In summary, electrophysiological evidence suggests a core role for the ATL in relating stimulus
meaning to cognitive context during event-encoding.
DIFFERENT FORMS OF ANTERIOR TEMPORAL PATHOLOGY CAN PRODUCE QUALITATIVELY DIFFERENT
SEMANTIC SYNDROMES. Timothy T. Rogers,University of Wisconsin-Madison — Semantic dementia (SD)
and herpes simplex viral encephalitis (HSVE) are both associated with bilateral anterior temporal pathology, and both diseases produce impairments to semantic memory, but with substantially different profiles:
whereas patients with SD show profound impairments for all semantic categories, patients with HSVE
often show degraded knowledge of living things, with comparatively spared or even normal knowledge of
manmade objects. Recent structural imaging studies comparing SD and HSVE patients have shown that i)
there is considerable overlap in the distribution of pathology in ATL regions and ii) the pathology in HSVE
can be more widespread, sometimes completely encompassing ATL regions affected in SD. These comparative studies pose a mystery: If HSVE affects the same ATL regions as SD, and additional regions besides,
how can knowledge of manmade objects be relatively spared in this disease, but seriously degraded in SD?
One possibility is that the two diseases produce qualitatively different kinds of functional disruption
within ATL regions. Computer simulations show that different forms of disruption to the same locus can
produce model analogs of the two syndromes. The simulations predict further counterintuitive differences
between the groups which have recently been tested in a case-series comparison of SD and HSVE.
THE ANTERIOR TEMPORAL LOBES DURING THE NORMAL COMPREHENSION AND PRODUCTION OF
LANGUAGE: CONVERGING ACTIVITY. Richard Wise, Imperial College London — Functional
imaging
studies have emphasized the roles of posterior temporal and inferior frontal cortex in speech comprehension and production. These studies have predominantly used magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), a technique that returns a relatively low signal-to-noise ratio in anterior temporal cortex. Positron emission
tomography (PET) does not have this disadvantage. Across a number of studies, using a range of different

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

15

Tuesday, April 15, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

CNS Symposia

study designs that involved normal speech comprehension, reading comprehension, propositional speech
production and narrative writing, PET has demonstrated strong converging activity in anterior temporal
cortex. Language comprehension, irrespective of modality, results in symmetrical activity between the
hemispheres, whereas language production is associated with greater activity on the left. The comprehension of speech is associated with strong functional connectivity between the two anterior temporal lobes, a
connectivity that is not present when subjects listen to acoustically matched but unintelligible spectrallyrotated speech. More recent fMRI studies are now also demonstrating language-related signal in anterior
temporal cortex. Interpretation of these functional imaging studies is made in the light of what is known of
impaired and preserved language and memory functions in patients with semantic dementia. Together,
the data provides very powerful evidence that anterior temporal cortex is implicated in semantic memory.

se s s i o n e i g h t

The relationship between social cognition and emotion
Tuesday, April 15
1:00 - 3:00 pm
Grand Ballroom A
Chair
Kevin N. Ochsner, Columbia University
Speakers
Daniella Schiller and Elizabeth Phelps, Jennifer S. Beer, Christian Keysers, Kevin N.
Ochsner
Summary: It has been said that humans are the Social Animal, and that what sets us apart from other
species is the complexity of our social relationships and the culture it makes possible. To understand the
neural mechanisms underlying these social abilities, recent functional imaging work has attempted to
clarify the neural mechanisms underlying various socially-relevant behaviors, ranging from person
perception to self-regulation, empathy and imitation. Despite mounting evidence that that the neural bases
of social cognition are quite similar to those of emotion, little work has attempted to explain what this
similarity might mean. Each talk in this symposium will shed light on this issue. Two talks (Schiller &
Phelps, Beer) will show that brain systems typically associated with emotion - the amygdala and
orbitofrontal cortex - are essential for person perception, because targets for social judgments - including
ourselves - have affective relevance. Two other talks (Keysers, Ochsner) will show that interactions among
regions involved in motor control, affect, and mental state attribution underlie our tendency to take on the
emotions of others and empathize with them. Taken together, these talks suggest that social cognition and
emotion share common mechanisms that interact to support social behavior in multiple contexts.

A B S T R A C T S
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF FIRST IMPRESSIONS Daniella Schiller and Elizabeth Phelps, NYU — Evaluating others requires processing of complex information. Nevertheless, during an initial encounter we can
rapidly form an opinion of a certain individual, these opinions may vary across individual although the
same information is provided. The present study investigated the brain mechanisms giving rise to the
impressions formed upon meeting a new person. We measured brain responses using fMRI during exposure to different person profiles. Each profile consisted of varying degrees of positive and negative information. Subjects were requested to form an impression of each person using an evaluation scale. Based on
subjects' responses, we determined which information was subjectively significant, influencing their
impressions (evaluation-relevant), and which was disregarded (evaluation-irrelevant). We then looked for
brain areas responding differentially to these two types of information. Results revealed that responses in
two brain regions typically associated with emotion - the amygdala and the posterior cingulate cortex
(PCC) - were stronger while encoding social information that was relevant, relative to irrelevant to subsequent evaluations. In addition, these responses scaled parametrically with the strength of evaluations.
These findings provide the first evidence for encoding difference based on subsequent evaluation ("the DE
effect"), suggesting a key role for the amygdala and PCC in forming first impressions.

16

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

CNS Symposia

Tuesday, April 15, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

EMOTIONS OFTEN DEPEND ON SELF-EVALUATION ACCURACY Jennifer S. Beer, University of Texas at
Austin — The neural overlap between systems of emotion and social cognition (both self-perception and
perception of others) is unsurprising from the perspective of appraisal theories of emotion. From this perspective, emotion and social cognition share underlying appraisals. For example, an event or stimulus
should not elicit emotion unless is it appraised as relevant to the goals of the self or another person. To
address this issue, research in our lab has examined orbitofrontal cortex involvement in relation to emotion
and self-evaluation. Studies of patients with orbitofrontal damage show that self-evaluations are impacted
much more than emotions. Although orbitofrontal patients often exhibit typical reactions to emotional
stimuli, their impaired emotions arise from unrealistically positive self-evaluations. An fMRI study supports these data by showing that the orbitofrontal cortex is recruited to support accurate self-evaluations.
Together these studies suggest that although the orbitofrontal cortex is often conceptualized as an emotional region, it is critically involved in self-evaluations that have a downstream effect on emotion and
social behavior.
INTEGRATING MOTOR AND EMOTIONAL CONTAGION Christian Keysers, University Medical Center
Groningen — Psychology proposes that our response to the facial expressions of others depend on two
mechanisms but their causal relationship remains unclear: (a) Facial Mimicry: the vision of emotional facial
expressions triggers congruent facial expressions in the observer and (b) Emotional Contagion: the observation of emotions triggers a similar emotional state in the observer. Here I show that the vision of facial
expressions, be they emotional or not, triggers activity in regions involved in the production of facial
expressions (BA45), providing a neural substrate for facial mimicry. Emotional facial expressions additionally trigger activity in the anterior insula/frontal operculum (IFO) involved in experiencing similar emotions, in particular in empathic individuals, providing a neural substrate for emotional contagion. Using
effective connectivity, I will show that while viewing emotional facial expressions, the IFO's become
strongly connected with BA45, suggesting that a link between facial mimicry and emotional contagion
indeed exists, illustrating how emotional and motor simulation combine in the social brain. Importantly,
this data helps explain why facial EMG is not predictive of emotional understanding: covert motor simulation in premotor structures not overt mimicry in primary motor or somatosensory regions seem most
directly linked to emotional contagion in the IFO.
UNPACKING THE MECHANISMS OF EMPATHY AND EMPATHIC ACCURACY Kevin
N.
Ochsner,
Columbia University — Imaging studies of empathy have shown that first person experience activates some
of the same neural systems activated by perception of others having the same experience. These data have
been taken to suggest that the ability to empathically connect with and understand other's emotions
depends upon the ability to automatically "share" their emotional responses. Problematic for this view,
however, are the facts that 1) medial PFC regions associated with understanding other's mental states are
seldom active in the contrasts analyses used in such studies, and 2) 40 years of behavioral studies show that
affect sharing does not predict accurate understanding of other's emotions. Here we 1) present data from
an imaging study of pain empathy showing that interactions between medial PFC and regions representing "shared emotions" can be detected using functional connectivity, but not contrast, analyses, and 2)
present behavioral data showing that a person's tendency to empathically share emotion can, in fact, predict their ability to accurately judge other's emotions, but only if we take into account the emotional expressivity of the judgment target. In other words, empathic accuracy is not a property of a perceiver, but of
their interaction with an emotionally expressive target.

session nine

Sleep, memory and plasticity: From molecules to mind
Tuesday, April 15
1:00 - 3:00 pm
Grand Ballroom B
Chair
Matthew Walker, University of California, Berkeley
Speakers
Marcos Frank, Gina Poe, Matthew Walker, Robert Stickgold

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

17

Tuesday, April 15, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

CNS Symposia

Summary: The function(s) of sleep remain largely unknown, a surprising fact given the vast amount of
time that this state takes from our lives. One of the most exciting, and contentious, hypotheses suggests
that sleep is critical for learning and brain plasticity. Over the last decade, a large number of studies have
begun to provide a substantive body of evidence in support of such sleep-dependent memory processing.
This symposium offers a synthesis of this rich array of experimental evidence from leading international
experts, spanning phylogeny and descriptive levels, ranging from molecules and cells, to networks,
systems and cognitive neuroscience. We believe the symposium would offer fertile ground for lively
discussions regarding the role of sleep in 1) memory encoding, consolidation, integration and association,
and 2) the underlying brain basis of these effects; sleep-dependent plasticity.

A B S T R A C T S
SLEEP-DEPENDENT CORTICAL PLASTICITY IN VIVO: AN INTEGRATIVE APPROACH TO UNDERSTANDING
SLEEP FUNCTION Marcos Frank, University of Pennsylvania — Converging findings from studies in
humans and animals strongly suggest that sleep facilitates memory consolidation. However, the precise
cellular mechanisms governing this process are unknown. We have shown that sleep consolidates a canonical form of in vivo synaptic plasticity (ocular dominance plasticity: ODP). This consolidation is blocked
when sleep is prevented, or when neural activity in the sleeping brain is reversibly inhibited. We are now
beginning to reveal the underlying, activity-dependent mechanisms that alter synaptic strength during
sleep. Because the study of ODP has provided insights into plasticity more generally, our findings will
uncover basic rules that explain how experience and sleep work in concert to produce long-lasting modifications of cortical circuitry.
PHYSIOLOGICAL PHENOMENA FOR REM SLEEP DEPENDENT MEMORY CONSOLIDATION Gina
Poe,
University of Michigan — The hippocampus is the assembly place, but not final storage site, of complex,
associative memories in the brain. During complex associative learning, neurons in the hippocampus are
active in a manner consistent with forming new memory networks. Consolidation is the process where
temporary hippocampal memories are transferred to long term storage sites throughout the neocortex.
Rapid Eye Movement Sleep (REM) has been implicated in the consolidation of many types of memories
and learning tasks. It is our hypothesis that the neurochemical milieu of REM creates a unique environment that allows REM sleep brain activity patterns to serve a function for memory consolidation that cannot be fulfilled under normal circumstances during waking. Specifically, in addition to strengthening
newly formed synapses, REM sleep allows for synaptic depotentiation of consolidated memories and the
erasure of extraneous synapses. We have shown hippocampal reactivation patterns during REM sleep consistent with strengthening novel memories and weakening synapses of consolidated memories, and saw
that the reactivation pattern, called theta phase reversal, occurred over the period of 5-7 days consistent
with the time course shown for memory consolidation. Further REM deprivation and REM augmentation
studies have supported the importance of hippocampal reactivation patterns for learning and memory
consolidation.
TO SLEEP…PER CHANCE TO LEARN? SLEEP-DEPENDENT MEMORY AND PLASTICITY IN THE HUMAN
BRAIN Matthew Walker, University of California, Berkeley — Building on the cellular and network-foundation presentations in this session, I will discuss complimentary evidence of sleep-dependent memory processing in the human brain at a systems and cognitive level. I will begin with an overview of the question
what is the relationship between sleep, memory and the brain plasticity, and how do we test it? This will be
followed by a selection of behavioral and neuroimaging studies describing 1) the essential need for sleep
before learning in preparing the brain for initial memory formation/encoding, 2) the critical need for sleep
after learning for the subsequent neuroplastic consolidation of memory, and 3) a novel role for sleep in the
development of associational links between recently learning information - potentially the ultimate goal of
memory storage. I will conclude with a conceptual framework of how sleep may facilitate the processes
underlying the acquisition, consolidation, integration and possibly erasure of human memories.
SLEEP, MEMORY AND DREAMS: BEYOND CONSOLIDATION Robert Stickgold, Harvard Medical School —
There is now considerable evidence for sleep's role in the consolidation of various forms of memory, from
procedural skill learning to word pair recall. But beyond simple consolidation, sleep can also facilitate the
integration of new information with older memories and the extraction of patterns from multiple exemplars, even when there is only a probabilistic relationship between exemplar and class. Evidence of these
more sophisticated forms of memory processing during sleep will be presented, and the possible relevance
of dreaming to these processes discussed.

18

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Graduate Students Present

Monday, April 14, 2008
3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B

The Graduate Students Present is a forum enabling students to present their research to the
general audience in ten-minute intervals. Nine abstracts were chosen in a blind review, from
nearly 300 abstracts submitted. Each recipient is awarded a $500-travel award.
The session will be moderated by Reiko Graham, Ph.D., Texas Sate University. Questions will
be at the discretion of each individual speaker.

Speakers:
Idil Kokal, University of Groningen, the Netherlands
Namhee Kim, The Ohio State University
Isabelle Pelletier, Centre de recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Mère-Enfant
(Sainte-Justine) and Université de Montréal
Aaron Boes, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine
Jai-Min Bai, UCSD
Pamela Perschler, Southern Illinois University
Elliot Berkman, UCLA
Sabrina Segal, University of California, Irvine
Keiko Yamazaki, Hokkaido University

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

19

Graduate Students Present
INVESTIGATING JOINT ACTIONS WITH FMRI Idil Kokal1,, Valeria
Gazzola1, Christian Keysers1; 1BCN Neuroimaging Center, University Medical
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, the Netherlands — Recent studies
suggest that the capacity to coordinate one’s actions with others’ relies on
the mirror neuron system (MNS). With fMRI we scanned participants
engaging in joint actions with the experimenter. The task involved moving
one of the two sticks of a clock-like device singly as well as creating a particular shape jointly with the experimenter. In the straight condition, the
participant had to move his stick to the opposite side where the experimenter moved hers; in the angle condition, to the same side. In the control
conditions, the participant had to (a) passively watch the experimenter’s
movements or (b) move his stick alone. The MNS, involved in (a) and (b)
included: the opercular part of the left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and the
left inferior parietal lobule (IPL). The regions that are more active during
joint actions compared to a+b were adjacent but anterior to the MNS
regions in the IFG and IPL and additional activities in the left posterior
superior temporal sulcus, right precenues and bilateral lingual gyrus were
found. The straight condition recruited the right superior frontal gyrus
more strongly than the angle condition, possibly to inhibit the predominant response to move in the same direction as the experimenter. The bilateral temporal parietal junction (TPJ), a region involved in perspective
taking and theory of mind, was activated only in the angle condition. Our
results suggest that dynamically coupling one’s actions to those of others’
involves a circuitry that goes beyond the classical mirror system.
THE EFFECT OF L-DOPA ON FMRI OF LANGUAGE
PROCESSING Namhee Kim1, Madalina Tivarus2, Prem Goel1, David
Beversdorf3; 1The Ohio State University, Department of Statistics, , 2University
of Rochester, Department of Imaging Science and the Rochester Center for Brain
Imaging Rochester, NY, 3The Ohio State University, Department of
Neurology — L-dopa, which is a precursor for dopamine, acts to amplify
strong signals, and dampen weak signals as suggested by other studies.
The effect of L-dopa on language processing has been demonstrated in language studies, suggesting restriction of the semantic network. In this
study, we aimed to examine the effect of L-dopa on language processing
with fMRI. Two types of language tasks (phonological and semantic categorization tasks) were tested under two drug conditions (placebo and Ldopa) in 16 healthy subjects. Independent Component Analysis (ICA) was
used to select task-relevant (positive) sources. Group ICA of fMRI Toolbox (GIFT) was implemented to generate 25 sources for each subject for the
four conditions and the sources were classified into task-relevant source
groups by correlation criterion. We found that the highly task relevant
brain regions Left Inferior Frontal Gyrus (LIFG), Left Fusiform Gyrus
(LFUS), and Middle Temporal Gyrus (MTG) showed distinct activation
patterns with L-dopa treatment as compared to placebo for both tasks. We
also found out that the thalamus was activated in language processing
with placebo but was not significant with L-dopa treatment. Further
research will be necessary to better understand how findings relate to the
semantic effects on L-dopa. However, the lack of thalamic activation with
L-dopa suggests that L-dopa allows semantic processing to occur with less
influence from thalamic feedback.
FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING STUDY OF
LANGUAGE LATERALIZATION IN ACALLOSAL PATIENTS.
Isabelle Pelletier1,2, Isabelle Rouleau4, Christine Rosa1, Katja Valois4, Frederic
Andermann5, Dave Saint-Amour1,2,3, Franco Lepore1,2, Maryse Lassonde1,2;
1
Centre de recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Mère-Enfant (SainteJustine), 2Centre de Recherche en Neuropsychologie et Cognition, Département de
psychologie, Université de Montréal, 3Département d’ophtalmologie, Université

20

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

de Montréal., 4Centre de Neuroscience de la Cognition, Département de
psychologie, Université du Québec à Montréal, 5Department of Neurology,
Montreal Neurological Institute — Since the seminal work of Broca in 1861, it
is well acknowledged that language is related to left hemisphere functions,
at least in adults. However, the origins of this hemispheric specialization
are more controversial. Some authors posit that language is geneticallycoded while others have suggested that hemispheric specialization develops over time. Tenants of the latter view have further suggested that the
adult pattern of left hemispheric specialization is achieved through callosal inhibition of the homologous right speech areas. According to this
hypothesis, it follows that language could develop bilaterally in the acallosal brain (callosal agenesis, ACC). A functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) study of a single case of ACC suggests that this might be
the case (Riecker et al., 2007). Considering the important variability of
reorganization patterns in ACC, this finding needs to be replicated in a
larger sample of subjects. In the present study, six ACC individuals underwent a language lateralization fMRI protocol comprising both a syntactic
decision task as well as a subvocal verbal fluency task. Some of the ACC
individuals showed a clear hemispheric specialization whereas others displayed a more bilateral speech representation. While these results indicate
that various patterns of brain reorganization may be occurring in ACC,
they also suggest that the corpus callosum does not play a necessary role
in the cerebral development of lateralized linguistic representation.
RIGHT
VENTROMEDIAL
PREFRONTAL
CORTEX:
A
NEUROANATOMICAL CORRELATE OF IMPULSIVENESS AND
HYPERACTIVITY IN BOYS Aaron Boes1,2, Daniel Tranel3, Steve
Anderson3, Antoine Bechara4, Lynn Richman5, Peg Nopoulos1; 1Department of
Psychiatry, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa,
2Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Iowa Carver College of
Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, 3Department of Neurology (Division of Behavioral
Neurology and Cognitive Neuroscience), University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa,
USA, 4Institute for the Neurological Study of Emotion and Creativity,
Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California, 5Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa Carver College of
Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa — Emerging data on the neural mechanisms of
impulse control have highlighted brain regions involved in emotion and
decision making, including the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPC),
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and amygdala. We have previously
hypothesized that variations in the development of these regions may
influence one’s propensity for impulsivity and, by extension, one’s vulnerability to disorders involving poor impulse control (e.g. substance abuse).
Here we test the hypothesis that poor impulse control is associated with
structural deficits in this emotion processing circuit in a group of normal
healthy boys. Also, we hypothesized that right-sided structures would
preferentially predict poor impulse control. In a sample of 61 boys, age 7 17, we assessed parent- and teacher-reported behavioral ratings of impulse
control (non-planning and hyperactive behavior) in relation to volume of
the VMPC, ACC and amygdala, measured using structural MRI and FreeSurfer. A regression analysis showed that, as a group, right-sided regions
of interest (ROIs) significantly predicted impulse control ratings, with the
VMPC as an individually significant predictor. Follow-up correlation tests
revealed a significant correlation for poor impulse control and low right
VMPC volume, which is more robust in the medial sector of the VMPC. A
comparison a right VMPC volume between boys with high and low impulsiveness\hyperactivity revealed significantly lower right VMPC volume
in the former group. These results are consistent with the notion that right

Graduate Students Present

VMPC provides a neuroanatomical correlate of the normal variance in
impulse control observed in boys.
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF EMPATHY AND
THEORY OF MIND FUNCTION IN CHILDREN WITH AUTISM
SPECTRUM DISORDER Jai-Min Bai1,5, Derrik Asher1, Oriana Aragon1,3,
Tom Gamage6, Yasmin Ghochani1, Stephen Johnson1, Steve Gilmore1, Matt
Erhart1, Heather Pelton1, Ernesto Enrique4, Dane Chambers1, Jaime Pineda1,2;
1
Department of Cognitive Science, UCSD, 2Neuroscience Department, UCSD,
3Cal State University, San Marcos, 4San Diego State University, 5University of
Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, 6Virginia Commonwealth University — Previous research has identified the mirror neuron system (MNS) as a collection of neurons involved in the integration of observation and execution
into a matching system. MNS activity monitored by EEG has been
indexed through power suppression from 8-13Hz (mu rhythms) over the
sensorimotor cortex. Typically developing (TD) individuals show mu
power suppression during goal oriented actions in observation and execution. Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) show suppression only in goal oriented actions involving execution and not
observation. Our research focused upon two methods for analyzing
social cognition through observation of visual stimuli, empathy and theory of mind (ToM). The ToM method revealed results that reinforced a
previous study that dissociates ToM into two subcomponents. The
empathy study applied to TD children revealed mu power suppression
to emotional faces. In contrast, children with ASD showed similar mu
power across different conditions. This result suggests that children with
ASD do not engage the mirror neuron system in face emotion processing
as do TD children. In addition, TD children show higher mu power suppression in the right hemisphere than in the left. However, children with
ASD showed no mu power difference between hemispheres. Therefore,
the electrophysiological data collected through these two methods contribute to the theory that children with ASD are deficient in their ability
to suppress mu rhythms. These results provide a fundamental basis for
an ongoing study that is investigating whether the electrophysiological
discrepancies in ASD are functional, structural or both.
MODULATION OF NEURAL ACTIVITY IN THE LEFT INFERIOR
FRONTAL GYRUS AS A FUNCTION OF PRIOR AND
SUBSEQUENT ASSOCIATIVE LEARNING Pamela Perschler1, Reza
Habib1; 1Southern Illinois University, Carbondale — The subsequent memory (SM) paradigm is used to identify differences in activity during
encoding that predict whether a stimulus will be subsequently remembered. Here, we asked whether performance during a previous memory
test will modulate activity during subsequent encoding. Neural activity
was measured with functional MRI during the encoding phase of a multitrial associative learning paradigm. Over the course of 7 trials, subjects
learned and recalled 40 unrelated word pairs. Cued recall performance
on trials 1-6 was used to categorize encoding activity on trials 2-7 into: 1)
Rc11 (successful recall on the previous and current trial), Rc01 (unsuccessful recall on the previous trial but successful recall on the current
trial), and Rc00 (unsuccessful recall on the previous and current trial).
The comparison between Rc01 and Rc00 corresponds to the standard SM
analysis and identified greater activity in the left inferior frontal gyrus
(LIFG) and right parahippocampal gyrus. The comparison between Rc11
and Rc01 identifies regions whose activity is modulated by whether an
item has been previously learned. Activations were observed in the left
superior temporal, medial frontal, and parahippocampal gyri; a deactivation was observed in the same LIFG region identified in the standard SM
analysis. This result indicates that activity of the LIFG is greater in the
Rc01 condition than either the Rc00 or the Rc11 condition, suggesting that
this region is critical for for transforming an item from an unlearned state
to a learned state; once an item is learned, activity in this region is
reduced.

Monday, April 14, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

CROSS-DOMAIN
INHIBITION:
INTENTIONAL
MOTOR
INHIBITION PRODUCES INCIDENTAL LIMBIC INHIBITION
Elliot Berkman1, Lisa Burklund1, Matthew Lieberman1; 1UCLA Department of
Psychology — Neurocognitive studies have consistently observed rIFG
involvement in inhibition across a number of domains (e.g. motor, cognitive, affective), however there has been no systematic investigation of
whether there is a common inhibitory mechanism in rIFG that produces
similar effects in each domain. The present study used an emotional go/
no-go task that produces prepotent responses in both the motor and
affective domains, but with intentional inhibition in only one domain
(motor) and affective responses being incidental to the task. We found
support for the hypothesis that rIFG serves as a common inhibitory
mechanism across multiple psychological domains. We observed
increased rIFG and reduced amygdala activity when participants
engaged in response inhibition during the presentation of negativelyvalenced stimuli. Across trials with negatively-valenced stimuli, functional connectivity analyses revealed significantly greater inverse correlations between the time courses of rIFG and amygdala during no-go trials
than go trials, suggesting that when participants intentionally inhibited a
motor response in the presence of an affective cue that would typically
activate the amygdala, amygdala activity was dampened to the extent
that the rIFG response was higher. Thus, intentional inhibition in the
motor domain produced unintended inhibitory consequences in the
affective domain.
ENDOGENOUS NORADRENERGIC ACTIVATION AND MEMORY
FOR EMOTIONAL MATERIAL IN MEN AND WOMEN Sabrina
Segal1, Larry Cahill1; 1University of California, Irvine — Abundant
evidence in animal studies suggests that noradrenergic activity is related to
memory, particularly for emotional material. The salivary enzyme, alphaamylase is known to be highly correlated with norepinephrine and is a
biomarker for the sympathetic nervous system response (Chatterton, et.
al 1996). This measurement was used to study the relationship between
endogenous noradrenergic activation and memory in healthy men and
women. Subjects viewed images from the International Affective Picture
Set (IAPS) that ranged from neutral to emotional. Saliva samples were
collected at baseline, immediately after viewing the slides, and then 3, 8,
18, and 28 minutes after the slide show. Subjects returned one week later
for a surprise memory recall test. The most notable results were with
respect to the women who displayed an increase in salivary alpha-amylase (sAA) immediately after versus before viewing the pictures (n= 21).
There was a highly significant correlation between the increase in sAA
immediately after viewing the pictures, and the percent of emotional
slides those subjects recalled (r = 0.73, p < 0.01). There was no correlation
between the increase in sAA immediately after viewing the slides and the
number of neutral slides recalled (r= 0.30, p> 0.05). The difference
between these correlation coefficients closely approached significance (p
< 0.06). These results are the first of which we are aware, to provide evidence that endogenous noradrenergic release is correlated with enhanced
memory for emotional material in women. Further studies will determine
whether this relationship extends to men and memory for emotionally
arousing material.
EARLY VISUAL COMPONENT OF ERP REFLECTS THE
SEQUENTIAL PROCESS OF MENTAL IMAGERY GENERATION
Keiko Yamazaki1, Jun'ichi Katayama2; 1Graduate School of Education, Hokkaido
University, 2Faculty of Education, Hokkaido University — We examined the
brain activity related to the mental imagery of sequentially memorized
shape using ERP. Four kinds of shape were named “a”, ”b”, ”c”, and ”d”,
two of which were SIMPLE shape composed of three segments, and the
others were COMPLEX shape of five segments. Participants memorized
these shapes with order of the segments to be drawn. In the experiment, 5
x 5 grids with the name of shape in the central cell, and with an “X” probe
mark in another cell, were presented. Participants decided whether or not
the probe mark fell on the visualized shapes. Half of the trials were ON
trials where the mark fell on the shape. Half of the ON trials were EARLY

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

21

Monday, April 14, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

trials when the marks placed on a segment drawn early in the order to be
memorized, and the other half were LATE trials. Choice reaction time for
the ON trials was shorter in the EARLY than in the LATE, and shorter in
the SIMPLE than in the COMPLEX trials. These results show that participants visualized shapes in the order to be memorized. ERP effects were
observed on the positive component over the posterior site around 200
ms after the stimulus (P200). The peak amplitude of this component was
larger for the COMPLEX than for the SIMPLE in EARLY trials over the
right parieto-occipital site. We concluded that imagery generation process is involved in visual areas activated in early latency range, and that
P200 reflects sequential process of mental imagery generation.

22

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Graduate Students Present

Poster Abstracts

Poster
Session

Date & Time

Set-up Begins

Session Begins

Session Ends

Take-down
Complete

A

Saturday 4/12/08

5:00 pm

5:30 pm

7:30 pm

8:00 pm

B

Sunday 4/13/08

*7:30 am

8:00 am

10:00 am

11:30 am

C

Sunday 4/13/08

11:30 am

1:00 pm

3:00 pm

3:30 pm

D

Sunday 4/13/08

3:30 pm

5:00 pm

7:00 pm

7:30 pm

E

Monday 4/14/08

*7:30 am

8:00 am

10:00 am

11:30 am

F

Monday 4/14/08

11:30 am

1:00 pm

3:00 pm

3:30 pm

G

Monday 4/14/08

3:30 pm

5:00 pm

7:00 pm

7:30 pm

H

Tuesday 4/15/08

*7:30 am

8:00 am

10:00 am

12:30 pm

I

Tuesday 4/15/08

12:30 pm

3:00 pm

5:00 pm

5:15 pm

* Please note that only scheduled poster presenters may enter the exhibit hall during the early
morning set-up time. All other attendees may only enter when the exhibit hall opens at 8:00
am.
The presenting author must be present at least one full hour during the assigned session and
the other authors should be present during the remaining time. You may post your materials
on the board assigned to you at any time after the "Set-up Begins" time (listed above), but
before the beginning of the assigned poster session. You must remove your poster promptly no
later than the time listed above in "Take-down Complete." Any posters left up after the "Takedown Complete" time may be discarded. Do not leave personal items in the poster room.
On Saturday, the doors to the poster room close and lock at 8:00 pm. On Sunday-Monday the
doors close and lock at 7:30 pm. On Tuesday, the doors close and lock at 5:15 pm. No attendee
or exhibitor will be allowed to enter the exhibit hall once the doors are locked.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

23

24

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A
Higher level cognition: Executive functions
A1
EFFECTS OF PRIOR PROBABILITY ON THE DECISION
CRITERION: AN FMRI STUDY Kathleen Hansen1, Sarah Hillenbrand1,
Leslie Ungerleider1; 1NIMH/NIH — Most models of decision-making
include several theoretical steps: sensory data are analyzed to yield evidence supporting one or more alternatives; biases are introduced to reflect
each alternative’s prior probability (PP) and value; and the biased outputs
are weighed against each other to produce a decision. Research in our laboratory investigates whether specific brain regions implement these theoretical steps. Here, we identify regions associated with the effect of explicit
PP on the decision criterion (Green and Swets, 1966). Subjects categorized
parametrically-defined abstract shapes (after Loffler et al., 2003) as belonging to set A or set B, during each of two explicitly-cued PP conditions (50%
vs. 80% chance that a stimulus would be of set B). During scanning, all 14
subjects responded “B” more frequently in the 80% than in the 50% PP
condition. We reasoned that in the brain region(s) mediating this behavioral decision criterion shift, individual differences in fMR signal level
change across PP conditions should predict individual differences in criterion shift across PP conditions. We tested this hypothesis with an analysis
of covariance, using fMR signal changes and decision criterion shifts
across PP as fixed effects and subjects as a random effect. Significant
regions were found in prefrontal cortex (including dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex, DLPFC), insula and visual cortex. The regions in visual cortex also
responded to a stimulus vs. blank catch trial contrast, but several DLPFC
regions did not. Thus, the DLPFC appears to participate in using PP information during decision-making.
A2
NEURONAL CORRELATES OF “IF ” AND “WHEN” DECISIONS
FOR ACTION Stephen Heinen1, Helen Hwang1, Shun-nan Yang1; 1SmithKettlewell Eye Research Institute, 2Care of the Elderly — We recently showed
that neurons in the supplementary eye field (SEF) encode the rule governing the “if” decision (whether to act) in a go/nogo baseball simulation, in
which eye movements indicate the decision. However, these neurons continue to reflect the correct rule on error trials, suggesting that the SEF does
not make the go/nogo decision. Here we examine whether SEF neurons
encode the timing decision (when to move) in a modified version of “ocular baseball.” In the task, monkeys fixate in the center of a visible square
(“plate”) as a target approaches and intersects it. The target moves at one
of two different speeds, and therefore intercepts the plate at two different
times. The monkey must pursue the target with an eye movement within
200 ms after it intersects the plate, forcing the animal to anticipate the
plate-crossing time. We found that in correct trials, the peak activity of SEF
neurons preceded and was time-locked to both plate intersection and
movement onset at both target speeds. However, in slow trials, often the
movement was erroneously initiated too early. In these trials, SEF activity
peaked earlier too, and now coincided more with movement onset than
with plate intersection, suggesting the neurons trigger the movement. In
support of this, muscimol inactivation of the SEF produced errors in pursuit initiation timing. Therefore, the SEF may provide a necessary timing
signal for pursuit initiation, whereas other structures may make the decision to pursue in the context of the ocular baseball rule.

A3
RELATIONAL
INTEGRATION
AND
ROSTROLATERAL
PREFRONTAL CORTEX: A COMBINED FMRI AND RTMS STUDY
Espen Helskog1,2, Carter Wendelken1, Julie Duque1, Silvia Bunge1, Tor
Endestad2; 1UC Berkeley, 2University of Oslo — Brain imaging studies indicate that the rostrolateral PFC (RLPFC; lateral Brodmann area 10) is
engaged during performance of a number of complex cognitive tasks. One
specific hypothesis holds that RLPFC is primarily involved in relational
integration, and this hypothesis is supported by imaging results, including
a relational matching task in which RLPFC is activated consistently on a
group- and individual level with a high degree of consistency (Smith,
Keramatian, & Christoff, 2007). In this study, we seek to use repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation techniques (r-TMS) to provide evidence
that RLPFC is necessary for relational integration. We will localize RLPFC
on an individual level using a modified version of the previously
employed relational matching task, and then use the acquired functional
MRI images laid over individual anatomical MR images to guide TMS of
RLPFC during performance of the same task. In the experimental condition, participants must evaluate the dimension of difference between one
pair of objects, and decide whether a second pair of objects differs along
the same dimension as the first pair. This higher-order relational comparison consistently engages RLPFC relative to trials on which one must indicate whether two items match in terms of a specific feature. This study will
provide the first empirical test of RLPFC’s causal role in relational integration
A4
LEARNING FROM ERRORS: ERROR-RELATED NEURAL ACTIVITY
PREDICTS IMPROVEMENTS IN FUTURE INHIBITORY CONTROL
PERFORMANCE Robert Hester1, Janelle Madeley1, Jason Mattingley1;
1Queensland Brain Institute and School of Psychology, University of Queensland,
St Lucia, Queensland, Australia — The magnitude of error-related neural
activity, particularly in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), has been
shown to relate to adaptive post-error changes in response behaviour.
These studies have focused on immediate changes in response behaviour,
typically response times for the trial immediately following an error. Here,
we examine the neural mechanisms underlying delayed adaptive changes
in performance that avoided repetition of an error up to 15 trials into the
future. We administered a go/no-go response inhibition task during fMRI
data collection that presented random letters of the alphabet (no-go trials
were repetitions of any letter, e.g., E,G,U,I,O,P,P). Participants were
instructed that no-go trial performance influenced the trial sequence,
whereby 50% of commission errors would be followed (2 to 15 trials later)
by another no-go trial presenting the same stimulus letter. Behavioural
data supported a ‘learning from errors’ effect, with no-go trial accuracy
following a commission error significantly better when the same stimulus
was presented (68%) than those presenting a different stimulus letter
(57%). Error-related neural activity was examined for those regions that
were predictive of improved performance on the following no-go trial –
the regions associated with learning from an error. Greater activity in the
dorsal ACC, left inferior frontal gyrus, right cerebellum and significant
deactivation in the posterior cingulate and left temporal cortices predicted
subsequent improvements in inhibition performance. These data suggest
that error-related ACC activity is predictive of improvements in future
performance, potentially by influencing other cortical regions critical to
task performance.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

25

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

A5
FITNESS EFFECTS ON THE EXECUTIVE CONTROL OF
RELATIONAL MEMORY IN PREADOLESCENT CHILDREN
Charles Hillman1, Sarah Buck2, Neal Cohen1; 1University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, 2Chicago State University — Investigations of fitness on cognition in humans and non-human animal models have determined that
cognitive abilities associated with prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus
are responsive to the effects of exercise. Whereas studies in humans have
predominantly examined executive control functions mediated by a neural network involving prefrontal structures, work with non-human animal models has focused predominantly on memory functions associated
with the hippocampus. The purpose of this investigation was to bridge
these two models through examination of fitness on the executive control
of memory. Preadolescent children (9-10 years) served as study participants in order to examine the influence of fitness on cognition during
development. High- (n=22) and low- (n=24) fit children were grouped
according to their performance on a VO2 max test, which measures cardiorespiratory fitness. A memory task was performed in which participants had to either encode faces and houses individually (i.e., nonrelationally) or form relations between the faces and houses during (relational) encoding for later recollection. At test, participants saw previously
studied pairs and pairings of completely new items, permitting both item
and relational memory to affect judgments of previous occurrence. Findings revealed better performance at test for items studied relationally,
disproportionately for high-fit relative to low-fit children. But no effects
of fitness were observed for items studied non-relationally. Thus, the
effects of aerobic fitness during development were related to the match
between the nature of the original encoding and the cues available at test,
implicating executive control or flexible use of memory presumptively
based on prefrontal-hippocampal interactions.
A6
MULTIMODAL AND UNIMODAL BRAIN AREAS FOR RULE
BASED BEHAVIOURAL CONTROL Timothy Hodgson1, Benjamin
Parris1; 1Exeter Centre for Cognitive Neuroscience, School of Psychology,
University of Exeter, United Kingdom — Event related fMRI was used to
investigate which brain regions showed activity related to rule based processes independent of response mode and which areas instantiate specific
stimulus to motor response mappings required for task execution. 14 participants performed a rule switching task using either saccadic or press
button manual responses. The colour of a centrally presented visual cue
indicated whether a response to the left or right was required on each
trial. Following response execution, feedback indicated whether the subject had made a correct or incorrect response and whether the rule linking
the colour with the correct response would reverse (“flip”) or stay the
same (“hold”) on the next trial. Rule changes occurred every 3 to 8 trials
and each experimental block comprised 21 trials. Prior to each block the
subjects were instructed which response mode to use (“respond with
eyes” / “respond with hands”) and four blocks were run in total. Results
showed that identical areas of the dorsal anterior cingulate gyrus and lateral prefrontal cortex showed activity correlated with the “flip” instruction for both manual and saccadic blocks. In contrast, the same event
generated activity within the ventral anterior cingulate and subcortical
regions which varied in exact location and extent with response. The
results indicate that the same regions of prefrontal cortex mediate rule
based processes regardless of the actual motor responses to be executed.
Actual associations between stimulus and response are instantiated
within sub-cortical and limbic structures.
A7
REDUCED SEMANTIC INHIBITION IN SCHIZOPHRENIA
DURING
CONTEXT-BASED
LEXICAL
AMBIGUITY
RESOLUTION: ERP EVIDENCE FROM A NOVEL RESPONSE-FREE
PARADIGM Klaus Hoenig1, Susanne Hellwig-Brida1, Christoph Bux1,
Dobrila Klein1, Markus Kiefer1; 1University of Ulm, Germany — Schizophrenic patients exhibit difficulties in inhibiting contextually inappropri-

26

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

ate information in a number of experimental paradigms. In the vast
majority of these experiments, however, inhibition was related to the
suppression of a motor response. Evidence for semantic inhibition in
schizophrenia is hitherto only scarce and inconclusive. The case of lexicosemantic ambiguity is an excellent tool to directly investigate the semantic inhibition of contextually inappropriate homonym meanings. The current ERP study provides a novel experimental approach that allows for
assessing behavioral target interference from residual activation of an
irrelevant homonym meaning without requiring any response to the
homonym. Behavioral interference can then be related to differences in
brain activation pertaining to disambiguation of a prior homonymy. Our
task asked schizophrenic patients and healthy controls to decide whether
a target noun (GARDEN or ACE) fits the semantic field spanned by two
preceding nouns (BUCKET-SHOVEL), with the second one being ambiguous in half the trials (SPADE). Semantic verifications to ambiguous trials were slower and less accurate compared to unambiguous ones in
schizophrenic patients than in control participants reflecting increased
interference from the irrelevant meaning of the preceding homonym.
Analysis of the ERP time-courses to the second word (ambiguous vs.
unambiguous) revealed group differences over fronto-temporal brain
areas. These findings are interpreted in terms of an inhibitory attentional
impairment in schizophrenia. The semantic inhibition deficit in schizophrenic patients is suggested to ensue from differences in the fronto-temporal circuitry that underlies effective inhibitory control over
contextually inappropriate homonym meanings in service of attentional
selection.
A8
COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE IN EDUCATIONAL SETTINGS:
PERFORMANCE MEASURES VERSUS TEACHER AND PARENT
RATINGS OF EXECUTIVE FUNCTION? Mariette Huizinga1, Anouk
van Loon1, Maurits van der Molen1; 1University of Amsterdam — Advances
in cognitive neuroscience are highly relevant in educational settings. In
addition, educational settings have shown great interest in advances in
cognitive neuroscience. Child neuropsychologists are often asked to evaluate a child’s executive function competence in real-world (e.g., academic) settings. Executive function refer to cognitive processes that
subserve goal-directed behavior, and is especially important in novel or
demanding situations which require a rapid and flexible adjustment of
behavior to the changing demands of the environment. The slow development of executive function has been attributed to the protracted maturation of the prefrontal cortex. The literature has emphasized the need to
examine executive function in children using multiple sources, including
performance-based measures and parent/teacher ratings. In the current
study, the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function (BRIEF; Gioia
et al., 2000) was used as parent/teacher rating index, and consists of two
composites: Regulation Index (BRI) and the Metacognition Index (MI). It
was administered to teacher and parents of children 7-8-, 11-12-, and 1516 year-old. Alongside, the children performed on commonly used
domain-specific performance measures related to several subdomains of
the BRI and MI. The measures included various computerized inhibition,
shifting and planning tasks. Results indicated considerable agreement
between parent/teacher ratings and performance-based measures across
age groups. Outcomes on the BRIEF were interpreted in terms of (agerelated) outcomes of performance-based measures. Follow-up studies
from a neuroscience perspective will provide insight in the neurocognitive underpinnings of executive function development. Implications of
the current results for cognitive neuroscience and educational settings are
discussed.
A9
DISSOCIABLE CONTRIBUTION OF DORSAL ANTERIOR
CINGULATE AND LATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTICES TO TASKSWITCHING Alexandre Hyafil1, Christopher Summerfield1, Etienne
Koechlin1; 1Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France — Switching
between
tasks incurs a cognitive cost that is reflected in a slowing of responses

Poster Session A

immediately following the switch. Competing theories have attributed
this slowing to either the resolution of interference from the previously
active task, the demands of configuring the appropriate action-outcome
contingencies for the new task, or both. However, the brain regions subserving these two processes are currently unknown. To address this question, we acquired functional magnetic resonance images (fMRI) from
human subjects performing a 'spatial' version of the Stroop task, in which
congruent or incongruent spatial and verbal task cues prompted joystick
responses in one of four directions. This allowed us to compare brain
activity elicited by 'switch' trials (e.g. from the spatial task to the verbal
task) and 'stay' trials (e.g. spatial to spatial) on the basis of current and
previous trial congruency. The dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC)
exhibited greater activity on switch than stay trials irrespective of current
and previous trial congruency, whereas the left caudal dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) exhibited a neural switch cost only when the previous task had to be 'de-selected', i.e. on the second of two successive
incongruent trials. These results argue for dissociable and yet complementary roles for the dACC and dlPFC in the flexible scheduling of successive tasks, with the dACC configuring the appropriate association
between action and outcome, and the lateral PFC responsible for resolving proactive interference from previously active task sets.
A10
ABNORMAL REWARD CIRCUITRY IN COCAINE ABUSERS – AN
FMRI BASED STUDY Jennifer Hylton1, André Thomas1, Shashwath
Meda1, Melissa Andrews1, Michael Stevens1,2, Godfrey Pearlson1,2,3; 1Olin
Neuropsychiatry Research Center, Institute of Living at Hartford Hospital,
Hartford CT, 2Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven CT, 3Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore MD — Background: We compared fMRI
patterns between cocaine abusers and controls during a monetary incentive delay (MID) task. We hypothesized deficient nucleus accumbens
(NAcc) activation during reward anticipation in cocaine subjects and
explored correlations with impulsivity behavioral measures. Methods
and Materials: 24 cocaine dependent individuals (19 male) and 33 controls (12 male) competed for rewards in a modified MID task that
included reward Prospect, reward Anticipation and reward/losses Outcome. Two-sample t-tests in SPM2 compared fMRI group differences
across task phases. We also correlated fMRI signal during reward anticipation and impulsivity scores (Experiential Discounting Task EDT, Balloon Analog Risk task BART). A small volume correction identified
significant differences/correlations in regions of interest: NAcc,
amygdala, ventral tegmental area (VTA), mesial PFC, caudate, putamen,
hippocampus, anterior cingulate, insula and OFC. Results: During
reward anticipation, cocaine users underactivated L NAcc; (0.05 FWE
corrected), R Caudate (p=0.01 uncorrected) and over-activated L and R
Putamen (p=0.016 FWE and .057 FWE respectively). During reward outcome, users activated the VTA more than controls (p=0.051 FWE corrected), and underactivated L Putamen (p=0.007 uncorrected). During
loss outcome, users underactivated R NAcc (p=0.01 uncorrected). A significant positive correlation (p=0.007) was found between insula fMRI
response and BART scores and a significant negative correlation between
EDT scores and OFC activation (p=0.01), left (p=0.005) and right insula
(p=0.028). Conclusions: Substance abusers showed impaired activation of
NAcc during reward anticipation; current users activated VTA > controls
during outcome of wins. Additionally supporting the reward deficit
hypothesis are correlations between impulsivity scores and fMRI activation patterns.
A11
NARROWING ATTENTION IN THE STROOP TASK Koki Ikeda1,
Toshikazu Hasegawa1; 1University of Tokyo — In the Stroop task, cognitive
control is assumed to resolve the conflict between task-relevant (e.g.
color) and -irrelevant (e.g. word) dimensions of stimuli by modulating
the focus of attention to the task-relevant one. However, there have been
little direct evidences that showed how attention was modulated during
cognitive control. Previous studies using color-word Stroop task showed

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

that when the range of spatial attention was narrowed by experimental
manipulations, then the Stroop interference was reduced, possibly by
blocking word recognition (e.g. Besner and Stolz 1999). Yet, none of those
studies directly tested that such attention narrowing was adopted during
the actual execution of Stroop incongruent task. Therefore, we conducted
an ERP experiment to examine whether cognitive control in the colorword Stroop task was actually accompanied by narrowing of spatial
attention. A white circle was presented in the peripheral visual field as a
probe, following the Stroop stimuli presented foveally, with varying SOA
(50ms, 150ms, 250ms). The P1 component evoked by the probe was compared between congruent and incongruent trials. Results showed that P1
amplitude was larger in the congruent trials than the incongruent, suggesting that attention was indeed narrowed spatially under cognitive
control. Temporal characteristics of cognitive control will also be discussed.
A12
ECONOMICS, EMOTION, AND ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY:
ERP CORRELATES OF DECISION-MAKING IN THE ULTIMATUM
GAME Noah J. Isserman1, Shauna Gordon-McKeon1, Tara B. Frady1, Jane
W. Couperus1; 1Amherst College, Hampshire College — This study explored
the electroencephalographic (EEG) correlates of decision-making in the
Ultimatum Game (UG), an economic game thought to induce conflict
between emotion or concepts of fairness and economically optimal decision-making. Using methodology based on a 2003 fMRI study (Sanfey et
al.), EEG data were recorded while subjects accepted or rejected offers
from human and computer proposers in a sham UG network. The protocol elicited typical behavioral results, allowing the subsequent analysis of
event-related potentials (ERP), which provide greater temporal resolution than previous studies. The decision-making process evinced an early
(120-170ms) pre-frontal cortex negativity with greater amplitude elicited
by offers from human proposers (electrodes FT7-8, p = .003). This difference supports previous fMRI data on the role of the PFC in UG decisionmaking (Knoch et al. 2006, Sanfey et al. 2003) that suggest greater emotional involvement in the anticipation and reaction to human players’
offers. In contrast, a parietal P300b showed significantly greater activation to unfair offers (p = .044, CZ, CPZ, and PZ 400-600ms) but was not
influenced by the type of proposer.
A13
ONE’S OWN GOOD REPUTATION IS PROCESSED IN A SIMILAR
MANNER TO MONEY IN THE STRIATUM Keise Izuma1,2, Daisuke
Saito1,3, Norihiro Sadato1,2,3; 1National Institute for Physiological Sciences,
2The Graduate University for Advanced Studies, 3Japan Science and Technology
Agency / Research Institute of Science and Technology for Society — Despite
increasing attention toward the neural basis of decision-making in neuroscience, little attention has been paid toward decision-making in social
settings. On the other hand, although social decision-making have been a
center of attention in social psychology, neural explanations for observed
findings have been ignored. In bridging this gap and constructing a more
accurate model of social decision-making, we investigated whether the
acquisition of one’s own good reputation by others, important incentive
for human social behaviors, activates the same reward circuitry as monetary reward. A total of 19 subjects participated two fMRI experiments
(monetary and social reward experiments) across two-separate days.
After participating the Monetary Reward experiment in the first day, subjects answered several personality questionnaires and introduced themselves in front of a video-camera. Then, in the Social Reward experiment,
they were presented with their impressions formed by other persons
based on answers in the questionnaire and video-recorded self-introduction. We found that the acquisition of one’s good reputation robustly activated reward-related brain areas, notably the striatum. Furthermore,
activations in the striatum overlapped with areas activated by monetary
reward, and both types of rewards were characterized by a similar activation pattern especially in the anterior part of the striatum including left
caudate nucleus and bilateral putamen. Thus, our findings bear strong

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

27

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

support for the idea of “common neural currency” for rewards and provide the important first step toward neurally explaining complex social
decision-making and behaviors.
A14
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SPECIFIC TRAINING EFFECTS AND
TRANSFER Susanne Jaeggi1,2, Martin Buschkuehl1,2, Oliver Markes2,
Walter Perrig2, Thomas Koenig2; 1University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,
2University of Bern, Switzerland — In this study, we investigated the outcome of a demanding working-memory training in terms of task-specific
improvements but also in terms of treatment effects on tasks that were
not trained (transfer effects). The 4-week training was designed adaptively by matching the participants’ individual capacity limit. In a preand post-test design, we collected behavioral and EEG data for the training task as well as for the transfer tasks. Preliminary data with 16 participants indicate that compared to the control group (N= 8; no training), the
training group (N= 8) significantly improved performance in the trained
task, but also in two transfer tasks (episodic memory and fluid intelligence). This performance increase was correlated with a power-increase
in the lower alpha band in the training task. Moreover, in the restingstate EEG, the training group showed a power increase in the upper
alpha band which was not observed in the control group. We conclude
that these results reflect neural correlates of an improvement in processing efficiency associated with training.
A15
FUNCTION AND STRUCTURE OF RESPONSE INHIBITION IN
THE RIGHT INFERIOR FRONTAL CORTEX: A MODEL-BASED
APPROACH Sara Jahfari1, K. Richard Ridderinkhof1, Uta Wolfensteller2,
Wery P. M. van den Wildenberg1, H. Steven Scholte1, Birte U. Forstmann1;
1
University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands, 2Max Planck Institute for Human
Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — The right inferior frontal
cortex (rIFC) is known to play an important role in implementing inhibitory control. In a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study,
for instance, Forstmann et al. (in press) showed that activation in rIFC
covaried with response time distribution parameters that are believed to
reflect selective response inhibition. The goal of the present study is to
elucidate the functional and structural role of the rIFC in selective
response inhibition by means of a model-based analysis. Fourteen participants took part in an fMRI experiment while performing a cueing version of the Simon task, and also underwent diffusion tensor imaging
(DTI). The analyses aimed to quantify the extent to which model-based
measures of response inhibition are associated with individual differences in both rIFC function and rIFC coherency of white matter tracts.
Preliminary results revealed a strong correlation between the modelbased measures of response inhibition and both functional and structural
indices of the rIFC.
A16
DIRECTED FORGETTING PERFORMANCE CORRELATES WITH
PSYCHOLOGICAL RESPONSES TO PAIN Kristin
Janschewitz1,
Barbara Knowlton1; 1University of California, Los Angeles — Psychological
reactions to pain may contribute to several chronic disorders, including
irritable bowel syndrome and fibromyalgia, in which somatic symptoms
occur in the absence of organic disease. In this study, we investigated
whether pain catastrophizing is associated with a general deficit in cognitive control for negative information as measured by the directed forgetting paradigm. Subjects studied a list of negative valence words and were
subsequently told that this list was just for practice and that they should
try to forget it. They were then given a second list of negative words to
remember. Later, subjects were asked to recall all of the words. Subjects
scoring high on the Pain Catastrophizing Scale showed significantly less
directed forgetting as measured by the ratio of to-be-forgotten words to
to-be-remembered words recalled. Interestingly, this measure did not
correlate with actual reported somatic symptoms, indicating that experienced pain is not related to cognitive control deficits, but rather one's
reactions to pain. These results suggest that deficits in cognitive control of

28

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

negative information may underlie pain catastrophizing, which may be
an important component of several functional somatic disorders.
A17
PROCESSING OF ERRORS WHILE SWITCHING BETWEEN
ADDITION AND MULTIPLICATION: A COMPARISON OF
DIFFERENT ERROR TYPES Kerstin Jost1, Tim Hahn2, Frank Rösler1;
1
Experimental and Biological Psychology, Philipps-University Marburg,
2Julius-Maximilians-University Würzburg — We investigated error-related
brain activity in a paradigm, in which participants (n=15) had to switch
between single-digit addition and multiplication problems. The task was
to decide whether a presented solution was correct or not. Different types
of incorrect solutions were compared: Incorrect solutions that were correct for the other operation (between-operation interference, e.g., 4*3=7),
incorrect solutions that were correct for another problem of the same
operation (within-operation interference, e.g., 4*3=15), and non-interfering incorrect solutions (e.g., 4*3=5 or 17). Both types of interfering incorrect solutions were more often accepted as correct than non-interfering
incorrect solutions. However, only the acceptance of a solution that is correct for the competing operation, i.e., “between operation” errors, should
be relevant for adaptive control in the switching paradigm and should
demand better adaptation to the relevant operation. Consistent with this
hypothesis, differences in error processing were indicated by the „errorrelated negativity“ (ERN): the ERN amplitude was larger for betweenoperation than for within-operation errors.
A18
THE ESSENCE OF SUBJECTIVE CONFLICT DURING SELFCONTROL:
NEURAL
CORRELATES
OF
SUSTAINING
INCOMPATIBLE INTENTIONS Yoo Na Kang1, Ezequiel Morsella2,
Noah Shamosh1, John Bargh1, Jeremy Gray1; 1Yale University, 2San Francisco
State University — Many theories of self-control or cognitive control are
agnostic about subjective awareness. While it is clear that response conflict (incompatible action tendencies) is associated with subjective experience in specific ways, why people consciously experience some conflicts
in the nervous system but not others remains a mystery. One hypothesis
is that people become conscious only of conflicts involving competition
for control of skeletal muscle (Morsella 2005, Psychological Review). To
test one aspect of this larger hypothesis, 17 participants were trained to
introspect the feeling of conflict (the urge to make an error during a
Stroop color-word interference task), and then were asked to introspect in
the same way while sustaining simple compatible and incompatible
intentions during fMRI scanning (to move a finger left or right). As predicted, merely sustaining incompatible skeletomotor intentions prior to
their execution during a novel task produced stronger systematic
changes in subjective experience than sustaining compatible intentions,
as indicated by self-report ratings obtained in the scanner. Similar ratings
held for a modified Stroop-like task (MSIT; Bush & Shin 2006, Nature
Protocols) when contrasting incompatible versus compatible trials also
during fMRI scanning. We will use the subjective ratings in analyses of
fMRI data, focusing a priori on the brain regions involved in cognitive
control (e.g., dorsal ACC, lateral PFC).
A19
CORTISOL RESPONSE TO PSYCHOSOCIAL STRESS PREDICTS
DECISION-MAKING BEHAVIOR. Lauren A. Kaplan1, Tor Wager1,
Richard Gonzalez2, Lauren Atlas1, Kevin Ochsner1, Stephan F. Taylor2, Israel
Liberzon2, James Abelson2, Brent Hughes3, Jason Buhle1, Kate Hard1, Edward
Smith1; 1Columbia University, 2University of Michigan, 3University of Texas at
Austin — Interactions between cognitive and emotional processes have
been studied in various domains, yet few studies have directly addressed
how stress, as indexed by HPA-axis activity, influences decision-making.
We examined the influence of acute social evaluative stress, induced
using the Trier Social Stressor Test, and the associated HPA-axis response
(measured from salivary cortisol) on basic monetary valuation parameters from Tversky & Kahneman's Cumulative Prospect Theory model
(1992). Participants (N = 40) either gave a speech and performed mental

Poster Session A

arithmetic before a panel of judges or performed a comparable nonstressful control task (N = 20 per group). All subjects then completed a
computerized decision task. On each trial, a prospect, or gamble, was
presented (e.g. 30% chance of winning $400 and 70% chance of winning
$0), and the subjects were asked to indicate the equivalent value of the
gamble. Gambles were optimized to minimize error in the estimation of
model parameters, which included measures of risk preference, loss aversion, sensitivity to probability variation, and subjective utility of rewards.
The Trier Test significantly increased cortisol, though with substantial
individual differences in magnitude. Cortisol increases predicted
increased loss aversion, and path analysis suggested that the extent of the
cortisol response to the stressor was a significant mediator of the relationship between Trier and loss aversion. The results suggest that short-term
stressors can affect fundamental processes related to valuation.
A20
MONITORING AND MODULATING YOUR OWN THOUGHTS
USING REAL-TIME FMRI FEEDBACK TRAINING Kamyar
Keramatian1, Graeme McCaig1, Rachelle Smith1, Burkhard Maedler1, Kalina
Christoff1; 1University of British Columbia — Real-time fMRI (rt-fMRI) is a
novel neuroimaging technique which allows subjects to observe the effect
of their own mental processes on brain activation in real-time. Recent rtfMRI studies have reported the ability of subjects to modulate localized
brain regions such as the sensory-motor cortex, the amygdala, the anterior cingulate, and the insula. It is unknown, however, if higher order
regions of the association cortex can be trained for modulation using rtfMRI feedback. In this study we sought to investigate whether subjects
can achieve enhanced modulation of the Rostrolateral Prefrontal Cortex
(RLPFC) using rt-fMRI feedback training. This region is known to be at
the highest level of association hierarchy and has been associated with
mental processing that requires metacognitive awareness, or evaluative
introspective thought. Subjects viewed real-time information about the
level of activation in their RLPFC, while attempting to up-regulate or
down-regulate this activation by engaging in introspective thought (passively observing and labeling any thoughts that occur) or externally-oriented thought (attending to body sensations or visual information),
respectively. Three different forms of visual feedback were provided,
spanning different time-scales, to assist with modulation. The findings
demonstrate improved modulation of RLPFC in the course of successive
rt-fMRI feedback sessions, with some individual variability across subjects in terms of both level of success in training and patterns of functional connectivity. These results provide further evidence for the
involvement of RLPFC in metacognitive awareness and introspective
thought processes, and suggest a novel approach to the study of higher
order association regions of the cortex.
A21
STROOP AND STOP-SIGNAL INHIBITION – COMMON OR
SEPARABLE MECHANISMS? EVIDENCE FROM BEHAVIORAL
AND FMRI STUDIES. Kiat-Hui Khng1, Kerry Lee1; 1National Institute of
Education, Nanyang Technological University — A previous study investigating the role of inhibition in the development of algebraic skills found
inhibitory measures from the Stroop and Stop-signal tasks loaded on different latent factors. Stroop predicted algebraic performance via susceptibility to intrusions from previously learned heuristics; Stop-signal
contributed to performance via intellectual ability. As these findings were
based on accuracy measures, the present study was conducted to examine whether the same relationship is found with reaction time (RT) measures, which may be more sensitive and is more commonly used in the
literature. 190 adolescents (13– 15 year-olds) completed a Stroop and two
versions of the Stop-signal tasks. As with the accuracy measures, Stroop
interference and Stop-signal RTs were uncorrelated. We will also report
preliminary findings from a second study that examines the same issue
from a neuroanatomical perspective. In this study, we perform functional
neuroimaging on 30 adolescents (13-15 year-olds) while they perform a
Stroop and a Stop-signal task. Based on their susceptibility to intrusions

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

from previously learned heuristics, participants are classified as exhibiting high or low intrusions. Analyses focus on whether inhibitory processes underlying each task are characterized by different networks with
overlapping regions, or similar networks with different patterns of activation. Inhibitory-related activations of the two tasks are expected to differ in loci and intensity, and in how they relate to behavioral measures of
performance. High and low intrusion groups are expected to exhibit different patterns of activation functionally related to Stroop inhibition. No
such difference between intrusion groups is expected for Stop-signal
inhibition.
A22
EXOGENOUSLY CUED ATTENTION SWITCHING RECRUITS
FRONTAL POLE Chobok Kim1, Doerte Spring1, James Kroger1; 1New
Mexico State University — Frontopolar cortex has been associated with
several varieties of complex processing, including Raven’s Progressive
Matrices, the Tower of London, as well as tasks involving mediation of
multiple task sets. Does frontopolar cortex participate in simple cognitive
acts? We presented subjects with successive stimuli consisting of two
superimposed circles—one large and one small--oscillating sinusoidally,
which might be the same (green) or different (green and blue or red) colors, and oscillating in the same or different directions. Subjects indicated
whether the circles were the same or different (different color or different
oscillation direction). Trials were arranged such that color-different trials
and same trials appeared for several presentations, followed by several
motion-different and same trials. Appearance of the first motion-different
trial (or color-different trial) following a group of the alternate type constituted a cross-dimensional switch trial, which caused subjects to redirect attention from the previously in-play stimulus attribute to the new
one. During the switch trials, but not during other difference trials or
same trials, frontopolar cortex was activated. Comparing non-switch difference trials to same trials did not reveal significant activations. Comparing within-color (between red and blue) switch trials to within-color
nonswitch trials and same trials revealed no significant differences. This
study partially replicates a study by Pollmann et al. (2000) but their targets appeared randomly in a spatial grid. Both visual search and appearance of targets inside or outside attentional focus can impact deployment
of attention. We demonstrate that with these considerations eliminated,
cross-dimensional switch recruits frontopolar cortex.
A23
BENEFITING FROM HIERARCHY: INTERACTIONS BETWEEN
LEVELS OF CONTROL IN THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX Aaron
Koralek1, David Badre2, Mark D'Esposito1; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience
Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 2Brown University — Recent
studies have provided evidence for a hierarchical organization of cognitive control in the prefrontal cortex, whereby caudal regions resolve competition between concrete action representations, such as among
individual responses, while rostral regions process more abstract representations. However, an important property of a hierarchy is that choices
at more abstract levels reduce competition at lower levels. This functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study tests whether this hypothesized property of hierarchy is evident among prefrontal cognitive control
mechanisms. Participants were required to select one of a set of keypress
responses based on a perceptual feature of a presented object cue, such as
its texture or its orientation. A colored box cued the relevant dimension.
The number of candidate responses varied between two (low response
competition) and four (high response competition), and the relevant
dimensions varied between one (low dimension competition) and two
(high dimension competition). Importantly, when both response and
dimension competition were high, successful selection of a dimension
resulted in fewer response alternatives. Consistent with prior work,
greater response competition was associated with greater activation in
dorsal premotor cortex. Critically, however, there was an interaction such
that this effect was reduced under conditions of high dimension competition, consistent with a reduction in lower-level competition due to selec-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

29

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

tion at the more abstract level. These results suggest that activity in dorsal
premotor cortex tracks choice demands at low levels of abstraction, and
further that selection at higher levels of abstraction facilitates the resolution of competition at lower levels.
A24
VISUAL ATTENTION DRIVES THE CONSTRUCTION AND
COMPARISON OF VALUES IN SIMPLE ECONOMIC CHOICE Ian
Krajbich1, Carrie Armel2, Antonio Rangel1; 1Caltech, HSS, 2Stanford
University, Economics — Binary choice between pairs of familiar consumption items is one of the simplest forms of economic choice. Economic and psychological models of decision-making assume that the
brain makes these choices by first computing a value for both items and
then comparing the values to select the best option. The exact processes
used to carry out these operations are unknown. We propose a new
model of how the brain makes binary choices. The model is a variant of
the race-to-barrier models of perceptual decision-making with an important modification: visual attention guides the path of integration of the
value signal. The model makes several novel stark predictions about the
relationship between visual attention and choices, and about the performance of the decision-making processes. Among others, it predicts that
there is a first-fixation bias (the first seen item is more likely to be chosen),
a last fixation bias (the last seem item is more likely to be chosen), an
exposure bias (items seem longer are more likely to be chosen), and a leftbias (for Westerners, items placed on the left visual field are more likely
to be chosen). We test the critical assumptions of the model, as well as its
predictions, using eye-tracking in a real choice task in which hungry subjects choose between snacks. The stimuli are presented in the screen
using high-resolution pictures of the food. We find support for the key
components of the model as well as for all of the decision-making biases
listed above.
A25
THE INFLUENCE OF WORKING MEMORY ON ERRORLIKELIHOOD PREDICTION IN THE ANTERIOR CINGULATE
CORTEX Adam Krawitz1, Todd S. Braver2, Joshua W. Brown1; 1Indiana
University, Bloomington, IN, 2Washington University, St. Louis, MO — A
large body of work has shown that anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) participates in cognitive control by modulating the degree to which other
control systems, including working memory, are brought to bear in specific task contexts. Specifically, according to the error-likelihood model
(Brown & Braver, 2005), the magnitude of ACC output in a given situation is proportional to the perceived likelihood of making an error. It
remains unknown whether ACC may use working memory contents to
guide error-likelihood prediction and thus complete a reciprocal loop
between working memory and ACC, as predicted by recent work with
the error-likelihood model. We addressed this by investigating whether
information in working memory is used as context by ACC to inform its
evaluation of error likelihood. In a modified version of the change-signal
task of Brown & Braver (2005), a cue predicting error-likelihood was incidentally encoded into WM by participants in order to perform a secondary task (delayed match-to-sample). Following the cue, a blank-screen
delay period occurred prior to the change-signal trial. Using a rapid
event-related fMRI design with partial trial decomposition, we found an
area of ACC whose response-related activation predicted error-likelihood as indicated by the initial cue, even for trials without errors or
response conflict. This illustrates that information about recent but currently unavailable stimuli, presumably maintained in working memory,
is used by ACC in evaluating error likelihood during task performance.
Supported by: T32 MH019879 and a NARSAD Young Investigator award
to JWB

30

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

A26
DOUBLE DISSOCIATIONS BETWEEN LATERAL AND MEDIAL
FRONTOPOLAR
CORTEX
FOR
MAINTENANCE
AND
MANIPULATION OF INTEGRATED INFORMATION James
Kroger1, Doerte Spring1, Chobok Kim1; 1New Mexico State University — Several functions have been ascribed to frontopolar cortex, including maintenance of multiple response plans, coordination of multiple cognitive acts,
episodic retrieval, and internal generation of information. Does frontopolar cortex mediate complex information not directly involved with
response or action selection? We presented subjects with three kinds of
delayed match-to-sample trial with three white letters arranged in a row,
three letters in three colors and three spatial locations, or only two colored and spatially distributed letters as samples. In the first two, subjects
indicated whether a probe matched the sample. In the third, before the
probe appeared, a “manipulation cue” appeared indicating a position
change and an identity change to be made to the internally maintained
two-latter sample. Significantly greater activation occurred in left frontopolar cortex, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and superior parietal cortex
for the integrated than for the simple three-letter samples. A similar network was observed during manipulation, but with increased frontopolar
activation compared to the three-letter trials. For the integrated three-letter sample, frontal pole was active in the left hemisphere and medial
wall, but not right frontal pole. Manipulation recruited right frontal pole
the most, and left frontal pole, but was suppressed in medial frontal pole.
Thus, 1) simple maintenance of complex integrated information recruits
left and medial frontal pole, 2) manipulation of complex information
recruits right and left frontal pole more than maintenance of information
but is suppressed medially, and 3) right frontal pole is not recruited for
maintenance but is the most involved region during manipulation.
A27
FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY
IN
COORDINATING
INCONGRUENT MEMORY PROCESSES OF DUAL N-BACK
TASKS Bo-Cheng Kuo1, Yei-Yu Yeh1, Anthony J.-W. Chen2, Mark
D’Esposito2; 1National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Helen Wills
Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley — The
prefrontal
cortex (PFC) is thought to be a critical mechanism for coordinating concurrent internal operations and enabling the selection of a task-relevant
response to accomplish a behavioral goal. Such coordination is necessary
in performing dual tasks. Yet, the nature of functional connectivity
engaged in dual-task coordination is unclear. By using a dual-task paradigm and fMRI, we examined functional connectivity during dual-task
coordination. We designed a dual n-back task involving verbal and spatial working memory (WM) and parametrically manipulated the WM
load (n=0, 1, 2) of each task. In the congruent condition, participants performed a verbal n-back and a spatial n-back task with identical WM load
(verbal n = 2 and spatial n = 2). The memory load differed in the incongruent condition (verbal n = 1 and spatial n = 2). The demand on executive control should be higher in the incongruent condition. The analysis
with cognitive subtraction showed greater activation in the right PFC,
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and the left parietal region in the incongruent condition than in the congruent condition. The conjunction analysis also showed the common regions of dual-task conditions in the PFC,
ACC, and the parietal regions. More important, the PFC showed stronger
functional connectivity with the parietal regions in the incongruent condition in contrast to the congruent condition. These results revealed a
critical role of PFC in executive control by providing top-down signals
that guide neural activity in the posterior parietal regions to meet the
behavioral goal in coordinating dual-task processes.
A28
DOPAMINE
FUNCTIONING
PREDICTS
PRESCHOOLERS’
THEORY-OF-MIND DEVELOPMENT Christine Lackner1, Lindsay
Bowman1, Jennie Ito1, Mark Sabbagh1; 1Queen's University — Theory
of
mind is the ability to understand that others have mental states; more
specifically, that others possess knowledge and have goals and intentions

Poster Session A

that may differ from one’s own. Theory of mind shows a stereotypical
developmental timetable whereby major developments occur over the
preschool years. This timetable has been observed in nearly every culture
that has been tested, thereby suggesting a role for neuromaturational
constraints. Recent EEG/ERPresults suggest that one such constraint
might be frontal lobe development. This hypothesis is strengthened by
findings showing that individual differences in marker tasks of frontal
lobe functioning (e.g., executive functioning tasks) predict performance
in theory-of- mind tasks. The neurotransmitter dopamine (DA) is generally thought to play a crucial role in typical frontal lobe development.
Thus, the goal of the present study was to investigate the role that DA
might play in theory-of-mind development. Ninety-one children (48- to
62- months-old) were given a battery of theory-of-mind and executive
functioning tasks along with EEG measurement as part of a larger study.
Because previous research has shown that blink rate is a reliable indicator
of DA functioning in adults and children, we combed children’s EEG
records for blinks and computed their blink rate as average blinks per
minute. Regression analyses showed that blink rate predicted unique
variance in children’s theory-of-mind performance after statistically controlling for the effects of age and performance on executive functioning
tasks. These findings provide preliminary evidence that DA functioning
is associated with theory-of-mind development in the preschool years.
A29
GOING AGAINST YOUR IMPULSE – A FMRI STUDY OF SELFCONTROL IN DECISION MAKING UNDER RISK Grace Lai1, Jack
Grinband1, Elke Weber1, Vincent Ferrera1, Joy Hirsch1; 1Columbia
University — When making decisions that involve risk, people are often
influenced by prior gains and losses. Increased risk-seeking is observed
following prior gains and decreased risk-seeking after losses. We took
advantage of these behavioral tendencies to identify neural mechanisms
of self-control recruited when subjects behaved contrary to their impulsive, or prepotent response after gaining or losing money. Subjects were
informed that they either gained $1, lost $1, or gained/lost nothing and
then prompted to decide whether to gamble or not (bet $1.5 for a 50/50
chance of winning $3.10). As predicted, people gambled more after gains
and less after losses. Responses that went against these behavioral tendencies (e.g. gambling after a loss) were associated with longer reactiontimes and activated brain regions that mediate top-down control, including right inferior frontal gyrus, medial prefrontal cortex, and right
DLPFC. Activity in these regions was correlated with the rarity with
which high-control choices were made, which we used as an index of the
degree of effort needed to overcome the prepotent response. Impulsive
choices, on the other hand, were associated with activity in limbic
regions. Impulsive risk-seeking choices activated vmPFC and medial
OFC, while impulsive risk-averse choices activated the amygdala. Interestingly, high-control choices also showed increased activation in limbic
regions, caudate for high-control risk-averse responses and vmPFC and
lateral OFC for high-control risk-seeking responses. These findings identify a network through which automatically initiated responses can be
overcome through deliberate control, and suggest mechanisms through
which control areas modulate limbic activity in self-control.
A30
CORTICAL AND SUBCORTICAL PROCESSES OF RESPONSE
INHIBITION DURING A STOP SIGNAL TASK C.-S. Ray Li1, Peisi
Yan1, Rajita Sinha1, Tien-Wen Lee1; 1Yale University — Previous
studies
have delineated the cortical processes of motor response inhibition during a stop signal task. Relatively little is known about the subcortical
mechanisms. Here with fMRI of 30 men we showed greater activation in
the subthalamic nucleus (STN) during stop (success or error) compared
to go trials, as did Aron and Poldrack, 2006. However, since a contrast
between stop and go trials involves processes that may be distinguished
from response inhibition, the role of the STN remains to be specified. To
this end we followed an alternative strategy to isolate the neural correlates of response inhibition. We compared individuals with short and

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

long stop signal reaction time (SSRT) as embodied by the horse race
model. The two groups of subjects did not differ in any other aspects of
stop signal performance. We showed greater activity in the short than the
long SSRT group in the left caudate nucleus, during stop successes, as
compared to stop errors. Left caudate activity was positively correlated
with that of the anterior pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA), previously shown to mediate stop signal inhibition (Li et al., 2006, J Neurosci).
Conversely, bilateral thalamic nuclei and other parts of the basal ganglia,
including the STN, showed greater activation in subjects with long than
short SSRT. Thus, fMRI delineated contrasting roles of the prefrontal-caudate and striato-thalamic activities in mediating motor response inhibition. These new results will be discussed along with the role of the
anterior pre-SMA and inferior frontal cortex during stop signal performance.
A31
SPECIFICITY OF ERP ABNORMALITIES DURING RESPONSE
INHIBITION IN ADHD CHILDREN Mario Liotti1, Margaret SemrudClickeman2, Steven R Pliszka3; 1Simon Fraser Unversity, 2University of
Michigan, Lensing, 3UTHSC, San Antonio, TX — Background:
Executive
function and working memory deficits are present both in ADHD and
Reading Disorder (RD). Here, specificity of electrophysiological abnormalities in ADHD-C children during inhibitory control tasks was tested
by comparison with a RD group. Methods: High-density ERPs were
recorded during the Stop Signal Task in 53 children and adolescents
divided in three groups: An ADHD-C group (n=16), a group with RD
(n=14), and an healthy group (n=23). Results: The ADHD-C group displayed smaller right frontal N200 relative to controls, while the RD group
didn’t. Both controls and RD groups showed a success-related right frontal N200 modulation, which was absent in the ADHD group. Finally, the
ADHD group showed smaller frontocentral NoGo- P3 amplitudes in
response to Failed Stops. In contrast, the RD group showed smaller temporoparietal N200s and a more widespread NoGo-P3 deficit, extending
to both Success and Fail Inhibitions. Conclusions: In contrast to ADHD,
RD children appear to have intact response inhibition mechanisms. However, they appear to have a deficit in early orienting to task-relevant stimuli, and a generalized deficit in cognitive control and error monitoring
mechanisms. Significance: This study suggests that common deficits in
executive control and response inhibition in RD and ADHD-C are the
consequence of different underlying abnormalities.
A32
COMPONENTS OF COGNITIVE CONTROL PROCESSES IN
PRESCHOOLERS FROM POOR- AND NON-POOR HOMES
Sebastian Lipina1,2, Soledad Segretin1,2, Julia Hermida1, Sol Benaros1; 1Unidad de
Neurobiologia Aplicada (UNA) CEMIC-CONICET, 2Escuela de Humanidades,
Universidad Nacional de General San Martin (UNSAM) — Working
memory, inhibitory control and planning paradigms, were used to evaluate
executive performance of healthy children (N=208, 3-5 years) from poor
(P) and non-poor (NP) homes. Significant differences were observed
between groups in AnotB (MANOVA, Delay 10”, Correct: NP:6.03±1.66,
P:5.72±1.95, p=0.02, Consecutive: NP:4.01±1.7, P:3.61±1.8, p=0.01), Three
and Four Colors (TFC) (Score1: NP:4.06±1.32, P:1.73±1.06, p<0.01, Score2:
NP:4.05±1.69, P:1.95±1.27, p<0.01), and Tower of London (TOL) (Planning Time: NP:6.85"±2.57, P:5.91"±2.56, p>0.01, Score1: NP:6.67±2.85,
P:6.39±2.84, p=0.01). To identify key components of executive functions
in both groups, data were subjected to two exploratory factor analyses
(Method: principal components, Rotation: Varimax). Stable structures
consisted in a 5-factors model were found in both groups, explaining
73.93% (KMO=0.66) and 72.49% (KMO=0.65) of the variance, respectively. In the NP group AnotB variables were related to Factor 1 (24.69%)
(Correct=0.89; Consecutive=0.92; Perseverative=-0.62; Sets=0.82); TFC
and TOL to Factor 2 (15.92%) (TFC Score1=0.76; TFC Score2=0.71; TOL
Score1=0.91; TOL Score2=0.85); Color Reversal to Factor 3 (14.84%) (Correct=0.71; Blocks=-0.91; Perseverative=0.89); Spatial Reversal to Factor 4
(11.58%) (Correct=0.78; Blocks=-0.84; Perseverative=0.78); and Day/

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

31

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

Night like stroop to Factor 5 (6.89%) (Score1=0.84). In the P group, TFC
and TOL were related to Factor 1 (22.95%) (TFC Score1=0.83; TFC
Score2=0.76; TOL Score1=0.85; TOL Score2=0.82); AnotB to Factor 2
(16.14%)
(Correct=0.76;
Consecutive=0.92;
Perseverative=-0.72;
Sets=0.87); Color Reversal to Factor 3 (14.14%) (Correct=0.75; Blocks=0.88; Perseverative=0.90); Spatial Reversal to Factor 4 (12.15%) (Correct=0.71; Blocks=-0.78; Perseverative=0.85); and Day/Night like stroop
to Factor 5 (7.11%) (Score1=0.87). Results indicate that factorial structures
were similar for both socioeconomic groups, despite their quantitative
differences in performance.
A33
CONFLICT VS. ERROR MONITORING AND ADJUSTMENTS IN
CONTROL Yanni Liu1, William Gehring1; 1University of Michigan — Theories of performance monitoring have tended to assume that monitoring
for response conflict serves the same purpose as monitoring for errors:
adjustments in performance will occur when either is detected. Few studies have tested this assumption. In this study, subjects performed a manual version of the Stroop color-naming task. Three conditions were
included: congruent (CO), where ink color and meaning of the word
were same; stimulus incongruent (SI), where ink color and meaning of
the word were different, but were mapped to the same response;
response incongruent (RI), where the ink color and the meaning of the
color were different and were mapped to two different responses. As in
previous studies, RI trials were responded to more slowly than SI and CO
trials and SI trials were responded to more slowly than CO trials. Subjects
were split into fast and slow groups according to their median reaction
times at the CO condition. The results showed that fast subjects’ performance monitoring was concerned more with overt errors than with conflict, whereas slow subjects monitored more for conflict than for errors.
For example, stimulus- and response-incompatibility effects, the
enhancement of the N450 on RI trials, and the enhancement of the CRN
on SI and RI trials were all greater in the slow subjects than in the fast
subjects. In contrast, post-error slowing and an enhanced CRN following
error trials were present only in the fast subjects. In summary, the data
are consistent with a double dissociation of conflict and error processing.
A34
FMRI INVESTIGATION OF AGENCY IN ADOLESCENTS Melissa
Long1, Paul Eslinger1,2, Jianli Wang3, Jennifer Realmuto1, Jorge Moll4,
Fernandez Moll4, Qing Yang3; 1Penn State College of Medicine, 2Neural and
Behavioral Sciences, Penn State College of Medicine, 3Radiology, Penn State
College of Medicine, 4Hospital D'or Rio de Janeiro Brazil — An
important
component of social behavior concerns intentionality of actions, or
agency. Humans are constantly making judgments and acting accordingly, based on their attribution of agency in social situations. As children
mature, they develop an understanding of shared and distinctive selfother interactions, their role in social settings, and consequences of their
chosen actions. Our objective was to investigate neural activations underlying the effects of agency in a developmental sample of 10 healthy volunteers between 10-17 years of age. The fMRI study was conducted on a
3T MRI scanner with a boxcar fMRI stimulation paradigm consisting of
alternating baseline and experimental activation. Experimental blocks
consisted of written social-moral situations that involved the participant’s intentional action (Agency) or other’s actions (Non-agency), in
contrast to a non-social-moral baseline condition. Functional images were
acquired with an echo planar sequence and data processed with SPM2
software. Significant average activations for the Agency condition were
observed in the frontal polar cortex, bilateral superior frontal cortex,
bilateral temporo-parietal (TP) junction, and the precuneus. Significant
activations for the Non-agency social-moral condition occurred in the
bilateral anterior temporal lobes, frontal polar cortex, left TP, precuneus,
polar occipital, parahippocampus and cerebellum. In contrast analysis,
the Agency condition led to more frontal and paralimbic activations,
whereas the Non-agency condition showed comparatively more posterior activations. Results indicate that in addition to activating social-

32

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

moral knowledge in typically developing adolescents, decisions about
personal actions activates a broader network of frontal-paralimbic structures associated with previous personal event knowledge and social emotions.
A35
TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF FEEDBACK PROCESSING IN THE
DORSAL AND VENTRAL STRIATUM ARE MODULATED BY
LEARNING AND EXPECTANCY Dan Lopez-Paniagua1, Carol A.
Seger1; 1Colorado State University — Previous studies focusing on feedback processing in the striatum have been invaluable for visualizing the
different the neural substrates involved in this network. However, conclusions gleaned from these studies are hindered either by a) limited
scanning time and/or slow, event-related paradigms, precluding the
study of late learning, and b) restricted methods for deconvolving the
BOLD response associated with cognitive feedback. The present study
used a rapid, event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging paradigm to examine how feedback processing in the striatum is modulated
by learning and expectancy using a simple categorization task. On each
trial, subjects were presented with one of six abstract visual stimuli,
pressed a button indicating whether it predicted “rain” or “sun”, then
received feedback as to whether the decision was right or wrong. For the
six stimuli used, four had a probabilistic relationship (half were associated with rain 80% of trials and sun 20% of trials, or vice versa) and two
were on a random reward schedule (50% of trials in each condition).
Moreover, both the delay between response and feedback and the intertrial interval were jittered in order to better visualize the hemodynamic
response associated with feedback processing. Preliminary results show
that early activation of the head of the caudate and ventral striatum associated with positive feedback early on decreased in later stages of learning, especially for probabilistic stimuli. Conversely, activity associated
with negative feedback increased throughout the course of learning and
elicited a greater BOLD response in late stages of learning.
A36
PREPARATION FOR A CROSS-MODAL STROOP TASK Kathy
Low1, Monica Fabiani1, Gabriele Gratton1; 1Beckman Institute, University of
Illinois-Urbana, Champaign — This study investigated brain activity
related to dynamically switching between rules in preparation to attend
to the auditory or visual modality in a cross-modal Stroop task. In a previous study using this paradigm, we recorded brain activity with the
event-related optical signal (EROS) and found modality-specific preparation effects in sensory association areas as well as task general effects
(switch > no switch, independent of modality) in the frontoparietal network. In the present study, we wanted to see whether event-related
potentials (ERPs) could also be used to identify signatures of preparation.
Precues associated with a switch in modality produced a positive shift at
Pz, independent of whether the switch was to the auditory or visual task.
In contrast, early sensory components showed modality-specific effects
(frontal N1 and P2: auditory > visual; occipital-temporal P1 and N1:
visual > auditory), despite the bimodal presentation of the cues. This pattern of both general and modality-specific effects shows good correspondence with our EROS results. A second objective was to see whether this
preparatory activity is related to subsequent success or failure on incongruent trials. During the preparatory period, incorrect trials were associated with an enhanced N2 at fronto-central electrodes and a greatly
reduced contingent negative variation compared to correct trials. Furthermore, the modality-specific effects on the earliest sensory components were not present on trials that ultimately resulted in an error.
Therefore, these data suggest that it may be possible to detect the likelihood of an error well in advance of the commission of an error.
A37
VOXEL-BASED MORPHOMETRY SHOWS TWO NETWORKS
ASSOCIATED WITH ATTENTIONAL CONTROL DYSFUNCTION
ON A FLANKER TASK IN DEMENTIA Tracy L. Luks1, Michael
Oliveria1,3, Katherine Possin2, Anne Bird2, Joel Kramer2; 1University of

Poster Session A

California San Francisco, 2Memory and Aging Center, University of California
San Francisco, 3University of California Merced — Dysfunction of the attentional control system plays an important role in the cognitive deficits
experienced by dementia patients, and in their overall quality of life as
disease progresses. This study investigated the neurobiological basis of
attentional control dysfunction in dementia by determining the effect of
regional brain atrophy on the Flanker Test performance of dementia
patients. Comparing atrophy associated with incongruent condition performance to that associated with congruent condition performance
allowed us to identify regional atrophy specifically associated with
increased conflict processing difficulty, which is an indicator of attentional control dysfunction. We hypothesized that atrophy in Dorsolateral
Prefrontal Cortex (DLPFC) and Anterior Cingulate Cortex (ACC) would
be significantly associated with decreased attentional control. Sixty-five
subjects participated in this study, ranging in age from 44 to 81 years of
age, including patients with a variety of dementia diagnoses and agematched healthy controls. A T1-weighted structural MR was obtained on
a 1.5-T Seimens scanner (MPRAGE, TR/TE/TI = 10/4/300 ms, 1 x 1mm
in-plane and 1.5mm slice resolution). We used Voxel-Based Morphometry (VBM) to measure the relationship between regional grey matter atrophy and attentional control performance on the Flanker Test, measured
by accuracy, and response time in the incongruent relative to congruent
conditions. Two networks were identified. First, there was an association
between DLPFC and ACC atrophy and poorer attentional control accuracy. Second, Temporo-Parietal Junction (TPJ) and Ventrolateral PreFrontal Cortex (VLPFC) atrophy were associated with poorer response
time measures of attentional control on accurate trials.
A38
DIFFERENCES IN EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING MODERATED BY
TRAUMA HISTORY AND SEX Kristen Mackiewicz1, Kirsten Orcutt1,
Marie Banich1,2; 1University of Colorado at Boulder, 2Institute of Cognitive
Science, University of Colorado at Boulder — Studies have demonstrated
alterations in attentional processes in people with Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder (PTSD), but little work has examined other executive functions
in people with PTSD or executive functioning in people with trauma histories and no diagnosis of PTSD. The purpose of this study was to examine whether people with diverse trauma histories and no formal
diagnosis of PTSD demonstrate differential performance on executive
functioning tasks. Undergraduates aged 18-21 completed a computer battery of executive functioning tasks, specifically the classic Stroop task, a
delayed discounting task, and a modified Bechara gambling task, as well
as measures of working memory, cognitive factors, such as dissociation,
and affective factors, such as anxiety. Participants were assigned to one of
four conditions based on their response to a trauma survey completed at
the end of the session: no trauma history, history of non-interpersonal
trauma, men with a history of interpersonal trauma, and women with a
history of interpersonal trauma. The main finding was that performance
on the Stroop task differed between the groups. Furthermore, men and
women with interpersonal trauma histories performed differently on this
task, with women demonstrating better performance than men. Dissociation is explored as a factor that might be contributing to group and gender differences. Performance on the other tasks, cognitive and affective
factors, and working memory, are explored as well. Relationships
between performance on executive functioning tasks and moderators of
performance are examined.
A39
FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING OF DLPFC ACTIVATION
DURING SET SHIFTING IN CHILDREN Kathleen Mak-Fan1,2, Drew
Morris1, Margot J. Taylor1,2; 1Hospital for Sick Children Research Institute,
2University of Toronto — The relation between development of frontal cortex and emergence of behavioural abilities is important for understanding the role of the frontal lobes in cognition. Lesion studies in primates
and neuroimaging studies in adults using set-shifting tasks have provided evidence for critical involvement of the dorsolateral prefrontal cor-

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

tex (DLPFC), and it has been hypothesized that this region would be
similarly important for this aspect of executive function in children. It is
also hypothesized that this would develop as frontal cortex matures during development. The present study examined a set-shifting task in children, in three age ranges (7-8, 9-10, 11-12 years). Using colourful, childfriendly stimuli, the task required a 2-alternative forced choice between
visual stimuli of two dimensions, based on a given rule. Periodically, the
rule changed; shifts were either intradimensional or extradimensional.
Neural activity was measured using functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI). Piloting of the task with 8 adults showed activation in
DLPFC, and also in parietal lobe. The ability to shift between set/dimension was also measured behaviourally using the Cambridge Intradimensional Extradimensional Shift task, and general executive function using
the Test of Everyday Attention for Children (TEAch). It was hypothesized that extradimensional shifts would be associated with activity in
the DLPFC, as seen in adults, but that the pattern of this activation would
become more focal with age, as frontal cortex matures. It was also
hypothesized that the pattern and extent of functional activity would be
correlated with performance on behavioural measures of set shifting and
executive function.
A40
FEEDBACK PRESENTATION TECHNIQUES FOR REAL-TIME
FMRI TRAINING OF HIGHER CORTICAL REGIONS Graeme
McCaig1, Kalina Christoff1; 1University of British Columbia — The
recent
technique of real-time fMRI (rt-fMRI) has been used to train subjects to
modulate activation in a number of brain regions, by providing feedback
from brain activation data simultaneously with acquisition. Regions
examined in the literature include the motor cortex, insula and anterior
cingulate. Rt-fMRI investigations in our laboratory have begun to focus
on higher-level cortical association regions such as the lateral and medial
prefrontal cortex. Rt-fMRI studies typically employ continuously varying
feedback, updated every TR. Such feedback presentation may seem desirable, given that feedback is known to be most useful for learning when it
follows performance with the least temporal delay. However, targeting
higher cortical regions raises challenges for feedback design: accessing
feedback information may divert subjects’ cognitive and attentional
resources away from the task; and attending to the display may encourage brain states that run counter to the task goal. This raises the need to
explore alternative feedback presentation techniques. Such techniques
include: discretising time-course data via thresholding and hysteresis,
adjusting display saliency to remain in the attentional background until
significant changes occur, and displaying multiple time scales in parallel
to allow quick assessment of current or prior performance. In the current
study, subjects were presented with alternate feedback display formats
during rt-fMRI sessions. Verbal reports were collected after each session,
including ratings of the usage and perceived utility of each feedback
method. Results show differences in subjects’ reports of usefulness
regarding display types, as well as variation of usage and preference over
the course of training.
A41
POSTERIOR PARIETAL ACTIVITY AND WORKLOAD CAPACITY
AS
CORRELATES
OF
FREQUENCY
OF
DECEPTIVE
RESPONDING: A BOLD IMAGING STUDY Scott Meek1, Michelle
Phillips1, Laura Baucom1, Jennifer Vendemia1; 1University of South
Carolina — In a study with college-aged students (N=30) using directed
deceptions during a sentence verification task with two stimuli, BOLD
activations in the posterior parietal region were measured. Participants
were assigned to one of three deception percentage conditions (10 participants in each condition). Participants responded deceptively 20, 50, or
80% of the time. Previous Event-Related Potential (ERP) research in our
lab has shown that increased activity in the posterior attention network
(PAN) is related to a decreased preparedness to deceive (Vendemia,
Buzan, Green, & Schillaci, 2006). Based on this, we anticipated an increase
in PAN activity when the percentage of deception trials was low (i.e. less

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

33

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

preparedness to deceive). Specifically, we anticipated BOLD activation in
the posterior parietal region to be negatively correlated with presentation
rate. We also administered neuropsychological tests of workload capacity
(as measured by the CANTAB tests of workload) to every participant.
Previous research in our lab suggests a possible correlation between individual differences in workload capacity and patterns of activity in the
posterior parietal area during deceptive responding (Vendemia, 2003).
The present study sought to further elucidate the existence of this correlation. The findings are discussed as they relate to attentional mechanisms
and decision making during deceptive responses.
A42
CONTROLLING
EPISODIC-ASSOCIATIVE
MEMORY
NEUROFUNCTIONAL
BASICS
AND
AGE-RELATED
DIFFERENCES Franziska Meister1, Thomas Meindl2, Christine Born2,
Maximilian Reiser2, Rolf Engel1, Kristina Fast1; 1Psychiatric Clinic of the
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Germany, 2Institute of Clinical
Radiology of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany — Within
a so-called think/no-think paradigm (subjects have either to remember
or to suppress former studied words) a network model of controlling
one’s own memory by active suppression has been developed: the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex seems to play a crucial role in controlling the hippocampus while retrieving neutral episodic memory contents. On
behavioural level has been detected that words remembered during the
think/no-think phase as well as words that are only learned initially and
retrieved in the end are significantly better stored in memory than words
that should be suppressed. This paradigm has been adapted to examine
behavioral and neurofunctional (fMRI) data of 15 younger and 15 older
healthy adults while completing the think/no-think paradigm. Concerning the behavioural data no suppression effect as predicted by the original study could be replicated in neither of the two groups. However,
there was an executive process during the think/no-think procedure, as
the imaging data suggest. The results indicate a prefrontal network of
cognitive control within the sample of young participants similar to
former findings. By dividing the elderly subjects into two groups, the
high-performing elderly showed a frontal network comparable to the
younger ones with a dedifferentiation concerning the relevant regions
activated. The low-performing elderly showed no frontal activation at all
at a comparable significance threshold. Therefore, the results of the presented study are in accordance with former studies to frontal compensation and beginning dysfunction during healthy aging and give reason to
further aging research related to cognitive control.
A43
TEMPORAL SENSITIVITY OF THE STROOP COLOR-WORD
INTERFERENCE EFFECT Karen Meyerhoff1, L. Gregory Appelbaum1,
Marty Woldorff1; 1Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University — Previous studies of the Stroop color-word interference task have shown that
subjects are slower to discriminate the physical color of a word-stimulus
when the word meaning is incongruent versus congruent. The incongruency also elicits characteristic frontocentral event-related potentials
(ERPs), thought to reflect the processing of conflicting stimulus information. We investigated the temporal dependence of Stroop-related interference by manipulating the relative timing of color and word attributes
while recording both behavioral measures and ERPs. Participants discriminated the physical color of a bar that framed the presentation of a
color word (e.g. “RED”). The bar and word elements were presented at
five relative offsets: No-Delay, Bar-First (100 and 200 ms prior to word),
and Word-First (100 and 200 ms prior to color-bar). Stroop-related behavioral interference, measured as longer reaction times for incongruent than
congruent trials, decayed with greater temporal offset between the two
elements when the color-bar was presented first, and grew with greater
offset when the word was presented first. The ERPs in the No-Delay condition showed the characteristic Stroop interference frontocentral negativity peaking at ~450 ms, followed by a positive deflection peaking at
~900 ms. Varying the temporal synchronicity of the Stroop elements

34

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

resulted in a monotonic shift in the peak latency of the incongruentminus-congruent difference wave, as well as modulations of the difference amplitudes. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that the
introduction of temporal offsets between conflicting stimulus elements
results in a nonlinear scaling of neural mechanisms that mediate the
detection and resolution of stimulus conflict.
A44
IS MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX NECESSARY FOR THE
SENSATION OF MENTAL EFFORT? Mandana Modirrousta1, Lesley K.
Fellows1; 1McGill University, Montreal Neurological Institute — The sensation of mental effort is one aspect of cognitive performance monitoring,
and may be important in optimal decision-making and executive control.
Several lines of evidence indicate that medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC)
participates in ‘effortful’ tasks, but the precise role of this sector remains a
matter of debate. A recent case report suggested that dorsal mPFC damage can disrupt the sensation of mental effort, such as that experienced
while performing incongruent trials of the Stroop task (Naccache et al.,
2005). We followed up this report in a larger group of subjects with damage to mPFC including anterior cingulate cortex. The patients, and 16
demographically-matched control subjects, completed a modified version of the Stroop task. In the first block, subjects performed a congruent
and an incongruent trial (in random order), and were asked to judge
which of the two trials felt more “effortful”. In a second control block,
they were asked to indicate which trial was incongruent. Effort sensation
estimation was considered accurate if the trial said to be most effortful in
a given pair was the trial with the longer RT. Overall, patients did not differ significantly from controls in Stroop task performance. Both groups
performed better than chance in correctly evaluating mental effort (CTL:
74 (10)%; mPFC: 67 (13)%), and performance did not differ significantly
between groups. Both groups correctly identified the incongruent stimulus in over 90% of trials. These findings argue against a necessary role for
mPFC in the conscious sensation of mental effort.
A45
INTER-STIMULUS JITTER LEADS TO IMPROVEMENTS IN
MOTOR RESPONSE INHIBITION Stewart H. Mostofsky1,2, Ericka L.
Wodka1,2, Daniel J. Simmonds1, E. Mark Mahone1,2; 1Kennedy Krieger
Institute, Baltimore, MD, 2Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD — Inter-stimulus jitter (ISJ) is the randomization of the
interval between successive stimulus events. While ISJ is often necessary
in event-related fMRI, it is unclear how ISJ affects performance. We
examined effects of ISJ on performance (reaction time, variability, errors)
on four go/no-go tasks differing in ISJ around a standard interstimulus
interval (ISI; 1000 ms). Participants included 31 healthy adults (mean
age=27.8, range 18-40). Four go/no-go tasks incorporated an overlearned
stimulus-response association (green = go, red = no-go), so that cognitive
demands extraneous to response selection/inhibition were minimized.
Each task was presented in two 3-minute blocks of 150 trials each (80%
"go", 20% "no-go"). The tasks were the same except for ISJ: The 0% jitter
had a fixed (1000ms) ISI, the 10% jitter range was 900-1100ms, the 30% jitter range was 700-1300ms, and the 50% jitter range was 500-1500ms.
Repeated measures MANOVA revealed a main effect for ISJ on reaction
time F(2,25)=8.3, p<.01 and commission errors F(2,23)=2.9, p<.05; a linear
relationship was observed for reaction time (positive slope) and a quadratic relationship was observed for commission errors (10% jitter best
performance). The findings suggest that in healthy adults, motor inhibitory control is optimized by small increases in ISJ (around 10%); this
occurs at the expense of RT, which slows with increasing jitter. The more
deliberate and controlled responding observed with jitter may reflect
increased baseline recruitment of premotor circuits important for
response preparation and selection; this may have important treatment
implications for disorders, such as ADHD, associated with impaired
inhibitory control.

Poster Session A

A46
NEURALLY DISSOCIATING OUTCOMES INTO EFFECT AND
VALUE COMPONENTS O'Dhaniel
Mullette-Gillman1,2,
Scott
1,2,3
1
Huettel
; Duke University,Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, 2Duke
University/Brain Imaging and Analysis Center, 3Duke University — Numerous studies have examined how humans and other animals learn actionreward contingences. Learning these contingencies may have many components – from understanding how an action leads to an outcome to
learning what outcomes are rewarding – which may in turn reflect multiple underlying mechanisms. Many behaviors suggest this dissociation,
such as satiety, where the valuation of a physical effect changes over
time, and observational learning, in which the observer gains information
about the effects of an action without full access to its value. To identify
brain regions that are involved in the construction and modification of
action-outcome and outcome-reward relations, independently, we developed a novel reward-learning task. Subjects performed a two-alternative
forced-choice task in which both the mappings of actions (button presses)
to outcomes (openings of reward chests on the screen) and the mappings
of outcomes to rewards (how much money was in each chest) changed
frequently and unexpectedly. While subjects were engaged in this task,
we collected functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data using an
inverse spiral pulse sequence in a 4T scanner. We matched action-outcome and outcome-reward changes according to the evoked changes in
responses, to control for behavioral confounds. We found that action-outcome changes evoke greater activation in regions associated with executive control, even when the associated behaviors are equivalent. These
results suggest that engagement of control during learning may depend
not just on the needed behavioral changes, but on the specific type of
learning that is required.
A47
DOES
EXERCISE
IMPROVE
EXECUTIVE
COGNITIVE
FUNCTIONING
IN
THE
ELDERLY?
A
RANDOMIZED
CONTROLLED TRIAL FMRI STUDY Lindsay
Nagamatsu1,
Todd
Handy1, Teresa Liu-Ambrose1; 1The University of British Columbia — Executive cognitive function has been known to decline with age, but it has
been shown that one useful intervention in overcoming this deterioration
is aerobic exercise. Because not all seniors are physically able to engage in
aerobic exercise, we were interested in investigating whether resistance
training would show similar benefits in terms of preventing cognitive
decline. The primary aim of this research was to investigate whether regular weight training would improve executive cognitive functioning in
seniors. 84 women aged 65 to 75 participated in a six-month randomized
controlled trial. Participants were randomly assigned to one of three conditions: resistance training once per week, twice per week, or no resistance training (control). Participants had their brain images recorded in
an fMRI scanner while they completed the Erickson flanker task. They
were instructed to keep their eyes at central fixation and respond to an
arrow in the center of the screen while ignoring distracter arrows in the
periphery, which were either congruent or incongruent with the center
arrow. Assessments were done at two time periods: baseline and 6
months. Performance on the task for each participant was compared
between measurements taken at baseline and at 6 months. Results were
then compared for each of the three groups. We found evidence consistent with the hypothesis that weight training can improve executive cognitive functioning in seniors. These findings have implications for
improving daily functioning in adults in our aging population.
A48
CONFLICT ADAPTATION PROCESSES IN A COMBINED SIMONGO/NOGO-PARADIGM Roland Nigbur1,2, Birgit Stürmer1; 1Humboldt
University Berlin, 2Berlin School of Mind & Brain — In an electrophysiological study we investigated whether different types of cognitive conflicts
trigger distinct adaptation processes in the upcoming trial. Therefore, a
Simon task was combined with NoGo trials. Overall RTs were prolonged
in trials following NoGos and errors. Moreover, the preceding trial type

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

affected the Simon effect: The 75-ms Simon effect after a compatible Go
was reduced to 29-ms after an incompatible Go. Errors and NoGo predecessors reduced the Simon effect with 46 ms and 50 ms, respectively, to a
much lesser extent. NoGo trials elicited a fronto-central negativity peaking between 228 - 240 ms post-stimulus (N2) independent of the predecessor´s trial type. In order to relate the extent of adaptation with N2
measures participants were classified as being strong or weak adaptators
depending on their RT benefit for incompatible trials after a preceding
incompatible trial. Relating this RT benefit to N2 measures revealed that
strong adaptators showed a left frontal N2 for incompatible compared to
compatible trials only after a preceding compatible trial. Whereas weak
adaptators showed a medio-frontal N2 when comparing incompatible trials for divers predecessors. To conclude, incompatible Simon trials trigger adaptation processes that differ from those after NoGo trials and
errors. Moreover, this adaptation processes affect the Simon effect differentially and are correlated with disparate N2 scalp topographies. Adaptation mechanisms of underlying neurocognitive networks will be
discussed.
A49
CONFLICTING LEVELS OF AWARENESS: DISTINGUISHING
SUBLIMINAL, PRECONSCIOUS AND CONSCIOUS PRIMING
EFFECTS IN THE ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX Redmond
O'Connell1, Robert Hester1, Jason Mattingley1, Mark Wakabayashi1, Mark
Bellgrove1; 1School of Psychology, Queensland Brain Institute, University of
Queensland, Australia — The extent to which top-down performance
monitoring processes are consciously driven is not well understood.
Dehaene et al (2006) have argued for a distinction between subliminal
processing, in which a stimulus does not reach consciousness due to
weak signal strength, and preconscious processing in which a visible
stimulus fails to reach consciousness due to inattention. Adopting this
model, our fMRI study investigated the extent to which the anterior cingulate (ACC) conflict response is dependent upon conscious appraisal of
the conflicting stimulus. Fifteen neurologically healthy participants were
presented with a series of trials containing a masked number (the prime)
followed by a readily visible target number. Participants responded
according to whether the target number was greater or less than 5 and
response conflict was generated by incongruence between the prime and
target. In order to compare subliminal and conscious processing the
prime stimulus was presented for six different durations (20-120ms) and
subjective ratings of visibility were acquired after each trial. In the second
experiment we contrasted preconscious and conscious conflict effects.
Participants performed the same task but with prime duration fixed at a
length that was reliably above detection threshold. To capture attention
away from the prime, a pattern of symmetrical distracter stimuli was presented in the periphery at the time of prime onset. Again ratings of visibility were acquired after each trial. In light of previous imaging data we
predict that the ACC conflict response will be evident following preconscious and conscious prime detection but not following subliminal prime
presentation.
A50
NEURAL CORRELATES OF ACTIVATION AND INHIBITION
COMPONENTS OF COGNITIVE CONTROL. Chrystele
Ody1,
Etienne Koechlin2; 1Columbia University, New York, 2Institut National de la
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Université Pierre
et Marie Curie, Paris, France — Flexibility of behavior is given by the ability to switch between several task-sets, each associated with a specific
context and attributing a particular response to a given stimulus. Previous studies have shown that task-set selection can occur in preparation of
as well as in reaction to stimulus occurrence, and that it relies crucially on
the posterior part of the lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC). However, little
is known about how task-set selection is achieved and, more particularly,
which are the respective contributions of activating the relevant task-set
and of inhibiting irrelevant ones. In the present study, we separate activation and inhibition components of task-set selection by using an experi-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

35

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

mental protocol mixing three task-sets and varying between trials
subjects’ foreknowledge about the subsequent task-set. A behavioral
experiment including 18 subjects showed that task preparation, as well as
task-repetition, improves reaction times. Moreover, we showed that even
without foreknowledge of the subsequent task-set, knowledge about
what task-set is irrelevant also improves reaction times, suggesting that
task inhibition is a significant component of cognitive control. An fMRI
study using the same protocol will reveal the neural bases of these subcomponents of task-set selection.

Memory: Other
A51
THE NEURAL RESPONSE WHEN TELLING APART REALITY
FROM FICTION Anna Abraham1, D.Yves von Cramon1, Ricarda Schubotz1;
1
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences — Narratives
and storytelling occupy an integral part of our daily lives. Although we
can readily assimilate all kinds of information about our real world as
well as fictional worlds, we rarely lose sight of what is real and what is
fictional. We carried out an fMRI study to explore the neural correlates
underlying our implicit knowledge of such distinctions by having participants evaluate reality-based scenarios that involved either real or fictional characters. Processing scenarios involving real people engaged
regions associated with episodic memory retrieval and self-referential
thinking. In contrast, areas known to be involved in executive processes
during semantic memory retrieval were activated when processing scenarios with fictional characters. One of the means by which we tell reality
apart from fiction, at least in the explicit context of reality testing, hence
lies in the manner in which such information is coded and accessed. Fiction, relative to reality, appears to be represented in factual terms,
whereas our representations of reality, relative to fiction, are coded in
subjective terms. The findings suggest that the degree of associated selfrelevance with a concept plays a role in modulating our understanding of
the relative difference between reality and fiction.
A52
HIPPOCAMPAL
ACTIVITY
DURING
THE
EPISODIC
SIMULATION OF SPECIFIC FUTURE EVENTS: A ROLE FOR
RELATIONAL PROCESSING Donna Rose Addis1,2, Karen F. Gold1,
Theresa Cheng1, Daniel L. Schacter1,2; 1Harvard University, 2Athinoula A.
Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging — Recent studies have demonstrated hippocampal contributions to imagining future events. We
reported that while the left hippocampus was active during the construction of both past and future events, right hippocampus (RHC) was specifically engaged by the construction of future events. This fMRI study
sought to (1) replicate RHC activity specific to future event construction;
(2) determine whether this effect generalizes across specific and generic
future events; and (3) investigate whether RHC activity reflects increased
relational processing (recombining details) or the novelty of future
events. Participants constructed either a specific (unique) or a generic
(routine) past or future event in response to a cue, made a button press,
and then generated details. Each event was rated for level of detail and
novelty. We replicated our previous finding of increased RHC activity
during construction of future relative to past events. An ROI analysis also
revealed that specific events engage RHC more than generic events.
However, these effects were driven by a significant interaction of temporal direction (past, future) and specificity (specific, generic), such that
specific future events engaged RHC significantly more than other conditions, including generic future events. Correlational analyses showed that
RHC activity during the construction of specific future events was significantly correlated with the level of detail generated; subjects who generated higher amounts of detail exhibited higher levels of RHC activity. In
contrast, novelty did not correlate significantly with RHC activity. These

36

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

findings further demonstrate the involvement of hippocampus and relational processing in the episodic simulation of specific future events.
A53
EVALUATION OF MEMORY, DISABILITY AND PSYCHOLOGICAL
DISTURBANCES IN IRAQI MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS PATIENTS
Eman Al-Khateeb1; 1University of Jordan — Background: Cognitive impairment is a recognizable aspect of multiple sclerosis (MS), memory is
impaired at an early stage of the disease, besides MS is associated with
variable degrees of disability, this greatly affects patients mood through
the course of the disease. Patients and methods: Sixty relapsing remitting
multiple sclerosis patients where recruited from MS clinic, Baghdad
teaching Hospital and matched to forty controls for demographic variables. Rey auditory verbal learning test (RAVLT) was used for memory
assessment, for disability assessment the pain disability index was used
(PDI), and hospital anxiety and depression scale (HADS) was used to
assess psychological aspect of the MS patients. Results: RAVLT results
indicate statistically significant difference between MS and control group
in the 1st recall trial, proactive interference and recognition memory (hits
and correct rejections). Impaired recall memory was reported in 18.03%
of MS patients and impaired recognition memory in 30% of them. Major
disabilities were in recreation, family/home responsibilities social activity and occupation. The mean of PDI for all activities was 3.628 ± 0.318
(mean ± S.E), HADS shows 55 % of MS patients suffers anxiety and 63 %
suffers depression. Euphoria was also reported in many patients despite
the disability and the pain. Conclusion: It was concluded that Iraqi MS
patients suffer impaired immediate memory and some sort of impaired
verbal long term memory. Higher disability score were obtained in certain domains while less scores in others (sexual behavior, self care and
life support activity) denial may play a role in reducing the score of these
items. Besides mood disturbance was reported in higher percentage than
it might be for biological, social and psychological factors.
A54
MENSTRUAL PHASE MODULATES THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN CORTISOL AND MEMORY CONSOLIDATION Joseph
Andreano1, Larry Cahill1; 1Center for the Neurobiology Of Learning and
Memory, University of California, Irvine — There is significant evidence to
suggest that post-training activation of receptors for glucocorticoids such
as cortisol, both centrally and peripherally, can have an enhancing effect
on memory (Roozendaal 2002). Recent findings have also indicated sexrelated differences in glucocorticoid effects on conditioning (Zorawski et.
al, 2005), as well as declarative memory consolidation (Andreano &
Cahill, 2006) and retrieval (Wolf et. al, 2001). Specifically, while significant relationships between cortisol levels and memory have been found
in men, no such relationship has been identified in women. One possible
explanation for these findings would be that ovarian hormones alter the
memory modulatory effects of stress, either by affecting the amount of
glucocorticoid release, or by altering the receptivity of target tissues. If
this were the case, then one would expect stress hormones to differentially relate to memory depending on estradiol and progesterone levels.
To test this hypothesis, the relationship between cortisol and episodic
recall was examined in three groups of healthy, naturally cycling women,
selected by their menstrual position for maximal sex hormone contrast.
Results indicated significantly different correlations between cortisol and
memory for each menstrual phase, with no relationship in the early follicular phase, a negative relationship in the late follicular phase, and a
highly significant positive relationship seen in the mid-luteal phase.
These findings suggest that ovarian hormones affect the modulation of
memory by stress in women.

Poster Session A

A55
PREDICTING ONESELF IN THE FUTURE: CONTRIBUTIONS
FROM TWO SEPARATE BUT INTERACTING BRAIN SYSTEMS.
Jessica Andrews-Hanna1,2, Renee Poulin1,2, Randy Buckner1,2,3; 1Harvard
University, 2Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, 3Howard
Hughes Medical Institute — Accumulating evidence suggests that a core
network is recruited when envisioning the future (Buckner & Carroll,
2007; Schacter & Addis, 2007; Hassabis & Maguire, 2007). Functional connectivity MRI further reveals that the core network consists of at least two
interacting subsystems: the medial temporal system (hippocampal formation, retrosplenial cortex, posterior cingulate, intraparietal lobe, and
ventral medial prefrontal cortex) and the medial prefrontal cortex system
(dorsal medial prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate, and the temporoparietal junction) (Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter, 2008). The present
study systematically explored the component processes that these two
subsystems contribute to prediction by manipulating whether a decision
required (1) reference to oneself and (2) prediction of the future. During
fMRI, 38 participants (15 male, mean age = 22.2) answered questions
varying self-relevance (SELF vs. SEMANTIC) and temporal distance
(FUTURE vs. PRESENT) in a 2x2 design. Rest data were also acquired for
functional connectivity analyses. After scanning, participants indicated
the degree to which each decision required mental imagery and self-projection. Self-projection varied markedly between the SELF and SEMANTIC conditions while imagery was held relatively constant. Providing
evidence for distinct functional contributions of the two subsystems, the
medial temporal system was more active for FUTURE than PRESENT
decisions emphasizing its role in predicting novel event scenarios. In contrast, the dorsal medial prefrontal system was more active for SELF than
SEMANTIC decisions suggesting a role in self-referential processes. Making predictions about oneself in the future yielded joint recruitment of
both systems suggesting the utility for the two systems’ close interactions.
A56
ESTABLISHING CONDITIONED PLACE PREFERENCES IN
HUMANS USING COCAINE AND NICOTINE Robert Astur1,2, Seth
Shipman1, Heather Breslawski1, Shepard Seigel3, Skip Rizzo4, Robert Malison2;
1
Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center, Harford Hospital, CT, 2Yale School of
Medicine / New Haven, CT, 3McMaster University / Hamilton, ON, 4Institute
for Creative Technologies / University of Southern California — It is important to examine how to minimize the cravings that occur when people are
exposed to environments where they previously abused substances.
Within rodent research, this is studied using a conditioned place preference (CPP) paradigm, whereby a specific environment is paired with a
positive reinforcer such as cocaine, alcohol, sex, or food, and via classical
conditioning, it is evident that a preference exists for this environment in
the absence of the reinforcer. To study this phenomenon, we have created
a virtual analogue of the CPP to examine whether such a preference can
be established in a virtual reality environment. In this study, 10 non-treatment seeking cocaine abusers and 12 nicotine smokers were given
repeated pairings of cocaine or nicotine, respectively, in one specific virtual environment, and a placebo in a different virtual environment.
Before and after the pairings, the subjects were allowed unrestricted
access to both environments without any drug.We also collected data on
how much the participants enjoyed their laboratory drug use and also
how negative they felt about their overall drug use. On the test day, there
was individual variability about whether or not a CPP existed. However,
if we integrate the drug use enjoyment data and their overall drug use
feelings, there is a 0.72 correlation between our CPP prediction strength
and the actual CPP. Hence, we can establish a CPP in humans using
cocaine or nicotine, and we are now poised to assess whether interventions can block CPP in humans.

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

A57
OSCILLATORY
BRAIN
ACTIVITY
ASSOCIATED
WITH
VOLUNTARY CONTROL OF CONSCIOUS RECOLLECTION
Zara Bergström1, Jan De Fockert1, Simon Hanslmayr2, Karl-Heinz Bäuml2, Alan
Richardson-Klavehn3,1; 1Goldsmiths, University of London, UK, 2University of
Regensburg, Germany, 3University of Magdeburg, Germany — We
investigated the oscillatory dynamics of brain processes involved in voluntary
control of recollection in a series of experiments. Participants were
trained on word-pairs, and were subsequently presented with the first
word of each pair and asked to either recollect or to completely avoid recollection of the associate. Electroencephalographic (EEG) data recorded
at the time of recollection control revealed a number of significant differences between conditions in oscillatory power and synchrony in both low
and high frequency bands. Across experiments, the strongest effects were
found in the lower beta band (~15-20 Hz) where avoiding recollection
was associated with a sustained suppression (or event-related desynchronization, ERD) of beta power. The effect emerged around the same time
that recollection related EEG effects typically take place (500-700 ms poststimulus) and lasted for the duration of the epoch, up to 2.5 seconds poststimulus. The beta ERD was specifically enhanced when participants
were trying to avoid recollection of a demonstrably learned associate
memory, compared to when the associated memory had not been learned
in the first place. This finding suggests that beta ERD indexed a neurocognitive process that was specifically engaged during efforts to prevent a learned memory from intruding into consciousness. Although beta
frequency effects have typically been associated with motor rather than
purely cognitive functions, recent studies have related beta ERD to effortful working memory processes. Our results therefore suggest that recollection control engaged executive control mechanisms to keep unwanted
memories out of consciousness on an item-by-item basis.
A58
SUPPRESSING NEGATIVE VERSUS NEUTRAL MEMORIES: THE
EFFECTS
OF
EMOTION
ON
ACTIVATION
IN
THE
HIPPOCAMPUS & AMYGDALA Andrew Butler1, Karin James1;
1Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana — To further understand the
relationship between emotion, memory, and cognitive control an eventrelated fMRI study comparing the suppression of recall of negative versus neutral words was performed. The hippocampus is crucial for memory retrieval showing greater activation during successful explicit recall
(Eldridge et al, 2000). Further, it has been demonstrated that hippocampal activation decreases when subjects intentionally suppress the recall of
neutral words (Anderson et al, 2004). Here we test whether the hippocampus is generally less activated during memory suppression or if emotional significance of an event has an influence. Subjects first learned
forty word pairs each consisting of a cue and target. Half of the words
were neutral (low arousal and intermediate valance), and half were negative (high arousal and negative valence). During scanning subjects were
shown the cue words, and were instructed to recall or suppress the targets. We show for the first time that relative bilateral hippocampal deactivation occurs during the suppression of memory for neutral but not
negative words. Further, the left amygdala along with visual cortex
showed greater activation during the suppression of negative compared
to neutral memories. Reactivation in these emotional and sensory related
areas may play a role in the sustained or enhanced activation of the hippocampus during attempts at suppressing negative memories. These
results may represent the neural correlates of the diminished ability to
suppress the recollection of negatively charged memories, a phenomenon
that we have all experienced and that can be life threatening in disorders
such as Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD).

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

37

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

A59
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SPATIAL NAVIGATION UNDER
DIRECTIONAL AND POSITIONAL CUE CONDITIONS Xiaoqian J.
Chai1,2, Lucia F. Jacobs1, John D.E. Gabrieli2; 1University of California,
Berkeley, 2Massachusetts Institute of Technology — Previous studies on the
neural correlates of spatial navigation have not considered how different
aspects of the environment are processed during navigation. In this study
we manipulate two distinct classes of cues, directional (global, compass)
cues and positional (local landmark) cues. Directional cues include gradient (graded information) and distant objects, whereas positional cues are
proximal objects which provide accurate position of the target. Animal
studies suggest that different cue types are represented by different parts
of the medial temporal lobe (MTL). Here, we use fMRI to examine brain
activations during navigation in 3D virtual environments with either
directional or positional cues. The directional cue environments are composed of a test arena located on a hill and a river down the hill. In the
positional cue environments, the test arena is situated on a flat terrain
and positional cues such as rocks and small plants are located within the
arena. For each cue condition, 3 trial types are presented in a block
design: encoding, retrieval and control. In the encoding trials, subjects are
given 30 seconds to explore the arena and remember the location of a visible target. After a delay of 16 seconds, the retrieval trial follows in which
the target is invisible and the subject tries to navigation to the location of
the target. In the control trial, subjects follow a trail in the same environment. Preliminary data suggest better performance under the positional
cue condition, and the two cue conditions activate different areas of the
MTL, including the hippocampus.
A60
CONTEXT LEARNING DURING SKILL ACQUISITION Matthew
Crossley1, John Ennis1, Greg Ashby1; 1University of California, Santa
Barbara — Single-unit recordings in monkeys show that some neurons in
the striatum exhibit category-specific responding following categorization training (e.g., Merchant, Zainos, Hernadez, Salinas, & Romo, 1997,
Journal of Neurophysiology). After this same training however, passive
exposure to these stimuli (i.e., in which the animal does not respond and
receives no reward) elicits no response from these same cells. We propose
that this dramatic difference is mediated by the tonically active neurons
(TANs) of the striatum. A biologically detailed computational model is
described in which the TANs mediate learning of context during skill
acquisition tasks that depend on procedural learning. In particular, in
non-rewarding environments the TANs tonically inhibit the medium
spiny cells of the striatum, but in environments in which rewards are
available, the TANs learn to release the medium spiny cells from this
tonic inhibition. The model accounts for the results of a number of singleunit recording studies, including those of Merchant et al. (1997). It also
accounts for several important behavioral phenomena, including for
example, that reacquisition following extinction is faster than original
acquisition.
A61
DISSOCIATING THE “RECOLLECTION” AREAS OF THE BRAIN:
EFFECTS OF RETRIEVAL DELAY Sander M. Daselaar1, Willem
Huijbers1, Cyriel M.A. Pennartz1; 1Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences,
University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands — A small group of brain regions
has been consistently implicated in episodic recollection, the vivid
remembering of episodes including contextual details. These regions
include posterior hippocampus, retrosplenial cortex, inferior parietal cortex (IPC), and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC). Despite these consistent findings, the functional roles of these regions remain poorly
understood. Given that recollection-based memory leads to high-confidence retrieval decisions, it is still unclear whether activity in these
regions reflects the episodic, long-term nature of the memory, or is
merely associated with retrieval confidence. In order to distinguish
between these alternatives, we manipulated study-test delays within the
context of a continuous recognition task during fMRI-scanning. The

38

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

design was based on the assumption that recognition responses after
short retrieval delays will be easy (high-confidence) but rely primarily on
the short-term memory buffer, whereas responses after long delays will
be difficult (low-confidence) but will rely almost exclusively on longterm episodic memory. In line with our behavioral predictions, successful
recognition responses were more accurate and faster for the short than
for the long delays. Interestingly, the fMRI results indicated opposite levels of activity as a function of retrieval delay in the recollection-related
regions: hippocampus and retrosplenial cortex showed increased activity
with longer delays, whereas IPC and VLPFC showed the opposite pattern. These findings support the idea that IPC and VLPFC are involved in
decision-related retrieval processes rather than remembering based on
long-term memory retrieval. To our knowledge, this is the first study to
reveal a cross-over dissociation among the “recollection” areas of the
brain.
A62
NEURODEVELOPMENTAL
CORRELATES
OF
MEMORY
RETRIEVAL: AN FMRI STUDY Dana DeMaster1, Simona Ghetti1;
1
University of California, Davis — Recent studies indicate a developmental dissociation between recollection (i.e., the process supporting retrieval
of qualitative detail about an event) and familiarity (i.e., the process supporting recognition of the event in the absence of qualitative detail).
Behavioral results suggest that when information is processed semantically, familiarity stabilizes during childhood, whereas recollection continues to develop throughout adolescence (Ghetti & Angelini, 2008). Our
previous imaging results suggest that at encoding activity in the hippocampus and posterior parahippocampal gyrus is specifically associated
with subsequent recollection in adults and that this pattern becomes
increasingly evident with age. In younger ages (8 year-olds), hippocampal activity is associated with both subsequent recollection and familiarity. Activation in the anterior parahippocampal cortex appears to be
associated with subsequent familiarity across ages. However, whether
similar developmental dissociations are observed during retrieval is currently unknown. In this study, children age 8- to 11-years old and adults
participate in an fMRI study. At encoding participants view drawings
presented in association with a frame of variable color. During fMRI data
acquisition, participants complete a self-paced recognition test on studied
drawings and new drawings. Participants indicate either the color of the
frame associated with the item, or, that the item is new. Behavioral results
confirm age-related improvements in our index of recollection but not in
that of familiarity. Consistent with our encoding results, we predict that
with age the hippocampus will be more specifically activated for recollection judgments. In contrast, across ages the anterior parahippocampal
cortex is expected to be involved in familiarity judgments.
A63
BRAIN-DERIVED
NEUROTROPHIC
FACTOR
VAL66MET
POLYMORPHISM AND HIPPOCAMPAL ACTIVATION DURING
EPISODIC ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL TASKS Nancy Dennis1,
Roberto Cabeza1, Anna Need2, Sheena Waters1, David Goldstein2, Kevin
LaBar1; 1Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, 2Institute for
Genomic Science and Policy, Duke University — A single nucleotide polymorphism in the targeting region of the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene (Val66Met) has been associated with a variety of
cognitive and affective functions in healthy and clinical populations.
Whereas several studies have implicated Met carriers with abnormal hippocampal volume and impaired episodic memory, others have shown
protective neurocognitive effects of the Met allele or exacerbated effects
in the elderly or clinical populations relative to controls. In the present
study, we re-examined the functional role of BDNF allelic variation on
medial temporal lobe activation during episodic encoding and retrieval
tasks in healthy young adults. The first task was a direct replication of
Hariri et al. (2003), which investigated encoding and retrieval of pictures
using a blocked fMRI design. The second task was an event-related fMRI
study of relational memory encoding and retrieval in which faces were

Poster Session A

studied in background scene contexts. Across both tasks and genotype
subgroups, significant hippocampal and/or parahippocampal activity
was found during encoding and retrieval. However, preliminary analysis
suggests that the Met carriers exhibited greater activation in these regions
than the homozygous Val/Val participants, despite having equivalent
memory performance. These group effects were consistent across both
tasks and stand in opposition to the results of Hariri et al. (2003). Differences in behavioral performance across studies are discussed as a possible reason to explain the discrepant findings.
A64
NEURONAL CORRELATES OF METAMEMORY: A FUNCTIONAL
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING STUDY Anne Do Lam1, Tilo
Kircher1, Siegfried Gauggel1, Susanne Weis1; 1University Hospital Aachen,
Germany — Metamemory pertains to monitoring and control of own
memory performance. Due to existing neuroimaging research, the neuronal correlates of metacognitive processing of memory processes are
suggested to be localized in the frontal cortex. The frontal cortex performs monitoring and controlling functions during encoding and
retrieval. Encoding and retrieval processes per se, seem to be determined
by functions localized in the medial temporal lobe. This study examined
the neuronal correlates of metamemory in 16 healthy subjects
(Mage=24.8; SD=4.75). The main focus was on monitoring which was
measured by judgments of learning (JOLs) during the encoding phase.
Subjects studied face-name-associations and provided JOLs immediately
after an item has been studied (“immediate JOLs”) or after a delay
(“delayed JOLs”). Additionally, the names of the to-be-studied associations had to be retrieved during the ongoing experiment. The comparison
of the neuronal correlates of subjective and objective memory performance revealed a dissociation of frontal and medial temporal areas. The
functions of metamemory were associated with bilateral medial frontal
activations, as opposed to the memory retrieval which was associated
with activations of medial temporal areas, especially of the hippocampus.
Furthermore, delayed JOLs were associated with increased activation of
occipital, medial temporal and frontal areas of the left hemisphere.
According to the “delayed JOL”-effect, JOLs which are made after a delay
show increased accuracy as compared to immediate JOLs. The results of
our study support the “monitoring-dual-memories”-hypothesis as
explanatory approach of the “delayed JOL”-effect. According to this
hypothesis, both short-term and long-term memories are monitored during delayed JOLs.
A65
MEMORY PERFORMANCE AND STEREOTYPE THREAT ACROSS
NORMAL AGING Teal Eich1, Barbara Knowlton1, Alan Castel1;
1
University of California, Los Angeles — Stereotype threat (ST) arises from
the risk of confirming a negative stereotype about the group to which a
person belongs (Steele & Aronson, 1995), and leads to suboptimal performance consistent with the negative stereotype. The current study investigated the ST of memory loss in older adults by testing both implicit and
explicit memory in a threat condition and a neutral, no-threat condition.
Subjects were healthy older adults divided into a relatively younger
group (N=20, mean age 70) and an older subgroup (N=19, mean age 85).
ST was induced by telling subjects that previous studies have shown that
memory declines with age and that the present study was designed to see
if this is true. Subjects then performed several cognitive tests including an
incidental word-encoding task followed by a word-stem completion and
a cued recall test to assess implicit and explicit memory, respectively.
Results showed that memory ST had no effect on implicit memory. However, ST had different effects on explicit memory performance in the
younger subgroup and the older subgroup. While the younger subgroup
showed significantly impaired explicit memory after the memory ST, the
older subgroup was unaffected. These data suggest that memory ST has
specific deleterious effects on retrieval processes in older adults and that
it may lead to impaired performance in cognitive studies. Furthermore,
the fact that ST had minimal influence on performance in very old sub-

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

jects suggests that people successfully attaining advanced age may be
less susceptible to stress effects on cognitive performance.
A66
BEHAVIORAL
AND
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
INVESTIGATIONS OF HEMISPHERIC ASYMMETRIES IN THE
ENCODING OF SURFACE FEATURES Karen M. Evans1, Kara D.
Federmeier1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — To
examine
hemispheric differences in the encoding of visual words and their consequences for verbal memory, we asked participants to remember study
words that were lateralized to one visual half-field (thus biasing encoding to a single hemisphere) and then tested centrally at a range of repetition lags. Across study and test presentations, repeated words either
appeared in the same letter case (e.g., table-table; TABLE-TABLE) or different letter cases (e.g., table-TABLE; TABLE-table). Previous work has
suggested that the left hemisphere (LH) is biased to encode verbal material in an abstract manner that generalizes across such superficial differences, whereas the right hemisphere (RH) is biased to encode more
specific information such as surface features. As predicted, electrophysiological measures revealed that different case test words were associated
with a weaker memory signal for words initially encoded by the RH, but
this was true only at some repetition lags. Furthermore, RH memory
advantages observed previously in both behavioral and electrophysiological responses in similar experiments without case switches were not
replicated here when surface features were not reliable memory cues,
suggesting that the RH’s tendency and/or ability to make use of perceptual information for memory judgments is modulated by task demands.
A67
AN EARLY ERP REPETITION EFFECT FOR REMEMBERED
COMPARED TO FORGOTTEN FACES Harlan Fichtenholtz1, Elise
Christopher1, Marcia Johnson1, Gregory McCarthy1; 1Yale University — In
two studies we investigated the electrophysiological correlates of face
repetition. Participants were instructed make a button press whenever an
animal picture was presented in a series that included task-irrelevant pictures of human faces and objects. The faces presented in the first third of
the block were repeated in the remainder of the block. These repeated
faces were randomly intermixed with objects and novel faces that had not
been previously presented. Repetition effects were assessed by comparing the ERPs elicited by the repeated and novel faces. In the first study
(N=27) a significantly greater positivity, which peaked approximately
365 msec post stimulus, was observed over frontal scalp electrodes (F3/
Fz/F4, FC3/FCz/FC4) for repeated compared to novel faces. The second
study (N=21) was similar to the first, but incorporated an unexpected recognition memory test at the end. Participants had better memory for
repeated compared to novel faces. A frontal positivity with a similar distribution as in study 1 was observed for repeated faces in study 2. The
latency of this repetition effect varied as a function of later recognition.
The repetition effect for subsequently remembered faces peaked at
approximately 290 msec post stimulus, while the repetition effect for subsequently missed faces peaked at approximately 440 msec post stimulus.
These findings suggest that latency of the ERP repetition effect may provide a marker of incidental encoding of information into long-term memory.
A68
MEMORY IMPAIRMENT ASSOCIATED WITH TYPE-1 DIABETES
IN CHILDHOOD Simona Ghetti1, Joshua Lee1, Clare Holtpatrick1, Dana
Demaster1, Nicole Glaser1; 1University of California, Davis — Research
on
animal models has demonstrated a causal connection between Type-1
diabetes (T1DM) and neuronal death in the hippocampus possibly due to
severe hypoglycemia associated with T1DM. This suggests that individuals with T1DM may suffer from impairment in memory functions that are
specifically sub-served by the hippocampus. The present research sought
to investigate the relation between T1DM and memory deficits in childhood. Children with T1DM and their non-diabetic siblings (current n =
67; age range =6-16) were tested on item recognition memory (i.e., deter-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

39

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

mining whether they had seen an item before), and memory for qualitative detail about the item (i.e., remembering the color and the spatial
position of the item). Preliminary behavioral results showed no significant differences between participant groups in memory performance.
However, among patients, those who experienced severe hypoglycemic
episodes were more likely to exhibit disproportionately reduced spatial
memory, suggesting that hippocampal function may be altered in these
patients. It is predicted that the association between severe hypoglycemia
and memory deficits is mediated by neuronal death in the hippocampus
which is expected to be reflected in reduced hippocampal volume.
A69
MODULATION OF HIPPOCAMPAL ACTIVATION DURING FACE
RECOGNITION BY EMOTION Kevin G. Guise1, Laura Martin2, Ashley
De Marchena3, Liang Wang1, John A. Fossella1, Cheuk Y. Tang1, Michael M.
Minzenberg4, Sanjay M. Mathew1, Xiaosi Gu1, Jin Fan1; 1The Mount Sinai
School of Medicine, 2Rutgers University, 3University of Connecticut,
4University of California, Davis — Though the neural substrates of face
identity recognition and emotional processing have been well delimited
by functional imaging studies, the modulatory effect of face emotion on
recognition-related substrate is under-explored. In the current study subjects passively encoded a series of faces with fearful and neutral expressions while engaged in an emotional categorization task and were then
asked to make “old” and “new” identity judgments on a superset of faces
in a separate block of trials while scanned using fMRI. Recognition accuracy was high and subjects were faster to correctly identify old faces than
new faces, though there was no main effect of emotional valence and no
interaction. Functional imaging data revealed increased activity in the
hippocampus, posterior cingulate cortex, and pregenual anterior cingulate cortex to old faces relative to new and increased activity in regions
related to emotional processing, such as the amygdala and insula to new
faces relative to old faces. A significant recognition (old, new) by emotion
(fearful, neutral) interaction was found in the left hippocampus indicating that activity related recognition of faces is positively modulated by
fearful face emotion. Results are discussed in terms of interactions on the
systems level.
A70
MEMORY
PERFORMANCE
AND
NEUROIMAGING
IN
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS (MPS-I) Ozgun Evren Guler1,2, Elsa G.
Shapiro3, Catherine N. Le3, Kathleen M. Thomas1; 1Institute of Child
Development, University of Minnesota, 2Center for Neurobehavioral
Development, University of Minnesota, 3University of Minnesota — Mucopolysaccharidosis Type I (MPSI) is a genetic lysosomal storage disease in
which deficiency in alpha-L-iduronidase enzyme activity causes accumulation of glycosaminoglycans (heparan and dermatan sulfate), resulting
in widespread tissue and organ damage. Level of intellectual functioning
and developmental delay vary by subtype. Individuals with the severe
form of MPS-I (MPSI_sev, or Hurler syndrome) are treated with hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) which allows the enzyme to reach the
brain and slows cognitive decline. Patients with the attenuated form
(MPSI_att; also called Hurler-Scheie or Scheie) are treated with enzyme
replacement therapy; however, the enzyme does not pass the blood-brain
barrier. Thus, we hypothesized that patients with MPSI_sev would perform better on cognitive measures and show less hippocampal abnormality compared to patients with the attenuated forms of the disease.
Fourteen MPSI subjects (7 severe; 7 attenuated) were tested using a battery of neuropsychological assessments and underwent Magnetic Resonance (MRI) and Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI). Whole brain and
hippocampal volume measures were obtained from T1- weighted highresolution structural MRI images. From DTI, regional fractional anisotropy (FA), which is an index of directionality of diffusion, and mean diffusivity were calculated. Preliminary analyses suggested that compared
to MPSI_sev patients, MPSI_att patients were more impaired on verbal
recognition memory, showed smaller volumes for left hippocampus and
left caudate; and higher fractional anisotropy in the corpus callosum. In

40

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

addition, performance on various memory tasks was correlated with hippocampal volume and FA. Comparison with matched controls will allow
for further characterization of the disease.
A71
LEFT VENTROLATERAL PFC AND SOURCE REMEMBERING:
DELIBERATIVE
RECOLLECTION
THROUGH
SEMANTIC
ELABORATION Sanghoon Han1, Andrea Eslick1, Ana Raposo1, Ian
Dobbins2; 1Duke University, 2Washington University, Saint Louis — One of
more consistent findings in fMRI memory research is increased activation
in left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) when comparing context
to item memory. Despite its ubiquity, the functional significance of this
activation is debated. One interpretation holds that regional activation
indicates the controlled retrieval of, or selection among, semantic representations. However, the prevalence of activation during contextual
memory could instead indicate that the region is critical for selecting
among competing episodic representations, which tend to share features
during context memory. Using event-related fMRI, we compared these
accounts by examining context memory judgments for meaningful (scenic pictures) versus meaningless (fractal-like pictures) stimuli. During
retrieval, subjects were shown probe triplets containing pictures originating from two prior encoding sources (Pleasant? vs. Complex?) and a
novel picture. Compared to novelty judgments, context memory judgments for meaningful stimuli elicited increased activation in left VLPFC
along with left dorsal PFC and lateral parietal cortex. In contrast, left
VLPFC activation was uniquely absent for the analogous contrast with
meaningless stimuli, although context judgments were more demanding
for meaningless pictures suggesting greater competition between episodic representations. Finally, multiple regression analysis demonstrated
that anterior and posterior VLPFC sub-regions demonstrated different
functional properties, with anterior VLPFC uniquely predictive of activation in posterior middle temporal gyrus, a region linked to semantic storage. These findings indicate that left VLPFC is activated as a function of
retrieving specific semantic features of retrieval probes during the course
of context memory attempts, and not reflective of competition among
perceptual or episodic memory representations.
A72
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL ACTIVITY DURING DIRECTED
FORGETTING OF UNPLEASANT AND NEUTRAL MATERIAL
Anne Hauswald1, Johanna Kissler1; 1University of Konstanz — Directed forgetting refers to the phenomenon that people can intentionally forget
material designated as unimportant. When, after learning, a list is
marked as ‘to-be-forgotten’ (F-list) its contents are recalled more poorly
than the contents of a ‘to-be-remembered’ list (R-list) on a surprise final
recall. This effect demonstrates the costs of directed forgetting. However,
benefits also occur: When additional lists are learned after an F-list these
are better remembered than those learned after an R-list. Using behavioural and electrophysiological measures, we explored directed forgetting of word lists varying in emotional content (neutral and unpleasant).
EEG was recorded from 64 channels while subjects learned four lists of
words all either neutral or all unpleasant. In the surprise free recall test,
costs and benefits of directed forgetting were found for both valences.
Additionally, electrophysiology showed increased activity during the
presentation of words that followed the F-list compared to those following the R-list. This activity difference occurred between 450 and 650 ms
after stimulus onset with a maximum in left-central regions for the neutral words and in left-frontal areas for the unpleasant ones. This
enhanced activity indicates that additional resources are recruited during
directed forgetting. Furthermore, the results suggest that, at least for verbal material, healthy subjects are able to control their episodic memory
and inhibit irrelevant contents regardless of their emotional significance.
However, the neural substrates sub-serving this ability may differ as
reflected by the different scalp topographies of the effect.

Poster Session A

A73
INCREASES IN SERUM BDNF ARE CORRELATED WITH
RESPONSE
TO
NEUROPLASTICITY-BASED
COGNITIVE
TRAINING IN PATIENTS WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA Christine
Holland1, Melissa Fisher1, Michael Merzenich2, Wendy Closshey2, Synthia
Mellon2, Owen Wolkowitz2, Sophia Vinogradov1; 1University of California, San
Francisco; San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 2University of
California, San Francisco,CA — BDNF, the most widely distributed neurotrophin in the central nervous system, promotes synaptogenesis and
plays a critical function in learning-induced neuroplasticity. In this study,
we investigated the relationship between serum BDNF levels and the
behavioral response to neuroplasticity-based cognitive training in subjects with schizophrenia. Thirty-two schizophrenia subjects, stratified by
IQ and symptom severity, were randomly assigned to either targeted
cognitive training (TCT) or a control condition of graphically interesting
computer games (CG). Both groups participated in the intervention for 1
hour per day, 5 days per week, for a total of 40-60 hours. We measured
serum BDNF levels via enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) at baseline,
and after 2, and 12 weeks of the intervention. In addition, serum BDNF
was measured in 10 age and education-matched healthy controls. We
find that: 1) serum BDNF levels in the schizophrenia subjects are lower
than that of healthy controls at baseline, 2) after 12 weeks of cognitive
training, serum BDNF levels are increased by 30% in the TCT schizophrenia group but not the CG group (group differences at p<.05), 3) preliminary results indicate that the increase in serum BDNF is positively
correlated with behavioral gains in measures of learning and memory.
These data suggest that increases in serum BDNF levels may serve as a
biomarker for improved performance on learning and memory tasks that
result from neuroplasicity-based training, consistent with the notion of
increased neurogenesis and a trophic/neuroplastic response in hippocampal and cortical neurons.
A74
RESPONSE LEARNING CONTRIBUTIONS TO BEHAVIOURAL
PRIMING AND REPETITION SUPPRESSION Aidan Horner1, Rik
Henson1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Science Unit — Prior exposure to a
stimulus can facilitate its subsequent identification and classification, a
phenomenon called priming. This behavioural facilitation is usually
accompanied by a reduction in neural response within specific cortical
regions (Repetition Suppression – RS) (Grill-Spector, Henson, & Martin,
2006). Recent research has suggested both behavioural priming and RS
are largely driven by previously learnt stimulus-response pairings (Dobbins, Schnyer, Verfaellie, & Schacter, 2004; Schnyer, Dobbins, Nicholls,
Schacter, & Verfaellie, 2006). On first presentation, a direct association
forms between the stimulus presented and the response given; on a subsequent encounter with the stimulus, this association automatically cues
the response, bypassing the processing stages required during its first
presentation. Here we present both behavioural and fMRI evidence suggesting that, although response learning mechanisms play a significant
role, they cannot explain all priming effects. Furthermore, although
response switches between initial and repeated stimulus presentations
significantly reduce behavioural priming, RS in perceptual brain regions
was found to be relatively robust to changes in both task and response.
A75
WHEN REMEMBERING HINDERS LEARNING Willem
Huijbers1,
1
2
1 1
Cyriel Pennartz , Roberto Cabeza , Sander Daselaar ; Swammerdam Institute
for Life Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Amsterdam, 2Center for
Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University — Recent functional neuroimaging evidence suggests a competition in our memory system between
learning new information (memory encoding) and remembering old
information (memory retrieval). In particular, successful retrieval has
been associated with increased activity in posterior cingulate cortex
(PCC) and posterior lateral parietal cortex (PLPC), whereas successful
encoding has been associated with decreased activity in these regions.
Given that global activity in a particular brain area cannot increase and

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

decrease at the same time, these findings lead to the hypothesis that successful remembering may hinder successful learning when both processes happen concurrently. Using functional magnetic resonance
imaging, the present study investigated the behavioral and neural consequences of this potential bottleneck in our memory system. During scanning, participants intentionally remembered old words displayed in the
foreground, while incidentally learning new scenes displayed in the
background. In addition to confirming and extending previous evidence
indicating opposing levels of brain activity during learning and remembering in PCC and PLPC, the study yielded three main findings. First, we
found that remembering old information was associated with impaired
learning of new information. Second, we found that this behavioral effect
was coupled with suppression of learning-related activity in visual and
medial temporal areas. Finally, we provide evidence that the mid-ventrolateral part of the left prefrontal cortex (mid-VLPFC) resolves the memory competition by allowing rapid switching between learning and
remembering. Overall, the study not only provides novel insight in our
capacity to learn and remember, but also increases our general understanding of the neural mechanisms underlying flexible behavior.
A76
CORTICAL ACTIVITIES RELATED TO SOURCE MEMORY
RETRIEVAL: CURRENT DENSITY IMAGING WITH INDIVIDUAL
MRI Young Youn Kim1, Ah Young Roh2, Jun Soo Kwon1,2; 1Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, 2Clinical Cognitive Neuroscience
Institute, SNU-MRC, Seoul, Korea — We investigated the neural correlates
of source memory retrieval using low-resolution electromagnetic tomography with 64 channels EEG and individual MRI as a realistic head
model. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded while subjects performed recognition tasks for spoken words (items) or for the voice of the
speaker in spoken words (sources). At 400-700 ms, the amplitude difference between the correctly judged old and new words was significantly
larger in the source memory task than in the item memory task and only
the source memory task revealed old/new effects in the right anterior
region between 1000 and 1200 ms. We conducted source reconstruction at
approximately 311, 604, 793, and 1100 ms and used statistical parametric
mapping for the statistical analysis. The results of source analysis suggest
that the activation of the right inferior parietal region may reflect retrieval
of source information. The source elicited by the difference ERP between
the source correct and source incorrect responses exhibited dynamic
change of current density activation in the overall cortices with time during source memory retrieval. These results indicate that multiple neural
systems may underlie the ability to recollect context.
A77
RETRIEVAL-INDUCED FORGETTING UNDER STRESS - MEMORY
PERFORMANCE AND CORTISOL LEVEL Susanne Kössler1, Johanna
Kissler1; 1University of Konstanz — Retrieval-induced forgetting refers to
the phenomenon that the repeated retrieval of a subset of previously
learned material can cause forgetting of the nonretrieved remaining
material. However, the degree of retrieval-induced forgetting varies
markedly between different subjects and conditions. The aim of the
present study was to investigate to what extent retrieval-induced forgetting can be influenced by psychosocial stress. Therefore, intervening
between study phase and retrieval practice phase, subjects were exposed
to either a standardized psychosocial laboratory stressor (Trier Social
Stress Test; stress group) or a cognitively challenging, but nonstressful
control task (control group). Personal stress experience was validated by
salivary cortisol responses acquired at different time points during the
experiment and by use of mood assessment questionnaires. No retrievalinduced forgetting effect occurred in the stress group, whereas a normal
degree of retrieval-induced forgetting was found in the control group.
Moreover, subjects exposed to stress showed a significant increase in free
salivary cortisol and a decrease in mood. The findings show that emotional stress abolishes retrieval-induced forgetting and suggest a causal
role of cortisol due to its memory modulating effects.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

41

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

A78
IN A NEW SEMANTIC LEARNING TASK, SLEEP PROMOTES
MEMORY FOR CATEGORY-ATYPICAL BUT NOT CATEGORYTYPICAL INFORMATION Emily J. Mayberry1,2, Timothy T. Rogers1;
1University of Wisconsin, Madison, 2University of Manchester, UK — We
employed a new semantic learning task to investigate how sleep influences memory for category-typical versus atypical information. Over six
training and testing sessions, participants learned the individual names,
category labels, and visual appearances of 24 novel objects organized into
three categories. Items within each category tended to share similar parts,
and varied in their distance to a category prototype. Participants were
tested at 12-hour intervals, with half beginning at 8AM and half at 8PM.
We then compared improvements over 12-hour spans that involved
mostly wake or mostly sleep, contrasting memory for category-typical
versus atypical items in a series of visual and verbal tests. Across tests,
we found that memory for properties shared by category members
improved more over wake than sleep periods; but that memory for properties that individuate category members showed the reverse pattern.
These results are consistent with a view of long-term memory in which
the hippocampus and cortex play complementary roles (the "Complementary Learning Systems" theory). Specifically, the cortex, because it
employs overlapping representations, can extract statistical structure
across examples; but to avoid interference, it must learn slowly. The hippocampus, because it employs sparse and non-overlapping representations, can rapidly form representations of individual items without
interference; but it will not learn the cross-item statistical structure critical
for organizing concepts. Under this theory, the fast-learning hippocampal system "replays" new memories to the slow-learning cortex during
sleep, so that new information acquired during the day can be consolidated into the cortical semantic network without disrupting existing
knowledge.
A79
STOPPING THOUGHTS: EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL (ERP)
CORRELATES
OF
INTENTIONAL
REMEMBERING
AND
FORGETTING Axel Mecklinger1, Mauricio Parra1, Gerd Waldhauser2;
1Saarland University, 2Lund University — We investigated the neurocognitive processes underlying intentional remembering and forgetting. In a
Think/No-Think experiment, adopted for using the ERP technique, participants learned word pairs. Subsequently, they were presented with the
cue words and were instructed to either suppress (suppression condition)
or to recall and think about the target word (respond condition) for 16
times. During final cued recall tests for all initially learned targets, memories of the to-be-suppressed or to be-recalled items were tested either
with the same probe (initial cue word) or with an independent probe (category cue word). We found remembering effects in the same probe test
and forgetting effects in the independent probe recall test. The results further revealed several ERP effects related to retrieval attempts or attempts
to avoid unwanted memories. Retrieval attempts were characterized by
an enhanced P2 component and a late parietal positivity, i.e. the ERP correlate of recollection. As revealed by subsequent remembering/forgetting analyses the parietal positivity was predictive for enhanced memory
performance in the respond condition. Attempts to avoid unwanted
memories were characterized by a negativity at 400 ms that bears similarities with negativities found in motor stopping paradigms and in this task
presumably reflects the inhibition of the prepotent recollection response.
The amplitude of the negativity was predictive for subsequent forgetting
in the suppression condition. The results suggest that the avoidance of
unwanted memories results from the inhibition of prepotent responses
that depletes recollection-based remembering.
A80
SKILL LEARNING AND REPETITION PRIMING IN ALZHEIMER’S
DISEASE Sarah Merbah1, Thierry Meulemans1; 1University of Liege — Several studies have shown with the mirror reading paradigm that procedural learning and repetition priming might be preserved in the early

42

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

stages of Alzheimer’s disease (Deweer et al., 1994). Repetition priming is
demonstrated by the reading times improvement for repeated words,
while procedural learning is demonstrated when this improvement is
also observed for new words. Our hypothesis was that this improvement
could be due to a repetition priming effect for the letters rather than to the
learning of a mirror reading skill. Indeed, because the same letters are
presented throughout the task, a repetition priming effect could be sufficient to explain the improvement of performance. In order to test this
hypothesis, we have administered to 20 young and elderly subjects and
to 20 Alzheimer’s patients a new mirror reading task including two
phases: an acquisition phase comprising pseudo-words constructed with
one part of the alphabet, and a test phase in which both pseudo-words
constructed with the same part of the alphabet and pseudo-words constructed with another part of the alphabet were presented. Reading faster
the new pseudo-words composed with the repeated letters would reflect
a repetition priming effect, while reading faster pseudo-words composed
with “new” letters would reflect a procedural learning effect. Results
show comparable repetition priming effects in Alzheimer’s patients and
in young and elderly subjects, whereas only young and elderly subjects
showed a procedural learning effect. These results suggest, contrary to
previous studies, that the learning of a new perceptual skill could be not
preserved in Alzheimer’s disease.
A81
DOSE EFFECTS OF TRIAZOLAM AND SCOPOLAMINE ON
METAMEMORY Miriam Mintzer1, Bethea Kleykamp1, Roland Griffiths1;
1Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine — Benzodiazepine and anticholinergic drugs both induce temporary amnesia when administered
acutely to healthy volunteers. This double-blind, double-dummy, placebo-controlled study tested the dose effects of the benzodiazepine triazolam (0.125, 0.25 mg/70 kg, orally administered) and the anticholinergic
scopolamine (0.25, 0.50 mg/70 kg, subcutaneously administered) in an
independent groups design in healthy volunteers (N = 16/group). Drug
effects on memory accuracy, memory quantity, and separate components
of metamnemonic monitoring and control were tested within semantic
memory (Koriat et al., 1996) and episodic memory (Kelley et al., 2003)
paradigms. There were no significant differences between corresponding
doses of triazolam and scopolamine. Neither drug significantly affected
memory or metamemory in the semantic memory paradigm. While both
drugs dose-dependently impaired accuracy and quantity in the episodic
memory paradigm, the usual pattern of higher accuracy and lower quantity under free report conditions (participants choose whether or not to
use each response towards performance-based bonus pay) relative to
forced report conditions (participants are required to respond to each
item) was observed under both placebo and active drug conditions. Both
drugs appeared to impair the absolute accuracy measure of monitoring
(calibration) and control sensitivity (correlation between confidence and
decision to use response), but not to impair the relative accuracy measure
of monitoring (correlation between confidence and accuracy). Both drugs
also appeared to affect response criterion setting under certain conditions. Results support the selectivity of drug effects on different components of metamemory, but do not provide evidence for differences
between benzodiazepines and anticholinergics.
A83
NEURAL CORRELATES OF RETRIEVAL FROM EXPLICIT
MEMORY AS A FUNCTION OF AGE AND DEPTH OF
PROCESSING Alexandra Osorio1,2, Séverine Fay3, Soledad Ballesteros2,
Viviane Pouthas1; 1Unité de Neurosciences Cognitives et Imagerie Cérébrale,
LENA CNRS UPR 640, Paris, 2Universidad Nacional de Educacion a
Distancia, Madrid, Spain, 3Langage, mémoire et Développement Cognitif,
Université François Rabelais, UMR CNRS Tours, France — The purpose of
the present study was to find out whether episodic memory performances and neural correlates of explicit retrieval would change with
aging. Completion rates and event-related potentials (ERPs) were
recorded while participants from two age groups with high educational

Poster Session A

level (20-30 and 60-70 years) performed a word-stem cued-recall task.
Depth of processing at encoding (lexical vs. semantic) was manipulated.
Levels of recall (percentage of correct completions belonging to studied
items) were higher for deeply (semantically) studied words than shallowly (lexically) studied words, but did not differ between the two age
groups. ERP old/new effects were observed in each encoding condition.
Several differences were observed between young and old adults. In the
lexical condition, the old/new effect was obtained at frontal and parietal
sites as soon as 400ms and lasted up to 600ms post stimulus in the elderly, whereas it became significant only at 600ms and lasted up to 1000
ms post-stimulus in the young adults. In the semantic condition, a robust
old/new effect lasting between 400 and 1000ms was observed over frontal and parietal sites in the young group. In the older group, the O/N
effect was significant between 600 and1000ms over the parietal sites
whereas over the frontal electrodes the effect was only significant over
the right hemisphere between 600 and 800ms and, over both hemispheres
between 800 and 1000ms. Since memory performances did not differ
between the two age groups, the ERPs results might reflect cognitive
compensation in elderly.
A84
SLEEP
PREFERENTIALLY
ENHANCES
MEMORY
FOR
EMOTIONAL COMPONENTS OF SCENES Jessica Payne1, Robert
Stickgold2, Kelley Swanberg1, Elizabeth Kensinger3; 1Harvard University,
2Harvard Medical School, Beth Israel Medical Center, 3Boston College — Central aspects of emotional experiences are often well remembered at the
expense of background details. Previous studies have focused on memory after brief delays, but little is known about how these components of
emotional memories change over time. Here we investigated the evolution of negative scene memories across 30 minutes, 12 daytime hours
spent awake, or 12 nighttime hours including sleep. Negative objects
were well remembered at the expense of their backgrounds after 30min.
Time spent awake led to forgetting of the entire negative scene, with both
objects and their backgrounds decaying at similar rates. Sleep, on the
other hand, led to a preservation of negative objects, but not their backgrounds, suggesting that the two components undergo differential processing during sleep. Negative scene memories develop differentially
across time delays containing sleep and wake, with the unique brain-state
of sleep selectively consolidating those aspects of a memory that are of
greatest value to the organism.
A85
EMOTIONAL
MODULATION
OF
THE
HIPPOCAMPUS:
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY ANALYSIS REVEALS EARLY
AND LATE SPATIOTEMPORAL NETWORK DYNAMICS Jordan
Poppenk1,2, Debbie Talmi1,2, Morris Moscovitch1,2, Adam Anderson1,2, Anthony
McIntosh1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research Institute — Researchers have determined that the emotional content in pictures enhances
memory encoding. We used the hippocampus as a starting point to
explore spatiotemporal network interactions during encoding of materials with high emotional valence. A right posterior hippocampal region
that predicted successful memory encoding was identified in an fMRI
experiment measuring brain responses to neutral and negativelyvalenced pictures (Talmi et al., 2006, Dissertation Abstracts International). Brain volumes from the dataset were transformed to represent the
covariance of brain voxels with this hippocampal region. The covariance
images were the focus of a novel volume-wise “coupling analysis” of
functional network connectivity involving a non-rotated partial least
squares contrast of emotional and neutral items using permutation and
bootstrap testing (McIntosh & Lobaugh, 2004, Neuroimage). The BOLD
response of a network containing occipitotemporal and subcortical
regions – which included the amygdala but no frontoparietal cortices –
was found to preferentially couple with the hippocampal BOLD response
2-4s after stimulus onset in response to emotional pictures. A second network, dominated by frontoparietal cortices and containing no subcortical
regions, preferentially coupled with the hippocampal BOLD response 4-

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

6s after stimulus onset in response to emotional pictures. These findings
indicate that initial encoding of emotional information involved interplay
amongst the hippocampus, sensory cortices and amygdala, perhaps serving to merge perceptual and emotional information. Later processes
engaged the hippocampus and frontoparietal networks, which may
reflect higher-order attentional processes needed to integrate memory
into cortical networks.
A86
PROSPECTIVE MEMORY AND AGING Sarah
Raskin1,
Hanna
Ghaleb1; 1Trinity College — Prospective memory (ProM) entails retaining
intentions and retrieving them at the appropriate time. Proper functioning of ProM is essential to everyday life and the effects of age are of great
importance to developmental research. To further investigate the elements of ProM and how it changes with age, this study examined how 30
young adults (mean = 19.7 years) and 30 older adults (mean= 64.1 years)
performed on the Memory for Intentions Screening Test (MIST). The test
takes into account 7 different possible error types, as well as testing performance in relation to 3 variables: response type (action or verbal), time
delay (2 or 15 minute retention intervals) and cue type (event- or timebased). There is also a task to call 24 hours after the end of testing. It was
hypothesized that older adults would make more errors than the
younger adults overall and that participants would perform better on the
shorter delay tasks than longer delay, and better on event-cued tasks than
time-cued tasks, and that there would be significant age effects for cue
type. Results indicate a clear effect of age on ProM performance. For the
most part, both groups showed the same pattern of performance, with
older subject showing more impairment in all domains. However, older
adults show ProM errors not shown by younger subjects.
A87
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MEASURES FOR REMEMBERED,
IGNORED AND NOVEL WORDS IN A STRATEGIC LEARNING
TASK Mary Kathryn Reagor1, Mandy Maguire1; 1University of Texas at
Dallas — The goal of this study is to investigate the mechanisms underlying recognition memory for memorized, novel, and actively ignored
words. Previous studies have used the Old/New paradigm to demonstrate electrophysiological differences between words that have been
seen before and those that have not. What the Old/New task does not
test is how we process information that we are supposed to ignore. For
this reason, we used the “Strategic Learning” (SL) task. The SL task
requires that participants either attend to or ignore words from a list
based on a perceptual property (e.g. CAT, mouse). Then, during the testing portion of the task, the participant sees and responds to a list of
words that they memorized, words they ignored, and novel words (e.g.
Cat, Dog, Mouse). ERPs were used to investigate the differences between
attended, ignored and novel words in the recognition portion of the
experiment. The attended words elicited a larger early frontal activation
than the ignored words or the novel words, t(84)=5.87, p<.001, and
t(84)=7.01, p<.001, likely due to the depth of encoding. Left parietal
showed activation due to remembered and novel words was larger than
that of ignored words, t(322)=3.35, p<.001 and t(322)=-2.12, p=0.035, possibly due to suppression the ignored words. There was also a right frontal
increase in power for attended and ignored words as compared to the
novel words, t(247)=4.89, p<.001 and t(247)=3.50, p<.001. The increase for
the ignored words could be due to the active control of suppression.
A88
DOPAMINE ENHANCES LONG-TERM RECOGNITION MEMORY
IN THE AGED Julia Reinholz1, Hubertus Lohmann1, Rasmus Thieme1,
Bianca Dräger1, Sabine Bruchmann1, Heike Wersching1, Caterina Breitenstein1,
Stefan Knecht1; 1University of Muenster, Germany — The dopaminergic system is crucially involved in learning and memory. In normal aging, a positive relationship was demonstrated between the amount of endogenous
dopamine and cognitive functioning (Volkow et al. 1998; Bäckman et al.
2000; Erixon-Lindroth et al. 2005). Accordingly, exogenous administration of dopamine increased motor training (Floel et al. 2005; 2006). Here,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

43

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

we wanted to investigate whether levodopa administration can improve
spatial learning and memory in healthy elderly. Twenty subjects (mean
age 68 years) completed a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled
crossover study. Subjects received three dosages of 100mg levodopa/
25mg benserazide or placebo within two days, the third dosage 90 minutes prior to testing. Spatial learning was assessed by an associative procedure. Test sessions included a learning phase, a free recall, and a
recognition test (immediately and one-hour delayed). For learning, drug
effects interacted with randomization order. In the levodopa-first group,
there was a trend for practice effects, but no significant difference
between conditions. In the placebo-first group, subjects learned significantly better under levodopa. There were no effects on free recall. For the
recognition task, a positive effect of levodopa on performance was found
in both groups. Overall, performance across the 60-min interval
improved under levodopa and worsened under placebo. Our results further underscore dopaminergic neuromodulation of learning and memory. Since the second session was characterized by task familiarity,
dopaminergic effects might be greater for non-strategic associative learning. More importantly, levodopa robustly enhanced long-term recognition memory. Our results demonstrate the potential of dopaminergic
interventions to improve cognitive functions in healthy aging.
A89
CULTURE INFLUENCES THE EFFECT OF GENERATION ON
SOURCE MEMORY Zachary Rosner1,2, Qien Yang3, Kaiping Peng1,2,
Arthur Shimamura1; 1The University of California, Berkeley, 2Tsinghua
University, 3Beijing University — Previous research has demonstrated a
generation effect; generating responses such as rhymes, antonyms, or
semantic associates to stimuli during encoding can facilitate memory for
items when compared to simply reading the same stimuli (Slamecka &
Graf, 1978). On the other hand, generation can impair memory for source
information such as color or font (Mulligan, Lozito & Rosner, 2006). In
contrast to these negative generation effects, Marsh (2006) found a positive generation effect for memory for stimulus location. While these
effects have been well-studied in the U.S., no one has explored the consistency of these effects across cultures. This study compared item and location memory between American and Chinese participants using an idiom
generation task. Participants completed idioms in which one target word
was missing. Later, their memories were tested for both the target word
(item memory) and the location on the computer screen (source memory). We hypothesized that both populations would show a positive generation effect for item memory. However, differences in the educational
systems between the two countries (rote memorization in China vs.
active generation in the U.S.) would lead to generation being a more cognitively demanding task for Chinese participants, impairing location
memory. As expected, generation benefited item recognition in both populations, demonstrating the superiority of active generation on item recognition regardless of the learning method with which one is familiar.
Interestingly, generation facilitated location memory in American participants but impaired it in Chinese participants, suggesting that the effect of
generation on source memory varies across cultures.
A90
A REEVALUATION OF LEARNING AND AWARENESS IN THE
HEBB DIGITS TASK Lorenda Rush1, Samantha Avenengo1, AnnMarie
Hilfiker1, Geoffrey O'Shea1; 1SUNY-Oneonta — The Hebb Digits (HD) task
has been a useful paradigm for investigating the transfer of serial information from short-term to long-term memory. In the procedure for the
HD task, participants are exposed to a total of twenty-four nine digit
sequences with one digit sequence repeated every third presentation. In
the HD paradigm, enhanced recall of the repeated digit sequence compared to the non-repeated sequences is considered evidence of learning.
Previous results have indicated that equivalent learning of the repeated
digit sequence occurs irrespective of awareness of sequence repetition
(McKelvie, 1987). However, McKelvie (1987) assessed awareness using
only a self-report measure. In the present experiment, two forms of

44

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

awareness of sequence repetition were assessed: Recognition Awareness
(e.g., identifying sequences as familiar/unfamiliar) and Recall Awareness
(e.g., examining knowledge of item positional information) using the process-dissociation procedure (Jacoby, 1991). Results found learning of the
repeated sequence was greater for aware than unaware participants suggesting that information learned via implicit mechanisms may not be as
strongly represented in memory compared to information learned via
explicit mechanisms. Additionally, unaware participants were found to
overestimate certain temporal aspects of the task such as the elapsed time
for each trial and the total time engaged in the task. These results are discussed in terms of the role of awareness in directing serial learning as
well as how awareness can influence one’s subjective perception of time.
Finally, the present experiment is important in that it introduces alternative methods for assessing awareness in the HD paradigm.
A91
EXAMINING
NEURAL
REPETITION
EFFECTS
ACROSS
DIFFERENT VISUAL EXEMPLARS IN FMRI Mithra Sathishkumar1,
David Schnyer1; 1University of Texas at Austin — Previous research has
revealed that prefrontal (PFC) neural activity reductions associated with
repetition priming can be linked to a mechanism of response learning
(RL), where an object becomes associated with previous classification
decisions. Utilizing different visual exemplars of common objects, it was
found that RL did not transfer when one specific exemplar was repeated
during learning and then a different exemplar of the same object was presented at test (Schnyer, et. al, 2007). One possibility is that RL is specific to
lower level visual representations, while another is that attention can be
shifted to higher lexical levels at study and contribute to RL across visual
exemplars. In the current work, participants made size judgments while
viewing visually presented common objects while fMRI was recorded. In
a study phase participants classified (bigger than shoebox) 3 different
exemplars of the same object. In a subsequent test phase, objects not seen
previously and a 4th exemplar of the objects repeated in the study phase
were presented. During this phase, participants either continued with the
same decision cue seen during study or inverted their decision orientation (smaller than shoebox). Both behavioral response times and function
imaging data reveal repetition related reductions, with neural reductions
most evident in portions of left PFC. In contrast to previous work where
repetitions were of the same visual exemplar, there were only sparse
reductions in ventral temporal cortex and when the decision cue was
altered to render previous decisions invalid, neural reductions were significantly reduced across the entire brain.
A92
INVESTIGATING THE ROLE OF EPISODIC MEMORY IN
PROBLEM SOLVING FOR YOUNGER AND OLDER ADULTS.
Signy Sheldon1, Aida Ramos1, Morris Moscovitch1,2; 1University of Toronto,
2
Rotman Research Institute — In this study, we tested the hypothesis that
episodic memory is essential to solve ill-defined problems by comparing
the results of younger and older adults on a measure of social problem
solving (MEPS; Platt and Spivak, 1975). The older group, having deficient
episodic memory retrieval likely associated with hippocampal deterioration (Driscoll et al., 2003), was expected to perform worse than the
younger group on the MEPS. Participants were given the beginnings and
endings of ten vignettes that each involved an ill-defined social problem.
The task was to describe, in detail, the steps one must take to reach a solution. Much like past memories, older adults provided fewer episodically
driven details than younger adults when describing scenarios that led to
a solution; however, both groups provided a similar number of semantically-driven details. Although both age groups provided the same number of steps to solve the problems, older adults provided fewer steps that
were relevant to the given solution (story end) than younger adults.
Importantly, for older adults, the number of relevant steps provided in
the stories was significantly correlated with the number of episodic
details provided in each story, but not the number of semantic details.
Additionally, older adults were also asked to describe five past memo-

Poster Session A

ries. The number of episodic details in these past memories was significantly correlated with the number of episodic details provided in the
means-end problem solving stories. Altogether, this study suggests that
solving ill-defined problems depends crucially on recollective processes
associated with episodic memory.
A93
INTERNALIZATION OF NEGATIVE AGE PERCEPTIONS IS
ASSOCIATED WITH HIGH CORTISOL LEVELS AND DEPRESSIVE
SYMPTOMS IN OLDER ADULTS Shireen Sindi1,2, N.P.Vasavan Nair1,2,
Ying Kin Ng1,2, George Scwartz1,2, Nathalie Wan1, Sonia Lupien1,2; 1McGill
University, 2Douglas - University Institute in Mental Health — Recent studies have shown that internalized negative aging stereotypes are associated with declines in physical and cognitive functioning. Few studies
however have looked at the impact of internalized age perceptions (AP)
on biological markers such as cortisol. The present study investigated the
associations between AP and measures of morning and afternoon cortisol
levels, scores on the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS), and scores on subjective memory assessments in older adults aged between 51-85. Bivariate
correlations were conducted. The results showed that AP were associated
with GDS scores and cortisol levels only when assessing self (internalized) AP related to being useful to society and memory decline. For the
item related to being less useful to society, the scores on self perceptions
revealed a significant positive correlation with GDS score (r=0.57;
p<0.056) and salivary cortisol levels in the afternoon and evening
(r=0.435; p<0.05). For the item on memory declines, the scores on self-perception revealed a significant positive correlation with subjective complaints of memory as assessed by the Mac-Q (r=0.604; p<0.04) and
Baddeley (r=0.57; p<0.07) questionnaires, and PM salivary cortisol
(r=0.438; p<.05). There were no significant correlations with cortisol, GDS
or subjective memory complaints for the items related to life becoming
less enjoyable, and becoming more dependent on others with aging.
Thus, older adults that have internalized negative aging perceptions
deem their memory worse and show greater depressive symptomatology
and elevated pm cortisol levels. Future studies could assess the predictive
value of internalization tendencies in older adults on changes in cortisol
and mood profiles.
A94
AS TIME GOES BY –HIPPOCAMPAL CONNECTIVITY CHANGES
WITH REMOTENESS OF AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY
RETRIEVAL Hedvig Soderlund1, Morris Moscovitch1,2, Namita Kumar1,
Marina Mandic1, Brian Levine1,2; 1The Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest
Centre, 2University of Toronto — Recent and remote autobiographical
memories may differentially engage brain structures critical for memory,
such as the hippocampus. In studies where recent and remote memories
have been matched on vividness and personal importance, the hippocampus has been equally involved in their retrieval. However, recent
memories were usually chosen from the last year(s), and possibly already
consolidated in a similar fashion as the more remote memories. To determine how age of memory affects the neural correlates of autobiographical retrieval at a finer time scale than previously investigated, we had
participants (n=12) recall memories from 1 week, 1 month, 1 year and 10
years back while being scanned with fMRI in an event-related design. Initial pairwise comparisons contrasting retrieval from the different time
periods to a control condition (odd/even number judgment) showed significant hippocampal activity only during the three most recent time periods. We investigated time period effects in detail through multivariate
spatiotemporal connectivity analyses (seed PLS), which revealed that
hippocampal-neocortical interconnectivity during the retrieval time
course differed in the most remote time period as compared to the others.
These differences in connectivity patterns may underlie the differences in
hippocampal activation across time periods. In summary, it appears that
recent (up to 1 year) and remote (10 years) memories differ in the way
hippocampal-neocortical interactions unfold over time. This may relate

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

to differences in the accessibility or other characteristics of memories
across time periods.
A95
EVENT-RELATED FMRI STUDIES OF EPISODIC ENCODING AND
RETRIEVAL:
A
META-ANALYSIS
USING
ACTIVATION
LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION Julia Spaniol1, Patrick S. R. Davidson2,
Alice S. N. Kim3,4, Cheryl L. Grady3,4, Morris Moscovitch3,4; 1Ryerson
University, 2University of Alberta, 3Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest,
4University of Toronto — The recent surge in event-related fMRI studies of
episodic memory encoding and retrieval has generated a wealth of information about the neural correlates of these processes. However, interpretation of individual studies is limited to particular experimental and
fMRI imaging methodologies, and sample sizes are typically small. We
submitted activation results from studies on episodic memory in healthy
young adults, published between 1998 and 2007, to a voxel-wise quantitative meta-analysis using Activation Likelihood Estimation (Laird et al.,
2005). We conducted separate meta-analyses for 3 contrasts of interest:
episodic retrieval success (Hit vs. Correct Rejection), episodic encoding
success as measured in the subsequent-memory paradigm (subsequent
Hit vs. Miss), and subjective recollection (e.g., Remember vs. Know).
Concordance maps revealed significant cross-study overlap in spatial
activitation patterns for each contrast. Retrieval success was associated
with activation in a bilateral fronto-parietal network as well as bilateral
caudate and left parahippocampal gyrus. Encoding success was associated with activation in regions including left middle frontal gyrus, right
inferior frontal gyrus, right fusiform gyrus, and left superior parietal lobule. Subjective recollection was associated with activation in multiple
frontal and parietal regions, as well as left hippocampus and bilateral
parahippocampal gyrus. These results identify consistent activation patterns associated with episodic encoding and retrieval, regardless of
experimental paradigm, imaging parameters, and testing materials. The
concordance maps also provide a standard of comparison for activation
patterns observed in future individual studies.
A96
START HARD, LEARN FASTER: A BETTER METHOD FOR
LEARNING INFORMATION-INTEGRATION CATEGORIES Brian
Spiering1, F. Greg Ashby1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara — In the
current study, we assessed three different training methods for learning
categories: (1) train the most difficult exemplars first followed by successively easier exemplars, (2) train the easiest exemplars first followed by
successively more difficult exemplars, and (3) train all exemplars. Participants first trained on the most difficult exemplars performed better when
tested on all exemplars compared to participants who were first trained
on the easiest exemplars or trained on all exemplars. The structure of the
categories required information from both stimulus dimensions to be
integrated at some pre-decisional stage to maximize accuracy, i.e. information-integration. This result suggests that training difficult exemplars
first is a better method for learning information-integration categories.
A97
IMPACT OF PRELIMINARY SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE ON SERIAL
REACTION TIME PERFORMANCE Nicolas
Stefaniak1,
Thierry
1
1
Meulemans ; University of Liège — Many of our abilities reflect some kind
of adaptation to the environmental regularities which are learned outside
of awareness of what we know. This knowledge learned implicitly
includes the acquisition of semantic – e.g., categorical (see, for example,
Ashby et al., 1998) – information. The aim of the present study was to further explore the relationship between semantic memory and implicit
learning. More specifically, our purpose was to test the hypothesis that a
preliminary sequential semantic knowledge might influence performance in an SRT task involving the learning of the same sequential structure. To explore this issue, we administered an SRT task in which the
repeating sequence was created on the basis of a phone number well
known by the participant. To limit the surface similarity between the tobe-learned sequence and the phone number, the number 1 was added to

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

45

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

each figure of the phone number. Reaction times for the phone-numberlike sequence were compared to a similar non significant sequence. The
results show that reaction times are faster for the significant sequence
than for the non significant one; moreover, this effect is implicit, as
attested by the incapacity of the participants to notice de relation between
this sequence and their phone number. These results confirm (1) that
implicit learning and semantic memory are closely related, and (2) that a
structured semantic knowledge might influence implicitly the learning of
structurally similar semantic information.
A98
SLOW-WAVE
SLEEP
PREDICTS
SPATIAL
MEMORY
CONSOLIDATION IN HUMANS Dana Szeles1, Seth Shipman1, Heather
Breslawski1, Peter Morgan2, Robert Astur1,2; 1Olin Neuropsychiatry Research
Center, Institute of Living, Hartford, CT, 2Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT — Objective: The purpose of this study was to examine
the effects of sleep and sleep architecture on performance of a hippocampal-dependent spatial memory navigation task. Subjects: Subjects were
ages 18-30, physically healthy, with no DSM diagnoses. Participants were
assigned to either the “Sleep” group (N= 17) or the “Wake” group
(N=15). “Sleep” participants were trained at night (7-9pm), then 12 hours
later following a night of sleep, while “Wake” participants were trained
in the morning, then 12 hours later without sleep. For the “Sleep” group,
participants wore a NightCap that quantified amount of sleep and relative periods of slow wave sleep (SWS) and REM sleep. Methods: Training
consisted of performing a hippocampal-dependent virtual Morris water
task whereby participants were in a virtual reality room and were to navigate to a hidden platform in a round pool of water. A “probe” trial was
conducted whereby the platform was removed from the pool, and participants were required to mark where the platform should be located. This
probe was again administered in session 2. Results: Session 2 probe trial
data indicate the Sleep group has a savings in memory of the platform
location, whereas the Wake group does not. Moreover, there is a significant positive correlation with the amount of SWS and spatial memory
indicating that more SWS results in better consolidation of spatial memory whereas increased REM sleep results in worse spatial memory. These
data reveal that SWS is important for consolidation of spatial memory in
humans.
A99
CONTEXTUAL
PROCESSING
IN
EPISODIC
FUTURE
THOUGHT Karl Szpunar1, Jason Chan1, Kathleen McDermott1;
1
Washington University in St. Louis — The present study was designed
with the goal of elucidating the relation between remembering (from
one’s past) and envisioning specific future events (i.e., episodic future
thought). Specifically, we tested the hypothesis that regions within posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), parahippocampal cortex (PHC), and superior
occipital gyrus (SOG), shown previously to be equivalently active in
remembering and episodic future thought, serve to reinstate previouslyexperienced contexts within which personal future events are envisioned.
In two tasks, participants underwent functional MRI while imagining
personal past and future events occurring in the context of familiar settings (e.g., apartment). In a third task, participants generated personal
future events occurring in the context of unfamiliar settings (e.g., safari).
Our data showed that PCC, PHC, and SOG were similarly engaged as
participants thought about personal events in familiar contexts, irrespective of temporal direction (past and future). Conversely, PCC, PHC, and
SOG exhibited relatively little neural activity as participants generated
personal future events in unfamiliar contexts, suggesting that these
regions support the contextual architecture associated with personal
future events.

46

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

A100
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES
OF
THE
INTERACTION
BETWEEN
EMOTION
AND
MEMORY
CONTROL Anne-Cécile Treese1, Mikael Johansson1, Magnus Lindgren1;
1Lund University, Sweden — This event-related potentials (ERP) study
examined memory control processes for emotional and neutral faces. We
used repeated runs of a continuous recognition task to measure healthy
participants’ ability to distinguish relevant from irrelevant emotional and
neutral memories. Participants showed difficulties in the subsequent
runs to distinguish relevant from irrelevant memories. Although performance data showed that control mechanisms worked equally efficient for
neutral and negative faces, the ERP data suggested that different retrieval
monitoring processes contributed to the successful control of neutral and
negative memories. Neutral faces in the third run were associated with
an early target effect, indicating that targets and distracters had been differentiated. This effect was absent for emotional faces. In a later time window, negative distracters were associated with a sustained posterior
positive-going modulation, suggesting that participants relied upon a
recall-to-reject strategy to successfully reject irrelevant distracter faces.
Strategic retrieval processes were also engaged for positive faces, however not enough diagnostic information was available in order to reject
irrelevant memory traces.
A101
DISSOCIATING REGIONAL CHANGES IN PREFRONTAL
CORTEX STRUCTURE THAT IMPACT TEMPORAL AND
SPATIAL SOURCE MEMORY PERFORMANCE DURING NORMAL
AGING. Luc Valiquette1, Sidney Pinto1, Rafael Langay1, Jens Pruessner1,
Maria Natasha Rajah1; 1McGill University — With age, there is reduction of
the ability to recollect spatial and temporal contextual details pertaining
to past events. Recent fMRI studies indicate that the prefrontal cortex
(PFC) is important for context memory (CM) retrieval. Moreover,
patients with PFC damage exhibit deficits in recollecting contextual
details. This suggests that age-related reductions in CM may be due to
changes in PFC function. This is supported by studies showing agerelated volume reductions in PFC. However, it remains unclear if CM
retrieval decrements in the elderly are correlated to similar or different
region-specific changes in PFC volumes. To test this, we conducted an
fMRI study in which 15 young and 15 elderly adults performed face recognition, temporal source and spatial source retrieval tasks, within the
same session. Furthermore, semi-automatic mapping of the PFC was
done via an automated template based package allowing non-linear mapping across the whole brain (ANIMAL), and manual correction. Grey
matter volumes were calculated in both hemispheres for the anterior
PFC, dorsolateral PFC and ventrolateral PFC regions of interests (ROIs),
using previously published landmarks. Group (2) X Task (3) ANOVA of
the behavioral accuracy and reaction time (RT) data indicated that elderly
performed consistently worse then young subjects on the CM tasks for
accuracy and RT. Moreover, there was a difference in RT between groups
for recognition, but not for accuracy. Volumetric analysis showed that
elderly exhibited smaller PFC grey matter volumes; results from Group
(2) X ROIs (6) ANOVA will be presented, as will results from ROI volume-behavior correlations
A102
NEURAL CORRELATES OF AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN
ASSOCIATIVE LEARNING Jorien van Paasschen1, Linda Clare1, Robert
Woods1, David Linden1; 1School of Psychology, Bangor University — Although
both young and older adults perform worse on associative compared to
item memory tasks, this discrepancy in performance is disproportionately larger in older people. Some studies proposed that alterations in
medial temporal lobe areas play a key role in associative memory decline
in aging, while others suggested that changes in the fronto-striatal system
are the main cause for this deterioration. We investigated age-related
functional differences in intentional encoding of associations compared
to single items with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).

Poster Session A

Using an event-related design, 12 young and 12 healthy older adults were
scanned while they learned face-name associations (AL condition) and
single faces and names (SI condition). Task performance for items and
associations was matched within groups. Both groups showed higher
activation in hippocampal and prefrontal regions for the AL condition
compared to the SI condition. When activation for encoding of associations was contrasted between the two age groups, young adults showed
higher activation in both prefrontal and medial temporal lobe regions.
This suggests that during associative learning, either one of these areas is
under-recruited in the older group and that this affects its input to connected regions, or that both of these areas are under-recruited by the
older group. However, when only activation during successful trials for
associations were compared between older and young adults, we found
no significant differences between the groups, which implies that during
successful formation of an association, both groups use a very similar network of areas more or less to the same extent.
A103
NEUROPLASTICITY-BASED COGNITIVE TRAINING IMPROVES
SELF-REFERENTIAL SOURCE MEMORY IN SCHIZOPHRENIA
PATIENTS: BEHAVIORAL AND FMRI ASSESSMENTS Sophia
Vinogradov1, Karuna Subramaniam1,2, Stephanie Aldebot1, Arul Thangavel1,
Adelaide Hearst1, Melissa Fisher1, Tracy Luks1, Gregory V. Simpson1; 1UCSF,
2Northwestern University — Previous research has shown that schizophrenia patients, compared to healthy controls (HCs), are impaired at identifying themselves as the source of self-generated items, and show
relatively decreased activation within dMPFC compared to when HCs
engage in this process (Vinogradov et al., 1997; 2006). In the present
study, we investigated whether this deficit is amenable to a behavioral
intervention. Sixteen patients and 8 HCs underwent an fMRI sourcememory task at baseline. Eight patients were then randomly assigned to
80 hours of computerized targeted cognitive training (TCT) exercises that
focused on auditory and visual processing, facial affect recognition, and
mentalizing tasks (PositScience). The other eight patients were assigned
to a control condition of 80 hours of graphic-based computer games
(CGs). All subjects repeated the task after the 16-week intervention
period. Before scanning, subjects were presented with sentences, where
the final word was either supplied by the experimenter, or was left blank
for subjects to fill in themselves. During scanning, subjects were presented with words, and decided whether they were experimenter-presented or self-generated. BOLD fMRI activity was measured on a 3T GE
scanner (EPI; TR=1sec, 14 slices) before and after intervention. Images
were analyzed using SPM2. At baseline, patients were significantly more
impaired on each category within the source-memory task, relative to
controls. Preliminary results regarding the changes in performance relative to baseline indicate that after training, TCTs correctly identified 65%
more externally-generated items; 55% more self-generated items; and
made 69% fewer errors at incorrectly attributing external items as selfgenerated, compared to CGs.
A104
THE INFLUENCE OF AGING AND SCHIZOPHRENIA ON
REWARD-BASED STIMULUS-ASSOCIATION LEARNING Julia A.
Weiler1,2,3, Christian Bellebaum1, Martin Brüne4, Georg Juckel4, Irene Daum1;
1
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany,
2International Graduate School of Neuroscience, Ruhr-University Bochum,
Germany, 3Ruhr-University Research School, Bochum, Germany, 4LWL Clinic
Bochum, Germany — Reward-based associative learning is mediated by a
distributed network of dopamine dependent brain regions. Healthy
aging and schizophrenia lead to changes in key regions of this system,
the striatum and the prefrontal cortex, which may adversely affect the
ability to use reward information for the guidance of behavior. In the
present study, different components of reward learning, such as acquisition, reversal, effects of reward magnitude, and transfer of learning, were
investigated in healthy young, healthy old, and schizophrenic subjects.
All participants completed two probabilistic reward-based stimulus asso-

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

ciation learning tasks. Compared to young subjects, older participants
showed poorer overall acquisition, impaired reversal learning, as well as
deficits in transfer learning. When only those subjects who showed evidence of significant learning were considered, younger subjects showed
significant learning irrespective of reward magnitude, while learning in
older subjects only reached significance for high reward magnitudes.
Schizophrenic subjects in comparison to healthy matched controls exhibited poorer overall performance during all experimental phases leading
to a profound impairment also during transfer learning phases. Additionally, significantly less schizophrenic subjects could be classified as
learners. However, if only those patients who showed evidence of significant learning were considered, performance differences between groups
reduced to impairments in reversal learning.
A105
THE USE OF PERCEPTUAL FLUENCY IN PATIENTS WITH
ALZHEIMER DISEASE: THE ROLE OF EXPECTATIONS Sylvie
Willems1, Martial Van der Linden1,2; 1University of Liège, 2University of
Geneva — We investigated whether the use of perceptual fluency as recognition cue by patients with Alzheimer disease (AD) depends on
whether fluency is perceived as relevant to the recognition decision. In
normal subjects, enhanced perceptual fluency increased positive recognition responses when study and test stimuli were presented in the same
sensory modality but not when stimuli were presented in different
modalities (Westerman et al., J. of Mem. & Lang., 47, 2002). These results
suggest that the use of perceptual fluency as a heuristic in recognition
memory depends on the correspondence between study and test modalities and thus on the perceived usefulness of fluency. We investigated this
change of sensory modality between study and test phases in 16 AD
patients and 16 matched normal controls by using a verbal recognition
task. The perceptual fluency of recognition test items was enhanced by
briefly presenting a prime that matched the subsequent test item. We
observed that changes in modality attenuated the contribution of fluency
to the recognition decision in both subjects groups. In addition, we noted
a positive correlation between fluency use and metamemory self-evaluation. These results suggest that the fluency heuristic is subject to metacognitive control in AD patients, exactly in the same way as normal subject,
since patients’ attributions of perceptual fluency depend on expectations
about the relevance of fluency as memory cue.
A106
DEVELOPMENTAL DIFFERENCES IN EPISODIC AND SEMANTIC
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY Karen A. Willoughby1,2, Erin D.
Sheard1, Sarah M. Wheeler1,2, Mary Desrocher3, Joanne Rovet1,2; 1Hospital for
Sick Children, 2University of Toronto, 3York University — Autobiographical
memory (AM), the recollection of past life events, includes episodic and
semantic components with distinct neuroanatomical underpinnings. Evidence suggests that episodic AM predominantly engages the left hippocampus and medial prefrontal cortex, while semantic AM involves a more
distributed frontal and temporal neural network. Given that the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus mature later than surrounding cortex and
continue to develop into adolescence, episodic and semantic AM may
have different developmental trajectories. Despite a growing literature on
the emergence of AM in children, no study has examined AM development in adolescence. The aim of the present study was to specifically
examine AM development in 180 8-16 year-olds using the Children's
Autobiographical Memory Interview (CAMI; developed from the Autobiographical Interview for Adults). All participants were asked to recall
two autobiographical events, each of which occurred on a single day
more than one month earlier. After the initial description of each event,
participants answered a series of structured questions eliciting additional
event-related details. Interviews were scored according to a standardized
system for categorizing episodic and semantic AM details. Regression
analyses revealed that age was a significant predictor of episodic AM:
older participants reported more episodic details than younger participants. In contrast, no age-related differences in semantic AM were found.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

47

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

These results indicate that only episodic AM develops into adolescence,
possibly due to late maturation of requisite brain regions. This study provides critical insight into current understanding of AM development and
the distinctions between episodic and semantic memory in children and
adolescents.
A107
LOOKING FOR MEANING: USING EYE-MOVEMENTS TO
CHARACTERIZE
THE
ORGANIZATION
OF
SEMANTIC
MEMORY Eiling Yee1, Stacy Huffstetler1, Sharon L. Thompson-Schill1;
1
University of Pennsylvania — Many theories of semantic memory
describe the representation of object concepts as patterns distributed
across semantic features, such that objects sharing features have overlapping representations. We used eye movements to explore whether activating one object’s concept leads to the activation of objects that are
similar in function, shape or color. Participants were presented with a
multi-picture display and instructed to click on the picture that corresponded to a heard word. In critical trials the conceptual representation
of one of the displayed objects (the “related” object) was similar to that of
the target object in function, shape or color (according to participants’ ratings). Importantly, similarity between related objects was not apparent in
the visual depictions (e.g., for the target “frisbee”, the shape-related
object was a triangular slice of pizza; for the target “frog”, the colorrelated object was a grayscale image of peas). By eliminating the possibility of visual confusion, preferential fixations on the related object can be
attributed to the overlap in conceptual representations on the features of
interest. We observed relatedness effects for function and shape (with
shape information becoming available earlier than function information).
For color, we found no overall relatedness effect when all pictures within
a display were presented in grayscale. However, when each display contained color as well as grayscale pictures, there was a positive correlation
between degree of color similarity and fixations on the (grayscale) colorrelated object. These findings indicate that semantic memory is organized
with respect to function, shape and to a small degree, color.

Perceptual processes: Low-level vision
A108
A DIFFERENTIAL ENCODING ACCOUNT OF HEMISPHERIC
ASYMMETRY IN VISUAL PERCEPTION Janet Hui-wen Hsiao1, Reza
Shahbazi1, Garrison Cottrell1; 1University of California, San Diego — Hemispheric asymmetries in the perception of local and global features have
been consistently reported (e.g., Sergent, 1982): there is an advantage for
responses to global features in the left visual field/right hemisphere (RH)
and an advantage for responses to local features in the right visual field/
left hemisphere (LH). It has been proposed that this asymmetry originates from differential frequency bias in the two hemispheres (Double
Filtering by Frequency theory, Ivry & Robertson, 1998). Nevertheless,
there is little evidence supporting hemispheric specialization for particular frequency ranges (e.g., Peterzell, Harvey, & Hardyck, 1989), or differential frequency tuning in the neurons in the two hemispheres. Here we
test the hypothesis that this hemispheric asymmetry takes place at the
encoding stage beyond the sensory level. We use two autoencoder networks with differential connectivity configurations as the way to develop
differential encoding in the two hemispheres, to reflect the anatomical
evidence that there is more interconnectivity among neighboring cortical
columns of the RH than the LH (Hutsler & Galuske, 2003): the RH network has a narrower connectivity distribution to allow more connectivity
among neighboring nodes compared with the LH network. We then use a
perceptron network to examine how good the two encoding systems are
in terms of detecting local and global features. We show that this differential encoding mechanism has a better contact with human data than the
model based on differential frequency bias, and thus is a more anatomi-

48

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

cally realistic and cognitively plausible model in accounting for the hemispheric asymmetry in visual perception.
A109
DEVELOPING
ENDOPHENOTYPIC
MARKERS
FOR
SCHIZOPHRENIA:
TESTING
A
BRIEF
MONOCULAR
DEPRIVATION PARADIGM Victoria Leavitt1,2, Sherlyn Yeap3, Jogin
Thakore3, Sophie Molholm1,2, John Foxe1,2,3; 1Nathan Kline Institute, 2The
Graduate Center of The City University of New York, 3St. Vincent's Psychiatric
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland — Visual sensory processing deficits in patients
with schizophrenia have been well established in the literature. A recent
electroencephalographic (EEG) study from our group found the visual P1
to be an endophenotypic marker for schizophrenia, with first-degree relatives showing significant attenuation of the component. However, in this
study there was inter-individual variance resulting in substantial overlap
in P1 amplitudes between controls and patients. We sought to increase
the sensitivity of our measure by tapping into a second order effect that
would "tax" the system further, enabling us to separate the distributions
of patients from controls. We created a paradigm that would challenge
the visual system such that patients would show greater relative decrements in their visual evoked potentials (VEPs) than controls. We
recorded VEPs from twenty patients and ten controls as they viewed
visual stimuli with both eyes for 9 minutes, then we administered an eye
patch and recorded VEPs from each single eye as participants viewed
visual stimuli monocularly for 9 minutes with each eye. Brief monocular
deprivation in controls resulted in robust VEPs from the non-occluded
eye. For the visual P1 in controls, an ANOVA found a significant interaction for group (patient vs. controls) x condition (both eyes vs. sum of
eyes), p=0.029. The compensatory mechanism that allows healthy individuals to generate robust VEPs monocularly does not appear to be effectively activated in patients with schizophrenia. This VEP challenge test
may provide us with an endophenotypic marker for the disease.
A110
PRESTIMULUS EEG ALPHA ACTIVITY REFLECTS TEMPORAL
EXPECTANCY Byoung-Kyong Min1,2, Jae-Jin Kim1,2, Hae-Jeong Park1,2;
1
College of Medicine, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea, 2Institute of Radiological
Science, College of Medicine, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea — As prestimulus EEG alpha activity has recently been considered as conveying prestimulus top-down information, in the present study we further
investigated whether prestimulus alpha activity reflects temporal expectancy of upcoming stimulation. EEG was recorded from 12 subjects performing a color and a shape discrimination task. We compared
prestimulus EEG alpha activity and contingent negative variation (CNV)
under two inter-stimulus interval (ISI) conditions: a constant ISI (1500
ms) vs. variable ISIs ranging from 1500 to 2500 ms. For investigating the
amplitude and time-course of oscillatory activity, the EEG signals were
convolved with Morlet wavelets. Although we did not observe significant differences in the CNV between the two ISI conditions, we found
significantly higher prestimulus alpha activity in the constant ISI condition than the variable ISI condition, particularly in the color task (Wilcoxon test: p<0.01). We proposed that prestimulus alpha activity could
reflect temporal expectancy more elaborately than CNV. Since the constant ISI condition yielded higher prestimulus alpha activity than the
variable ISI condition, higher prestimulus alpha activity may reflect
higher expectancy of upcoming stimuli. We supposed that the considerable inhibition of more salient color feature in the shape task might interfere in efficacy of expectation, probably resulting in no significant
differences in the shape task. All the observations corroborate that prestimulus ongoing alpha activity reflects a prestimulus top-down mental
state.
A111
LIGHT DETECTION TRAINING IMPROVES TEMPORALINFORMATION PROCESSING IN CEREBRAL VISUAL FIELD
DEFECTS Dorothe A. Poggel1,2, Bernhard Treutwein3, Bernhard A. Sabel4,
Hans Strasburger1,5; 1Generation Research Program (GRP), Ludwig-

Poster Session A

Maximilian University Munich, Germany, 2Center for Innovative Visual
Rehabilitation, Boston VA Medical Center, 3IuK, Ludwig-Maximilian
University Munich, Germany, 4Institute of Medical Psychology, Otto-vonGuericke University Magdeburg, Germany, 5University of Göttingen,
Germany — Cerebral visual system lesions lead to visual field loss in
perimetry, i.e. partial blindness towards light detection. Many patients
additionally show impaired temporal-information processing, even in
perimetrically intact regions (Poggel et al., CNS 2006). We investigated
whether a computer-based training designed to restore light detection
would also have an effect on dynamic visual field properties. Before and
after a three months period of Vision Restoration Therapy (VRT, Boca
Raton, FL), nine patients with cerebral visual field loss underwent visual
field assessment with three techniques: standard perimetry, double-pulse
resolution (DPR, minimum perceivable duration of temporal gap
between two light pulses), and simple reaction times (RT). Patient performance was compared to normative values (Poggel & Strasburger, 2004).
Intact visual field size increased over the training period. DPR and RT
remained unchanged in the intact visual field, but improved significantly
in areas of residual vision where light detection improvement was also
most pronounced. Effect size was graded with the level of intactness of
the visual field region. Temporal information processing improved relative to pre-training baseline, but only in some patients reached normal
levels after training. We thus observed a generalization of training effects
from light detection to dynamic visual functions. Study supported by a
grant of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Str 354/3-1) to HS.
A112
RICA: A COMPUTATIONAL MODEL THAT EXPLORES THE
FUNCTIONAL ROLES OF HIGHER VISUAL LAYERS Honghao
Shan1, Garrison Cottrell1; 1University of California, San Diego — The
efficient coding hypothesis (Barlow, 1961) has been used to explain the functional role of low-level vision. When ICA (Independent Component
Analysis), a linear implementation of the efficient coding hypothesis, is
applied to natural image patches, the resulting basis functions resemble
V1 simple cells’ receptive fields (Olshausen and Field, 1996; Bell and
Sejnowski, 1997). Then what are the functional roles of higher layers in
the human visual pathway? Since the anatomical structures of higher
visual layers are similar to that of the primary visual cortex, it is likely
that the higher layers are also working under similar computational principles as V1. We take the assumption that higher layers are also working
under the efficient coding principle, and derive a hierarchical statistical
model, the recursive ICA (RICA), to capture nonlinear statistical structure of natural images (Shan, Zhang, and Cottrell, 2006). In this model,
the linear efficient coding model is at work on each layer and coordinatewise nonlinear activation functions transform the outputs of a lower
layer to the inputs of the higher layer. When RICA is applied to natural
images, the learned first layer basis functions resemble V1 simple cells’
receptive fields. Higher layers of RICA capture more complex visual
structures. Specifically, some of the second layer basis functions encode
the combinations of bar/edge orientations. This result qualitatively
matches the neurophysiological observations of monkey’s V2 neurons
(Anzai, Peng, and Van Essen, 2007). Also, the learned RICA features outperform most state-of-art computer vision techniques when applied for
pattern recognition tasks.
A113
EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS AND VISUAL SENSORY GATING
IN A FLASH TRAIN PARADIGM Lucy J. Troup1, Carly A. Yadon1,
Michael A. Pitts2, Jessa S. Hafer-Zdral3; 1Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, Colorado, 2University of California San Diego, California, 3Reed
College, Portland, Oregon — Auditory sensory gating is a well documented phenomenon in which pairs of brief identical stimuli are presented, and the neural response to the second stimulus is reduced relative
to the first. Analogous processes in the visual domain have not yet been
identified. Further, the distinction between sensory gating, habituation,
and sensory refractory periods remains unclear. In the current study, par-

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

ticipants viewed visual stimulus trains (1200 msec inter-stimulus intervals) consisting of 5 identical flashes (grey; 12 msec duration), followed
by a sixth deviant flash (green; 80 msec duration). All stimuli including
the deviant were isoluminant. ERPs were recorded using a high-density
electrode configuration to allow for potential source analyses. ERPs for
flashes 2-5 showed no differences anywhere on the scalp. Early amplitude differences (less than 150 msec) were found at occipital-parietal
scalp locations between flash 1 and all other flashes including the sixth
deviant stimulus. Differences between the sixth deviant stimulus and the
first 5 stimuli did not occur until after 200 msec. A possible interpretation
of these results is that visual sensory gating may exist, albeit later in processing than its auditory counterpart. Habituation could not fully account
for the pattern of results. Alternatively, sensory refractory periods may
explain the amplitude differences observed in this study as well as in previous auditory gating experiments.
A114
ABNORMAL SPATIAL FREQUENCY PROCESSING IN 3- AND 4YEAR-OLDS WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER (ASD) Petra
Vlamings1, Chantal Kemner1,2; 1University of Maastricht, 2University of
Utrecht — Besides problems in social interaction, people with ASD have
an atypical visual processing style which is more detail oriented than in
typical subjects (Happe and Frith, 2006). Any input to the visual system
consists of luminance variations at various frequencies across space. Low
spatial frequencies (LSF) capture large-scale variations (coarse information) whereas high spatial frequencies (HSF) represent small-scale variations (fine information). Several studies indicated abnormal spatial
frequency (SF) processing in ASD (Boeschoten et al., 2007). In the present
study we investigate whether abnormal SF processing is already present
in ASD in early childhood and how this is reflected in the brain. Nineteen
ASD children (3/4 years) and 21 age matched controls were presented
with 90 HSF and 90 LSF gratings (duration: 500 ms; ISI: 500-900 ms), during which EEG was recorded. We predicted faster or elevated processing
of HSF in ASD. No latency differences between ASD and controls were
found for the P1 (positivity at 100 ms) and N2 (negativity at 200 ms) at
OZ (electrode above visual cortex). Children with ASD showed higher P1
amplitudes for HSF than for LSF, whereas this was not significant in controls. Amplitude differences at the P1 are typically linked to the involvement of different brain areas for HSF and LSF in adults (Ossenblok &
Spekreijse, 1990).The present data suggest that the visual system might
be more differentiated and mature at an early age in ASD, as the pattern
of larger P1 amplitudes to HSF than LSF gratings is also seen in healthy
adults.

Perceptual processes: Other
A115
THERMAL STIMULATION AS A PROBE TO INTEROCEPTIVE
CORTEX FUNCTION Craig Bennett1, Daniel Ansari2, Abigail Baird3;
1
Dartmouth College, 2University of Western Ontario, 3Vassar College — It has
been hypothesized that there are distinct neural systems for the processing of internal, interoceptive stimuli (originating within the body) and
exteroceptive stimuli (originating from outside the body). The anterior
insula, especially on the right side, has been highlighted as a region
where interoceptive information is integrated with higher cognitive processes. The goal of this experiment was to determine the feasibility of
using thermal stimulation to investigate the function of interoceptive cortex. Twenty adult subjects completed the functional MRI experiment.
During the task participants were asked to make magnitude judgments
between their left and right hands. During the thermal condition participants made decisions based on varying levels of temperature per hand.
During the tactile condition participants made decisions based on a varying number of pegs in contact with the hands. Participants responded
with the hand that had the warmer temperature or that had the greatest

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

49

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

number of pegs in contact. Areas of intraparietal sulcus (IPS) and lateral
premotor cortex were commonly activated between the two modalities.
The tactile condition differentially activated areas of the somatosensory
system, including the primary (S1) and secondary (S2) areas of somatosensory cortex. The thermal condition differentially activated areas of
interoceptive cortex, including areas of left mid insula and right anterior
insula. The results of this study add empirical support to the hypothesis
that thermal stimuli tap into the resources of the interoceptive system. It
also demonstrates the feasibility of using this methodology in future
studies examining the representation and perception of internal state.
A116
LEARNING TO BECOME AN EXPERT: REINFORCEMENT
LEARNING AND THE ACQUISITION OF PERCEPTUAL
EXPERTISE Olav Krigolson1, Lara Pierce2, Clay Holroyd2, Jim Tanaka2;
1University of British Columbia, 2University of Victoria — Although
we
know that birdwatchers, dog judges and other types of perceptual
experts acquire their skills through systematic training and years of practice, the neural learning mechanisms that underlie the acquisition of perceptual expertise are poorly understood. More specifically, while a
growing body of research has demonstrated enhanced neural responses
when experts view objects from their domain of expertise, how these neural changes occur is not well understood. To help resolve this question,
we recorded event-related brain potentials while participants performed
a category verification task in which they learned to indentify randomly
generated blob stimuli. Our results demonstrate increases in ERP components associated with object recognition (the N250) and internal error
evaluation (the response error-related negativity) for participants who
demonstrated performance improvements at the experimental task.
Changes in the amplitudes of the N250 and response error-related negativity were not observed for participants who did not improve their performance of the task. Importantly, our results suggest that a
reinforcement learning system involving anterior cingulate cortex and
the basal ganglia underlies the acquisition of perceptual expertise.
A117
UNFORCED ERROR: SYSTEMATIC MISLOCALIZATION OF
TENNIS BALLS BY PROFESSIONAL REFEREES. Elizabeth
Louie1,
Nicole Wurnitsch1, Byron Hontiveros1, David Whitney1; 1University of
California, Davis — It is well known that moving objects appear shifted in
the direction of their motion. Here, we investigated whether referees misperceive bouncing tennis balls as being shifted in the direction of the
ball’s motion. We examined sixteen recorded matches (videos as well as
replays using the “PointTracker” online tool) from the 2007 Wimbledon
series and recorded balls that bounced near any line boundary. Incorrect
referee judgments were divided into two categories: the landing position
of the ball was either misperceived as being shifted “consistent” with the
direction of motion or “opposite” the direction of motion. Thus, a leftward moving ball that is perceived to land on the left side of a line is a
“consistent” judgment; a leftward moving ball that is perceived to land
on the right side of a line is an “opposite” judgment. If an object’s direction of motion influences its perceived landing position, then we should
expect to find more “consistent” calls rather than “opposite” calls.
Indeed, we found a “consistent” to “opposite” ratio of 22 to 3. In a followup psychophysical experiment, we confirmed that a moving object’s
bounce is mislocalized as being shifted in the direction of motion. This
perceptual error depended on the bounce angle and speed of the moving
object and the fixation of the subject. The results suggest that motioninduced perceptual errors occur in professional sports, and the asymmetries in these errors can be exploited by players who are given opportunities to challenge referee calls.
A118
HEMISPHERIC DIFFERENCES IN FACE PROCESSING: EVIDENCE
FROM DIVIDED VISUAL-FIELD PRIMING Elias Mouchlianitis1, Rik
Henson1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK — Our
previous studies on repetition priming of faces (Mouchlianitis & Henson,

50

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

in prep) found larger priming effects when a central prime was followed
by a probe lateralised to the right visual-field (left-hemisphere, LH) than
a probe lateralised to the left visual-field (RH). Bourne & Hole (2006),
however, found greater priming for the RH than LH when using lateralised primes followed by a central probe. We proposed that both these
findings can be explained by the RH advantage in face-processing, which
causes the RH advantage at encoding found by Bourne & Hall, but a LH
advantage following (central) face encoding, owing to the LH benefiting
from priming to a greater extent than the RH, in which face processing
may already be close to optimal. This proposal was supported by priming effects in a number of behavioural experiments that explicitly crossed
the lateralisation of the prime and the lateralisation of the probe. These
experiments were extended using fMRI, with the addition of non-face
control stimuli. Despite main effects of visual-field and of stimulus-type
(face vs house), there was no evidence for an interaction, in either left or
right FFA (and despite overall greater activity in the right than left FFA).
In other words, the face-house difference in FFA did not appear greater
for left than right visual field presentations. Moreover, no priming effects
reached significance. This lack of reliable modulation of face-processing
by visual hemifield may reflect the limited temporal resolution of fMRI,
which has prompted subsequent MEG versions of the experiments.
A119
IMAGING UNSUPERVISED PERCEPTUAL LEARNING Matthew
Mundy1, Robert Honey1, Richard Wise2, Dominic Dwyer1; 1School of
Psychology, Cardiff University, 2Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging
Centre — Unsupervised exposure to a pair of highly similar stimuli can
improve subsequent discrimination between them. This is true with faces
(e.g. Mundy et al., 2007), random chequerboards and scenes as the test
stimuli. Of particular importance, the schedule of exposure modulates
this effect. Alternating two stimuli (e.g. AX, BX, AX, BX) during exposure
produces larger improvements in discrimination than an equivalent
amount of blocked presentation of the two stimuli (e.g. AX, AX… BX,
BX…). This schedule effect is the same regardless of the nature of the
stimuli used, which implies that the cognitive mechanism for perceptual
learning is similar in all cases. However, it could be suggested that different neural mechanisms may be recruited in tasks using different categories of stimuli. For instance, a recent paper (Graham et al., 2006) reported
that medial temporal lobe structures may be selectively involved in perceptual learning with non-face stimuli. In this event-related fMRI study
participants were given intermixed and blocked exposure to confusable
face-pair and chequerboard-pair stimuli and subsequently were asked to
perform same/different judgements as an index of perceptual learning.
Areas of cortex recruited during perceptual learning were identified by
contrasting activation associated with discrimination following intermixed presentation with that following blocked presentation. We present
evidence for both stimulus-invariant (e.g. primary visual cortex) and
stimulus specific (e.g. fusiform face area) regions of activation following
perceptual learning. There is also evidence to indicate that the stimulus
invariant activation is modulated by the quality of perceptual learning
(see also Mukai et al., 2007).
A120
MEG RESPONSE TO VISUAL IMPRESSION OF SOCIAL
INTERACTION THROUGH MOTION Marina
Pavlova1,
Michele
Guerreschi1,2, Werner Lutzenberger3, Alexander Sokolov4, Ingeborg KrägelohMann1; 1Children's Hospital of University of Tübingen Medical School,
Tübingen, Germany, 2University of Padova, Italy, 3MEG-Center, University of
Tübingen Medical School, Germany, 4CNL, University of Ulm Medical School,
Ulm, Germany — Perception of intentions and dispositions of others is an
essential ingredient of adaptive daily-life social behavior and non-verbal
communication. Visual information revealed through motion of living
beings allows for veridical estimation of social properties of agents
involved in these events. Recent brain imaging and lesional data point to
several brain regions involved in visual perception of social interaction
through motion. However, temporal interrelations between regions are

Poster Session A

still unknown. Successful visual perception of social interaction through
motion depends on intact communication between different brain
regions. Here we assess induced gamma oscillatory MEG response to
visual social interaction of two abstract geometric shapes revealed
through their motion in Heider-and-Simmel-like animations. In healthy
adults, enhanced peak of gamma activity (62 Hz) was observed at 1 s
from the stimulus onset over the right temporo-parietal junctions. Two
further enhancements in gamma oscillatory response of lower frequency
of 44 HZ occurred at 1.4 s over the prefrontal and posterior temporal cortex in the right hemisphere. Consequent peaks of 44 Hz were found over
the left temporo-parietal and right temporal cortices. The findings
uncover the cortical network involved in visual processing of social interaction through motion. For the first time, the data show that gamma
oscillatory cortical activity underlies visual processing of social interaction.
A121
SUBJECTIVE SHORTENING IN DURATION AND LENGTH
DISCRIMINATION Frances Rauscher1, Sean Hinton2, Karin Reinke1;
1
University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh, 2Abbott Laboratories — This study examined how perception of the duration of an event is systematically distorted as a function of how long the event duration is stored in working
memory, a phenomenon known as subjective shortening [see Wearden,
Parry, and Stamp (2002)]. The current experiment tested discrimination
of 1000 ms (duration) and 100 mm (length) standard stimuli against six
logarithmically arrayed comparison stimuli at three different delay intervals (1, 3, and 9 seconds). Based on the findings of Wearden et al., one
would expect to observe in the present study that increasing delay interval improves performance on longer comparison intervals while impairing performance on shorter ones and that there are no delay-related
changes in line-discrimination performance. Our preliminary data (N =
19) that are most comparable to Wearden et al.'s show some evidence of
the first pattern. However, further evidence of subjective shortening in
our design would also be manifested by the stimulus just slightly shorter
than the standard being the least accurate. Instead, our data show the
slightly longer stimulus being least accurate. In addition, over the range
of stimuli used by Wearden et al., we find a consistent pattern of monotonically decreasing accuracy with increasing delay interval for the
length-discrimination task, a finding that also runs contrary to a subjective-shortening account. A variety of differences exist between the two
studies that might account for these discrepant results. More research
will be required to identify the specific features of our respective designs
that can explain these apparently contradictory findings.
A122
EFFICACY OF BILATERAL RTMS OVER TEMPORO-PARIETAL
CORTEX IN REDUCING AUDITORY HALLUCINATIONS IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA A. Vercammen1, H. Knegtering2, J. A. Jenner2, C.
Slooff3, H. Westenbroek2, R. Bruggeman2, A. Aleman1; 1BCN NeuroImaging
Center, University Medical Center Groningen, The Netherlands, 2University
Medical Center Groningen, The Netherlands, 3Mental Health Center Drenthe,
Assen, The Netherlands — Background: Low frequency transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) of the left temporo-parietal area has been proposed as a treatment for auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia. Recent
neuroimaging studies have indicated bilateral temporal cortex involvement. We hypothesized that bilateral stimulation could improve effectiveness of rTMS treatment. We present preliminary data on a small
sample from a sham-controlled randomized trial. Methods: rTMS stimulation was conducted on left (n=6) or bilateral (n=6) temporo-parietal
sites in 12 sessions of 20 minutes at 90% of the motor threshold. Placebo
treatment (n=5) was achieved using a sham-coil. Outcome measures were
recorded at four timepoints: baseline, mid-treatment, post-treatment and
one week follow-up. Measurements consisted of a clinical interview (Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale; PANSS) and self-report questionnaires, including the Auditory Hallucination Rating Scale (AHRS), and
the Positive and Negative Affect Scale (PANAS). Results: We performed

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

separate repeated measure analyses, comparing bilateral and left groups
with the placebo group. We observed a time by group interaction on the
frequency item of the AHRS, indicating a decrease in the bilateral
[F(3,15)=4.18; p<.05], but not the left group [p>.10], compared to the placebo group. The bilateral, but not the left group showed a decrease on the
negative PANAS subscale, compared to the placebo group. This effect
was observed mid-treatment and post-treatment [F(1,9)=5.67 ; p<.05;
F(1,9)=5.74; p<.05], but failed to reach significance at follow-up. PANSS
subscales revealed no significant effects. Conclusions: Preliminary results
point to increased effectiveness of bilateral rTMS, in terms of a reduction
of hallucination frequency and negative emotional responsiveness.
A123
FAST FORWARD: REPETITIVE TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC
STIMULATION OF PARIETAL CORTEX DISRUPTS TEMPORAL
PERCEPTION Martin Wiener1, Roy Hamilton1, Matthew Matell2, H.B.
Coslett1; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2Villanova University — Although the
perception of time is a fundamental element of human cognition, much
debate exists regarding its neural instantiation. Recent work (Lewis &
Miall, 2006) suggests that a right fronto-parietal network is involved in
temporal perception. In order to further elucidate the properties of this
network, we administered brief trains of repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation (rTMS) at a frequency of 10hz to the supramarginal gyrus of
the left and right parietal cortex during a temporal discrimination task.
Subjects were required to judge whether a comparison visual stimulus
was displayed for a longer or shorter duration than a standard visual
stimulus (600ms). Subjects received rTMS at the onset of presentation of
the standard visual stimulus on half of the trials in a session. When compared to non-rTMS trials, subjects demonstrated a significant change in
accuracy on rTMS trials, more so for the right supramarginal gyrus than
for the left. The direction of the effects across comparison conditions suggests that rTMS increased the perceived duration of the standard. These
results support the notion of a network for temporal perception that preferentially employs the right-hemisphere and demonstrate that the supramarginal gyrus modulates temporal discrimination.
A124
DAMPENING THE PAIN SIGNAL: COGNITIVE MANIPULATIONS
ON EXPERIMENTAL PAIN Fadel Zeidan1, Nakia Gordon1, Junaid
Merchant1, Catherine Zanbaka1, Paula Goolkasian1, Larry Hodges1;
1University of North Carolina at Charlotte — It is well established that pain
has sensory as well as cognitive and affective components (Melzack,
1999). Manipulating the cognitive component has been effective in pain
attenuation; perhaps through reallocation of attentional resources (Seminowicz & Davis, 2007). The current study examined the effectiveness of 3
cognitive manipulations, which potentially allocate resources in different
ways, on subjective pain ratings (NR; 0-6). “Painful” and “unpleasant”
electrical stimuli were delivered while subjects (N=55) engaged in a virtual reality game (VR), a three-day mindfulness meditation intervention,
or an arithmetic distraction task (math). Meditation, VR, and math all significantly reduced pain intensity ratings when compared to a baseline
condition. However, meditation was significantly more effective at
reducing pain than VR or math, and, was effective at both the “painful”
and “unpleasant” levels of stimulation. In previous neuroimaging studies, expert meditators show decreased activity in the pain neuromatrix
and pre-frontal cortices (Orme-Johnson et al., 2006). Virtual reality and
arithmetic distraction, also show reductions in the pain neuromatrix, but
not in the pre-frontal cortex (Hoffman et al., 2004; Del Percio et al., 2006).
Prefrontal activation may account for the more global effect meditation
had at reducing both painful and unpleasant pain responses compared to
the distraction tasks that were only effective at the higher intensity of
pain. As a cognitive technique, meditation may be more effective in reallocating attentional resources. These data highlight the necessity of
comparing different cognitive techniques to explore how attentional
resources are allocated to influence pain perception.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

51

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

Perceptual processes: Somatosensory
processing
A125
TRACING PAIN PATHWAYS FROM STIMULUS TO REPORT
Lauren Atlas1, Matthew Davidson1, Kate Dahl1, Martin Lindquist1, Tor
Wager1; 1Columbia University — The relationship between stimulus intensity and reported pain is robust and lawful, but endogenous brain processes play a large role in determining how painful a given stimulus will
actually be. Identifying the brain pathways and components that determine pain intensity is a critical step towards understanding the circuits
that generate and regulate pain and related affective processes. We used
a single-trial fMRI approach combined with multi-level mediation analyses to localize pathways that link stimulus intensity to reported experience. We quantified the amplitude, onset, and shape of responses to
individual thermal stimuli of four intensities in each brain voxel. This single-trial estimation allowed us to perform effective connectivity analyses
on variations in trial response amplitude, avoiding issues with hemodynamic variation across the brain. Multi-level mediation analyses identified a network of regions that explained a significant amount of the covariation between temperature and pain reports. A ‘stimulus-related’
network tracked the stimulus intensity more closely than reported pain,
including thalamus, posterior SII, periaqueductal gray, rostral dorsal
anterior cingulate and rostral anterior insula. Anterior SII, right midanterior insula, dorsal anterior cingulate, and deep cerebellar nuclei were
mediators of the relationship between applied stimulation and reported
pain. Finally, a ‘response-related’ network tracked reported pain, but not
stimulus intensity, including putamen and posterior cingulate cortex.
Results identify many known ‘pain’ regions—including putative ‘sensory’ and ‘affective’ regions—as key mediators, and identify novel frontal
activity related specifically to stimulus processing.
A126
'MIRROR-TOUCH' SYNAESTHESIA IS ASSOCIATED WITH
ENHANCED TACTILE DISCRIMINATION Michael Banissy1, Vincent
Walsh1, Jamie Ward2; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, UCL, UK,
2
University of Sussex, UK — People with synaesthesia have unusual perceptual experiences (e.g. graphemes may evoke color, or watching someone touched may elicit tactile sensations). However, it is unclear whether
their perception of veridical stimuli is normal. Yaro and Ward (2007) provided evidence that grapheme-color synaesthetes have enhanced color
discrimination for luminance matched stimuli (and better memory for
color). Is this a general property of synaesthesia? Is the enhanced performance due to back-translation from colors to verbal labels? In order to
answer these questions, we assessed tactile discrimination (two alternative forced-choice discrimination of spatial gratings applied to the fingertips) in a group of ‘mirror touch’ synaesthetes in whom observed touch to
another human elicits tactile sensations on their own body. These synaesthetes had enhanced tactile perceptual discrimination relative to age
matched controls. We conclude that enhanced perceptual discrimination
is a core property of synaesthesia that is not limited to color, but occurs in
each affected sensory modality. It remains to be determined whether an
over-sensitive (and/or over-active) concurrent perceptual system is a
cause or consequence of synaesthesia.
A127
AGING EFFECTS ON TEMPORO-SPATIAL PERCEPTION:
BEHAVIOURAL AND EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS (ERPS)
EVIDENCE Gerard Nisal Bischof1,2, Kirsten Hoetting1, Brigitte Roeder1;
1University of Hamburg, Germany, 2Beckman Institute for Advanced Science
and Technology, Urbana-Champaign, IL — Crossing the hands has been
shown to interfere with temporo-spatial tactile perception. It has been
suggested that this effect reflects a conflict between an anatomical and an
external spatial reference frame. Developmental studies have provided
evidence that a default remapping of tactile input into external coordi-

52

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

nates is acquired rather than innate but it is not known yet if tactile temporo-spatial encoding is subject to age-related changes. Thirteen healthy
elderly adults (mean age 71 years) and 12 young adults (mean age 25
years) performed a tactile temporal order judgment task (TOJ) adopting
either an uncrossed or crossed hands posture. The just noticeable difference (JND) for the two tactile stimuli, one presented to either hand were
larger in old participants. Furthermore the crossed hands deficit was
larger for old adults as compared to young adults. To investigate the role
of spatial coordinate systems involved in the control of tactile-spatial
attention and in subsequent attentional modulations of somatosensory
processing, event-related potentials were recorded. Thirteen elderly
adults (mean age 68 years) and 17 young adults (mean age 24 years) performed a tactile attention task during uncrossed and crossed hands positions. Qualitative and quantitative differences of age were observed
during shifts of tactile spatial attention. In addition, attentional modulations of somatosensory ERPs were attenuated with crossed as compared
to uncrossed hands in both groups. Moreover old adults showed quantitative differences in the onset of attention-related processing of somatosensory stimuli. Thus, temporo-spatial encoding seems to be
susceptible to aging effects.
A128
VISION OF THE BODY IS ANALGESIC FOR PAIN Matthew Longo1,
Viviana Betti2,3, Salvatore Aglioti2,4, Patrick Haggard1; 1University College
London, United Kingdom, 2Università di Roma (“La Sapienza”), Italy, 3AFaR,
Fatebenefratelli Hospital, Isola Tiberina, Rome, Italy, 4Centro Ricerche
Neuropsicologia, IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy — Several
recent studies have demonstrated that non-informative vision of the
hand increases the acuity of touch on that hand. In this experiment, we
investigated how such non-informative vision of the hand affects the processing of painful stimuli using a Nd:Yap laser, using both subjective ratings of pain obtained with a visual analogue scale (VAS) and laserevoked potentials (LEPs) obtained from the EEG. Participants looked into
a mirror aligned with their body midline at either the reflection of their
own left hand (creating the illusion that they were looking directly at
their own right hand), or at the reflection of a non-hand object (a small
brown book). Though the actual laser stimulation was constant throughout the experiment, VAS ratings indicated that pain was significantly less
intense and unpleasant when participants looked at their hand than at
the object. Similarly, vision of the hand led to a selective reduction of the
amplitude of the P2 component of the LEP that is thought to originate
from the ACC and to index cognitive/affective responses to pain. Reduction of subjective pain and LEPs was correlated across participants. These
results demonstrate that non-informative vision of the hand is analgesic
for pain on that hand. Whereas vision of the hand selectively increases
sensory processing of tactile stimuli, it selectively decreases cognitive
processing of painful stimuli. This dissociation suggests that vision of the
body does not indiscriminately increase somatosensory processing generally, but differentially influences different sensory channels.
A129
CHILDREN WITH AUTISM SHOW ATYPICAL EARLY RESPONSE
TO
NOVEL
TACTILE
STIMULI
USING
MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY (MEG) Elysa
Marco1,
Kasra
Khatibi1, Anne Findlay1, Zhao Zhu1, Sophia Vinogradov1, Heidi Kirsch1,2,
Srikantan Nagarajan1; 1University of California, 2University of California,
Epilepsy Center — Children with autism experience sensory processing
difficulties which may be at the core of their learning and behavioral deficits. The nature of these deficits, especially in the tactile domain, remain
unclear. M50 sensory evoked fields (SEF) collected in response to familiar
and novel finger taps reflect the early processing of somatosensory information. This study aims to compare early unimodal cortical processing in
children with high functioning autism (AS) and matched healthy controls
(HC). Responses were recorded for the AS group (N=7, mean age=9.6)
and the HC group (N=6, mean age=8.9) using a 275-sensor MEG. The
stimuli were pneumatic finger taps (140 ms, ~17 PSI, and ISI 330 ms).

Poster Session A

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

Taps to the right index finger (deviant) occurred every 3 -7 taps to the
middle finger (standard). The amplitude and latency averages of the M50
were compared between AS and HC for deviant taps, pre-deviant standard taps and post-deviant standard taps. Reliable parietal M50 was elicited to all tactile stimuli and exhibited a characteristic latency and
waveform in the HC group. The HC group demonstrated the expected
latency delay and amplitude increase to the deviant stimuli. By contrast,
the AS group showed considerable variability in their waveforms, with
M50 peak amplitude to deviant stimuli being significantly lower than
HC. Our results suggest an atypical processing of novel tactile information in autism that can be detected as early as the M50 waveform. While
this may represent primary sensory cortical dysfunction, we cannot
exclude the contribution of disrupted top-down modulation to novel
stimuli.
A131
NEURAL PROCESSING OF SUBJECTIVE PAIN EXPERIENCE: THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN STATE AND TRAIT Michal
Ziv1,
Rachel Tomer1, Ruth Defrin2, Talma Hendler3; 1University of Haifa, 2Sackler
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, 3Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center
and Tel Aviv University — Both state (attention, arousal, affect) and trait
(personality) factors are part of the psychological component of pain
experience. Using pain anticipation, we tried to characterize the relationship between these two factors and to examine their effect on the subjective experience of pain. Twelve subjects underwent fMRI while receiving
a sequence of twelve intense pain stimuli to their wrist. Six of the painful
stimuli were preceded by a warning signal and six were not. Following
each stimulus participants rated the pain intensity on a ten point scale. In
addition, each subject completed Cloninger's Tridimensional Personality
Questionnaire (TPQ). The results showed that, on average, subjects gave
a higher rating to the intensity of the painful stimuli which were preceded by a warning cue. However, there was inter-subject variability –
only half of the subjects reported expected pain as more painful than
unexpected pain. This rating variability, representing individual sensitivity to anticipation, was found to be correlated with activity of the frontal
and cingulate cortex, the midbrain and the hippocampus. Correlating
whole brain activity with harm-avoidance trait scores revealed a different
neural network, including the medial frontal & temporal cortex, the cingulate cortex and the amygdala. The results of this study suggest two
possible neural mechanisms that mediate the subjective experience of
pain; one includes the hippocampus and is involved in the processing of
preceding cues (state) while the other, which includes the amygdala,
relates to differences in harm avoidance (trait).

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

53

Saturday April 12, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

54

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session A

Poster Session B
Attentional processes: Visual
B1
DISTINCT NETWORKS OF CONNECTIVITY FOR PARIETAL
(AIPS/PIPS) BUT NOT FRONTAL (VLPFC/DLPFC) REGIONS
IDENTIFIED WITH A NOVEL ALTERNATIVE TO THE “RESTING
STATE” METHOD Rhodri Cusack1, Adrian Owen1; 1MRC Cognition and
Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge — Scanning volunteers without specifying a
task for them to do (“resting state”) has previously been used to find functionally connected networks. In the current study, rather than choosing
this approach, connectivity was measured across a broad range of different
tasks in 1200+ imaging runs acquired from 300+ volunteers for FMRI studies performed at our institution. Even across this task variety, clear consistent networks were identified, with high correlation values for some
distant regions. Seeds in the VLPFC and DLPFC both revealed strong connectivity with the multiple demands (MD) fronto-parietal network. No
dissociation was found, consistent with a lack of modular distinction
between these regions as concluded following meta-analysis. In contrast,
although both also showed co-activation with the MD network, the pIPS
and aIPS dissociated, with the former showing greater connectivity to the
hippocampus, parahippocampal regions and medial frontal cortex. This
dissociation is consistent with findings from other methods, including
human DTI, macaque axon tracing, a recent resting state study, and FMRI
of perceptual organisation and selective attention. This method avoids a
problem inherent in resting state studies which is that a significant proportion of the observed results may arise from the fact that volunteers are performing a similar task, albeit not one specified by the experimenter. It has
the added advantage that it does not require the collection of new FMRI
data, and as a result can have great power at low cost. We discuss the challenges faced in the implementation of the method, and future extension to
multivariate connectivity.
B2
INATTENTIVE SYMPTOMS PREDICT ATTENTIONAL SET
DYSFUNCTION IN ADULT ADHD INDIVIDUALS Brendan Depue1,
Marie Banich1,2,3, Gregory Burgess1, Erik Willcutt1; 1University of ColoradoBoulder, 2Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Colorado–Boulder,
3University of Colorado-Denver — The relationship between brain activation
in adults with ADHD and behavioral symptomatology is largely
unknown. Whereas, hyperactive symptoms decrease as ADHD individuals transition into adulthood inattention symptoms remain relatively stable. We investigated the degree to which inattentive and hyperactive
symptoms were associated with patterns of brain activity in an attentional
task in 23 young adults (14 male, 9 female) carefully screened to have
ADHD symptoms both currently and during childhood but who are not
co-morbid for other psychiatric disorders. Our participants performed a
hybrid blocked/event related manual Stroop task with blocks of incongruent, neutral, and congruent trials. Comparisons of all these blocks to fixation baseline indicated that individuals with lower inattentive symptoms
showed increased activity in a multitude of brain areas and not necessarily
those associated with attentional control in the Stroop task. In contrast,
higher hyperactivity and inattention symptoms ratings were associated
with increased brain activation in overlapping regions of the bilateral
superior frontal gyrus (SFG) and the left middle frontal gyrus (MFG). This
latter result suggests that individuals with higher overall levels of ADHD
symptoms appear to recruit areas involved in attentional control to a
greater degree across all conditions (neutral, incongruent, congruent) in
which attention must be directed away from the more automatic process of

word reading to the less automatic process of ink color identification. Our
results provide a first step in being able to realize the promise that brain
imaging holds for the diagnosis and treatment of psychiatric disorders.
B3
SENSORY GAIN CONTROL AT FIXATION Jordan DeVylder1, Paul
Corballis1, Nathan Parks1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology — Spatial attention
appears to operate by a sensory gain control mechanism, enhancing visual
perception in attended regions of space. Sensory gain effects can be measured electrophysiologically through changes in the amplitude of the P1
component of the event related potential (ERP). P1 amplitude can be modulated by low-level sensory features as well as by attention allocation, and
changes in P1 amplitude can be attributed to attention effects if all physical
stimulus properties are held constant. Sensory gain effects are well documented with attention to the periphery of the visual field, but have rarely
been studied at fixation. The few studies that have been conducted that
look at sensory gain for foveal stimuli have yielded conflicting results
(Handy & Khoe 2005; Miniussi, Rau, & Nobre, 2002), and sensory gain for
extrafoveal stimuli at fixation has only been found in emotion studies
(Smith, Cacioppo, Larsen, & Chartrand, 2003). We manipulated attention
towards centrally-presented foveal and centrally-presented extrafoveal
stimuli at fixation, using three levels of attentional load for each stimulus
size. ERPs were recorded in response to stimulus onset, and tested for differences in P1 amplitude across attentional load conditions. Sensory gain
was interpreted as an increase in P1 amplitude as attentional load
increased, and was tested independently for the foveal and extrafoveal
stimulus sizes. P1 amplitudes were greater for high attentional load than
for low attentional load, suggesting that attention exerts an effect on the
perception of centrally-presented stimuli in a manner consistent with sensory gain control.
B4
CONTEXTUAL CUEING IN SCHOOL-AGED CHILDREN USING
TARGET-DIRECTED ACTION Matthew Dixon1, Daniel H Lee1, Philip
David Zelazo3, Eve De Rosa1,2; 1University of Toronto St. George, 2Rotman
Research Institute, Baycrest Centre for Geriatric Care, 3University of Minnesota,
Institute of Child Development — Prior experience with the spatial layout of
stimuli ultimately enhances attentional deployment to relevant locations
(Chun & Jiang, 1998). This phenomenon, termed “contextual cueing”, is
mediated by a medial temporal lobe (MTL)-posterior parietal network that
support mnemonic and attentional processes respectively. It remains
unknown whether children have mature neural substrates to support such
memory-guided attention. Thus, we examined the development of spatial
contextual cueing in school-aged children between the ages of 5 to 9 (M =
6.93, SD = 1.03) with target-directed action. Children searched for a target
among distractors in both novel displays and in “old” displays on a touchscreen. Old displays, which were repeated five times across the experiment, provided an opportunity for prior experience with the spatial layout
of the stimuli to guide attentional deployment. Consistent with the adult
literature, we hypothesized there would be progressively faster response
times (RT) with the repetition of the old displays. Using a touchscreen,
children were able to directly act on the target stimulus allowing us to
have a reliable RT measure and removed the need for children to maintain
a response mapping to keys. As expected, children displayed no difference
in RT at block five relative to block one for novel displays, but were significantly faster at block five when searching old displays. To our knowledge,
this is the first evidence for intact contextual cueing in children and may
reveal a maturity of a MTL-posterior parietal network that supports memory-guided attentional deployment.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

55

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

B5
EXPLORING
THE
SPATIOTEMPORAL
DYNAMICS
OF
SUSTAINED ATTENTION USING SSVEPS Paul Dockree1, Redmond
O'Connell1,2, Simon Kelly4, Shani Shalgi3, Ian Robertson1; 1Trinity College
Institute of Neuroscience, Dublin, 2Queensland Brain Institute, University of
Queensland, 3The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 4The Cognitive
Neurophysiology Laboratory, Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric
Reserach — The aim of the present investigation was to examine withinsubject changes in Steady State Visual Evoked Potential (SSVEP) amplitude and oscillatory alpha activity in relation to behavioral indices of
momentary lapses of attention. Short-term changes in these signals may
help elucidate the temporal dynamics of sustained attention performance
in neurologically healthy subjects and sustained attention failures in clinical populations. High-density EEG recordings were acquired from 128scalp electrodes during performance on a visual sustained attention task.
Neurologically healthy volunteers were presented with flickering (25Hz)
pattern-reversal stimuli and were required to monitor standard stimuli
presented for 800ms and respond with a key press to target stimuli presented for the longer duration of 1120ms. Each participant completed 10
blocks each with 180 standard stimuli and 20 targets. The pattern-reversal
sustained attention task proved sensitive to transient lapses of attention
over time as demonstrated by both the number and distribution of errors
over task blocks in each subject. Furthermore, the transient ERPs, the
steady state oscillatory response and phasic changes in the alpha (~10Hz)
band were extracted for analysis and examined in relation to target detections and misses (or lapses of attention). Results are discussed in terms of
increased sensory transmission in parieto-occipital regions necessary for
increased visual attention to task stimuli. In a second experiment, a modified visual attention task was used in which response time (RT) to
warned and unwarned targets was manipulated. Similarly, transient
ERPs, SSVEP power and alpha power were analysed and the clinical utility of this measure is discussed.
B6
ONLINE MEASUREMENT OF DYNAMIC CHANGES IN
TRACKING LOAD. Trafton Drew1, Todd Horowitz2,3, Edward Vogel1;
1University of Oregon, 2Brigham and Women's Hospital, 3Harvard Medical
School — In the multiple-object tracking paradigm, subjects are asked to
covertly track several target objects simultaneously as they move randomly amongst identical distractors. Recently, Wolfe and colleagues
have demonstrated that observers can dynamically change which items
are being tracked during the course of the trial. In the current study, we
attempted to examine the neural mechanisms underlying this ability by
measuring ERPs as the subjects tracked moving objects. In particular, we
examined the contralateral delay activity (CDA) which provides an
online neural measure of the number of active representations being held
in memory. On some trials, a cue informed subjects to switch from tracking one item to three items, while on others the tracking load switched
from three items to one item. Here we found that shortly following the
switch cue, the amplitude of the CDA increased when subjects added
new items and decreased when they were instructed to drop target items.
Moreover, our electrophysiological results suggest that the time-course of
dropping tracked items is much slower than that of adding new items
into the tracked set. Together, these results demonstrate that this activity
can measure rapid and dynamic changes to the current attentional tracking load.
B7
ASSESSMENT OF HEMISPATIAL NEGLECT WITHIN A VIRTUAL
ENVIRONMENT Assaf Dvorkin1, William Rymer1,2, Krista Settle1,
Richard Harvey1, Ross Bogey1, James Patton1,2; 1Rehabilitation Institute of
Chicago, Chicago, IL, 2Northwestern University, Chicago, IL — Hemispatial
neglect is commonly assessed using batteries of paper-and-pencil tests.
However, these tests have several drawbacks due to their fixed and
repetitive nature. Although neglect has been most commonly assessed
and studied in the horizontal spatial dimension, recent studies have

56

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

shown neglect along the radial and vertical dimensions as well. We have
developed and tested a virtual reality based assessment tool for spatial
neglect in multiple spatial dimensions. The performance during a targetdetection task of five stroke patients with neglect was compared to that of
eight stroke patients without neglect and eight age-matched healthy controls. Subjects were exposed to a three-dimensional virtual scene and
were instructed to press a response button when they detected a target
appearing within the scene. To quantify perceptual performance both the
percent of correct detection and reaction time to initiate a button press
were calculated. Our results show significant differences between the
neglect patients and control groups. All neglect patients exhibited asymmetries of performance, where their mean reaction time and detection
accuracy systematically varied in one or more spatial dimensions – an
obvious left as well as near neglect were evident. This asymmetry was
not a harsh transition but instead showed a gradual reduction of attention across the space. By contrast, the neglect patients' performance on
the Behavioral Inattention Test was less conclusive. These findings demonstrate the feasibility of virtual reality tools for detailed assessments of
multidimensional attentional deficits, supporting the hypothesis that
neglect patients might exhibit spatial bias in one or more spatial dimensions simultaneously.
B8
THE CO-INVOLVEMENT OF FRONTAL EYE FIELDS AND
POSTERIOR PARIETAL CORTEX IN VISUAL ATTENTIONAL
TASKS Amanda Ellison1, S. Jayne Swindells1, Daniel Smith1, Thomas
Schenk1; 1Durham University — The decrease in reaction time when target
location is repeated in successive trials in visual search is an established
effect. Using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) we have previously shown that repetition of target location in a colour/orientation conjunction visual search task is also commensurate with a decrease in
involvement of right posterior parietal cortex (rPPC), an area known to
be involved in the processing of this task. The decrease in reaction time
therefore seems to be mediated by a concomitant lack of engagement of
rPPC. So there must be another area of the brain which can keep track of
target location and render rPPC redundant in the processing of the task.
This role could be fulfilled by slowly decaying saliency maps, which are
thought to reside in the frontal eye fields (FEF), involved in the recall of
location and orientation of attention. Much has recently been discovered
about the role of FEF in visual search tasks and also how FEF influences
activity in posterior regions. This leads to an interesting prediction; by
TMS stimulation of FEF, it should be possible to restore the action of
rPPC even after several repetitions i.e. if the area involved in location
priming is disrupted, rPPC would be required for processing of every
trial. Results show that FEF and rPPC TMS has a constant and additive
effect over location repeated trials and so can be taken as evidence of
important functional pathway involved in the control of spatial attention.
B9
WHAT YOU ATTEND IS WHAT YOU GET: ATTENTION DOES
NOT AUTOMATICALLY SPREAD TO ALL FEATURES OF AN
OBJECT Edward Ester1, Edward Awh1, Edward Vogel1, John Serences2;
1University of Oregon, 2University of California, Irvine — What are the units
of visual attention? O'Craven, Downing, and Kanwisher (1999) have
demonstrated that attending to one feature of an object (e.g., motion)
enhances the cortical response to this feature as well as other features
(e.g., form) of the same object. This result suggests that attention operates
at the level of whole objects. However, the behavioral task used in these
studies did not explicitly discourage observers from attending multiple
features of the same object. In the present experiments, observers performed a change detection task in which they were required to discriminate differences in either the orientation or color of a single object. To
encourage a narrow focus of attention on the relevant feature, task difficulty was continuously titrated for each observer. Using fMRI and a multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA), we show that when the observer was
attending orientation, the pattern of activation in V1 discriminated the

Poster Session B

currently viewed orientation, but not the currently viewed color. In contrast, when the observer attended color, the pattern of activation in V1
discriminated the currently viewed color, but not the currently viewed
orientation. These results are inconsistent with the notion that attention
automatically spreads to all features of an attended object. Instead, they
suggest that attention may be voluntarily restricted to a single behaviorally relevant feature.
B10
THE EFFECTS OF IRRELEVANT PRE-TARGET STIMULI ON
FEATURE-SPECIFIC
BASELINE
SHIFTS
IN
SELECTIVE
ATTENTION Sean P. Fannon1,2, George R. Mangun2; 1Folsom Lake
College, 2Center for Mind & Brain, UC Davis — Functional MRI studies
have shown that visual selective attention to a spatial location increases
baseline neural activity in visual areas that represent that location even
before the onset of an attended visual target. However, analogous “baseline shifts” are not observed consistently for attention to non-spatial
visual features. Some previous studies that reported baseline shifts during feature-based attention presented an irrelevant visual stimulus in the
interval preceding attended targets (e.g. Chawla et al., 1999; Shulman et
al., 1998). However, similar studies in which the screen was left blank
during the pre-target period failed to observe feature-specific baseline
shifts (e.g. Shulman et al., 2002; Fannon and Mangun, 2005). We tested
the hypothesis that selective attention modulates the visual system’s
response to irrelevant pre-target stimuli, producing what appear to be
feature-specific baseline shifts. We examined BOLD responses to randomly intermixed cues for specific colors and directions of motion in
individually localized color- and motion-sensitive visual areas. During
half of the runs only a small fixation cross was present during the cue-target interval, but during the other half of the runs a static random dot
stimulus was present during these periods. Feature-specific baseline
shifts were not observed in either run type, failing to confirm our suspicion that the presence of irrelevant stimuli in the pre-target interval permits attentional modulation that might be interpreted as a baseline shift.
Other possible explanations for the discrepant results of previous studies
are offered.
B11
ATTENTION NARROWS POSITION TUNING IN EARLY VISUAL
AREAS Jason Fischer1, David Whitney1; 1University of California, Davis —
Voluntary visual attention allows us to perceive a selected region with a
great deal of precision. Psychophysical studies have shown that attention
improves performance on tasks that depend on spatial resolution; however, the mechanisms underlying such resolution improvements remain
unclear. Several studies have found boosted neuronal responses to
attended stimuli, and such signal gains could produce resolution
improvements. However, recordings in extrastriate areas have also found
that attention can effectively shrink the receptive fields of individual neurons. This has given rise to the hypothesis that in addition to producing
signal gain, attention might also narrow the selectivity of populationlevel responses for object position. However, no evidence has yet been
found for this narrowing of position tuning. Here, we tested the hypothesis that attention narrows position tuning in early visual areas, including
V1. Subjects either passively viewed or attended to the positions of target
objects. We measured the pattern of fMRI BOLD response across visual
areas V1 through V4 and found that in each area, the precision of retinotopic encoding improved significantly with attention. Further, when subjects attended to object position, regions of BOLD activity produced by
adjacent stimuli overlapped less than they did under passive viewing, as
revealed by a decreased correlation between the patterns of activity in the
attended conditions. A multiplicative gain mechanism alone cannot
explain these results; the resolution improvements result from the simultaneous influence of signal gain and an improvement in selectivity for
object position at the population level.

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

B12
ATTENTIONAL
MODULATION
OF
PERCEIVED
ECCENTRICITY Francesca Fortenbaugh1, Lynn Robertson1; 1University of
California, Berkeley — Can attention change the perceived extent of the
visual field? The present study investigated this question by asking 12
participants to estimate the eccentricity of target dots briefly flashed on a
computer screen under three levels of attentional distribution along horizontal and vertical axes: 1) attend to one radius, 2) attend to one axis, and
3) attend to both axes. Participants gave magnitude estimates between 0
(central fixation) and 100 (edge of aperture at 30deg). Attention was modulated by informing participants along what axes the targets would
appear before each block. Seven eccentricities were randomly tested
along each of the four radii from fixation. Participants increasingly
underestimated the eccentricity of the targets as the true eccentricity
increased, and this underestimation was mediated by both axis and
attentional distribution. Specifically, the degree of underestimation
increased with the area of visual space the participants monitored and
greater underestimations were observed along the horizontal axis than
the vertical axis. The magnitude estimates were well fit by power functions and show a complex relationship between the best fitting constants
and exponents. Analysis of the standard deviations of the magnitude estimates showed a significant quadratic trend with eccentricity, suggesting
that participants showed the greatest uncertainty when the target was
farthest from the two anchoring positions (i.e. fixation and the aperture’s
edge). This suggests that attention did not simply increase the uncertainty of target locations in unattended regions but actually modulated
the perceived extent of the visual field.
B13
DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES IN FUNCTIONAL NETWORKS
FOR VISUAL SELECTIVE ATTENTION Stacia Friedman-Hill1,2, Meryl
Wagman1, Andrew Speer1, Daniel Pine1, Ellen Leibenluft1, Leslie Ungerleider1;
1National Institute of Mental Health, 2National Science Foundation — While a
great deal is known about the fronto-parietal selective attention network
in adults, much less is known about the functional organization of attention in children. Given that frontal and parietal cortex have different
developmental trajectories, what are the relative contributions of these
areas across development? We employed event-related fMRI to study 18
healthy adults and 19 typically developing children (age 8-13) as they
performed a visual discrimination task which varied in difficulty and distractor salience. During a practice block, we determined subjects’ perceptual threshold, in order to equate task difficulty. In subsequent fMRI
blocks, we found no differences in error rates between children and
adults. Children’s response times were equivalent to adults for difficult
discriminations, but were slower for easy discriminations. Although
there were few behavioral differences between adults and children, fMRI
activations revealed many significant differences between the groups.
For easy discriminations, adults had significantly more activation than
children of inferior parietal lobule and fusiform gyrus, whereas children
had greater activation than adults of superior and middle temporal gyri,
putamen, thalamus, caudate, insula, medial frontal gyrus, and anterior
cingulate. For difficult discriminations, adults showed greater recruitment than children of intraparietal sulcus, inferior and superior parietal
lobules, and inferior and middle frontal gyri. In contrast, children continued to show greater activations than adults of the same regions as noted
for easy discriminations, and additionally superior frontal gyrus (BA 10)
and paracentral lobule. These results suggest that the fronto-parietal
attention network has not yet reached functional maturity in school-age
children.
B14
DISSOCIATION OF VISUAL C1 AND P1 COMPONENTS AS A
FUNCTION OF ATTENTION: EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL
STUDIES Shimin Fu1, John Fedota1, Raja Parasuraman1; 1George Mason
University, Fairfax, VA — The earliest cortical location at which attention
influences visual information processing in the brain remains controver-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

57

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

sial. Previous event-related potential (ERP) studies comparing the cortical response to the same stimulus when attended and unattended have
shown modulation of the P1 component but not the earlier C1 component. Here we used an alternative method to evaluate the effects of attention on C1 and P1. A virtual square consisting of four brackets was
presented in the left, right, or both visual fields. ERPs were recorded
while participants performed a passive viewing task (exp. 1) and an
active viewing task (exp. 2). ERPs to the unilateral left and right stimuli
were summed and compared to the ERPs to the bilateral stimuli. The C1
component (~80 ms) was comparable in amplitude and latency between
the bilateral and the summed ERPs, regardless of the experimental condition. In contrast, while the amplitude of the P1 component (~130 ms)
between the summed ERPs and the bilateral ERPs was comparable under
passive viewing, a larger P1 for summed ERPs was observed in the active
condition. These results using a novel methodology suggest a dissociation between the C1 and P1 components as a function of attention—C1 is
an exogenous component that is sensitive primarily to stimulus properties and insensitive to attention, whereas P1 is modulated by attention.
B15
INDUCED
ALPHA-BAND
EEG
OSCILLATIONS
INDEX
ANTICIPATORY BIASING OF VISUAL CORTEX DURING
VOLUNTARY SPATIAL ATTENTION Jessica
Green1,
John
1
1
McDonald ; Simon Fraser University — During voluntary shifts of spatial
attention, two electrophysiological effects have been linked to anticipatory biasing in visual cortex: the late-directing-attention-positivity
(LDAP) in the event-related potentials (ERPs) and increases in alphaband (8-14 Hz) activity in the electroencephalographic (EEG) oscillations.
However, in a handful of studies that used variable intervals between
attention-directing cues and response-relevant targets the LDAP was not
observed in the ERPs despite other evidence that attention had been allocated to the cued location. Here we sought to determine if alpha-band
oscillations would still occur when the target onset was unpredictable
and anticipatory biasing was not observed in the ERPs. We performed
two variants of an attention cueing task with multiple intervals between
the cues and targets (300, 900, or 1500 ms), one in which the target onsets
were unpredictable and only the to-be attended location was cued (Exp.
1) and one in which both the temporal interval and to-be-attended location were cued (Exp. 2). As expected, when the target onset was unpredictable no LDAP was evident, whereas when the target onset was
predictable the LDAP was observed. Increases in alpha-band activity,
however, occurred in visual cortical regions contralateral to the to-beignored location in both experiments, suggesting they play an integral
role in anticipatory biasing of sensory cortex. When the target onset
occurs at a predictable interval the alpha oscillations become phaselocked to the stimuli, enabling their visualization in the ERP waveforms.
B16
THE AUTOMATIC NATURE OF SOCIAL STIMULI ON SPATIAL
ORIENTING OF ATTENTION: CAN SOCIAL CUES GENERATE
INHIBITION OF RETURN? Deanna J. Greene1, Eran Zaidel1,2;
1
University of California Los Angeles, 2University of California Los Angeles,
Brain Research Institute — Evidence suggests that directed social cues,
such as eye gaze, cause automatic shifts in attention following gaze direction. The effect of central gaze cues on attention has been investigated
using a variant of Posner’s spatial cueing paradigm, where participants
respond to a peripheral target that is preceded by a valid or invalid cue.
Participants typically respond faster to validly cued than invalidly cued
targets, even when gaze direction does not have predictive value. Typical
automatic cues, such as peripheral luminance changes, exhibit a selective
inhibitory effect (inhibition of return; IOR), in which participants respond
faster to invalidly cued targets at long (>300ms) cue-to-target intervals.
However, there have been no reports of IOR with gaze cues. A similar
behavioral pattern has been found for non-predictive central arrow cues,
which are commonly used as a nonsocial control for gaze cues. Yet,
peripheral cues are usually presented briefly, while the aforementioned

58

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

central cues are not. Thus, we ran a variation of the spatial cueing task
with three non-predictive cue types (central gaze, central arrow, peripheral squares), all flashed briefly for 125msec. While previous studies
blocked different cue types, we presented both blocked and randomly
intermixed versions of the task. We found IOR for both peripheral and
gaze cues, but not for arrow cues in the blocked experiment. In the mixed
experiment, gaze cues no longer showed IOR, similar to arrow cues. This
demonstrates that social cues are flexible and behave like peripheral cues
in isolation, but like central cues in mixed context.
B17
INVESTIGATING NEURAL NETWORKS IN HUMAN SPATIAL
ATTENTION USING FREQUENCY TAGGING Nienke Hoogenboom1,
Markus Butz2, Alfons Schnitzler2,3, Klaus Kessler1; 1Centre for Cognitive
Neuroimaging, University of Glasgow, UK, 2MEG Laboratory, Neurology,
Heinrich-Heine-University, Duesseldorf, Germany, 3Wolfson Centre for
Clinical and Cognitive Neuroscience, University of Bangor, UK — Spatial
attention studies have demonstrated that the neural activity elicited by a
visual stimulus is enhanced when the observers direct their attention to
the region of space containing that stimulus. Increasing evidence has suggested a number of cortical regions to be involved in attentional networks, however, in these classical paradigms it is difficult to disentangle
the various brain processes going on in parallel. Another well known
phenomenon is that flickering visual stimuli entrain the visual cortex into
oscillations in the same frequency (Steady State Visually Evoked Potentials, SSVEP). We set out to test whether such oscillations are modulated
by attention and whether we would observe cortico-cortical synchronization in this frequency. This would allow us to trace the network and disentangle parallel processing by means of a “frequency tag”.Accordingly,
we employed flickering stimuli in a spatial attention paradigm while
recoding magnetoencephalography (MEG). We presented figures in left
and right hemi-field with a flicker frequency of 6Hz or 7.5Hz, while subjects had to maintain fixation. At the beginning of each trial two directional cues (endogenous and exogenous) were presented and subject had
to direct their attention to the cued side. Preliminary data of 16 subjects
shows a clear driving effect of tagging frequencies and its harmonics in
visual cortex, while attention modulates the power in these frequency
bands. Furthermore, preliminary analysis revealed clusters of activity in
the tagging frequencies that extended beyond visual cortex. We therefore
suggest that frequency tagging is a sensitive tool to study networks of
spatial attention.
B18
HUMAN PARIETAL CORTEX MEDIATES BOTH STIMULUSDRIVEN AND GOAL-DRIVEN VISUAL ORIENTING Masud
Husain1,2, Victoria Singh-Curry1,2, Paul Bays1,2; 1Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, University College London, UK, 2Institute of Neurology,
University College London, UK — To extract useful information from the
visual world we must direct our eyes serially to different regions of
space. How do we decide where and in what order these fixations should
be directed? Studies in primates suggest that attentional priority may be
represented in the brain by neuronal activity in posterior parietal cortex
(PPC), in the form of a topographically-organised map of visual space.
Consistent with this, PPC lesions in humans may result in failure to direct
attention to stimuli in space – contralesionally in unilateral neglect and
bilaterally in Bálint’s syndrome – perhaps reflecting damage to such a
priority map. Activity in primate PPC appears to combine a stimulusdriven component, relating to the visual salience of the retinal image, and
a goal-driven component, reflecting the relevance of items in the scene to
our current aims and intentions. Here we attempt to dissociate the effects
of PPC lesions in humans on stimulus- and goal-driven visual orienting.
Subjects are given the task of scanning a rapidly-changing array of distractors for target letters. We provoke reflexive saccades to non-target
items by increasing their salience, through changes in onset, luminance,
or orientation. Patients with parietal lesions show deficits in both stimulus-driven orienting, as determined by saccades to salient non-targets,

Poster Session B

and goal-driven orienting, evaluated by saccades to targets and by
exploratory eye movements. The spatial distribution of impairment is
identical in each case, supporting the conclusion that human PPC represents both stimulus-driven and goal-driven components of attentional
priority.
B19
FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION OF HUMAN FRONTAL CORTEX
ACCORDING TO PERCEPTUAL AND RESPONSE SELECTION
DEMANDS Akiko Ikkai1, Trenton Jerde1, Clayton Curtis1,2; 1New York
Univeristy, 2Center for Neural Science, New York University — Compared to
posterior cortex, the functional organization of the frontal cortex remains
largely unknown. Here, we test the hypothesis that segregated projections from posterior cortex carry visual information about actions and
perceptions to dorsal and ventral frontal cortex, respectively. We used
rapid event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to
measure cortical activity that parametrically scaled with perceptual or
response selection demands of a visual search task. We manipulated perceptual demands by increasing the number of distractors in a search
array (i.e., 4, 8, 12 items). We manipulated response demands by requiring more difficult transformations between a search target location and
the instructed saccadic goal (i.e., prosaccade, antisaccade, 90-degree
rotated saccade). Longer saccadic response times were associated with
larger set sizes and more difficult saccade transformations, but these two
factors did not statistically interact. In posterior cortex, fMRI signal in the
ventral visual stream (i.e., occipito-temporal cortex) was associated with
increasing set size. Signal in the dorsal visual stream (i.e., parietal cortex)
was associated with more difficult saccade transformations. In frontal
cortex, we observed strong saccade transformation effects, regardless of
set size, along the extent of the precentral sulcus. However, the set size
manipulation had relatively small effects in the frontal cortex. Thus far,
the data do not support a dorsal-ventral distinction in frontal cortex
according to perceptual and response selection demands. These preliminary results may indicate that although visual processing is segregated in
posterior cortex, it may be integrated in frontal cortex.
B20
EFFECTS OF VOLUNTARY MODULATIONS IN ATTENTIONAL
FOCUS ON DISTRACTOR INTERFERENCE Tonya Jacobs1, Ewa
Wojciulik1; 1University of California, Davis — Behaviorally irrelevant distractors often interfere with task performance, especially when the task is
easy. However, distractor interference can be reduced when spatial cues
define an attentional window that excludes irrelevant information. Here
we determined whether the size of an attentional window can be reduced
in the absence of spatial cues in a voluntary manner such that irrelevant
stimuli are filtered out. Subjects performed a 2-choice letter identification
task while ignoring task irrelevant distractor letters. One of two possible
target letters was presented within a row of non-target letters. Distractor
letters flanked this central row and were either compatible or incompatible with the target. The task was either easy or was made more difficult
by presenting letters at reduced size and contrast. Prior to each display, a
central ‘readiness’ cue indicated the onset of a trial and subjects were
instructed to ignore the flanking distractors to the best of their ability.
Less frequently, a central ‘focus’ cue indicated that the subject should
make an extra effort to restrict their attentional focus in order to filter out
flanking distractors. Results show that distractor interference was significantly diminished when a ‘focus’ cue preceded a trial, with significant
reductions in reaction time differences between compatible and incompatible trials for both easy and hard task conditions. These data suggest
that the size of an attentional window can be modulated as part of an
endogenous control process that may be initiated prior to a task without
the use of concurrent spatial cues.

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

B21
CULTURAL
DIFFERENCES
IN
THE
PROCESSING
OF
INCONGRUOUS
SCENES
REVEALED
USING
FMR
ADAPTATION. Lucas Jenkins1, Yung-Jui Yang1, Joshua Goh1, Ying-Yi
Hong1, Denise Park1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Converging behavioral and neuroimaging evidence indicates that culture
influences the processing of complex visual scenes. Whereas Westerners
focus on central objects and tend to ignore context, East Asians process
scenes more holistically, attending to the context in which objects are
embedded. We investigated cultural differences in contextual processing
by manipulating the congruity of visual scenes presented in an fMR
adaptation paradigm. We hypothesized that East Asians would show
greater adaptation to incongruous scenes, consistent with their tendency
to process contextual relationships more extensively than Westerners.
Sixteen Americans and 16 native Chinese were scanned while viewing
sets of pictures consisting of a focal object superimposed upon a background scene. In half of the pictures objects were paired with congruous
backgrounds (e.g. a cow in a field), and in the other half objects were
paired with backgrounds that were incongruous but not impossible (e.g.
a blender on a bus). We found that within both the right and left lateral
occipital complexes (visual processing regions selective to objects), Chinese subjects showed significantly greater adaptation to incongruous
scenes than to congruous scenes relative to American subjects. These
results indicate that Chinese subjects were more sensitive to contextual
incongruity than were Americans and that they reacted to incompatible
object/background pairings by focusing greater attention on the focal
object.
B22
MINDWANDERING SHIFTS THE LEVEL OF SENSORY ANALYSIS
IN VISUAL CORTEX Julia Kam1, Jonathan W. Schooler1, Todd C.
Handy1; 1University of British Columbia — Mindwandering is associated
with reduced cognitive analysis of external visual events, yet it remains
uncertain as to exactly how the processing of visual events are dampened
during periods of mindwandering. Here we used event-related potentials
(ERPs) to examine whether mindwandering may be associated with
reduced sensory responses in visual cortex. Participants performed a target detection task at fixation while ERPs were recorded. Interspersed
with each target was a task-irrelevant probe in the visual periphery. At
the end of each trial block participants self-reported on whether or not
they had been mindwandering at the conclusion of the trial block. The
ERPs to peripheral probes were then examined as a function of whether
or not they immediately preceded a report of mindwandering. We found
that the amplitude of the lateral occipital P1 ERP component elicited by
the probes decreased during periods of mindwandering relative to
reports of being "on-task", which suggests that mindwandering reduced
sensory-level responses in the extrastriate visual cortex. At the same time,
however, we also found that mindwandering increased sensory
responses in primary visual cortex, as measured via the C1 ERP component. Taken together, our data thus suggest that mindwandering doesn't
simply reduce the intensity of sensory responses in the visual cortex in a
manner akin to turning off the attentional spotlight. Rather, mindwandering appears to shift the focus of sensory analysis to a more primitive
or cursory cortical level.
B23
DIFFERENTIATED VISUAL AND MOTOR COMPONENTS OF
CUEING EFFECTS ON ANTI-SACCADES Aarlenne Z Khan1, Stephen
J Heinen1, Robert M McPeek1; 1Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Institute, San
Francisco, California — Previous studies have shown that congruent spatial cues can influence saccade latencies (attentional capture vs. inhibition
of return (IOR)). However, it is unclear whether the cue affects the time it
takes to detect the visual target or to form the motor response to the same
spatial location. To address this issue, we used a mirror-antisaccade task
to dissociate visual detection from saccade generation and then tested the
effect of a cue on these two components separately. Visual targets were

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

59

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

presented at one of 4 oblique positions at a 7 degree distance from central
fixation. Subjects made saccades to the mirror position of the visual target
(90 degrees away), e.g. if the visual target was presented up and to the
left, they were to make a saccade up and to the right. A cue was flashed
randomly at one of the 4 positions at different times before the visual target was presented. Therefore, the cue could appear at a location that was
the same as or opposite to that of either the saccade goal or the visual target. We found that the spatial cue affected the visual detection of the target but not the motor planning stage, suggesting that attention may
influence only early sensory processing. In addition we found that the
cue only affected visual detection at very short cue-target delays (attentional capture but no IOR). This suggests that different attentional components, i.e. early attentional facilitation vs. later inhibitory mechanisms,
are subserved by distinct neural substrates.
B24
EFFECTS OF HEALTHY AGING ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF
ATTENTION IN A WORKING MEMORY TASK Reshma
Kumar1,
Pamela Greenwood1, Raja Parasuraman1; 1George Mason University — Attention and working memory are mutually dependent processes that interact. Specifically, selective attention can restrict the contents of working
memory to task-relevant events. Consequently, age-related decline in
working memory performance may reflect reduced efficiency of selective
attention. We tested this hypothesis by using verbal and spatial versions
of the 2-back task to assess the effect of attention on working memory.
The task presented a continuous string of discrete letters to which a
match/non-match response was required which compared the identity
(verbal 2-back) or spatial location (spatial 2-back) of the current letter to
one presented 2 trials previously. To manipulate the focus of attention,
letters could occur at two possible locations -- 2° or 4.8° from central fixation -- along two imaginary circles. Target letters (1°) appeared equiprobably at all 12 locations for 200ms, followed by a response interval of
2750ms. For the spatial task, older adults showed increased accuracy
when targets appeared at the farther location while younger adults benefited from targets appearing closer to central fixation (p < 0.01). No age
effects were seen for the verbal task. For both tasks, older adults were
more accurate on match trials while younger adults performed better on
non-match trials. Results show (a) the attentional distribution influences
the efficiency of spatial encoding; (b) in healthy aging, attention is
broadly distributed facilitating peripheral at the expense of central spatial
encoding in working memory. Therefore, one explanation for age deficits
in spatial working memory is the different distribution of visuospatial
attention.
B25
THE NEURAL FATE OF ATTENDED VS. IGNORED WORDS:
LESSONS FROM NEUROLOGICALLY HEALTHY PARTICIPANTS
AND A PATIENT WITH UNILATERAL NEGLECT Ayelet Landau1,
Lara Pierce2, Lynn Robertson1,3; 1University of California, Berkeley, CA,
2University of Victoria, British Columbia, Canada, 3Veterans Administration,
Martinez, CA — The present study was designed to examine perceptual
responses to words under different attentional conditions in normal participants and in patients with unilateral neglect. EEG was recorded from
scalp electrodes while participants were either attending or ignoring
words presented lateralized to fixation. The focus was on the N170 ERP
to words and was measured for both attention conditions (attend/
ignore). Each display contained a symbol at the center of fixation and a
lateralized presentation of a word. Words either appeared to the left or to
the right of fixation (in separate blocks). In the attend-word condition,
participants were monitoring the peripheral words covertly for an
inverted word. In the ignore-word condition participants were instructed
to monitor the symbols for an ‘x’. ERPs to attended and ignored words
were compared in a group of 16 neurologically healthy participants and a
patient with neglect. In the neurologically healthy group the N170 was
modulated by spatial attention. Namely the N170 was larger to attended
words compared to identical displays in which the words were ignored.

60

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

This finding was consistent across visual fields and was present in both
hemispheres. In the patient with unilateral neglect attention modulation
of the N170 depended on the visual field of the lateralized-stimulus.
When a word appeared in the LVF (the bad field) this modulation was
present in both hemispheres. When a word appeared in the RVF (the
good field) the modulation was restricted to the intact hemisphere suggesting a functional asymmetry in hemispheric relay subsequent to unilateral damage.
B26
FUNCTIONAL NETWORKS UNDERLYING HUMAN TOP-DOWN
VISUAL SPATIAL ATTENTION Thomas
Lauritzen1,2,3,
Mark
D'Esposito2,3, David Heeger5, Michael Silver2,3,4; 1Redwood Center for
Theoretical Neuroscience, UC Berkeley, 2Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, UC
Berkeley, 3Wheeler Brain Imaging Center, UC Berkeley, 4School of Optometry,
UC Berkeley, 5Center for Neural Science, New York University — Visual spatial attention enhances perception at attended locations. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have shown that allocation of
attention increases fMRI signals in portions of early visual cortex that retinotopically represent the attended location, even in the absence of a
visual stimulus (Kastner et al. 1999). When attention is maintained during a delay period, these visual cortical signals are sustained for the duration of the delay period (Silver et al., 2007). IPS1 and IPS2 are
topographically organized areas in human posterior parietal cortex that
may transmit top-down spatial attention signals to early visual cortex
(Silver et al., 2005). We employed fMRI and computed coherency among
visual cortical areas and IPS1 and IPS2 during periods of sustained visual
spatial attention in the absence of visual stimulation. Subjects performed
a visual detection task in which a variable-duration delay period preceded target presentation. During the delay period, subjects continuously
maintained attention at the visual field locations corresponding to the
annulus. We calculated coherency magnitudes (strength of coupling) and
phase delays (temporal differences in activity) between pairs of cortical
areas during periods of sustained visual spatial attention and for periods
of visual fixation. The magnitudes and phase delays during fixation were
subtracted from the corresponding measures during sustained attention
to determine the functional connectivity specific to top-down spatial
attention. Both the coherency magnitude and phase delay results are consistent with transmission of top-down spatial attention signals from IPS1
and IPS2 to early visual cortex.
B27
NEURAL BASIS OF ATTENTIONAL TOP-DOWN MODULATION
OF CAUSAL JUDGMENT Roberto Limongi-Tirado1,2, Reza Habib1,
Michael Young1, Karen Reinke1,3; 1Southern Illinois University Carbondale,
2
Venezuelan Institute for Scientific Research, 3University of Illinois at
Springfield — The behavioral literature has reported a differentiation
between bottom-up (perceived) and top-down (inferred) causality. While
the bottom-up approach presupposes that the brain automatically detects
direct causal events, we propose that linguistic representations of causation increase the system’s sensitivity to detect a wide range of indirect
causal events via top-down modulation of the sensory input. Psycholinguistic research has shown that whereas lexical sentences such as “the
orange ball moves the purple ball” describe direct causal events, periphrastic structures of the form “the orange ball causes the purple ball to
move” could represent either direct or indirect events. Consequently, we
hypothesized that a periphrastic verbal instruction would modulate the
perception of the visual causal events. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging to identify the neural basis of this linguistic top-down
modulation. In a decision task, participants observed lexical and periphrastic verbal instructions followed by animations of causal (direct and
indirect) and non-causal events. During the reading of the periphrastic
verbal instruction, activations were noted in the frontal cortex, the caudate nucleus and the visual cortex. Moreover, during the observation of
the animations under the periphrastic condition, we found differential
activity in frontal, temporal, and parietal regions previously reported as

Poster Session B

participating in goal-directed attentional tasks. We summarize these
results as the periphrastic effect, and hypothesize a two-stage top-down
modulation of causal judgment. Fronto-striatum connections might elicit
anticipatory activity in the visual area which, in turn, would be followed
by activity in areas associated with top-down attentional control.
B28
THE ROLE OF THE HUMAN PULVINAR IN VISUAL ATTENTION
AND ACTION: EVIDENCE
FROM TEMPORAL ORDER
JUDGMENTS, SACCADE DECISION AND ANTI-SACCADE
TASKS Liana Machado1, Isabel Arend2, Michelle McGrath2, Tony Ro3,
Robert Ward2, Robert Rafal2; 1University of Otago, 2Bangor University, 3Rice
University — Recent research indicates that the pulvinar nucleus of the
thalamus may play a key role in visual attention functions. We investigated the contribution of the human pulvinar to visual attention and oculomotor behavior by testing a small pool of patients with unilateral
lesions involving the pulvinar nucleus. Here we present new evidence for
the role of this structure in both visual attention and eye movements
through perceptual and oculomotor versions of a temporal order judgment task and an anti-saccade task. Pulvinar damage induces a bias
against contralesional stimuli for both perceptual temporal order judgments and saccadic decision, and also increases the latency of anti-saccades for contralesional targets. The demonstration that pulvinar damage
affects both visual perception and eye movement behavior highlights the
role of this structure as a part of the complex network engaged in integrating visual and oculomotor signals that are central for both visual
attention and action.
B29
IMPROVEMENTS
IN
PERCEPTUAL
THRESHOLD
WITH
INTENSIVE
ATTENTION
TRAINING
THROUGH
CONCENTRATION MEDITATION Katherine MacLean1,2, Clifford
Saron2, Stephen Aichele2, David Bridwell2, Tonya Jacobs2, Anthony Zanesco2,
George Mangun1,2; 1University of California, Davis, 2University of California
Davis/Center for Mind and Brain — The practice of concentration meditation aims to cultivate trait improvements in selective attention, perceptual resolution and attentional control. Selective attention has
consistently been shown to promote perceptual learning such that discrimination of attended features improves with exposure and training. In
this vein, meditation training may enhance perceptual learning as task
relevant features are better attended during exposure. We investigated
changes in perceptual discrimination threshold in a group of participants
(n = 30) who practiced concentration meditation (shamatha taught by
Alan Wallace) for 8-10 hours/day during the course of a 3-month retreat.
We compared their performance on computer-based tasks to that of a
group of wait-list controls (n=30) who were matched on demographic,
psychological and performance-based factors. Continuous EEG from 88
channels was collected during task performance. Visual discrimination
thresholds – the visual angle difference between a long non-target line
and a short target line - were determined using Parameter Estimation
through Sequential Testing (PEST). At each of three testing points, participants completed the threshold task immediately before a related visual
sustained attention task. Results from t-tests show that the groups had
similar thresholds at pre-test (p = .73), with retreat participants exhibiting
a trend toward lower thresholds at mid-test (p = .07) and significantly
lower thresholds at post-test (p = .01). These findings demonstrate that
intensive training in concentration meditation can lead to generalizable
improvements in perception that are likely driven by enhanced selective
attention. Changes in early and late ERPs describe the neural processing
that underlies the observed improvements.
B30
TOP-DOWN MODULATION OF VISUAL CORTEX BY HIGHLEVEL ATTENTIONAL CONTROL REGIONS OBSERVED BY
MEG-BASED GRANGER CAUSALITY ANALYSIS Muhilan
Mahalingam1, Steven L Bressler1, Rajamini Sreenivasan2, Dimitrios Pantazis3,
Darren L Weber4, Corby L Dale5, Richard M Leahy3, Gregory V Simpson5;

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

1
Florida Atlantic University, 2National Institute of Mental Health, 3University
of Southern California, 4Smith Kettlewell Institute, 5University of California,
San Francisco — Although prefrontal and posterior parietal cortical areas
have been implicated as high-level control regions in the top-down biasing of visual spatial attention, the nature of their influence on low-level
visual cortical regions has not been resolved. We hypothesized that following spatial cueing top-down attentional modulation of representations of the cued location is facilitatory and that of the non-cued location
is suppressive. We therefore predicted that top-down influences from
prefrontal and posterior parietal regions to visual cortical regions
observed after spatial cueing would differentially modulate visual cortical representations of cued and non-cued locations. We tested this prediction with Granger Causality analysis of magnetoencephalographic
(MEG) data collected from 8 human subjects as they performed a cued
covert visual spatial attention task. A cortically-constrained minimum
norm imaging method was used to localize 40,000 cortical sources from
which ROIs were selected for analysis. MultiVariate AutoRegressive
(MVAR) modeling was used to derive spectral power, coherence and
Granger causality. Analyzing these spectral measures in multiple frequency bands and in multiple post-cue time windows, we characterized
the nature of cortico-cortical interactions of high-level control regions
with low-level visual cortical regions in relation to visual spatial attention.

B31
FMRI INVESTIGATIONS OF THE EFFECT OF MACULAR
DEGENERATION ON SPATIAL ATTENTION Keith L. Main1, Kevin
P. Moloney1, Erin N. Kinzel1, Jimmy Ginn1, Temilade A. Adelore1, Susan A.
Primo2, Julie A. Jacko1,2, Eric H. Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of
Technology, 2Emory University — Research indicates that human visual
cortex is able to reorganize in response to retinal deafferentation. Studies
conducted on patients with ocular or retinal diseases, such as macular
degeneration (MD), show that lesion projection zones (LPZ) begin to
respond to ectopic stimulation in the peripheral retina (Baker et al, 2005).
This reorganization may depend on whether patients adopt a preferred
retinal location (PRL) (Main et al, 2007). These findings indicate that
visual cortex may be able to adapt either structurally, functionally, or
both, to changes in sensory input. In addition to changes in striate cortex,
reorganization may extend to extrastriate and executive control areas of
the brain. Connections between striate cortex and these areas have been
demonstrated in the normal human brain (Desimone & Duncan, 1995).
Such connections may allow changes in the organization of striate cortex
to subsequently affect extrastriate and frontal brain areas that mediate
attention. To investigate this hypothesis, we examined the spatial attention of patients with MD using both behavioral and fMRI procedures. We
found marked departures in the way MD patients allocate their attention
between their PRLs and other, non-PRL, retinal areas. These behavioral
findings were corroborated by fMRI data, showing differential activation
in neural correlates of attention in response to stimulation of the PRL and
Non-PRL areas.
B32
ACTIVITY WITHIN THE HUMAN MIRROR SYSTEM DURING
IMITATION OF UNSEEN HAND ACTIONS: AN FMRI STUDY
USING CONTINUOUS FLASH SUPPRESSION Jason B. Mattingley1,
Chris Brander1, Darren Tan1, Trevor Chong1, Ross Cunnington1; 1Queensland
Brain Institute & School of Psychology, University of Queensland — The primate ‘mirror neuron’ system is thought to provide a neural mechanism
through which perceived actions are understood by engaging representations within an observer’s own motor repertoire. Evidence from monkeys
suggests that some mirror neurons are sensitive to the degree of correspondence between observed and executed actions. In humans, this is
manifested as a congruency effect for actions that are performed while
participants observe task-irrelevant matching versus non-matching
actions. Here we investigated whether such congruency effects are evident within the human mirror system during imitation of actions that are

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

61

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

rendered invisible using continuous flash suppression. In the first phase
of the study, we used fMRI to localize areas of the brain that responded
under all four of the following conditions: (1) passive observation of
actions; (2) self-selection of actions; (3) cued actions; and (4) imitated
actions. Neural responses within these operationally defined mirror areas
were then examined in a second phase in which participants performed a
familiar hand action (e.g., hammering a nail) while viewing dynamic displays of congruent or incongruent actions. The visual displays were
either visible or rendered invisible using continuous flash suppression.
Activity within the mirror regions did not vary significantly with congruency for visible actions; by contrast, a small region of the left premotor
cortex was sensitive to the congruency manipulation when the observed
hand actions were not consciously perceived. The findings suggest that in
the absence of strategic control processes the mirror system encodes
potential conflict between observed and executed actions.
B33
A NEW ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MARKER OF ATTENTIONAL
SUPPRESSION IN HUMANS John McDonald1, Clayton Hickey2,
Vincent Di Lollo1; 1Simon Fraser University, 2Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam — Attentional selection of a target item that pops out from
surrounding distractor items can be indexed with an event-related potential (ERP) component known as the N2pc. Several lines of evidence suggest that the N2pc reflects a fundamental mechanism of attention that
acts upon the neural representation of the target to reduce ambiguity
resulting from the presentation of nearby distractors. However, results
from other methodologies suggest that attention can also act upon the
neural representation of the distractors themselves. Here, we report the
results of several experiments designed to identify ERP correlates of the
direct suppression of distractor representations. In the first experiment,
participants viewed sparse visual search arrays containing a target and a
single distractor that was isoluminant with the background. When the
target appeared on the vertical meridian and thus produced no lateralized activity, we observed a positive ERP component contralateral to the
lateral distractor. We labeled this posterior contralateral ERP component
the distractor positivity (PD). We found that the PD was present when
participants discriminates the shape of the target but not when participants detected the target (Experiment 2) or when the distractor was presented with a non-target item that was task irrelevant (Experiment 3).
These results indicate that the PD reflects suppression of the cortical representation of the distractor and that such suppression occurs only when
participants are actively attending to another item in the display.
B34
ROLES OF SUPERIOR COLLICULUS AND FRONTAL EYE FIELD
IN STIMULUS-DRIVEN AND TOP-DOWN ATTENTION SHIFTS
Robert McPeek1, Byeong-Taek Lee1; 1Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research
Institute — Covert spatial attention can be captured by a salient stimulus
or voluntarily shifted using top-down mechanisms. To investigate
whether the primate superior colliculus (SC) and frontal eye field (FEF)
play different roles in attention, we recorded single-unit activity as monkeys fixated and discriminated the orientation of a briefly-presented
peripheral target embedded in an array of distractors. In some blocks of
trials, stimulus-driven attention was tested by cueing the target location
with a color-oddity cue. In other blocks, top-down attention was tested
by making the target more likely to appear in one location than in the others. Both manipulations had significant effects on the accuracy of discriminating the target's orientation, indicating that they influenced
attention. If SC and FEF cells are involved in controlling attention, they
should show a modulation in activity after presentation of the attentional
precue and before the onset of the target. We found that activity during
this "pre-target" time interval was strongly modulated by precues in the
stimulus-driven attention task for a subpopulation of both SC and FEF
cells. The activity was correlated with the locus and timecourse of attention, as well as with behavioral performance. In contrast, in the top-down
attention task, only FEF cells showed strong pre-target activity modula-

62

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

tions. These results suggest that stimulus-driven shifts involve both the
SC and the FEF, while top-down shifts involve the FEF, but not the SC.
This dissociation supports the idea that stimulus-driven and top-down
shifts of attention are processed, at least in part, by different neural pathways.
B35
VISUAL STRATEGIES DURING TEXTBOOK READING Lisa
M.
Meschino1, Michael G. Reynolds2, Daniel Smilek1; 1University of Waterloo,
2Trent University — Textbook reading is a common student activity, yet
very little is known about how visual attention is strategically deployed
during this task. We addressed this issue by observing participants’ eye
movements as they read two four-page sections taken from two different
chapters of an undergraduate textbook. The textbook pages were presented to participants on a wide-screen computer in two-page spreads.
Participants could “turn” the pages by pressing the trigger on a gamepad.
The layout of each textbook section included headings, sub-headings,
text arranged in a two-column format, coloured figures, tables, photos
and text boxes. Participants were given 10 minutes to read each section,
during which time their eye movements were monitored. Each reading
task was followed by a comprehension task that tested the participants’
memory of the content. Finally, participants provided subjective reports
of their reading strategies. The results show that there are several distinct
phases of reading that are consistent across individuals. In addition, we
found several different reading strategies within these phases that varied
across individuals. These findings are discussed in terms of the relationship between the visual dimensions of text, reading strategies, and reading comprehension.

Higher level cognition: Disorders
B36
DIMINISHED
PERCEPTION
OF
SADNESS
IN
HIGH
FUNCTIONING AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS Laura
Case1,
Lauren Kenworthy2,1, Alex Martin1, Gregory Wallace1; 1National Institute of
Mental Health, 2Center for Autism Spectrum Disorders, Children's National
Medical Center — Facial emotion recognition tasks are one way of assessing social-emotional processing difficulties associated with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). We use a finely graduated morphing paradigm to
evaluate differences in perceptual sensitivity (PS) to emotional expression between ASD and typically developing (TD) male adolescents and to
clarify the relationship between PS and ASD symptomatology (Autism
Diagnostic Observation Schedule [ADOS]). Neutral and emotional faces
(happy, sad, fear, anger, surprise, disgust) were morphed to create series
of 21 images for each emotion advancing from 0-100% emotion. Highfunctioning (IQ>80) ASD adolescents (N=28) and matched TD controls
(N=23) viewed each series and named the emotion shown. Performance
was assessed by accuracy and by PS (the number of morphs earlier than
100% emotional expression). The groups did not differ in accuracy. ASD
adolescents showed overall lower PS than TD adolescents (p<0.01) and
there was an interaction between group and emotion (p<0.05). Pairwise
comparisons revealed lower PS in ASD participants to sad, happy, and
disgust; only sad remained significant after controlling for overall PS.
While sensitivity to sad was high for TD participants, it was the lowest of
all six emotions for the ASD participants. In addition, PS to sad among
ASD adolescents correlated with the ADOS social interaction score
(p<0.01). These findings suggest a relation between perception of facial
emotion, especially sadness, and real-life social difficulties in ASD.

Poster Session B

B37
SLORETA REVEALS RESTING ANTERIOR CINGULATE THETA
BAND POWER DIFFERENCES IN HIGH VS. LOW OBSESSIVE
COMPULSIVE SYMPTOMOLOGY James Cavanagh1, Theo Gruendler2,
Christina Figueroa1, Antonia Kaczkurkin1, Michael Frank1, John Allen1;
1
University of Arizona, 2Max-Planck Institute for Neurological Research — A
hyperactive striatal-cortical circuit has been hypothesized to underlie the
obtrusive thoughts and repetitive behaviors which comprise obsessivecompulsive (OC) symptoms. Larger error-related negativities (ERNs)
generated from the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) have been proposed
to reflect hyperactive error signals originating from this network in OCD,
as well as across OC symptom scores in non-patients. This study reveals
that resting EEG power may reflect specific tonic alterations in ACC functioning as a function of OC symptom scores. Two minutes of resting EEG
from 61 undergraduates scoring over a range of OC symptoms were
investigated using the sLORETA source localization algorithm. High OC
participants displayed significantly higher relative theta band power in
rostral ACC, but lower relative theta band power in dorsal ACC when
compared to either Middle or Low OC groups. Degree of self-reported
obsession frequency demonstrated a similar correlation with resting ACC
theta power (hotter rostral ACC, cooler dorsal ACC) across all participants. Region-of-interest analysis indicated that relative dorsal ACC
theta power at rest directly predicted future ERN amplitude during a
probabilistic learning task. However, ERN amplitudes were diminished
in High OC; possibly conflicting with a hyperactive error monitoring
account, but fitting with a hypoactive dorsal ACC account. A replication
and extension study is currently underway to offer insight into: 1) the
functional role of different ACC sub-regions in OCD, and 2) the specificity of the ERN as an index of error monitoring.
B38
CHILDREN WITH DYSLEXIA SHOW WEAKER BRAIN
ACTIVATION IN ORTHOGRAPHIC AND PHONOLOGICAL
PROCESSING
REGIONS
DURING
SPOKEN
LANGUAGE
PROCESSING Nadia Cone1, Donald Bolger1, Caroline Na1, Douglas
Burman1,2, James Booth1,2; 1Northwestern University, 2Evanston Northwestern
Healthcare — We examined differences in brain activation between dyslexic and normally-achieving children (9- to 15-years of age) during an
auditory rhyme decision task using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Both groups showed activation across all conditions in bilateral superior and middle temporal gyri (BA 42, 22, 21) and medial frontal
cortex (BA 6, 32), with no significant group differences in activation of
these regions. Only the normally-achieving children showed activation of
left fusiform cortex (BA 37), which has been previously implicated in
orthographic processing, and direct comparison of the two groups
revealed significantly greater activation in this region in the normallyachieving children. When comparing activation to conflicting (i.e., matching orthographic but non-matching phonological endings; e.g., PINTMINT) versus nonconflicting (i.e., non-matching in terms of both phonological and orthographic endings; e.g., STAFF-GAIN) conditions, the normally-achieving children showed greater activation in left middle frontal
cortex (BA 9) in the conflicting condition, and significantly more so than
the dyslexic children. Activation in left middle frontal cortex (BA 9) has
been shown to be correlated with phonological naming ability, so greater
activation of this region by normally-achieving children in the conflicting
condition suggests that they effectively recruit this region for task-relevant phonological processing in order to resolve conflict from the orthographic domain. Altogether, our results suggest that normally-achieving
children more automatically activate orthographic representations of
auditorily-presented words, yet also more effectively resolve conflict
between phonological and orthographic representations, than do dyslexic children.

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

B39
FUNCTIONAL BRAIN ACTIVIATION AND SUBJECTIVE
EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCE IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Erin
Connor1,
1
1
1
Yvette Sheline , Deanna Barch ; Washington University in St. Louis — Emotional disturbances are well-known clinical features of schizophrenia, but
self-report data suggests that patients with schizophrenia experience
intact emotions. In this study, we explored this disconnect by using fMRI
to examine brain activity during emotional processing and its relationship to subsequent memory. Forty individuals with schizophrenia and 32
demographically matched controls made arousal and valence ratings to
stimuli consisting of pictures, words, and faces that varied in both
arousal and emotional valence. After scanning, the participants were
given surprise recall and recognition tests. For both arousal and valence,
the ratings were modulated by emotion in the same way in both patients
and controls. The fMRI data showed decreased overall activity in patients
in a number of regions including the basal ganglia, left DLPFC, and right
amygdala. However, the activity in these regions interacted with emotion
in the same way as in controls. In the memory tasks, patients showed
poorer memory overall, but recall was facilitated by arousal in both
groups, indicating an intact influence of emotion on memory. However,
the relationship between brain activity during the rating task and subsequent recall differed between groups in regions such as the basal ganglia
and amygdala. In these regions, increased activity during the rating task
predicted subsequent recall in controls, but not in patients. These findings indicate that while patients with schizophrenia experience intact
emotion and memory for emotional events, there are abnormalities in
how these events are encoded in patients relative to controls.
B40
NORMAL SEMANTIC INTEGRATION IN HEALTHY SUBJECTS
MORE PRONE TO DELUSIONS J. Bruno Debruille1, Marie Prévost1,
Mitchell Rodier1, Louis Renoult1, Mathieu Brodeur1, Claire Lionnet2; 1McGill
University, 6Douglas Mental Health University Institute — In two previous
studies, more delusional schizophrenia patients were found to have
smaller N400 event-related potentials (ERPs) than less delusional
patients, suggesting a deficit in semantic processes (Debruille, et al., 2007;
Kiang et al. 2007). In the present study, we examined whether delusion
proneness is also accompanied by an N400 amplitude reduction in
healthy subjects who perform the same semantic categorization task as
that used with patients. The schizotypal personality questionnaire (Raine,
1991) was utilized to assess the delusion proneness, the interpersonal and
the disorganization factors scores. Subjects were presented with a semantic categorization task where the prime word, ‘ANIMAL?’ was followed
either by an animal name (e. g., dog) or by a name of a ‘thing’ (e. g., table).
No correlation between the delusion proneness scores and the N400
amplitudes was found. Thus, it seems that the semantic deficit found in
delusional schizophrenia patients cannot be found in more prone to delusion healthy subjects. Disorganization scores correlated with enhanced
N400 amplitudes, confirming previous results in schizophrenia patients
(Andrews et al., 1993). Moreover, as in Kiang and Kutas (2005) the interpersonal scores correlated with reduced N400 effects. Our study thus
showed that the semantic processes that are indexed by the N400 may be
normal in healthy subjects who are more prone to delusion.
B41
AN ERP EXAMINATION OF LEXICO-SEMANTIC AND
CONTEXTUAL INFLUENCES ACROSS SENTENCE BOUNDARIES
IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Tali Ditman1,2, Gina Kuperberg1,2; 1Massachusetts
General Hospital, 2Tufts University — The present study investigated
whether schizophrenia patients would use lexico-semantic and contextual information across several sentences to correctly resolve an ambiguous noun-phrase anaphor. We examined ERPs as schizophrenia patients
and healthy demographically-matched controls read scenarios. Below is
an example: 1. Champagne is served at a New Year’s party. 2. Beer is
served at a ballpark. 3. Cake is served at a birthday party. 4. At the New
Year’s party, Bill took a sip of the alcohol. 5. The champagne was good.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

63

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Sentences 1-3 introduced three possible antecedents (champagne, beer,
cake). Two of these antecedents were exemplars of the anaphor (alcohol),
presented at the end of sentence four. Sentence five began with one of
three “reinstatement” words: contextually-appropriate and lexico-semantically related words (champagne), contextually-inappropriate but lexicosemantically related words (beer), or contextually-inappropriate and
unrelated words (cake). Participants indicated whether the last two sentences referred to the same entity. N400 amplitude reflected the ease of
semantically integrating the reinstatement word into its preceding context. Results demonstrated that, similar to controls, patients used context
and lexico-semantic associations across sentences to resolve anaphors.
Specifically, the largest N400 was evoked to contextually-inappropriate
and unrelated words, a medium-sized N400 was evoked to contextuallyinappropriate but lexico-semantically related words, and the smallest
amplitude N400 was evoked to contextually-appropriate and lexicosemantically related words. Behaviorally, patients were more likely than
controls to erroneously resolve anaphors with contextually-inappropriate, but lexico-semantically related, words. Thus, strong contextual constraints led to discourse-appropriate neural responses but later decisions
were more likely guided by lexico-semantic associations.
B42
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN LANGUAGE AND MEMORY IN
TOURETTE’S SYNDROME: NEW EVIDENCE Cristina Dye1, Dezso
Nemeth1,2, Matthew Walenski3, Stewart Mostofsky4, Michael Ullman1;
1
Georgetown University, 2University of Szeged, 3University of California at
San Diego, 4Kennedy Krieger Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine — Tourette’s Syndrome (TS) is a developmental disorder characterized by verbal and motor tics. The tics, which are fast and involuntary, are linked to abnormalities in frontal/basal-ganglia circuits. Few
previous studies have examined language in the disorder. Recently we
found that children with TS were significantly faster than typically developing control children at producing rule-governed real and novel past
tenses (slip–slipped, bring–bringed, plim–plimmed) but not irregular and
other unpredictable past tenses (bring–brought, splim–splam). They were
also faster than controls in naming pictures of manipulated (hammer) but
not non-manipulated (elephant) items (Walenski, Mostofsky and Ullman,
2007). These data were not explained by a wide range of potentially confounding subject- and item-level factors. The results were taken to suggest that the processing of procedurally based knowledge, both of
grammar and of manipulated objects, is particularly speeded in TS. The
present study on TS and typically-developing control children extends
the previous investigation in two ways. First, we used revised versions of
the past tense production and object naming tasks, controlling for additional confounding factors. Additionally and most importantly, we
assessed receptive syntactic processing of active and passive sentences
(e.g., John loves Mary > Mary is loved by John), receptive lexical-conceptual processing in an object judgment task, and phonological short-term
memory with a non-word repetition task. Details of the analysis and
results are presented, along with discussion and implications.
B43
RECREATIONAL
MDMA
USE
AFFECTS
FMRI
BRAIN
ACTIVATION IN FOREBRAIN SEROTONIN TARGET REGIONS
DURING ASSOCIATIVE LEARNING James
Eliassen1,2,
Jane
Allendorfer1,2, Martine Lamy1,2; 1University of Cincinnati, Center for Imaging
Research, 2University of Cincinnati — Learning and memory impairments
have been linked to recreational MDMA (“ecstasy”) use. In animals
MDMA damages serotonergic axons. Despite substantial research, the
neurotoxic effects of human MDMA use remain uncertain, and MDMA
may have medical uses for PTSD and anxiety. In order to ascertain the
functional effects of recreational MDMA use on human associative learning circuits, we studied seven heavy current MDMA users and seven
matched non-MDMA drug-using comparison subjects. After obtaining
written informed consent, we interviewed participants for their drug use
history and administered the Beck Depression Inventory and California

64

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

Verbal Learning Test. We acquired functional MRI while participants
performed an associative learning paradigm. We acquired standard gradient-echo echoplanar fMRI and anatomical images on a Varian 4T
INOVA. Two 6-minute fMRI scans each consisted of 16 control trials and
32 associative learning trials. Subjects viewed the task through MR compatible goggles and responded with a button box in the right hand. FMRI
processing included motion correction, smoothing, normalization, eventrelated modeling, and random effects analyses. The associative task
required participants to learn associations between 4 easily named color
pictures and two buttons through trial and error with using feedback. We
observed significantly greater learning activation in MDMA users in
right ventrolateral (BA10) and left dorsolateral PFC (BA9), precuneus
(BA7) and right thalamus. There were no performance differences
between groups. These data suggest that MDMA users exhibit compensatory brain activation, but the correspondence between fMRI group differences and forebrain serotonin targets is limited to thalamus and right
ventrolateral PFC.
B44
NEURAL NETWORKS UNDERLYING SPATIAL ATTENTION AND
VISUO-SPATIAL NEGLECT Gail Eskes1, John Christie1, David
Westwood1, Patricia McMullen1, Michael Noseworthy2, Raymond Klein1,
Matthias Schmidt1; 1Dalhousie University, 2McMaster University — Background: Visuo-spatial neglect is a heterogenous disorder that can be
divided into perceptual neglect (i.e., impaired reception of perceptual
information from the left side) vs motor neglect or directional hypokinesia (i.e., difficulty with responding leftward with the unaffected limb).
Mattingley, Husain & colleagues developed a novel task to distinguish
these subtypes, presumed to eliminate extraneous task requirements
(e.g., conflict resolution) dependent upon frontal system function. The
purpose of our study was to examine neurocognitive mechanisms in this
task in normal subjects to provide converging evidence for its use in distinguishing neglect subtypes. Method: Ten normal subjects were tested
with the Mattingley et al task modified for use while scanning with a 1.5T
GE Twin Speed scanner in a block design. Subjects indicated the position
of a target (left or right of fixation) by pressing one of two buttons. Variables included start position of the responding finger (center, left or right
of response buttons) and RT to initiate movement to press was measured.
Functional data sets were analyzed off-line with AFNI using t-tests corrected for multiple comparisons. Results: Behavioural results indicated
slower RTs for response initiation when starting from peripheral positions compared to a central start. Peripheral start positions were also
associated with increased activation in lateral prefrontal cortex compared
to central start position. Conclusions: Both behavioural and imaging data
are consistent with conflict processes associated with frontal involvement
in this task in normals. These results suggest caution is warranted when
using this task to distinguish neglect subtypes.
B45
PERSEVERATION ERRORS AND THE TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF
COGNITIVE PROCESSES Simon Fischer-Baum1, Brenda Rapp1; 1Johns
Hopkins University — The study of perseveration errors, the intrusion of a
previous response into a current trial, can provide information regarding
the temporal dynamics of cognitive processing. However, the precise
nature of the deficit/s which gives rise to perseveration errors subsequent to neural injury is not well understood. According to the deafferentation account, these errors occur because a level of representation is
deprived of normal input (Cohen and Dehaene 1998). Given that in an
intact system response activation persists and gradually decays, when
damage reduces the input to a given processing level, the system will
respond with recently produced items. An alternative, the abnormal persistence account, argues that previously produced representations persist
at abnormally high rates, perhaps due to an imbalance of certain neurotransmitters (McNamara and Albert 2004). By this account, if the previous response cannot be suppressed, it may be selected in the place of a
robustly activated target response. The current study examines a series of

Poster Session B

individuals with acquired dysgraphia subsequent to stroke who make
errors in spelling-to-dictation. Careful analysis of these errors reveals that
most individuals make more letter perseveration errors than would be
expected by chance. However, a subset of these individuals perseverates
at rates much higher than others despite comparable overall error rates.
Various analyses are performed that indicate that while the deafferentation account is correct in predicting that neural injury may lead to greater
than chance rates of perseveration, it alone cannot explain the extremely
high rates of perseveration observed in some individuals.
B46
A CASE OF DEVELOPMENTAL PHONAGNOSIA Lucia
Garrido1,
Frank Eisner1, Carolyn McGettigan1, Lauren Stewart2, Disa Sauter3, Rick
Hanley4, Stefan Schweinberger5, Bradley Duchaine1; 1Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, University College London, UK, 2Goldsmiths, London, UK,
3Birkbeck College, UK, 4University of Essex, UK, 5Institute of Psychology,
Friedrich-Schiller-University of Jena, Germany — The inability to recognize
familiar voices is called phonagnosia. Since the term was first proposed
by Van Lancker and Canter (1982), several studies have investigated
cases of phonagnosia following brain damage, but cases due to developmental problems have not been reported. Here we will describe the case
of KH, a 59 year-old active professional woman who reports that she has
always experienced severe voice recognition difficulties. KH does not recognize even her closest relatives from their voices, such as when she
answers the phone or hears them without seeing them. However, her
hearing abilities are normal, and she does not report any brain damage.
We tested KH on a number of behavioural tasks looking at voice recognition, recognition of vocal emotions, face recognition, speech perception
and processing of other auditory stimuli such as environmental sounds
and music. KH was impaired on tasks requiring the recognition of
famous voices, and the learning and recognition of new voices. In contrast, she performed well on nearly all other tasks. This is, to our knowledge, the first report of a case of developmental phonagnosia, and its
investigation provides a crucial means to test predictions from voice processing models.
B47
ABNORMAL FUNCTIONAL SPECIALIZATION WITHIN MEDIAL
PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN HIGH-FUNCTIONING AUTISM: A
MULTI-VOXEL CORRELATION APPROACH Sam J. Gilbert1, Julia
Meuwese1, Karren Towgood1, Chris D. Frith2, Paul W. Burgess1; 1Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, University College, London, 2Wellcome Department of
Imaging Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, University College London — In
order to investigate functional specialization within medial rostral prefrontal cortex (mrPFC), we administered two tasks (spatial, verbal) previously shown to activate mrPFC to a group of high-functioning
participants with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and age- and IQmatched controls. Each task manipulated a) attention towards perceptual
versus self-generated information, and b) reflection on another person’s
mental state (‘mentalizing’ versus ‘non-mentalizing’) in a 2x2 factorial
design. Behavioral performance and group-level analysis of the fMRI
data was similar in the two groups. However, analysis of patterns of
activity across voxels within mrPFC on a participant-by-participant basis
revealed strong group differences. In the control group, the spatial distribution of attention-related activity generalised significantly between
tasks (spatial, verbal), as did mentalizing-related activity, but attentionrelated and mentalizing-related activity patterns were uncorrelated with
each other. This pattern was disrupted in the ASD group. These findings
indicate abnormal fine-grained functional organisation of mrPFC in ASD,
and suggest that multi-voxel pattern analysis is a sensitive method for
identifying differences in brain organization in atypical populations.
B48
IMPAIRED
ANTI-POINTING
AND
ANTI-SACCADE
PERFORMANCE IN PATIENTS WITH HEMISPATIAL NEGLECT
Monika Harvey Stephanie Rossit, Stephen Butler, Bettina Olk, Keith Muir;
University of Glasgow, UK, University of Strathclyde, UK, School of

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Humanities and Social Sciences, Jacobs University Bremen, Germany, Southern
General Hospital, Glasgow, UK — Hemispatial neglect is generally defined
as the inability to spontaneously report, respond or orient towards events
on the contralesional side of space. Milner and Goodale (2006) have
claimed that the disorder results from a breakdown in a system that puts
together visual information received via the ventral stream but that such
patients are relatively unimpaired when programming goal-directed
movements. We asked 6 neglect patients and right hemisphere lesioned
patients without neglect as well as healthy elderly control subjects to perform both pro-and anti-pointing movements (anti-pointing movements
require an explicit representation of the target location and are thus
thought to rely more on ventral stream structures). We found no specific
impairments in the pro-pointing condition, but neglect patients were
selectively impaired in the anti-pointing in terms of final accuracy as well
as in terms of directional errors in that they failed to inhibit a pro-pointing movement. We then investigated how these same patients would perform on an antisaccade task. Neglect patients showed relatively good
prosaccade performance but clear impairments in the anti-saccade task in
that they failed to suppress incorrect pro-saccades. These data confirm
that on-line visuomotor processing is relatively normal in neglect
patients but that they fail to acquire and/or transform the explicit spatial
representation of targets for off-line remapping actions. Our data also
further indicate that neglect patients suffer from deficits in response inhibition. Milner and Goodale (2006) The visual brain in action. OUP.
B49
ABNORMAL FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF THE DEFAULT
MODE NETWORK IN CHRONIC SCHIZOPHRENIA Ryu-ichiro
Hashimoto1, KangUk Lee1, Alexander Preus1, Robert McCarley1, Cynthia
Wible1; 1Schizophrenia Research Group, Harvard Medical School — Previous
functional imaging studies proposed that the brain has a default or intrinsic mode of functioning, which is active in the absence of presentation of
sensory stimuli or engagement of cognitive tasks. In particular, the
medial parietal area (MPA), the medial prefrontal area (MPFA), the lateral inferior parietal area (LIPA), and parts of the medial temporal structure (i.e. hippocampus) have been reported to show task-related
reduction of activation. Although abnormality of the “default network”
has been investigated in several clinical populations (i.e. autism), its association with schizophrenia has not yet been established. In the present
fMRI study, we examined potential abnormality of areas in the default
network in schizophrenia by comparing brain activity of 14 chronic
schizophrenic (CSZ) patients and 14 normal control (NC) subjects under
a verbal working memory paradigm. Comparing the magnitude of fMRI
signals between the task and the rest period, we confirmed the previous
findings that activity in the MPA, MPFA, the bilateral LIPA, and the hippocampus is larger during the rest period. In order to identify the possible deficiency in functional connectivity of the default network in
schizophrenia, we examined the temporal correlation of the signals
among these areas in each group. We found that, compared with NCs,
CSZs had significantly reduced correlation between the MPA and the
hippocampus, and between the MPA and MPFA (p < 0.05). These results
suggest that schizophrenia may be associated with abnormalities in functional connectivity between areas in the default network, particularly the
paths involving the MPA.
B50
AUTISM IN A 45 YEAR OLD MAN WITH A LARGE TEMPORAL
ARACHNOID CYST. Terence Hines1,2, Alex Braun2; 1Pace University,
2New York Medical College — We report the case of a male who died of
gastric carcinoma at age 45. At autopsy a large (7 x 5 x 4 mm) arachnoid
cyst was found in the left Sylvian fissure greatly displacing the frontoparietal and temporal operculae. The cyst probably dated from early childhood since there was considerable bony abnormality of the temporal
bone at the base of the skull. A head CT taken two weeks prior to death
showed a 2 to 3 mm midline shift from left to right. No other gross neuropathology was evident either on the scan or at autopsy. Postmortem

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

65

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

studies of autistic brains have demonstrated a number of abnormalities at
the cellular level. These include reduced number of Purkinje cells, differences in the thickness of the gray matter and abnormalities in the thickness of several cerebellar lobules. None of these abnormalities was found
on gross or microscopic examination in the present case. fMRI studies
have suggested abnormalities of function of the mirror neurons involved
in the social aspects of disordered autistic behavior. These have been
locatized to the inferior frontal areas. The cyst in this case was pressing
strongly enough on this area on the left to cause the midline shift noted
above. We speculate that in this case the autistic behavior was due not to
any anatomical derangements at the cellular level, but to impaired function secondary to the cyst.
B51
CONGENITAL TOPOGRAPHICAL DISORIENTATION: A CASE
STUDY. Giuseppe Iaria1, Nicholas Bogod2, Christopher J Fox1, Jason JJS
Barton1; 1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada, 2Neurosciences
Program, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada — Topographical disorientation is the impaired ability to orient
within the environment. This selective impairment may result from
acquired damage to different brain regions involved in the attentional,
perceptual or mnemonic processes that participate in the human navigation and orientation. Despite a long history of reports of acquired
topographagnosia, there are no prior reports of this occurring as a congenital deficit. We report a patient with apparently life-long topographical disorientation without obvious structural lesions on MRI, and without
any other sensory or intellectual deficit. The patient was administered (1)
a neuropsychological assessment (2) a variety of experimental tests to
assess her ability to use different cognitive strategies in orientation and
navigation, and (3) a functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)
study aimed at investigating her neural pattern of activity while navigating in a virtual environment. Behavioural findings revealed a selective
impairment in forming a mental representation of the environment (i.e. a
cognitive map), and functional neuroimaging showed lack of neural
activity within the hippocampus and retrosplenial cortex, brain regions
that are critically involved during formation of cognitive maps, despite
apparent normality of these regions on structural MRI. These findings
suggest that, as with other cognitive disorders such as prosopagnosia,
topographical disorientation may occur as a congenital defect, and result
in a lifelong disorder affecting activities of daily living.
B52
SCHIZOTYPAL TENDENCIES, BRAIN STRUCTURE, AND
PERSONALITY IN HEALTHY OLDER ADULTS Marlisa
Isom1,
Denise Head1; 1Washington University in St. Louis — Schizotypal personality disorder (SPD) is associated with volumetric reductions in frontostriatal and medial temporal circuits as well as impairments in executive
functions and memory. However, it has not been established whether
these changes are specific to the personality disorder or are instead linked
to the personality traits of individuals with the disorder. While advancing age has been associated with a decline in the severity of symptoms of
schizotypal personality disorder, the associated personality traits are still
present. Studying older adults who are not frankly disordered and thus
have not been exposed to psychiatric drugs will allow examination of
brain structure, cognition, and personality relationships without psychiatric drug exposure confounds. The goal of the current study was to
determine whether schizotypal tendencies, as measured with the Schizotypal Personality Questionnaire (SPQ), are predictive of structural and
cognitive differences among a healthy older adult population. Twentythree older adults aged 59-87 (14 female) were screened for mental and
psychiatric illness. Participants completed the SPQ, a structural MRI, and
a neuropsychological battery. A significant positive relationship between
schizotypal tendency and left medial temporal lobe gray matter volume
was observed, controlling for age. Scores on several subscales of the
NEO-FFI also correlated with schizotypal tendencies. The results provide

66

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

evidence of a relationship between schizotypal tendency, brain structure,
and personality in an older adult sample without diagnosed SPD.
B53
PERFORMANCE ON NONVERBAL EXECUTIVE FUNCTION
TASKS IN CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS WITH KLINEFELTER
SYNDROME Nancy Raitano Lee1, Gregory Wallace1, Liv Clasen1, Jonathan
Blumenthal1, Rhoshel Lenroot1, Jay Giedd1; 1National Institute of Mental
Health, National Institutes of Health — Research has suggested that individuals with Klinefelter syndrome or XXY, a sex chromosome disorder in
which males have an extra X-chromosome, have deficits on executive
functioning (EF) tasks, tasks tapping higher level cognitive processes
such as working memory and planning. However, findings have been
mixed. Inconsistent findings may relate to differences in the verbal and
motor demands of EF tasks used across studies, as research has documented verbal and motor weaknesses in the XXY group that may contribute to EF performance. The present study examined EF skills in a sample
of 6-18 year old children and adolescents with XXY (n = 46) and typically
developing male participants (n = 46) matched pairwise on age (mean
age = 12.16 +/- 4.23) and groupwise on full scale IQ. EF tasks were chosen to have limited verbal and motor demands and were taken from the
Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (Spatial Working Memory, Intra-Extra Dimensional Set Shift, and Stockings of Cambridge Tasks). While the XXY group demonstrated reductions in
performance relative to the control group on this set of EF tasks, none of
these differences was large enough to reach statistical significance. Therefore, these findings suggest that on certain EF tasks with minimal verbal
and motor demands, children and adolescents with XXY perform similarly to typically developing control participants. Data collection is ongoing, and thus, these results will be explored further with a larger sample
of individuals.
B54
WHAT DO LETTER AND COLOR PRIMING REVEAL ABOUT
SYNASETHESIA? Kelly A. Malcolmson1, Daniel Smilek1, Philip M.
Merikle1; 1University of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada — Grapheme-color synaesthesia is a condition in which achromatic letters and digits elicit specific
experiences of color. In a recent report on this condition, Mattingley,
Rich, Yelland, and Bradshaw (2001) concluded that synaesthetic colors
are not activated when the inducing graphemes are unavailable for conscious report. This conclusion was based on a finding that achromatic letters presented below the subjective threshold for awareness, do not
prime color naming of a subsequent color patch even though they prime
letter naming of a subsequent letter. As a comparison, we evaluated color
and letter priming above and below the subjective threshold of awareness in non-synaesthetic participants. Across four experiments, participants were presented with a lower case letter prime that was either gray
(letter priming) or colored (color priming), and an upper case target letter
(letter priming) or colored patch (color priming). Participants named
either the target letter or the color of the patch. The letter primes were
presented either above or below the subjective threshold of awareness.
The results showed that both letter and color priming were only obtained
when primes were presented above the threshold for awareness, and
only when an equal number of congruent and incongruent trials were
used, leaving the possibility of strategic influences. When strategies were
eliminated by increasing the proportion of incongruent trials, no priming
occurred in any condition. These results suggest that both letter priming
and color priming are unreliable. Therefore, we suggest caution when
drawing conclusions about the nature of synaesthesia from unconscious
priming results.
B55
THE ROLE OF THE CEREBELLUM IN SPATIAL ATTENTION IN
AUTISM Kristen Merkle1,2, Rebecca Groen1,2, Steve Dager1,2, James
Phillips3, Geraldine Dawson1,2, Sara Jane Webb1,2; 1University of Washington
Autism Center and Center on Human Development and Disability, 2University

Poster Session B

of Washington, 3Children’s Hospital and Regional Medical Center, Seattle
Washington — While the specific cause of autism spectrum disorder
(ASD) is still unknown, there has been a substantial amount of research
documenting cerebellar dysfunction in individuals with ASD. Individuals with ASD have been found to have smaller cerebellum volume and
vermal areas and perform worse on visual attention tasks than matched
controls. Specifically, Harris et al. (1999) found that larger orienting deficits at 7.5 years were correlated with smaller vermal VI-VII areas at 4.5
years of age. To further explore the role of vermal area and visual attention, we examined the development of the vermis between 3 and 9 years
of age, and spatial attention at 11 years of age in 13 children with ASD
compared to matched controls. Magnetic resonance imaging was used to
measure cerebellum volume and vermal area at 3, 6, and 9 years of age.
Spatial attention was measured using a spatial target detection task. Differences in orienting based on the cue-target relation and the cue-target
delay were analyzed. Preliminary results suggest that, in contrast to prior
findings, children with ASD did not demonstrate impairments in orienting to targets at 11 years of age. Cerebellum volume at 3 years of age was
related to the reaction time to invalid targets at 11 years. Further analyses
examine whether or not changes in vermal area are also related to attention at 11 years.
B56
FACE BUILDING: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF BRAIN
ACTIVATION OF FACES VERSUS HOUSES, OBJECTS, AND
PATTERNS IN INDIVIDUALS WITH HIGH FUNCTIONING
AUTISM Laura Miller1, Michal Assaf1,2, Gregory Book1, Godfrey
Pearlson1,2; 1Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center, Insitute of Living,
Hartford Hospital, CT, 2Yale School of Medicine — Background: Social interaction impairments are key deficits in individuals with autism spectrum
disorders (ASD). An important aspect of social interaction is facial perception. We used an fMRI task to further explore brain regions associated
with face processing in individuals with ASD. Methods: We tested 8 high
functioning ASD patients (ages 12-21, all male) and 13 healthy controls
(ages 14-25, 1 female) using BOLD fMRI. Subjects performed a face,
building and object localization task. They were presented with static
drawings of faces, houses, objects, and patterns and were asked to press a
button with their right index finger whenever the same stimuli were presented twice in a row. The data were realigned, normalized, and
smoothed using SPM2 neuroimaging software. Two sample t-tests were
performed comparing activation between the groups in faces v. objects,
houses, and patterns. Results: Preliminary results showed that individuals with ASD had significant differences in the fusiform gyrus (FG), when
comparing activation during the presentation of faces versus objects,
houses, and patterns. There were no significant differences between ASD
and healthy controls. Conclusions: Our data suggest that individuals
with ASD activate the FG in response to static faces similarly to healthy
controls, when compared to static drawings of other, non-face categories.
Implications of these results to patients’ social impairments and clinical
presentation will be discussed.
B57
DELAYED MIMICRY RESPONSE IN CHILDREN WITH AUTISM
SPECTRUM DISORDERS: AN EMG STUDY Lindsay
Oberman1,2,3,
Piotr Winkielman2, V.S. Ramachandran1,2,4; 1Center for Brain and Cognition,
UC San Diego, 2UC San Diego, 3Berenson-Allen Center for Noninvasive Brain
Stimulation, Beth Israel Deconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, 4UC San
Diego — “One may find by one's own observation that the imitation of
the bodily expression of a mental condition makes us understand it much
better than the merely looking on” (W. Fechner, as quoted in James,
1890). Spontaneous mimicry, including that of emotional facial expressions, is imporant for socio-emotional skills such as empathy and communication. Those skills are often impacted in autism spectrum disorders
(ASD). Successful mimicry requires not only the activation of the
response, but also its appropriate speed. Yet, previous studies only examined ASD differences in response magnitude. The current study investi-

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

gated timing and magnitude of spontaneous and voluntary mimicry in
ASD children and matched controls using facial electromyography
(EMG). First, participants viewed and recognized happy, sad, fear, anger,
disgust and neutral expressions presented at different durations. Later,
participants voluntarily mimicked the expressions. There were no group
differences on emotion recognition and amplitude of expression-appropriate EMG activity. However, ASD participants’ spontaneous, but not
voluntary, mimicry activity was delayed about 160 ms. This delay
occurred across different expressions and presentation durations. We
relate these findings to the literature on temporal dynamics in social
interaction and ASD impairments in sensory-motor coordination.
B58
VOXEL-BASED MORPHOMETRY REVEALS DIFFERENTIAL
PATTERNS OF ATROPHY IN DYSEXECUTIVE AND AMNESTIC
MCI SUBGROUPS Judy Pa1, Adam L. Boxer1, Katie Freeman1, Michael W.
Weiner2, Julene K. Johnson1; 1University of California, San Francisco, Memory
and Aging Center, 2San Francisco VA Medical Center, Center for Imaging of
Neurodegenerative Diseases — Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) is considered a transitional period between healthy aging and dementia. Many
studies have investigated patients with amnestic MCI who have focal
deficits in memory, while few studies have investigated non-amnestic
MCI. Thus, the aim of this study was to compare brain atrophy patterns
in two subgroups: amnestic and dysexcutive MCI. Dysexecutive MCI
(dMCI) was operationally defined as patients who complained of recent
onset of dysexecutive symptoms (e.g., attention, multi-tasking, behavior)
or had impaired scores on executive, but not memory, measures. Amnestic MCI (aMCI) patients had impaired scores on memory, but not executive function. We used 1.5 Tesla T1-weighted MR images and
investigated differences in the gray matter atrophy of 35 dMCI patients,
24 aMCI, and 35 healthy controls using voxel-based morphometry (VBM)
in SPM5. We included age, gender, and total intracranial volume as nuisance variables. We examined differences in four a priori regions of interest: prefrontal cortex (PFC), posterior cingulate gyrus (pCG), precuneus,
and medial temporal lobe (MTL). We predicted that dMCI would show
more atrophy in PFC while aMCI would show more atrophy in MTL,
pCG, and precuneus, compared to healthy controls. We found that dMCI
patients had more atrophy in the PFC and precuneus when compared to
controls. In contrast, aMCI had more atrophy in pCG and parahippocampal gyrus when compared to controls. We conclude that two distinct subgroups of MCI exist, and that dMCI and aMCI patients present with
differential patterns of atrophy when compared to healthy aging.
B59
LOCALIZATION OF SEMANTIC PROCESSES ASSOCIATED
WITH PRODUCING AND UNDERSTANDING TRANSITIVE
ACTION Norman Park1,2, Eric Roy3,4, Sandra Black5,2,4, Jill Rich1,2, Tobi
Lubinsky1, Quincy Almeida6, Vessela Stamenova5,4; 1York University,
2
Baycrest, University of Toronto, 3University of Waterloo, 4Rehabilitation
Sciences, University of Toronto, 5Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre,
University of Toronto, 6Movement Disorders Research & Rehabilitation Centre,
Wilfrid Laurier University — The goals of this study were: to determine
the relation of stored tool-action knowledge of tools to the production of
gestures involving those tools (transitive gestures), to examine whether
this knowledge is lateralized in the brain, and to investigate whether two
types of semantic knowledge are distinct. Thirty-six participants with
unilateral stroke were examined on their production of transitive gestures and on tasks requiring conceptual knowledge of actions. Two conceptual tests examined their ability to identify tools based on function
and manipulation (function + manipulation knowledge) and two other
tests examined their ability to make conceptual judgments when gestures
were shown (visual-gesture knowledge). Performance on tests of function + manipulation knowledge and transitive gesture production were
both impaired with damage to the left hemisphere. Visual-gestural
knowledge performance was impaired with damage to either hemisphere. Impairments of function + manipulation knowledge generally co-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

67

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

occurred with apraxia (determined by impaired transitive gesture production), but apraxia was observed in the absence of conceptual impairment. Visual-gestural knowledge impairment was associated with
apraxia after left but not right hemisphere damage. Impaired visual-gestural knowledge performance occurred in the absence of function +
manipulation impairment with right hemisphere damage. We propose
that function + manipulation knowledge is represented in the left hemisphere and is closely associated with cognitive processes involved in the
production of transitive gestures. Visual-gestural knowledge appears to
be bilaterally represented and it is less strongly associated to transitive
gesture production. Function + manipulation knowledge and visual-gestural knowledge appear to represent distinct forms of tool-action knowledge.
B60
BASAL GANGLIA AND CEREBELLAR MOTOR CONTRIBUTIONS
TO ATTENTIONAL PROCESSES IN AUTISM SPECTRUM
DISORDERS Susan Ravizza1, Marjorie Solomon2,3, Petrina Kaluzhny2,3,
Richard Ivry4, Cameron Carter2,5; 1Michigan State University, 2UC Davis,
3
MIND Institute/UC Davis, 4UC Berkeley, 5Imaging Research Center/UC
Davis — Adolescents with autism often show difficulty allocating and
shifting selective attention. In addition to abnormalities of the parietal
and prefrontal cortices, autism is marked by widespread pathology in
neural regions associated with movement disorders such as the cerebellum and the basal ganglia. Individuals with autism-spectrum disorders
(ASD) often present with abnormal motor signs (e.g., mirror movements).
We sought to assess the degree to which attentional impairments may be
modulated by motor demands and evaluate if any such relationship was
correlated with soft neurological signs of cerebellar or basal ganglia dysfunction. We tested a group of high-functioning adolescents with ASD
(high-functioning autism (n=15) or Asperger’s Disorder (n= 9)) and typically-developing participants (n=20) on tests of selective attention and
attention switching under varying motor demands. We also rated soft
neurological signs of cerebellar and basal ganglia pathology. In the Posner cuing task of spatial attention, no differences were observed between
the groups on measures assessing the benefits and costs associated with
valid and invalid cues, respectively, regardless of the motor demands of
the tasks. In contrast, the ASD group was less accurate on trials requiring
either rapid or slow shifts of attention. This impairment was evident even
when the motor demands were reduced. When we correlated attentional
performance with severity of motor symptoms, measures of attentional
performance were related to soft neurological signs of basal ganglia dysfunction. These results suggest that some of the attentional deficits in
ASD may be related to abnormal function of the basal ganglia rather than
the cerebellum.
B61
CONFLICT RELATED ADJUSTMENTS OF COGNITIVE CONTROL
IN SCHIZOPHRENIA AND INDIVIDUALS AT INCREASED
GENETIC RISK FOR THE ILLNESS Alexandra
Roach1,2,
Raechel
Steckley1,2, Cameron Carter1,2; 1Translational Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience Laboratory, 2University of California, Davis — People
with
schizophrenia have impairments in cognitive control related to impaired
function of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and anterior cingulate (ACC). Abnormalities have been observed in chronically ill and
first-episode patients. Unaffected first-degree relatives of patients also
have less clearly characterized cognitive control deficits. fMRI studies
suggest that DLPFC function is impaired in relatives to a level intermediate between that seen in patients and healthy subjects, suggesting
DLPFC-related cognitive deficits reflect a marker of genetic risk for the
illness. Less clear is whether cognitive control functions related to the
ACC are impaired in relatives. Some studies suggest impairment, others
an intact ACC and associated behaviors. In the present study we measured behavioral and brain activity during EEG recordings while subjects
performed the Stroop color-naming task. Analyses focused on behavioral
effects associated with ACC function: conflict adaptation (increased cog-

68

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

nitive control on trials following incongruent trials) and post error adjustments (speed accuracy trade off following errors). Thirty three firstepisode schizophrenia patients were compared to 25 demographically
matched controls; 17 unaffected first-degree relatives were compared to
22 matched controls. Schizophrenia patients showed behavioral evidence
of impaired ACC function (reduced conflict adaptation, post error adjustments). Unaffected relatives demonstrated attenuated reduction in these
behavioral markers of ACC function. ERP analyses focusing on the conflict-associated N450 ERP and error related negativity (ERN) will also be
presented to provide converging evidence for a possible role for dysfunction of the ACC in individuals with schizophrenia as well as those at
increased genetic risk of the illness.
B62
POINTING TO THE PAST IN PATIENTS WITH HEMISPATIAL
NEGLECT Stephanie Rossit1, Keith Muir2, Duncan George2, Reeves Ian2,
Livingstone Katrina2, Hazel Clark2, Pauline Castle2, Monika Harvey1;
1University of Glasgow, Scotland, UK, 2Care of the Elderly, Southern General
Hospital, Glasgow, Scotland, UK — D.F. a famous visual form agnosic
patient, has been shown to be able to perform immediate actions towards
objects that she can’t recognize, but is selectively impaired when asked to
store suitable information about the object for future movements. In
marked contrast, patients with optic ataxia, a reaching disorder due to
bilateral damage of posterior parietal areas, show a paradoxical improvement of their movement accuracy when an action is delayed. However,
whether hemispatial neglect affects visuomotor control has been controversially debated in the literature. Therefore, here we analysed the ability
of 6 patients with hemispatial neglect to perform immediate movements
and movements that were delayed by 5 seconds in response to target presentation. In both conditions responses were made to left, centred and
rightwardly presented targets. A group of 10 age-matched healthy controls and 8 patients with right-hemisphere lesions but no neglect served
as controls. When asked to perform an immediate action towards a target
or a delayed action towards a target which they had seen before but was
no longer present, the performance of patients with hemispatial neglect
was similar to the one of patients without neglect and healthy controls for
both sides of space both in terms of speed and accuracy. These results
confirm that patients with neglect are not specifically impaired when performing goal-directed actions, as this would be accomplished by posterior parietal areas which are presumably spared in these patients.
B63
TRIAL
TO
TRIAL
BEHAVIORAL
ADJUSTMENTS
IN
METHAMPHETAMINE ABUSE: EVIDENCE FOR IMPAIRED
COGNITIVE CONTROL Ruth Salo1, Stefan Ursu1, Thomas Nordahl1,
Martin Leamon1; 1University of California Davis Medical Center — Deficits
in top-down behavioral control are one contributing factor to the sustainment of addictive behaviors. Neurobiological models of addiction propose that ventral pathways within the brain contribute to the impulse to
seek drugs, whereas the recruitment of prefrontal dorsal pathways may
be critical to control those prepotent impulses. In order to selectively
examine patterns of behavioral control relevant to addiction, we examined trial to trial reaction time (RT) adjustments using a single-trial
Stroop task in 17 chronic methamphetamine (MA) abusers who met
DSM-IV criteria for MA dependence (mean age= 35.6 + 7.3), and 14 nonsubstance abusing controls. Eight male and nine female MA abusers were
tested with a mean duration of 13.1 years MA use. Preliminary analyses
reveal that MA abusers failed to exhibit RT trial to trial adjustments (i.e.
reduced RT on conflict trials that follow other conflict trials) compared to
controls (p=.036). In contrast, the MA abusers and controls exhibited
equivalent post-error RT adjustment (i.e. slowed RT following an error
trial) (p=.19) as well as equivalent rates of conflict errors (p=.20). As trial
to trial RT adjustments have been shown to be related to the function of
an anterior cingulate/prefrontal cortex circuit these behavioral findings
may reflect underlying neural dysfunction within these regions and pathways. The observed dissociation in behavioral regulation suggests that

Poster Session B

MA abusers may recognize conflict situations, but the ability to modify
and adapt a sustained behavioral response to that situation may be compromised [K01DA16293-01 to RS]
B64
REWARD-BASED
LEARNING
IN
AUTISM
SPECTRUM
DISORDERS: PROBABILISTIC SELECTION AND TRANSITIVE
INFERENCE Marjorie Solomon1,2,3, Michael Frank4, Petrina Kaluzhny1,2,
Cameron Carter1,3; 1U.C. Davis, 2MIND Institute, 3U.C. Davis Imaging
Research Center, 4University of Arizona — Individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) exhibit atypical motivation in social and nonsocial contexts. Theories about social motivation impairments, including
those found in joint attention and face processing, recently have been
articulated. However, there has been little study of autism-related deficits
in processing rewards that are not explicitly social such as those in
reward-based learning. The goal of this study was to investigate performance on two learning tasks involving feedback in 15 high functioning
adults with ASDs versus 15 age, gender, and IQ matched typically developing adults. In a probabilistic selection task where individuals were first
trained on 3 stimulus pairs of Japanese Hiragana in which one of the
stimuli was correct a majority (but different percentage) of the time, individuals with ASDs were slower to learn the task. When tested on novel
stimulus pairs, they exhibited enhanced learning to avoid the most punished stimuli (as opposed to chosing frequently rewarded ones) relative
to individuals with typical development. On a transitive inference task,
which required learning a stimulus hierarchy consisting of pairs of letters
in alphabetical order with later testing on implicit awareness of the hierarchy, individuals with ASDs showed a generalized performance deficit.
Preliminary results suggest that autism spectrum disorders involve
learning atypicalities resembling those associated with dopaminergic
modulation of basal ganglia. Relatively enhanced negative feedback
learning in the PSS task is similar to the pattern found in Parkinson's Disease, which is thought to involve tonic dysregulation of the direct and
indirect pathways of the basal ganglia
B65
KINDERGARTEN CHILDREN AT-RISK FOR READING FAILURE:
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
MEASURES
OF
SELECTIVE
AUDITORY ATTENTION BEFORE AND AFTER THE EARLY
READING INTERVENTION Courtney Stevens1, Jeff Currin1, David
Paulsen1, Beth Harn1, David Chard1, David Larsen1, Danielle Parisi1, Helen
Neville1; 1University of Oregon — Previous research indicates that children
with language impairment have deficits in the early neural mechanisms
of selective attention (Stevens et al., 2006) that can be ameliorated following computerized language training (Stevens et al., in press) The present
study investigated (1) Whether kindergarten children at-risk for reading
failure have similar deficits in selective attention and, if so, (2) Whether
such deficits could be habilitated following an interpersonally-delivered
reading intervention. Twenty-eight kindergarten children, either at-risk
for reading failure (<35th percentile, n=20) or above-average in preliteracy skills (35th-75th percentile, n=8), participated. Children at-risk for
reading failure received supplemental reading instruction with the Early
Reading Intervention (ERI), a previously-validated program (Simmons et
al., 2003; 2007). Before and after eight weeks of intervention, children
completed an early literacy battery (also administered at follow-up points
in the winter and spring) and an event-related brain potential (ERP) measure of selective auditory attention (Sanders et al, 2005). Prior to intervention, children in the ERI group showed reduced effects of attention on
sensorineural processing compared to the above-average group. However, following training, children in the ERI group showed a large
increase in the effects of attention on sensorineural processing. This
increase exceeded changes in the above-average readers. Children receiving ERI also showed accelerated growth on several preliteracy measures,
raising their scores closer to those of the above-average group by the end
of the year. These data are consistent with the hypothesis that effective

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

reading and language interventions may work in part by training aspects
of selective attention.
B66
BEHAVIORAL CORRELATES OF SUBTLE ANATOMICAL
ABNORMALITIES FOLLOWING TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY: A
CASE REPORT And Turken1, Timothy Herron1, Xiaojiang Kang1,2,
William Yund1, David Woods1,2; 1Veterans Affairs Northern California Health
Care System, 2University of California, Davis — Unlike focal brain injury,
the diffuse damage caused by traumatic brain injury (TBI) presents a special challenge for establishing the structural correlates of TBI-related cognitive impairments. We report the case of a TBI patient who has severe
cognitive impairments, with apparently normal brain structure when
evaluated with standard MRI scans. We used multi-modal imaging
(high-resolution anatomical imaging and diffusion tensor MRI) and automated quantitative image analysis to detect statistically significant alterations in brain tissue properties with respect to a database of normal
subjects. Neurocognitive assessment revealed reduced processing speed,
impaired executive function, memory problems and poor performance
on visual-perceptual tasks. Cortical surface-based analyses revealed thinning and increased diffusivity in the cortex and reduced pericortical
white matter anisotropy. Regional abnormalities were pronounced in
orbitofrontal, prefrontal and occipital regions bilaterally. Fiber integrity
was reduced in major white matter tracts. The genu, isthmus and splenium of the corpus callosum had low anisotropy and high diffusivity,
with significant thinning of the isthmus. These brain abnormalities were
predictive of behavioral impairments. Perceptual-motor slowing is consistent with diffuse white matter injury, impaired executive control with
frontal lobe dysfunction, and visual deficits with occipital lobe damage.
Memory problems are likely to be associated with disruption of the prefrontal-hippocampal connections through the cingulum bundle. Consistent with posterior callosal damage, the patient was disproportionately
impaired in comparing simultaneously presented visual stimuli. These
findings highlight the importance of novel brain imaging and behavioral
assessment procedures for assessing brain-behavior relationships in TBI
research, an area receiving increasing attention from cognitive neuroscientists.
B67
FRONTOTEMPORAL
DEMENTIA
SELECTIVELY
IMPAIRS
TRANSITIVE REASONING ABOUT FAMILIAR MATERIAL Oshin
Vartanian1, Vinod Goel1, Michael Tierney2, Edward Huey2, Jordan Grafman2;
1
York University, 2National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
NIH — Neuroimaging studies in humans have linked a frontal-temporal
lobe system to reasoning about meaningful, familiar material and a parietal system to reasoning about unfamiliar or nonspecific material. Motivated by these findings, we tested the necessity of the frontal-temporal
system in reasoning about familiar material in 14 patients with frontotemporal dementia and compared their performance to that of 21 normal
controls. Our results demonstrated that patients with frontotemporal
dementia were less accurate than normal controls only when the content
of transitive relational arguments involved familiar material. They performed as well as normal controls on identical logical arguments with
nonspecific material. These results suggest that the frontal-temporal lobe
system plays a necessary role in reasoning about meaningful, familiar
material.
B68
ANOSOGNOSIA: A PROSPECTIVE STUDY Roland Vocat1,2, Fabienne
Staub3, Patrik Vuilleumier1,2; 1University Medical Center, Geneva, 2Faculty of
Psychology, University of Geneva, Geneva, 3CHUV, Lausanne — Anosognosia
is defined as a lack of awareness of a neurological deficit (e.g. hemiplegia)
due to focal brain damage. We prospectively screened a population of
337 patients with an acute right hemispheric stroke, among whom 58
cases showed significant motor deficit of the left hemibody. Anosognosia
was present in 32% of these patients during the hyperacute phase (up to 3
days after stroke). This frequency is much higher than previous reports in

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

69

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

the literature (10 to 18% according to Baier and Karnath, 2005) and likely
to reflect the precocity of our evaluation. Indeed, follow-up testing
showed that the frequency of anosognosia was reduced to 18% one week
later and to 5% after six months. Other rare phenomena associated with
anosognosia, such as kinesthesic hallucinations, feelings of non-belonging, misoplegia, personification of the arm, strange sensations, or supernumerary phantom limb, were also found with a high frequency during
the hyperacute phase, followed by a similar decrease over time. In terms
of clinical characteristics, anosognosia was correlated with the presence
of severe sensorimotor deficits, hemianopsia, neglect, impaired vigilance,
spatio-temporal disorientation, and overestimation of self-performance
in motor tasks, though none of these deficits was uniquely associated
with anosognosia. Taken together, our data indicate that anosognosia is a
major but transitory and hyperacute manifestation of stroke, highlighting
the importance to study it as early as possible to understand the underlying neuropsychological mechanisms. The frequent dissociations with
other clinical symptoms points to the complexity of the phenomenology
of this deficit, and multiple causal factors.
B69
THE SENSE OF AGENCY IN SCHIZOPHRENIA: DISTURBANCES
IN PREDICTING ACTION-EFFECT RELATIONS CAN EXPLAIN
ABNORMALITIES IN ACTION AWARENESS Martin Voss1, James
Moore2, Marta Hauser1, Dieter Kunz1, Juergen Gallinat1, Andreas Heinz1, Patrick
Haggard2; 1Charité University Hospital & St. Hedwig Hospital, Berlin, Germany,
2
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Queen Square, London, UK — There
has
been some debate over the last years whether the conscious awareness of
action is mainly a predictive process based on the motor command or
whether retrospective mechanisms such as backward masking and inferential “sense-making” are more important. While empirical evidence
suggests that the conscious experience of action results from a dynamic
interplay between such mechanisms, its disturbances in schizophrenia
remain elusive. To address this question, we have used the intentional
binding effect (Haggard et al., 2002) to measure the extent to which perceptual estimates of action are influenced by subsequent effects in a population of schizophrenic patients and matched controls. In our
experiment, we varied the probability with which a simple manual action
(a key-press) produced an effect (a tone). In healthy volunteers, a high
probability of causing an effect led to a predictive shift of the perceptual
estimate of the action towards the effect, even on those trials where the
action produced no effect. Conversely, when predictability of the effect to
occur was low, temporal binding was seen only on those trials where the
effect actually occurred. Schizophrenic patients showed absence of the
predictive effect and a highly exaggerated temporal binding whenever an
effect occurred. The result suggests a disturbance in predicting actioneffect relations, which may lead to abnormalities in experiencing a sense
of agency in schizophrenia.
B70
CAN PLASTICITY-RELATED RELEARNING ACCOUNT FOR
“SPONTANEOUS” RECOVERY OF COGNITIVE FUNCTION
AFTER ACUTE BRAIN DAMAGE? Stephen Welbourne1, Jennifer Read1,
Karen Sage1, Matthew Lambon Ralph1, James McClelland2; 1School of
Psychological Sciences, University of Manchester, England, 2Stanford
University — Much of cognitive neuropsychology relies on data collected
from brain damaged patients when they have reached a “stable”, chronic
state (typically six-nine months post onset). Clinical observations indicate
that patients exhibit considerable “spontaneous” recovery to varying
degrees during this phase. The standard explanations for recovery usually involve the idea that a reduction in oedema allows some temporarily
incapacitated systems to come back online. If one takes seriously the idea
from computational modelling that knowledge is encoded in the pattern
of synaptic weights then another possible explanation presents itself:
namely that “spontaneous” recovery may be a genuine re-learning process. This study aims to explore how realistic an explanation this is. To
get direct evidence of the extent of “spontaneous” recovery, detailed

70

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

assessment of patients was conducted within one month of their stroke
and again three months later. Data on single word reading in the patients
was compared with a connectionist reading model, which had been damaged and allowed to recover. The patients exhibited a remarkable degree
of recovery in their word reading skills, and this was mirrored in the
model. In both patients and model recovery was faster than initial learning. Analysis of recovery in a simpler encoder model suggests that rapid
recovery depends on the fact that the structure of the weights in the
model is optimised to learn the task. When the model is damaged the
ability to perform the task is lost, but the model is still optimised for
relearning allowing for a very rapid “spontaneous” recovery.
B71
REVERSAL LEARNING DEFICITS IN RUMINATORS Anson
Whitmer1, Marie Banich3; 1University of Colorado at Boulder, 2University of
Colorado at Boulder, Institute of Cognitive Science, 3University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center — Individuals who often ruminate or repetitively
think about their current dysphoria tend to experience worse and longer
lasting periods of depression. Because of these serious consequences of
depressive rumination, it is important to determine the mechanisms
underlying rumination. Ruminators perseverate more than non-ruminators in the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task (WCST), a pattern that has been
suggested to occur because ruminators are attentionally inflexible (Davis
& Nolen-Hoeksema, 2000). The goal of the current work was to distinguish between two potential mechanisms driving perseveration in ruminators: a) an inability to reverse stimulus-reward associations and b)
inability to switch between higher order attentional sets. To do so, we
used a probabilistic version of the intradimensional-extradimensional
task. In this task individuals learn which of two items is probabilistically
associated with a reward. In two studies, we found that tendency to
depressively ruminate is related to difficulties using probabilistic negative feedback to reverse learned stimulus-reward associations. However,
it was not associated with difficulties in switching between attentional
sets when a new dimension of the stimulus signaled the item’s reward
value. These results raise the possibility that, even though increases in
depression and negative mood should negatively reinforce the value of
ruminative thoughts, the inability of ruminators to learn from negative
reward may mistakenly lead them to continue to believe that those ruminative thoughts will eventually help overcome their problems.
B72
IMPAIRED FORWARD MODELS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA AS
ASSESSED BY THE SIZE-WEIGHT ILLUSION Lisa Williams1,2, Greg
Light2, Vilayanur Ramachandran1,2; 1Center for Brain and Cognition, UCSD,
2UCSD — The size-weight illusion (SWI) is a striking perceptual effect
wherein an individual asked to compare the weight of two objects of
identical physical weight but different sizes will feel the smaller object is
substantially heavier. The forward model of motor control proposes that
when a motor act is initiated an efference copy of the action is also generated. Comparisons between this copy and actual sensory feedback are
used for a variety of purposes, including online movement adjustments,
cancelling sensory reafference, and movement prediction and planning.
Previously, our lab has suggested the source of the SWI may be a central
mismatch between expected sensory feedback – efference copy - and
actual proprioceptive feedback of the two stimuli. Disruptions in this
mechanism have also been proposed to explain various positive symptoms of schizophrenia, including auditory hallucinations and delusions
of control. We tested the SWI in individuals with schizophrenia and control participants by asking them to report which of two disks was
heavier. Disks were large (5 inches diameter) or small (2 inches diameter),
and weighed 90, 120, 150, 180 or 210 grams. Testing included illusion trials (90 small vs. 120-210 large) and control trials (comparisons between
same size weights). We found that on the two most difficult size-weight
discriminations (90 small vs. 120 and 150 large), as a group, individuals
with schizophrenia experience the size-weight illusion on fewer trials
than control participants, despite demonstrating comparable weight dis-

Poster Session B

crimination, offering further support to the idea of a dysfunctional motor
control comparator mechanism in schizophrenia.
B73
FMRI ACTIVATION PATTERNS PREDICT READING ABILITY IN
ADULTS WITH AND WITHOUT DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA
Allison Zumberge1, Jennifer Bruno1, Frank Manis1, Zhong-lin Lu1, Jason
Goldman1, Rachel Beattie1, Jason Batten1; 1University of Southern
California — Neuroimaging studies of developmental dyslexia, a biologically-based disorder affecting phonological processing, have suggested
deficiencies in one or more posterior regions within the reading network.
fMRI studies of skilled reading have demonstrated a positive relationship
between reading skill and activation in one posterior region, the occipitotemporal junction; and a negative relationship between reading skill and
activaton in an anterior region, the inferior frontal gyrus (e.g., Bruno &
Zumberge et al., in press). The current study extends these findings
across a broad range of reading ability, including individuals with dyslexia. Preliminary results indicate a similar pattern of correlations
between reading skill and activation measures for dyslexic and non-dyslexic participants, suggesting that allocation of resources across the reading network depends on reading skill. This study supports—using
neuroimaging measures—the hypothesis that developmental dyslexia
represents the bottom end of a continuous distribution of reading skill in
the population (Shaywitz et al., 1992). Further analyses will employ
methods of functional and effective connectivity to better explain the
relationship between regional activation and reading skill.

Higher level cognition: Problem solving
B74
CAN ELECTRICAL STIMULATION OF FRONTAL CORTEX
IMPROVE COMPLEX VERBAL PERFORMANCE? Carlo
Cerruti1,2,
Gottfried Schlaug2; 1Harvard Graduate School of Education, 2Music,
Neuroimaging, and Stroke Recovery Laboratories, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center and Harvard Medical School — Previous studies have provided evidence that verbal cognition can be enhanced by transcranial
direct current stimulation (tDCS). These studies have focused largely on
site F3 of left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and have used tests of working memory. One tDCS study found that relatively strong stimulation
produced a significant enhancement of performance on a relatively complex verbal task, verbal fluency (Iyer, et al. 2005). The present study
attempted to partially replicate Iyer et al. and also to extend it by employing a complex verbal task with problem-solving and working memory
components, the Remote Associates Test (RAT). Seventeen subjects
underwent 1 milliampere anodal, cathodal and sham tDCS sessions with
the active electrode on F3. We found no effect on verbal fluency scores
across conditions. RAT performance was significantly enhanced by
anodal stimulation. The data provide evidence that complex verbal problem-solving can be enhanced by tDCS. The data also reflect on the nature
of remote association, a task associated with both creative and logical
problem-solving. Given the association between F3 and working memory, it appears that the RAT may engage considerable working memory
or executive function processing. To our knowledge, this is the first tDCS
study to use a highly complex verbal task. Future studies may help link
neuroscience and fields such as education by using complex cognitive
tasks while also parsing the effects of subcomponent processes such as
working memory and others.
B75
CAUSAL REASONING AND INTENTIONALITY JUDGMENTS
AFTER FOCAL BRAIN LESIONS Shelley Channon1, David Lagnado1,
Helena Drury1, Elizabeth Matheson1, Lyndsay Taylor1, Roxanne Barrett1,
Claire Doyle1, Mary-Beth Young1, Sian Fitzpatrick1, Colin Shieff2, Nigel
Mendoza3, Dave Maudgil4; 1University College London, UK, 2Royal Free

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Hospital, UK, 3Charing Cross Hospital, UK, 4Heatherwood and Wexham Park
Hospitals NHS Trust, UK — This study focused on sequences of everyday
events that led to adverse outcomes, and examined people’s judgments of
key events in these sequences. Intuitively, the mentalistic versus nonmentalistic distinction appears critical to how people make everyday
judgments of cause and blame. Whether an agent intends or foresees the
effects of an action is likely to influence the extent to which they are perceived to be responsible. This study was designed to investigate the
impact of focal brain lesions on causal reasoning. Participants with focal
lesions and matched healthy control participants were compared in their
judgments about intentional human actions, unintentional human actions
and physical events. The results showed that, compared to the control
group, the lesion participants differentiated less between intentional and
unintentional acts in assigning blame. The role of frontal regions in contributing to this pattern of performance was evaluated.
B76
SEQUENCE LEARNING: EXTERNAL VERSUS INTERNAL ERROR
EVALUATION Jeffrey Cockburn1, Olav Krigolson1, Kyle Matheson1, Clay
Holroyd1; 1University of Victoria — The error-related negativity (ERN) is a
component of the event-related brain potential that occurs following negative feedback (fERN) and erroneous responses (rERN). Recently, it has
been proposed that the ERN reflects a reward prediction error carried by
the midbrain dopamine system. Importantly, this prediction error signal
occurs at the earliest indication that events are worse than expected. As
such, during the time course of learning, people should shift from external error evaluation (i.e., feedback: fERN) to internal error evaluation
(i.e., efference copy: rERN). To examine this contention we had participants learn a seven-item sequence by trial-and-error. Our results indicated that in the initial stages of learning error feedback evoked a fERN.
Furthermore, response errors in the learning phase of the experiment did
not elicit a rERN. After learning had occurred, our results indicated that
error feedback no longer elicited a fERN. While we did not find a typical
rERN associated with response errors made after the sequence had been
learned, we did find differences in the event-related brain potentials
between the waveforms associated with response errors and correct
guesses. Importantly, our results suggest that during the time course of
learning participants in the present experiment shifted from an external
to internal mode of error evaluation.
B77
THE
EFFECTS
OF
SLEEP
DEPRIVATION
ON
THE
EXPLORATION-EXPLOITATION TRADEOFF Brian D. Glass1,
Arthur B. Markman1, David M. Schnyer2, W. Todd Maddox2; 1The University
of Texas at Austin, 2Institute for Neuroscience, The University of Texas at
Austin — We examined the cognitive deficits exhibited by sleep deprived
individuals by utilizing a computerized resource acquisition task to
assess the tradeoff between exploration and exploitation in decision making. The subjects were tested over a two day period (24 hours apart), with
sleep (control) or without sleep (sleep deprived). The exploration-exploitation tradeoff is the balancing of previously successful strategies with
the adoption of new strategies. The locus coeruleus-norepinephrine system has been implicated as driving this tradeoff process via connections
with brain areas that monitor the effectiveness of currently employed
strategies, such as the anterior cingulate and orbitofrontal cortices
(Aston-Jones & Cohen, 2005). The resource acquisition task is a computer
game in which subjects compete against simulated opponents for
resources in a virtual environment (see Goldstone & Ashpole, 2004). Different game environments were used that required either an exploratory
or exploitative strategy. The simulated competitors were driven by the
Generalized Exploration Model (GEM; Glass, Maddox & Markman,
2007). Model simulation provides information about whether the optimal
strategy in an environment requires individuals to adopt exploratory or
exploitative strategies. By comparing subject data to model output and
matched controls, subject’s decision making processes are assessed. Sleep
deprived subjects demonstrated improved performance on the explora-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

71

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

tion task and impaired performance on the exploitative task relative to
themselves when fresh and relative to controls. These results provide evidence that sleep deprivation impairs the ability to adopt exploitative
strategies, while facilitating the adoption of exploratory strategies.
B78
NEURAL CORRELATES OF LEARNING IN A VISUAL
CATEGORIZATION TASK Andrew Kayser1,2, Mark D'Esposito1,2; 1UC
Berkeley, 2UC San Francisco — Learning new concepts in the setting of
minimal previous experience with them is a critical skill we employ routinely in our everyday lives. In this fMRI study of healthy undergraduates, we investigated the role of frontal, basal ganglia, and medial
temporal structures in the acquisition of a series of rule-based category
discriminations. Subjects received a standardized set of instructions but
minimal practice on the task, which involved sorting rectangles into two
(initially unknown) groups based on their length and width. Subjects
learned each task via feedback over the course of 63 trials. In our ROIbased analysis, we found significant univariate activations that correlated
with each subject's learning curves in the bilateral head of the caudate,
bilateral middle frontal gyrus (MFG), and left anterior parahippocampal
gyrus (PHG). Timecourse and anatomical data suggested that these
results could not be explained by differential activation to correct versus
incorrect responses, late versus early time sensitivity, or motor preparation. Interestingly, multivariate activity could distinguish good from
poor learning: over the course of successful rule acquisition, the right
MFG became differentially coherent with separate regions in the right
MFG and left posterior PHG, whereas in poor learning it became more
coherent with general task-active areas in the right parietal lobe. The
above results confirm previous findings that the caudate and bilateral
MFG are active during learning of a visual categorization task; and
extend them to demonstrate that this univariate activity correlates with
the learning curve, while right MFG connectivity distinguishes good
from poor learning runs.
B79
THE EFFECTS OF VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX
DAMAGE ON EVERYDAY SOCIAL PROBLEM SOLVING Frank
Krueger1, Michael Koenigs1, Andrew Snyder2, Edward D. Huey1, Aron
Barbey1, Vanessa Raymont3, Jordan Grafman1; 1NINDS/ NIH, 2University of
Chicago, 3Mount Sinai School of Medicine — The prefrontal cortex (PFC) is
responsible for regulating human social behavior. More specifically, ventromedial PFC (VMPFC) lesions result in deficits in social decision-making, problems in interpersonal interactions, and diminished sensitivity to
socially relevant situations. However, little is known about the role of the
VMPFC in everyday social problem solving. We administered the Everyday Problem Solving Inventory (EPSI) to 31 VMPFC lesion patients, who
were matched by handedness, age, education, and intelligence with nonventromedial frontal lobe (NVMFC=44) lesion patients, posterior cortex
(PC=29) lesion patients, and normal controls (NC=50). The EPSI is composed of scenarios depicting everyday problems. Participants were asked
to imagine themselves in social and non-social problem situations and to
rate given emotion- and cognitive-focused solution strategies for their
effectiveness. Ratings were compared with judges’ ratings, which were
considered a good approximation of optimal solutions to the problem situations. Our results demonstrate that the VMPFC patients’ EPSI rank
orderings for social but not for non-social problem situation were significantly less optimal compared to the performances of the NVMFC, PC,
and NC groups. Furthermore, VMPFC patients’ rankings were significantly worse for emotion- than for cognitive-focused solution strategies.
Finally, VMPFC patients’ performance for the social problems correlated
significantly with their total Neurobehavioral Rating Scale scores (a
behavioral scale on the patient completed by a trained observer) suggesting a relationship between patients’ failure to choose an optimal social
problem solution and their actual social behavior. In conclusion, our
study emphasizes the unique role of the VMPFC in representing social
knowledge utilized to solve everyday problems.

72

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

B80
STRATEGY
VARIATION
IN
MULTI-DIGIT
MENTAL
MULTIPLICATION: FMRI, BEHAVIORAL AND MODELING
PERSPECTIVES Miriam Rosenberg-Lee1,2, Marsha Lovett1,3, John
Anderson1,2; 1Carnegie Mellon, 2Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, Carnegie
Mellon, 3Eberly Center for Teaching Excellence, Carnegie Mellon — Recent
research into math cognition has identified areas of the brain involved in
number processing (Dehaene et al., 2003) and complex problem solving
(Anderson, 2007). Much of this research assumes that participants use the
same strategies; yet, cognitive psychology tells us people use a variety of
strategies (Siegler et al., 1987, 1997, LeFevre et al., 1996). In an fMRI
experiment, we examined cortical activation as a function of two different
calculation strategies for solving multi-digit multiplication problems. The
School strategy, equivalent to long multiplication without pen and paper,
involves working from right-to-left. The Expert strategy, used by “lightning” mental calculators (Staszewski, 1988), proceeds from left-to-right.
The two strategies require essentially the same calculations but have different working memory demands (School incurring greater demands). In
a slow event-related design, we compared activity on short and long multiplication problems solved by both strategies. We found significantly
greater early activity for the School strategy in areas involved in attentional aspects of number processing (PSPL) and mental representation
(BA 40/7), but not in a numerical magnitude area (HIPS). A prefrontal
declarative memory retrieval area (BA 9/46) did not differentiate
between the strategies. We extend these results with two behavioral
experiments examining the effects of training on strategy choice. In a
choice/no choice paradigm, we found greater practice leads to more
selection of the Expert strategy, but more difficult training problems
(implemented by number of carries) leads to less selection of the Expert
strategy. An ACT-R model accounts for choice behavior and predicts cortical activity.
B81
THE EFFECTS OF ATTENTIONAL STATES ON VERBAL
PROBLEM SOLVING PROCESSES Ezra Wegbreit1, Satoru Suzuki1,
Marcia Grabowecky1, Mark Jung-Beeman1; 1Northwestern University — People who are in a positive mood show states of broadened attention and
are more likely to solve a problem with a sudden restructuring known as
an insight. Behavioral priming and neuroimaging findings indicate that
distinct cognitive and neural processes underlie insights. However, it
remains to be seen if specific attentional states, such as a state of broadened attention, are related to solving problems with an insight. Thirtytwo healthy, right-handed, native English-speaking undergraduates
completed four visual attention tasks selected to manipulate their attention into a broadened or narrowed state. In order, participants responded
to a center letter while ignoring flankers, identified briefly presented
objects, attentively tracked multiple moving objects, and determined the
direction of spatially distributed coherent motion. Before and after the
administration of the attention tasks, participants completed a set of short
three-word problems that could be solved with insight or with analytic
processing. Participants solved reliably more word problems after completing the four attention tasks than before the tasks. Furthermore, participants solved reliably more problems with insight after the visual
attention tasks than before. Participants did not show significant differences in the number of analytic solutions or incorrect responses they produced before and after the attention tasks. Thus, the four intervening
attention tasks principally helped participants solve more word problems
by increasing the number of problems participants solved with insight.
Further research will determine which specific attentional states engendered by the four tasks facilitated insightful solutions, and will investigate the neural correlates of such facilitation.

Poster Session B

B82
ROSTROLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND HIPPOCAMPUS
IN RELATIONAL REASONING AND TRANSITIVE INFERENCE
Carter Wendelken1, Sandeep Sabhlok1, Silvia Bunge1,2; 1Helen Wills
Neuroscience Institute, UC-Berkeley, 2UC-Berkeley — Prior studies implicate
the rostral part of lateral prefrontal cortex (RLPFC) in relational integration (e.g. Christoff et al, 2001; Bunge et al, 2005). Based on these findings,
we hypothesized that RLPFC should be particularly involved in transitive inference, which involves combining multiple relational instances in
order to draw some conclusion. However, multiple prior studies, mainly
in rats but also with human fMRI, have pointed to hippocampus as a primary locus of transitive inference (e.g. Duseck and Eichenbaum 1997;
Heckers et al, 2004), at least when long-term memory retrieval is
involved. Our goal was to test the hypothesis that RLPFC should be a primary locus of transitive inference processing, especially in the absence of
long-term retrieval demands. To this end, we designed a task in which
subjects were presented with four relational instances (depicted as colored balls on iconic balance scales) and then were asked to judge the
validity of a fifth relationship, given the first four. On inference trials,
subjects had to infer across two of the initial relationships in order to confirm or deny the query relation. On direct trials, a single initial relation
was sufficient. Results confirm our main predictions: the most prominent
activation associated with inference was RLPFC, and hippocampus
showed no inference effect. The necessity of attending to predicate-argument structure was a second experimental factor. Hippocampus was
more active for specific relations where predicate-argument structure
mattered than for generic relations where it did not; however, this manipulation had no effect on RLPFC activation.
B83
THINKING ANEW: NEURAL CORRELATES OF PROCESSING
INNOVATIVE OPTIONS Stacy L. Wood1, Jennifer Vendemia1, Yuliya
Komarova1, Adam Craig1; 1University of South Carolina — The goal of this
research is to better understand the diffusion of innovations (Rogers
1996) by determining individual processes of evaluation, especially in
affective responses to new options (Wood and Moreau 2006). Differences
in BOLD activations during processing of innovative and familiar options
were examined in a product evaluation task. College-aged students
(N=25) attended an experimental session in which they were scanned
using a Siemens 3T magnet while performing a task with directed evaluations of six different product descriptions. Three products were considered (as determined by pretesting in the same population as the
experimental task) to be innovative and three were considered to be not
innovative. The product description consisted of a picture and descriptive paragraph similar to a catalog format. Blank screens were interspersed randomly between the descriptions to prevent carryover effects
from one description to another. Participants were given an evaluative
goal prior to being exposed to these descriptions. This research goes
beyond a more basic investigation of novel stimuli to examine complex
and self-relevant novel evaluations. Evidence for the differential activation in the hippocampus denoting declarative versus episodic memory
and differential activation in affective systems (amygdala and inferior
frontal cortex) will be discussed. This imaging data will be discussed in
conjunction with behavioral data from two other studies that assessed
explicit attitudinal responses to the same familiar and innovative products.
B84
ARE REWARD EXPECTANCIES IN CHOICE TASKS PROCESSED
AS RATIOS OR DIFFERENCES?: IMPLICATIONS FOR THEORIES
OF REWARD PROCESSING IN THE ORBITOFRONTAL
CORTEX Darrell A. Worthy1, Arthur B. Markman1, W. Todd Maddox1;
1
University of Texas at Austin — The Orbitofrontal Cortex (OFC) has been
implicated in processing the magnitude of rewards in choice tasks (Wallis
and Miller, 2003; Schultz, 2000). However, it is unclear if the relative magnitude of an expected reward relative to the alternatives is processed in

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

the OFC by comparing the ratio or the distance of the expected rewards.
We designed a behavioral experiment in which healthy young adult subjects chose from two or more decks of cards and gained points on each
trial. One group of subjects earned between 1 and 10 points on each draw.
A second group of subjects performed the same task, but each reward
value was shifted by 80 points such that they earned between 81 and 90
points on each draw. A third group of subjects performed the same task
as the first group, but each reward value was multiplied by ten such that
they received between 10 and 100 points on each draw. Thus for the
shifted reward values group the distance between the expected rewards
was maintained, and for the multiplied reward values group the ratio
between the expected rewards was maintained. Behavioral and computational model-based analyses indicate that subjects with shifted reward
values significantly underperformed subjects in the other two groups due
to an initial failure to exploit the most advantageous option. This suggests that the reward system initially processes the relative magnitude of
a reward by comparing the ratio and not the distance between the
expected rewards.

Methodological Issues: Electrophysiology
B85
SYNCHRONIZED OSCILLATIONS IN DISTRIBUTED NEURAL
CIRCUITS
UNDERLIE
COGNITIVE
AND
PERCEPTUAL
PROCESSES IN THE HUMAN BRAIN Michael Cohen1; 1University of
Bonn, Germany — Phrenology—the idea that modular pieces of the brain
are responsible for specific perceptual, cognitive, and psychological functions—was discredited over a century ago, and yet the “localization”
approach remains the dominant (though sometimes polemic) method of
mapping neural mechanisms onto specific mental processes. An alternative is the “network” approach: Functions in the brain, though localized
to some extent, are supported by spatially distributed networks. How
might the brain coordinate the activity of anatomically distributed but
functionally linked networks? One possibility is through oscillations—
coherent and rhythmic fluctuations of neural populations—which are
thought to act as the “glue” that binds both local and distal neural networks. Data from intracranial EEG recorded in epilepsy patients from
several experiments (perceptual, decision-making, etc.) are presented to
support the idea that cognitive functions arise from the coherent activity
of functionally linked networks. In some cases, localized activity does not
statistically distinguish different experimental conditions, whereas patterns of inter-region oscillatory synchrony do. Synchronized activity was
measured through inter-electrode phase and power coherence in frequency bands ranging from delta (2-4 Hz) to upper gamma (80-150 Hz).
Theta (4-8 Hz) and lower gamma (30-80 Hz) oscillations appear to play
special roles in coordinating inter-regional task-related activity, and often
interact, with theta putatively gating the power and/or phase synchrony
in gamma-oscillating networks. Together, these findings suggest that a
systems-level approach (e.g., functional connectivity) might yield fruitful
insights into how the brain supports complex cognitive, perceptual, and
social phenomena beyond what can be gleaned from localization
approaches.
B86
HIGH IMPEDANCE ERP RECORDINGS: WILL YOU NEED MORE
TRIALS TO GET THE SAME P-VALUE? Emily S. Kappenman1, Steven
J. Luck1; 1University of California, Davis — High impedance recording systems have become increasingly popular for ERP research, largely because
they make it possible to apply a large number of electrodes in a small
amount of time. However, the effects of high impedance recordings on
the quality of ERP data have not been examined systematically by a neutral third party. If high-impedance recordings yield a poorer signal-tonoise ratio, more trials or subjects will be needed to achieve a given level
of statistical significance, and this may more than offset the savings in

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

73

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

electrode application time. To measure the effects of electrode impedance
on signal-to-noise ratio, we performed simultaneous low- and highimpedance recordings using a Biosemi Active-2 system and an oddball
paradigm. In each subject, we abraded the skin for the electrode sites in
one hemisphere (yielding impedances of <5 k?) but not in the other hemisphere (yielding impedances of 20-190 k?). In addition, because noise
may be affected by temperature and humidity, subjects were tested
under both cool/dry and warm/humid conditions. Data quality was
comparable for low- and high-impedance recordings in the cool condition. In the warm condition, however, P300 amplitude variance was substantially higher for the high impedance recording sites. The usefulness
of various filters to attenuate these effects will be presented. Overall,
these results suggest that high impedance recording systems can provide
adequate data quality in an optimal recording environment but may lead
to a net increase in subject testing time in suboptimal environments.
B87
THE NOVELTY, TASK-SWITCH, AND GO/NO-GO P3A ARE THE
SAME COMPONENT Aminda O'Hare1, Cody Wolcott1, Joseph Dien1;
1
University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS — While the P3a produced by novel
and rare stimuli in the oddball paradigm and the P3a produced by taskswitch paradigms have been shown to share the same scalp topography,
and thus are likely be the same component (Bechara, et al., 2006), no
direct comparisons between the P3a that is produced by “no-go” stimuli
in a go/no-go task have been conducted. In the current study, 24 participants completed auditory novelty-oddball, auditory go/no-go, and Wisconsin Card Sorting (WISC) (with auditory feedback) tasks all in one
session while event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded from a highdensity, 128 channel system. The P3a components produced by each task
were found to have similar scalp topographies and latencies via principal
component analyses (PCA). Additionally, dipole source localizations
found the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) to be the most likely source for
each P3a component (Oddball: R.V. = .82%, Go/No-go: R.V. = .68%,
WCST: R.V. = .67%). These results strongly suggest that the P3a is the
same component for each of these tasks. This provides new information
for the go/no-go task, as the cognitive function for its P3a has been
unclear. Additionally, these results support the idea that the P3a represents processing a task change, as this is the major similarity among these
tasks. Additional ERPs that were specific to each task are also reported.
B88
NEURAL CORRELATES OF CONCEALED KNOWLEDGE: AN
ERPS INVESTIGATION Giuseppe Sartori1, Sara Agosta1, Claudia Civai1,
Maddalena Marini1; 1Università degli Studi di Padova, via Venezia, Padova,
Italy — Objective: The IAT-A (Autobiographical Implicit Association
Test) is based on a modified version of Implicit Association Test. The
method measures the positive and negative associations a participant has
between a verbal description of an event (autobiographical implicit memory) and the logical dimension TRUE. Here we investigate the neural correlates of concealed knowledge using the IAT-A (Card Test Paradigm).
Participants and methods. Thirty-two participants were asked to select
one of two playing cards (“4 of diamonds” and “7 of clubs”). Then they
were administered the F-IAT combined with ERPs registration. In one
stage, participants categorized both sentences referred to the card that
they had chosen and TRUE sentences on the same computer key and both
sentences referred to the non chosen card and FALSE sentences on the
other computer key (congruent condition). In a later stage, the tasks were
reversed and participants categorized sentences referred to the non-chosen card and TRUE sentences on the same computer key and sentences
referred to the chosen card and FALSE sentences on the other computer
key (incongruent condition). Results: RT analysis confirmed that IAT-A is
highly accurate in identifying the card selected by participants. We found
a larger negative deflection peaking at about 300 msec (N200) in the
incongruent condition with respect to the congruent condition.

74

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

Conclusions: Our results show that the N200 is the neural marker of the
incongruency using IAT-A.
B89
COHERENCE MAPPING OF BEHAVIORAL ECOG MIGROGRID
DATA Minna Silfverhuth1, Felix Darvas1, Adam O. Hebb1, Heracles
Panagiotides1, Jeffrey G. Ojemann1, Mark D. Holmes2; 1University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, 2EEG and Clinical Neurophysiology Laboratory,
University of Washington, Seattle — GOAL. In order to demonstrate
‘micromapping’ of brain function, we applied coherence analysis, using
integrated coherence over a frequency band, while the subject performed
distinct behaviors during unconstrained interactions. METHODS. Microgrid data was recorded through a 8x8 electrodes grid (10 × 10mm area,
sampling rate 200Hz) over the right middle temporal gyrus during evaluation for epilepsy surgery [1]. By reviewing video, periods were determined when subject was facing and talking to a friend (FACE), on the
telephone (PHONE), looking at photos (PHOTOS) and reading a book
(READING). Average integrated coherence was calculated over 1-30Hz
and 31-100Hz frequency bands between microgrid and electrocorticography (ECoG) electrodes over right and left hemisphere. RESULTS. Average integrated coherence values were highest in 31-100 Hz band between
migrogrid and ECoG electrodes in the right side, up to 0.68 (vs. 0.62 in
left side). Both frequency bands showed values over noise level (0.52).
The strongest interactions were with ECoG electrodes over areas BA 20
and 21 (anterior temporal lobe), BA 11 and BA 9/46 (orbitofrontal and
dorsiolateral frontal cortex), during FACE and PHOTOS, and less in the
other behaviors. Inside the microgrid, the pattern of coherence values
varied with conditions and the ECoG electrode pair. CONCLUSIONS.
We have shown, using coherence as a measure of connectivity between
electrode sites, that selective interaction between regions exists for specific, unconstrained behaviors, below the 1 cm resolution. This connectivity is most pronounced and specific for the higher (gamma) frequency
band. [1] Freeman et al., 2006.
B90
REASSESSMENT OF THE ORIGINS OF INDUCED GAMMA BAND
RESPONSES – A SINGLE TRIAL ANALYSIS Shlomit
YuvalGreenberg1, Orr Tomer2, Leon Y. Deouell1,3; 1The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, 2The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, School of Medicine, 3The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Interdisciplinary Center for Neural
Computation — The induced gamma response (iGBR) is a typical increase
in the gamma band (>30Hz) peaking around 250ms post stimulus, following the presentation of a visual stimulus. The iGBR was hypothesized
to represent the neural synchronized oscillatory activity involved in various cognitive functions such as binding and consciousness. The iGBR is
calculated by averaging single trials’ spectral data, circumventing phase
cancellation due to inter-trial latency jitter. Subjects in our study were
presented with objects which were masked with 2 thick or 30 thin vertical
white stripes. In half of these trials the visible segments were left in their
native order (Coherent 2, Coherent 30) while in the other half the segments were shuffled (Incoherent2, Incoherent 30). In the Incoherent 30
condition the objects could not be identified, whereas in the incoherent 2
they were still identifiable. We found the iGBR decreases significantly,
across subjects, only in the Incoherent 30 condition. Thus, it was related
to the semantic content rather than to object coherence or ‘binding’.
Moreover, to address the nature of the iGBR we examined single trial
data. A gamma increase at a similar latency, topography and frequencies
as the average iGBR could be detected in many single trials. Whereas previously iGBR was discussed in terms of gamma ‘oscillations’, we find the
gamma increase to be brief, on the order of one or two cycles only. The
single trials data leads to a reassessment of the origins of the scalpedrecorded iGBR.

Poster Session B

Methodological Issues: Neuroimaging
B91
FUNCTIONAL DIFFERENTIATION WITHIN THE MONKEY
CORTEX AS REVEALED BY NEAR-INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY
Allen Ardestani1,2, Felix Darvas3, Jens Steinbrink4, Richard Leahy5, Arthur
Toga6, Joaquin Fuster1,2; 1Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human
Behavior, UCLA, 2Brain Research Institute, UCLA, 3University of Washington,
4Charité, Humboldt University, 5Signal and Image Processing Institute, USC,
6
Laboratory of Neuroimaging, UCLA — The role of prefrontal cortex in
working memory (WM) is well established. However, questions remain
regarding the topography and “domain-specific differentiation” of different types of information processing in the cortex. While it has been theorized that dorsolateral (DPFC) and ventrolateral (VPFC) prefrontal cortex
preferentially process spatial and object WM, respectively, both electrophysiological evidence in the monkey and neuroimaging in the human
have largely failed to demonstrate such regional differentiation. In this
study we use near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) to detect functional
changes, across relatively large cortical cell populations, simultaneously
from prefrontal and posterior parietal cortices. Imaging data were
recorded from a Rhesus macaque performing two types of WM tasks: a
spatial task in which the animal had to retain the spatial position of a
visual stimulus, and a non-spatial task where he had to retain its color
(red or green) during a 20s delay. During performance of the spatial WM
task, cerebral activation trends were found in which DPFC exhibited
stronger covariance with posterior parietal cortex than did VPFC. These
correlations were more pronounced during performance of the spatial
task than during the non-spatial task. Additionally, incorrect trials generally elicited lower activations during the delay period than did trials ending with a correct response. Furthermore, NIRS data collected during the
performance of a haptic WM task also appear to exhibit inter-regional differences in delay activation. The data thus suggest the presence of preferential cognitive processing between and within posterior and frontal
cortical regions.
B92
FUNCTIONAL LOCALIZERS Marc Berman1, John Jonides1; 1The
University of Michigan — There is an increasing trend in fMRI research for
researchers to conduct simple functional localizer tasks to establish
regions of interest (ROI) which are then used to analyze a task of interest
(e.g., a more complex memory or attention task). This two-stage process
is quite common in research that uses faces, objects, or words as stimuli.
This procedure, however, begs two questions: 1) whether functional
localization depends on the task a researcher uses (e.g., a passive viewing
task vs. a 1-back task) and 2) whether functional localization hinges on
the contrasting stimuli that are used as the control. Here we review the
literature on functional localizers for face stimuli, which are used to localize activation in the Fusiform Face Area (FFA). We find that the type of
localizer task (e.g., passive-viewing, 1-back, etc.) does not localize to different areas of FFA. In addition, the contrasting stimuli with which the
face stimuli are contrasted (e.g., houses, objects, words, etc.) also do not
produce different localization in FFA. These data suggest that the choice
of functional localizer is robust against the task used for localization and
the contrasting stimuli which the localized stimuli are compared.
B93
FUSION OF FMRI AND THE PUPIL RESPONSE DURING AN
AUDITORY ODDBALL TASK Gregory Book1, Michael Stevens1,2,
Godfrey Pearlson1,2,3, Kent Kiehl4; 1Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center,
Institute of Living at Hartford Hospital, Hartford, CT, 2Yale University School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 3Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD,
4MIND Institute, Albuquerque, New Mexico — Background: Pupillary dilatation has been used as a robust measure of cognitive processes, and
associated neural pathways are well understood. However, brain regions
responsible for dilatation during the orienting response are unexplored.
We used a method involving fusing fMRI and pupil response data to

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

identify areas implicated in this pupil response. Methods: We tested 19
healthy control subjects (ages 18-49, 37% male) using BOLD fMRI
(TR=1500ms) in a Siemens Allegra 3T magnet while simultaneously collecting pupillary data using an ASL model 5000 eye-tracker. Subjects performed an auditory oddball task consisting of 10% target, 10% novel, and
80% standard tones. They pressed a button to respond only to target
tones. fMRI data were realigned, normalized, smoothed, and statistics
were generated using the general linear model. Pupil response data were
processed by removing blinks, and averaging the time courses surrounding the button presses. The fMRI and pupil data for all subjects were
entered into the Fusion ICA Toolbox (FIT, Calhoun et al), and statistics
were generated for the correctly identified target condition. Results: Pupil
response averages showed dilatation of 0.203mm for targets, 0.08mm for
novels, and 0.006mm for standards. Fusion analysis produced one component for target tones and one for novels. Fusion of target fMRI and
pupil diameter showed significant mutual information in the parahippocampal gyrus and midbrain [p<0.05 uncorr]. Fusion of novels produced no significant mutual information. Conclusions: Our data suggest
that the parahippocampal gyrus, known to activate during memory
retrieval and recognition, activates concomitant with pupil dilatation.
B94
COMPARING APPLES AND ORANGES: SIMILARITY AMONG
PATTERNS OF NEURAL ACTIVATION REFLECTS BEHAVIORAL
JUDGMENTS OF CONCEPT SIMILARITY Andrew C. Connolly1,
Matthew Weber2, Daniel Osherson2, Kenneth A. Norman2, Sharon L.
Thompson-Schill1; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2Princeton University — We
investigated the similarity structure present among patterns of neural
activation associated with a set of category exemplars within a single
superordinate category, namely, FRUIT. Pairwise similarities derived
from neural data were compared with similarities based on behavioral
judgments. During fMRI scanning, subjects (n = 12) viewed colored photographs of 16 different types of fruit (e.g., apple, oranges) while performing a category verification task. After the scanning session, subjects
made pair-wise similarity judgments for all pairs of fruit viewed during
scanning. Other measures of behavioral similarity involved a different
group of subjects making judgments in an odd-man-out triad task with
either naïve similarity instructions, color similarity instructions, or biological taxonomic similarity instructions. Significant correlations between
neural and behavioral similarity were observed for similarities based on
activation throughout the occipital lobe and adjacent regions in the posterior temporal and parietal lobes in a group analysis. Variation across
brain regions for comparisons with different types of behavioral similarity (e.g., color similarity vs. biological similarity), suggest that similarities
among neural activation patterns reflect relationships among represented
features of the stimulus, and that the types of features represented differ
as a function of brain region. For example, a small effect for color was
only observed in the most posterior region of the occipital lobe, while an
effect for biological similarity was observed more anteriorly. These findings demonstrate how analysis of patterns in fMRI data can help illuminate how objects are represented in the brain, in addition to where they
are represented.
B95
THE
MULTILEVEL
MEDIATION/MODERATION
(M3)
FRAMEWORK: A STRATEGY FOR CONNECTIVITY ANALYSIS
FOR FMRI DATA Matthew Davidson1, Lauren Atlas1, Martin Lindquist1,
Niall Bolger1, Tor Wager1; 1Columbia University — The ability to characterize and test pathways and circuits is critically important for understanding how psychological processes map onto brain function. Few existing
methods allow for population inferences on functional connectivity
between brain regions, and none provide a way to search for connectivity
in a whole-brain analysis. The multilevel mediation/moderation (M3)
framework we have developed allows researchers to localize and test
functional pathways in humans. The M3 approach combines two concepts that have been enormously successful for modeling multivariate

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

75

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

relationships in behavioral research: the concept of mediation/moderation in path analysis, and the concept of mixed-effects (or hierarchical)
models. Mediation analyses provide tests of whether the relationship
between two variables is explained (mediated) by a third, thereby establishing either a direct linkage between two variables or an indirect linkage in a three-variable pathway. Moderation analyses test whether the
relationship between two variables depends on a third (sometimes
referred to as modulation.) Mixed-effects models allow population inferences on functional pathways identified within-subjects. In this poster we
outline the M3 framework and discuss its potentials and pitfalls. We contrast the method to related procedures, including linear decomposition
methods and structural and dynamic confirmatory modeling. We also
discuss Matlab-based software, developed in our lab, that will soon be
available to the broader neuroimaging community. The beta version is
available from http://www.columbia.edu/cu/psychology/tor/.
B96
A META-ANALYSIS TOOLBOX FOR ANALYZING REGIONAL
CORTICAL FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION Timothy
Herron1,
1,3
2
1,3,4 1
Xiaojian Kang , Kimmo Alho , David Woods
; Veterans Affairs, Martinez,
CA, 2University of Helsinki, 3UC Davis, 4Center for Mind and Brain, UC
Davis — Meta-analytic studies of the localization of cortical functions are
faced with two problems: (1) Visualizing activations reported as 3D coordinates (MNI or Talairach space) in relation to cortical surface anatomy;
(2) Evaluating the statistical significance of differences in cortical activation foci in different categories of experiments. We describe a meta-analysis toolbox that permits 3D activation foci to be mapped to a standardized
representation of the inflated cortical surface and that statistically analyzes differences in location on both the cortical surface and in 3D space.
Three steps are involved. First, each 3D coordinate in MNI or Talairach
space is transformed into Freesurfer spherical coordinates by identifying
the cortical surface voxel nearest to the 3D coordinate in each of 63 normal, right-handed brains and by computing the median location of those
63 cortical surface points on a standardized hemispheric atlas. Second,
topographic maps showing cortical surface foci locations in relation to
average gyral and sulcal structures are displayed on Mollweide whole
hemisphere projections either for different groups of studies or for different subjects in a single experiment. 3D foci distributions and median locations can also be visualized on the Colin MNI brain. Third, cortical
surface and 3D locations from two different categories of experiments or
from two different conditions in a single experiment are statistically analyzed for group location differences using non-parametric permutation
testing. A MatLab toolbox that includes the display and statistical tools as
well as the anatomical database will be available at www.ebire.org/hcnlab.
B97
NAVIGATION
ABILITY
AND
RIGHT
HIPPOCAMPAL
ACTIVATION IN UNSELECTED PARTICIPANTS Lars
Bagger
Hviid1, Jamila Ahdidan1, Barbara Ravnkilde1, Raben Rosenberg1, Poul
Videbech1; 1Centre for Psychiatric Research, Aarhus University Hospital,
Risskov, Denmark — Aim: The interest in neuropsychological tasks that
may provide sensitive measures of hippocampal impairment is growing.
Hippocampus specific tasks are particularly relevant when it comes to
assessing the impact of syndromes such as epilepsy, Alzheimer’s and
major depression on the hippocampus. Previous studies investigating
hippocampal involvement in visuo-spatial navigation have mainly
included healthy participants with either extensive navigation or gaming
expertise. When testing clinical populations, these types of control populations seldom fit the clinical populations. Here we investigated whether
previous findings could be replicated for unselected healthy participants
of mixed gender and age and with little previous navigation or gaming
experience. Methods: We compared regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF)
in the right hippocampus and cognitive performance of 13 healthy participants, while participants performed a 3D-virtual reality navigation task
(3DVRNT) during Positron Emission Tomography (PET). Besides the

76

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

3DVRNT, participants underwent PET rest-measurements (baseline),
magnetic resonance imaging (co-registration) and extensive neuropsychological and gaming ability assessment. Results: Our results indicate a
significant correlation between navigation ability on the 3DVRNT and
rCBF in the right hippocampus when correcting for age and gender. Conclusion: We examined the relationship between the ability to successfully
navigate a 3DVRNT and rCBF in the right hippocampus of a group of
unselected healthy subjects. Previous studies have mainly focused on
highly specialized subject groups, thus bringing into question whether
such results can be replicated for “normal control participants”. Our
results suggest that it is possible to replicate previous findings despite of
the participants’ lack of extensive navigation or gaming expertise.
B98
ALTERATIONS IN BRAIN ACTIVATION DURING IMPULSIVE
BEHAVIOR
IS
ASSOCIATED
WITH
BIOCHEMICAL
ABNORMALITIES IN BIPOLAR DISORDER. Martine
Lamy1,2,5,
3,5
3,5
3,5
Wenjang Chu , Xing Wang , Stephen Strakowski , Jing-Huei Lee3,5, James
Eliassen3,5; 1University of Cincinnati Neuroscience Graduate Program,
2
University of Cincinnati Physician Scientist Training Program, 3University of
Cincinnati, 4University of Cincinnati Center for Imaging Research — Impulsivity is a prominent aspect of bipolar disorder (BD). We assessed impulsivity in euthymic bipolar patients and healthy subjects using the Balloon
Analogue Risk Task (BART) while undergoing fMRI. The BART is a
novel behavioral measure of risk taking and impulsive behavior. Restingstate 31P magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging (MRSI) was also performed to investigate regional phosphate metabolism. We hypothesized
that alterations in brain regions associated with impulsive behavior on
the BART (as measured by fMRI) would also show changes in restingstate high-energy phosphate metabolites (as measured by 31P MRSI) in
BD. Participants included 6 medicated, euthymic bipolar patients (3
female, average age 35). Three demographically matched healthy subjects
served as controls. 31P MR spectra were reconstructed from six regions of
interest (ROIs) activated by euthymic patients during BART performance. The ROIs included the anterior cingulate cortex, left and right
inferior frontal gyrus, left and right thalamus, and the cerebellar vermis.
The PCr/ATP ratio, a marker of energy change, was decreased in the vermis of BD patients as compared to healthy subjects (1.43±0.49 vs.
2.15±0.50, p=0.03). No significant differences in 31P metabolites were
found in the other ROIs. Previous work suggests that structural abnormalities in the vermis are associated with multiple affective episodes and
deficits in emotional modulation in BD. This preliminary evidence suggests that functional brain activation abnormalities are associated with
resting-state biochemical abnormalities in BD, and that further work
should be done to investigate the relationship between functional, structural and biochemical abnormalities found in psychiatric disorders.
B99
AMELIORATION OF MOVEMENT ARTIFACTS IN SLOW AND
FAST OPTICAL RECORDINGS Edward Maclin1, Schneider Nils1,
Gabriele Gratton1, Monica Fabiani1; 1University of Illinois UrbanaChampaign — Near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) and the event related
optical signal (EROS) are relatively immune to electrical and magnetic
interference. It has long been recognized, however, that these methods,
particularly intensity measures, are susceptible to movement artifacts
arising from variations in the source and detector to scalp interfaces.
While these artifacts can be greatly reduced by good interface design and
recording procedures, in large data sets some artifacts will inevitably
occur. We have developed a program for detecting and either correcting,
interpolating or rejecting data segments in frequency domain data. First
we discard channels whose source-detector distance is too large, or
whose phase variability is too great. Abrupt changes in the data, likely
due to movement, are then detected and classified as either “spikes” or
“steps”. “Spikes” are replaced with interpolated data, and “steps” are
corrected by subtracting the pre and post means. Finally, as the data are
averaged channels whose range within in a given epoch exceeds a speci-

Poster Session B

fied value are ignored. The number of accepted trials is accumulated separately for each channel. We investigated the utility of this program in a
large dataset (10 blocks of 4 minutes with 1024 channels, in 48 subjects).
We compared main effects in the NIRS data across subsamples of “clean”
subjects and “noisy” subjects before and after cleaning and found cleaning to improve the consistency of results between the “clean” and “noisy”
groups, without introducing noticeable spurious effects.
B100
ANATOMICAL AND FUNCTIONAL SEGMENTATION OF THE
COGNITIVE CONTROL NETWORK Sudhir
Pathak1,2,
Bruna
2
1,3,2
1,2,3
1
Martins , Michael W. Cole
, Walter Schneider
; Center for Neuroscience,
University of Pittsburgh, 2University of Pittsburgh, 3Center for the Neural
Basis of Cognition, University of Pittsburgh — Diffusion tensor imaging
(DTI) was used to segment functional regions (using probabilistic tractography) based on anatomical connectivity within the cognitive control
network, identifying subregions with specialized connectivity. Previous
work has shown that this set of regions is active across a wide variety of
task demands and forms a highly integrated functional network (Cole &
Schneider, 2007). Here we anatomically segmented the network’s (functionally defined) regions, which include dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC), posterior medial frontal cortex (PMFC), inferior frontal junction
(IFJ), dorsal pre-motor cortex (DPMC), anterior insula cortex (AIC), and
posterior parietal cortex (PPC). We found that all these regions are segmented based on their differing anatomical connections within the network. For instance, functionally defined PMFC is segmented into three
sub-regions based on its anatomical connectivity with DLPFC, AIC, and
PPC. We hypothesize that anatomically coupled areas will exhibit higher
functional connectivity with their respective sub-regions than with functionally-defined regions (based on resting state correlations between
fMRI signals). These findings would support our prediction that functional regions can be segmented into functional sub-regions, showing
tight coupling of functions within the cognitive control network.
B101
TO DO THE RIGHT THING: TEMPORAL DIFFERENCE LEARNING
AS TOOL TO DISSECT THE ROLE OF FEEDBACK IN THE
STRIATUM. Erik Peterson1, Carol Seger1; 1Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, CO — Always do the right thing! That's the ideal policy; however, determining what action is optimal in a given situation is difficult.
The basal ganglia are thought to be crucial in forming associations
between stimuli and actions. Studies of Parkinson's Disease and other
basal ganglia disorders suggest that dopaminergic activity is crucial for
feedback mediated learning in the basal ganglia. Multiple lines of evidence also suggest that one of dopamine's roles is as an error signal, representing the difference between expectation and result. One theoretical
framework for understanding this signal is temporal difference (TD)
learning, which utilizes a similar error signal. We are using the TDf ramework and event-related fMRI to identify the particular learning functions
subserved by different corticostriatal loops. As a first step we used a classification of arbitrary visual stimuli task, with simple (but probablistic)
feedback: "correct" or "incorrect". Previous work indicated that TD
regression predicts BOLD responses in, among others, the ventral striatum, and the dopaminergic substantia nigra (SNc). Our preliminary
results are consistent with these findings. However the paradigms used
to test the TD framework may be biased in favor of TD-consistent results.
We plan to test the TD framework under more challenging conditions.
B102
FEATURE-DRIVEN DECOMPOSITION OF MEG SIGNALS TO
CLARIFY VISUAL INFORMATION PROCESSING IN THE BRAIN
Marie Smith1,2, Philippe Schyns1,2; 1University of Glasgow, 2Centre for
Cognitive NeuroImaging, University of Glasgow — In this study, we present
an analysis methodology that merges our Bubbles techniques of assigning specific information processing content to brain signals with spatially
and temporally resolved MEG signals to clarify the dynamics of visual
information processing in the brain. We illustrate this by applying it to

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

the analysis of two biologically relevant face categorization tasks: judgments of facial gender and expressiveness in four observers. On the sensor level, we initially observe MEG sensitivity to contra-lateral eye
information bi-laterally over occipito-temporal regions irrespective of
task, which then extends to ipsi-lateral regions in the gender task and
diminishes to be replaced by sensitivity to the mouth in the expressiveness task. Selecting three key sensors, we map out with a 1ms temporal
resolution the visual information underlying the M170 and P300 brain
responses, and observe complementary information processing from the
horizontal and vertical orientation recordings. In the source space, (5000
voxels, 1cm resolution), we track the processing of three key visual features, (left eye, right eye and mouth), as it flows within the cortex from
initial task independent sensitivity in lateral occipito-temporal regions to
medial parietal sensitivity to task specific information. Crucially, while
standard approaches may find activity in a particular brain region during
one task vs’ another (or baseline), our approach establishes which information in the visual stimulus the brain signal is responding to and how
this response varies with time, cortical location and task demands to
establish a more precise tracking of information processing mechanisms.
B103
IDENTIFICATION OF LANGUAGE AREAS FROM EVENTRELATED FMRI PARADIGMS USING DATA-DRIVEN METHOD
Yanmei Tie1, Ralph Suarez1, Stephen Whalen1, Alexandra Golby1; 1Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA — Vocalized
event-related language fMRI paradigms for studying language function
offer an advantage of more closely simulating natural language performance. However, the motion artifact resulting from verbalizing the
responses and co-activations in the sensory-motor areas may lead to contamination in the statistical maps generated using a conventional general
linear model (GLM) method. To address this problem, we investigated
the capability of a data-driven method, probabilistic ICA (PICA), in separating the language area activations from such complex language paradigms. We analyzed event-related fMRI data from 13 normal healthy
controls performing two language tasks (antonym generation, and noun
categorization) with two different stimulus modes (visual and auditory
presentations). The PICA results consistently revealed two functional
networks for each subject’s data, one in the putative language areas and
the ipsilateral pre-motor area (PMA), the other in the motor and/or sensory (visual or auditory) areas. The time course of the language-related
components showed relatively poor correlation (r = 0.34 ± 0.19) with the
reference hemodynamic response (HR) function based on the design
matrix, indicating deviation from the HR model used in the GLM
method. Combining the results for the same language task across different stimulus modes revealed the essential language areas. In conclusion,
this type of data-driven method maybe more appropriate for analyzing
language fMRI data with complex paradigms, so as to capture the language-related neural activity that deviates from the putative time course.
This may be particularly helpful for patient studies for pre-operative language mapping.
B104
VARIATIONS AMONG MEDITATIVE AND CONCENTRATIVE
STATES: A CASE STUDY Emanuela Tura1, Jessica Turner2, Matthew
Turner2, Tugan Muftuler2; 1University of Victoria, 2University of California,
Irvine — Meditation is a state of consciousness that varies according to
technique, person, and session, as well as state achieved. The complexity
of the meditation task may imply the use of different brain circuitries and
partially explains the different results of past neuroimaging studies. Variability in the results may also be due to the limited number of neuroimaging studies conducted on meditation. The purpose of our study was to
assess the level of variability within different sessions of the same individual and to characterize the circuitry of different levels of meditative
absorption. We selected an advanced meditator from the Maya school in
Rome. He underwent five functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(fMRI) sessions. Each session was characterized by three conditions: con-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

77

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

centration on the breath, meditation on a verse displayed on a screen, and
meditation on a verse played by audio and spoken by his teacher. The
sequence of the conditions reflected the deepening of the absorption level
(as understood by the Maya school). We used Partial Least Squares, a
data-driven multivariate approach, to determine the primary covariance
patterns generated by the comparison of the three conditions. We found
that brain patterns were the same across each session. Primary patterns
differentiated the two types of meditations while patterns related to concentration did not covary with the meditation patterns at all. It appeared
that neural structures used for concentration and meditation were different, and that the deeper stages of meditation were characterized by the
use of different prefrontal and temporal areas.
B105
PROBING INTRINSIC CONNECTIVITY NETWORKS WITH TASKFREE FMRI: EYES OPEN, OR CLOSED? Weiming Zeng1,2, Daniel
Simmonds2, Stewart Mostofsky1,2, James Pekar1,2; 1Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore MD, 2Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore MD — The distributed
modular organization of brain function appears to be maintained absent
external stimuli or directed behavior, as “intrinsic connectivity networks”
(ICNs) [Seeley et al., J. Neurosci. 27:2349, 2007] are revealed by exploratory analyses of fMRI data acquired during “rest.” While task-free
acquisitions reduce demands on participant compliance, vs. typical neuroimaging paradigms, simply maintaining visual fixation or eye closure
can be a challenge for children and some clinically diagnosed populations. Hence, we assessed ICNs using data from alternating four-minute
scans of two “task-free” conditions: eyes-open rest and eyes-closed rest.
Data were acquired at 3.0 Tesla, and analyzed using Independent Component Analysis (ICA). ICA of individual scans, group ICA of all eyesopen data, and group ICA of all eyes-closed data, all yielded very similar
ICNs. Overall, results were similar to the findings of De Luca et al. [NeuroImage 29:1359, 2006] for eyes-closed rest. Group ICA of all scans from
all participants yielded ICNs for which loading factors for eyes open and
eyes closed can be compared. Median component loading factors across
the two conditions were similar, although larger inter-scan variance –
dominated by inter-individual variance – was noted in occipital
(“visual”) ICNs in the eyes closed condition. Further study of differences
in inter-individual variance is called for, as different degrees of inter-individual variance are favorable in different contexts: less variance within a
population may lead to more robust between-group comparisons,
whereas more variance may be advantageous when the goal is to exploit
inter-individual differences for examining brain-behavior correlations.

Methodological Issues: Other
B106
SUCCESSFUL TMS DISRUPTION OF LEFT POSTERIOR
FUSIFORM DURING READING Keith J Duncan1,2, Philip Kelly1,2,
Joseph T Devlin1,2; 1University College London, UK, 2Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, University College London, UK — There
is
considerable
debate regarding the role of the left posterior fusiform gyrus in skilled
reading that is based primarily on functional neuroimaging data. If it
were possible to selectively perturb neural activity in this region using
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), this would offer a powerful
complementary tool for investigating the nature of neural information
processing in the region. It is commonly assumed, however, that its position on the ventral surface of the brain makes it inaccessible to TMS. We
tested this assumption in a set of 10 healthy, native English speakers performing a visual lexical decision task. Using a frameless stereotaxy system, we targeted the lateral posterior fusiform gyrus and/or posterior
occipito-temporal sulcus using a trajectory immediately superior to the
cerebellum and inferior to the inferior temporal gyrus. In 50% of the trials, repetitive TMS (10Hz for 500msec at 120% active motor threshold)
was delivered during the presentation of a letter string, resulting in a sig-

78

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

nificant increase in reaction times for TMS versus non-TMS trials. In contrast, when TMS was delivered to a control site it had no significant effect
on RTs. These findings demonstrate the feasibility of using TMS to temporarily disrupt processing in the posterior fusiform region and offers the
potential to investigate the question of reading-specific representations in
a novel fashion.

Motor control
B107
BEHAVIOURAL CONSEQUENCES OF PREFERRED DIRECTION
CODING IN HUMAN MOTOR CORTEX Christopher Cowper-Smith1,
David Westwood2; 1Dalhousie University, Life Sciences Centre, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada, 2School of Health and Human Performance, Dalhousie
University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada — Here we examine the behavioural consequences of Georgopoulos’ (1986) model of movement direction coding in human primary motor cortex (M1). Based on evidence that
motor neurons in M1 exhibit preferred direction tuning curves where
neural activity is strongest in the preferred direction and weakest at a 180
degree offset, we analyzed reaction times of consecutive, endogenously
cued arm and eye movements in separate experiments. Each trial consisted of a prime and probe movement made in rapid succession. Participants sat at a computer workstation and fixated a central target that was
surrounded by 8 equidistant peripheral targets. When the ‘prime’ cue
was displayed (a centrally presented arrow pointing to one of the peripheral targets), participants responded as quickly as possible with a corresponding reaching or eye movement. The probe movement was cued by
a second arrow 1.5 seconds after prime onset and required a movement
response that was offset from the prime movement by 0, ±45, ±90, or 180
degrees. Successive trials were separated by a 4 second delay. Based on
the hypothetical tuning curves for neurons in M1, we predicted a sinusoidal relationship between the reaction time for the probe movement and
its directional offset from the prime movement. Our results suggest that
reaching and eye movements are modulated differently by the degree of
offset between prime and probe movements, indicating that directional
tuning curves for arm and eye movements may have distinct shapes that
can be defined by different functions.
B108
PREPARATION OF FAMILIAR AND UNFAMILIAR MOVEMENT
SEQUENCES REFLECTED IN EEG. Elian de Kleine1, Rob H.J. van der
Lubbe1; 1University of Twente, The Netherlands — Learning
movement
sequences, like playing the piano, develops through various phases, from
an initial attentive to a more automatic phase. With practice execution of
familiar motor sequences becomes faster, which is suggested to occur at
an abstract rather than a peripheral processing level. We examined
whether these effects were already present during the preparation of
familiar sequences by focusing on several measures derived from the
electroencephalogram. The contingent negative variation (CNV) was
used as a general index of motor preparation, whereas the lateralized
readiness potential (LRP) was employed to index effector-specific motor
preparation. Furthermore, the posterior contralateral negativity (PCN)
was used to index differences in spatial attention. Fixed series of eight
keypresses, which were familiar or unfamiliar, had to be prepared, and
executed in case of a go-signal. Familiar sequences were executed faster
and more accurately than unfamiliar sequences. During the 200 ms before
the go-nogo signal the central CNV was enlarged for unfamiliar
sequences and the PCN was enlarged for familiar sequences. No differences were found on the LRP. These findings confirm that preparation of
familiar sequences requires less attention and involves an abstract rather
than a peripheral motor level.

Poster Session B

B109
EVIDENCE
FOR
CEREBELLAR-CORTICAL
LOOPS
FOR
INTRINSICALLY COORDINATED AND EXTRINSICALLY GUIDED
ACTIONS. Madeleine Grealy1; 1University of Strathclyde, Glasgow,
Scotland — Traditionally the cerebellum has been associated with motor
control, however, Gao et al. (1996) discovered that the dentate nuclei
were more strongly activated during a perceptuo-motor discrimination
task than a movement only task. They concluded that the cerebellum
‘coordinates the sensory information on which the motor systems
depend’. Middleton and Strick (2000) reported projections from the cerebellum to PMv and M1 with a specific role for actions guided by external
rather than internal cues, and it is now known that there are distinct
loops between the cerebellum and cortical areas, each possibly having a
specific behavioural function. Presented here is a case study of a 27 year
old (AM) who, eight years previously, had an operation to remove a cystic cerebellar tumour which lay mainly to the left of the midline, including the dentate nucleus, with a solid component on the right. His ability
to use proprioceptive and exproprioceptive information to guide his
movements was tested. Analyses using the tau-model of perceptuomotor control revealed that compared to six controls AM had a distinct
pattern of deficits. His ability to make movements requiring intrinsic
guidance (horizontal and vertical hand movements) remained intact, but
movements requiring intrinsic coordination (clapping and eating) were
uncontrolled when performed both with and without vision. Actions
requiring extrinsic guidance (grasping and pointing) were also poor.
These data revealed that AM’s motor problems related to the perceptual
information used to guide the action and suggest a further cerebellar-cortical loop relating to intrinsically coordinated actions.
B110
MOTOR
PRIMING
OF
TRAJECTORIES
IN
OBSTACLE
AVOIDANCE, WITHIN AND BETWEEN PERSONS Debbie
Griffiths1, Steven Tipper1; 1Centre for Clinical and Cognitive Neuroscience,
Bangor University — Previous research has demonstrated motor priming,
that previous actions can influence the current one (Jax & Rosenbaum,
2007; Edwards, Humphreys, & Castiello, 2003). Presented here are the
results of several experiments. An individual’s previous experience
avoiding an obstacle to reach a goal affects the trajectory of their subsequent reaches, despite the absence of that obstacle. Reaches following
obstacle avoidance are more deviant than those following non-obstacle
reaches. Participants made reaches using actual objects in real space. The
priming affect was observed in both vertical and horizontal avoidance of
obstacles. The effect was also shown to occur between trajectories whose
goals (grasp/touch of an object) were quite different. This study also
investigated whether this within person priming was also found between
persons, that is, the extent to which the observation of another’s avoidance action can prime an individuals’ own trajectories. Both allocentric
and egocentric perspectives were investigated. The data indicate a robust
within person effect, however, results from between persons suggested
that motor priming between individuals maybe limited to certain circumstances.
B111
THE EFFECT OF VISUAL TRANSFORMATION ON EXPLICITLY
AND IMPLICITLY TIMED BIMANUAL DRAWING TASKS Nadine
Guerrette1, Ramesh Balasubramaniam1,2; 1School of Human Kinetics, University
of Ottawa, 2Centre for Neural Dynamics, University of Ottawa — In order to
produce an accurate hand movement we require knowledge of our current hand position and of the motion of our arm as it moves to an
intended location (Miall & Cole, 2007). Mirror drawing is a particularly
challenging task because appropriate hand actions must be planned and
directed despite receiving visual feedback that is reversed by the mirror
(Lajoie et al., 1992; Miall & Cole, 2007). The purpose of the present study
was to investigate the effect of mirror-reflection on explicitly and implicitly timed bimanual drawing movements. Healthy participants (n=8)
rhythmically and bimanually traced various template shapes (circles,

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

lines, vertical triangles and horizontal triangles) under two different
visual conditions (normal and mirror-reflected visual feedback). Tracing
movements were paced by an external auditory cue, and all templates
were traced in both symmetrical and asymmetrical coordination modes,
where the phasing between the hands was 0º and 180º, respectively. Timing errors were computed, and the quality of the drawings was assessed
by measuring deviations from desired trajectories. Our results show that
the variability of movement trajectories was greater during the mirror
condition for all shapes, however no difference was observed between
the symmetrical and asymmetrical coordination modes. Furthermore,
timing errors were greater in the mirror condition in comparison to the
normal vision condition. This effect was most evident during line and
vertical triangle drawing tasks. Results are discussed in terms of the taskspecific mechanisms involved in trajectory planning and timing of
bimanual movements when faced with a visual transformation.
B112
DISRUPTION OF ACTION EXECUTION DURING OBSERVATION
OF BIOLOGICAL AND ROBOTIC EFFECTORS Ada Kritikos1, Glen
Russell1; 1School of Psychology University of Queensland, St Lucia,
Australia — It is clear that humans are sensitive to biological (human)
motion differentially to motion produced by non-biological effectors,
such as robots. Response latencies for actions primed by biological effectors are faster than those primed by non-biological effectors. Interestingly, our movement parameters are disrupted when watching dissimilar
movements of biological but not effectors non-biological effectors. What
remains unclear, however, is precisely what features of the movement are
coded by the visuomotor system as ‘biological’. Here we speculate that it
is the pattern of the kinematic parameters of a biological effector that is
crucial, such as the time to peak grasp and peak velocity. The implication
of this speculation is that if the kinematic parameters of an biological
effector are not ‘biological’, then ‘biological motion’ effects should not be
evident. Conversely, a non-biological effector should produce these
effects if its parameters are re-constructed to appear biological. In this
series of experiments, we recorded movements with a motion capture
system. Participants made reach-to-grasp movements while watching
digitised videos of reach-to-grasp actions by biological or non-biological
effectors (biological hand or mechanical hand). Execution parameters
were disrupted when observed biological (but not robotic) actions were
incongruent for grasp width. We then altered the parameters of the effectors by re-digitising the video clips, such that the biological hand
reflected the temporal parameters of the mechanical arm, and vice versa.
Preliminary data suggest temporal parameters associated with biological
effectors disrupt action execution, regardless of the appearance of the
effector.
B113
ATTENTION MODULATES ACTIVATION IN THE MIRROR
NEURON SYSTEM Karolina Moutsopoulou1, Tom Manly1, Rhodri
Cusack1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK — The
mirror neuron (MN) system is activated both during action execution and
action observation. Although studies to date have investigated many
properties of the system (e.g., its role in action intention understanding,
and relation to language processing), it has not been established which
parts of the MN response are automatic and which are modulated by
attention. There may be benefits in preventing irrelevant stimuli from
influencing the processing of attended actions. This fMRI study aimed to
investigate the modulatory effects of attention on MN function. Videos of
biological action (arm/leg) and non-biological equivalents (spatially and
temporally matched) were used. Trials consisted of two overlaid clips
(either both biological, both non-biological, or one of each), and subjects
attended to one clip while performing a target detection task (observation). Execution trials of hand/foot movements were included for localization of the MN system. Relative to control stimuli, observation of arm
actions activated the STS (commonly implicated in processing biological
motion) and MN regions in motor & parietal cortex, which were also

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

79

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

active during execution. Leg stimuli yielded less reliable activity. Crucially, the response was modulated by attention in MN regions in motor
cortex and left parietal lobe, and in bilateral STS. However, the right STS
and a right superior parietal region remained activated even in the unattended condition. The results therefore indicate differential effects of
attention in different areas of the MN network. The findings will be discussed in relation to MN models and connectivity between the regions
involved.
B114
PLACING ACTIONS IN CONTEXT: MOTOR FACILITATION
FOLLOWING OBSERVATION OF IDENTICAL AND NONIDENTICAL ACTS Brenda Ocampo1, Ada Kritikos1; 1School of Psychology,
The University of Queensland, 2The University of Queensland — The probable function of the human mirror system is to enable imitation through
‘direct motor mapping’ between observed and executed actions (Iacoboni
et al., 1999). Goal-directed actions can be facilitated by observation of
identical acts (Edwards et al., 2003). Recent evidence suggests, however,
that the mirror system is active during the preparation of non-identical,
complementary actions, and that performance (in response time) to
objects can also be facilitated (Newman-Norlund et al., 2007). Using
motion-capture analysis (ProReflex) we demonstrate that action observation modulated movement parameters to identical objects, whether
action observation and execution occurred simultaneously or consecutively. In Experiment 1, participants observed reach-to-grasp actions and
then performed these in imitative and complementary contexts. On 40%
of trials, cues appeared requiring participants to violate context rules and
perform both identical and non identical acts. Findings suggest that in
imitative contexts, prior observation of identical acts facilitated movements towards objects relative to prior observation of non-identical acts.
Crucially, during complementary contexts, this effect was reversed such
that prior observation of non-identical acts facilitated movements compared with identical acts. Preliminary evidence from a further experiment suggests that facilitation occurred only when cues came following
the observation of hand actions rather than alone as action words, indicating the possible involvement of the mirror system in mapping
observed actions to both identical and non-identical (but goal-related)
motor acts. Results are consistent with those of Newman-Norlund et al.
(2007), and extend this evidence from basic RT to accuracy in movement
trajectories through space.
B115
CEREBELLUM UNDERLIES TRANSFER TO UNTRAINED TASK
FOLLOWING A COMBINATION OF MENTAL AND PHYSICAL
TRAINING CJ Olsson1, Bert Jonsson1, Lars Nyberg1,2; 1Umeå University,
Sweden, 2Umeå center for Functional Brain Imaging (UFBI), Umeå University,
Sweden — It is well known that mental imagery training can be used to
enhance performance on motor tasks. However, the underlying mechanisms of such training effects are not yet completely understood. The current study investigated behavioral and neural effects of mental, physical
and combined mental + physical training on a finger tapping task. The
mental or physical only groups trained on a finger-sequence for a total of
60 min over six weeks. The combined group trained 60 min physically
and in addition 60 min mentally. The results showed that all groups had
significantly increased tapping performance for the trained sequence. In
addition, for the combined training group there was significant transfer
to an untrained sequence. To test whether the transfer effect was as a
result of training magnitude, a control group received 120 min of physical practice over six weeks, but this group did not show significant transfer. FMRI scanning indicated that transfer was mediated by the
cerebellum, which was activated by the combined group during performance of the untrained sequence. Thus, the combination of mental and
physical practice results in transfer to tasks with similar requirements.
This implies that adding mental training to existing physical training will
improve motor ability and that it promotes flexibility to more easily

80

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

adapt to untrained tasks. The findings have implications for the use of
imagery as a performance enhancer.
B116
TIMING VARIABILITY AND TRACKING BEHAVIOR IN SERIES OF
REPETITIVE
SACCADIC
AND
SMOOTH-PURSUIT
EYE
MOVEMENTS Brian Richardson1, Ramesh Balasubramaniam2; 1University
of Ottawa, 2University of Ottawa, Center for Neural Dynamics — When performing series of saccadic or smooth-pursuit eye movements with monotonic changes in pacing frequency, the points at which phase transitions
occur between reactive and predictive behaviors exhibit a similar hysteresis. These findings suggest a common decision process shared by multiple downstream neural pathways. The present study was designed to
further characterize the global nature of this temporal organization. In
the first experiment, we established intra-subject behavioral transition
points with a saccadic target (square wave, position vs. time trajectory)
that either increased or decreased its pacing monotonically (0.165Hz and
1Hz). We recorded the characteristics of the behavioral transition to optimally structure subsequent stimuli. Subjects were then shown a smoothpursuit target (trapezoidal waveform) at identical pacing intervals. During smooth-pursuit trials, once the pacing rate was reached where persistence of a behavior was established, the visual target was switched to a
saccadic target. The distribution of saccade latencies was compared
between saccade-only, and smooth-pursuit switched to saccade trials.
The second experiment involved a synchronization-continuation design.
The synchronization phase was presented with either saccade or smoothpursuit (triangle waveform) targets, while the continuation was performed with saccades. The decomposition of variability during the continuation phase was compared between the two synchronization
conditions. Results indicate that a time interval established through
tracking with one type of eye movement is not identically transferred to
the other. This is indicative of an internal representation of timing which
can facilitate timing for multiple effector pathways, but is dependent on
the mode of synchronization for optimal accuracy.
B117
OBSERVING JOINT ACTIONS: THE BRAIN KEEPS TABS ON
EACH ACTOR’S MOVEMENTS IN SEGREGATED PROCESSING
STREAMS Jeremy Skipper1, Ekaterina Dobryakova2, Natalie Sebanz3;
1
Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill-Cornell Medical
College, NY, 2Rutgers University, Newark, New Jersey, 3University of
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK — Areas of cortex involved in producing
movements are active when we observe an individual performing an
action as if we were going to perform the action ourselves. Activity in
these “motor” areas during action observation has been hypothesized to
underlie aspects of action understanding. However, this begs the question of how brain areas involved in the production of movements process
joint action, where two or more people are seen acting together . During
fMRI, participants watched videos of two actors passing a cup to each
other. We varied whether the two actors used the same grip or a different
grip. Using a novel repetition suppression method we were able to isolate
activity associated with each of the actor’s movements. When the actors
were both performing the same grips, the distal and proximal actor’s
movements were more associated with activity in ventral and dorsal
aspects of the parietal lobules, precental sulcus and gyrus, and central
sulcus, respectively. When actors were performing different grips, the
activity for each actor’s movements in these areas was more interdispersed, i.e., less divisible along a dorsal/ventral axis, especially in the
ventral aspects of the precentral sulcus and gyrus. These results suggest
that the brain “keeps tabs” on each individual’s movements through spatial segregation of activity patterns, perhaps in accord with known properties of dorsal and ventral aspects of premotor cortex. Interference
effects observed in behavioural studies where actors perform “incongruent” movements may result from a breakdown of this segregation.

Poster Session B

B118
EYE-HAND COORDINATION DURING A TARGET SELECTION
TASK IN MONKEYS Joo-Hyun Song1, Robert M. McPeek1; 1The SmithKettlewell Eye Research Institute — We examined how saccades and
reaches are coordinated for target selection in monkeys by training them
to perform a visual search task in which they reached to an odd-colored
target presented with three distractors. The colors of the target and distractors were randomly switched in each trial between red and green. We
compared trials in which an initial saccade was misdirected to a distractor, followed by a corrective saccade, and those in which a single saccade
was directly executed to the target. We found that an initial saccade
directed to the target always preceded a reach. However, when multiple
saccades were coordinated with reaches, reaches were sometimes initiated before saccades were executed to the target, demonstrating a flexible
temporal eye-hand coordination. When multiple saccades were executed,
the precision of reach endpoints was not reduced, but the distance
between saccade and reach endpoints increased. Furthermore, we found
that a common target was selected for saccades and reaches so that when
reach errors were made, saccades were also accompanied to the same
site. In addition, we demonstrated that a distractor located within the
same hemifield with the target interfered with the target selection process
more than any other distractors. This might be explained by the fact that
within-hemisphere integration is faster than cross-hemispheric integration due to lateral connections within-hemisphere. Taken together, we
suggest that the eye and hand share target selection processes and yet,
their coupling is flexible and strategic to maximize the efficiency.
B119
IMITATION IS THE ECHO OF OBSERVATION: MU RHYTHM IN
EEG REFLECTS MOTOR RESONANCE WHILE LEARNING
OBSERVED MOVEMENTS Jurjen van der Helden1, Hein T. van Schie2,
Christiaan Rombouts1; 1University of Twente, Enschede, the Netherlands,
2Radboud University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands — Many skills are learned
by imitation of a teacher, a model, a sportsman, etc. Mu-activation (~8-13
Hz) in the EEG is thought to reflect motor cortex activation and has
repeatedly been shown to be modulated during observation of actions
such as reaching and grasping, or finger movement observation. The current study investigated the role of Mu-activation in observational learning of sequences. Fifteen participants (6 male, 9 female, mean age 20.5 y)
observed a sequence of six button presses of two index fingers pressing
two target buttons in a fixed order, followed by a pause. After 4 repetitions of the same sequence, participants had to repeat the same series of
finger movement in the Imitation Condition (IC) or had to indicate
whether a deviant movement had been made in the Detection Condition
(DC, i.e. in some cases the thumb rather than an index finger moved).
Both Alpha and Mu power were suppressed during the IC as compared
to the DC. Interestingly, suppression of Mu rhythm was found maximal
during the pauses between sequence repetitions. No such effect was
found for the DC, which instead showed a rebound of Alpha power during pauses. These data suggest a functional contribution of the Mu
rhythm to observational learning related to the maintenance of observed
movements within the motor system.
B120
FUNCTIONAL REORGANIZATION IN THE SACCADIC SYSTEM:
COMPARING VIRTUAL AND REAL LESIONS Martijn
G
van
Koningsbruggen1, Paul E Downing1, Robert D. Rafal1; 1School of Psychology,
Bangor University — Damage to the Frontal Eye Fields (FEF) impairs the
ability to initiate voluntary, but not reflexive eye movements in the direction opposite to their lesion. This implicates involvement of the FEF in the
generation of voluntary eye movements, and suggests that there are separate networks controlling reflexive and voluntary eye movements. On the
other hand, fMRI studies have found similar involvement of the FEF in
both voluntary and reflexive eye movements, and concluded that the FEF
is equally important for both. Another interesting but often neglected
finding is the fact that although patients’ eye movements are slower, the

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

patients can still make voluntary eye movements, suggesting that another
area can partly take over from the damaged FEF. We have developed a
new approach to investigate this controversy between neuropsychological and fMRI studies. First, we measured the BOLD response in the FEF
for both reflexive and voluntary eye movements, and a voluntary key
press task. We found that the FEF were activated to the same degree for
both voluntary and reflexive eye movements. Next, we applied functionally guided theta burst TMS over the FEF or the vertex just before the
start of the fMRI experiment. We discovered that voluntary saccades
were slower in the contralateral direction. Preliminary fMRI results suggest that other areas become more activate following theta burst TMS to
the FEF, relative to baseline. This will be compared to the fMRI activation
found in FEF patients doing the same task, allowing us to investigate
functional reorganization.
B121
THE EFFECT OF UPPER LIMB RHYTHMIC ACTIVITY ON
STANDING BALANCE IN PATIENTS WITH CEREBELLAR
DAMAGE David White1, Ramesh Balasubramaniam2; 1University of
Ottawa, 2Centre for Neural Dynamics, University of Ottawa — Coordinating
muscles and joints to accomplish a task is a seemingly automatic process.
However, without proper functioning of the cerebellum, performance of
simple movements in an organized manner is challenged. Some of the
most distinctive signs of cerebellar damage are disturbance to balance
and gait, including increased postural sway and irregular responses to
perturbations (Earhart & Bastian, 2001). Previous studies on self-perturbation tasks involving arm movements have examined postural patterns
(Abe & Yamada, 2001) and the relationship between arm movement and
the body’s center of pressure (CoP) (Forner-Cordero et al., 2005; Ustinova
et al., 2004). Here we examine the cases of two unilateral cerebellar
patients with left-hemisphere damage by looking at the coupling in lower
limb joints in response to a voluntary and repetitive upper limb perturbation. The two patients and ten healthy controls swung their arms inphase
and antiphase in the sagittal plane to a metronome at frequencies of 0.67
and 0.75 Hz. Movement kinematics and CoP data were collected concurrently. Relative phase between the lower limb joints, and between the
arm and CoP was computed as well as the amplitude of the excursion of
each of the joints. Our results revealed asymmetries in amplitude and relative phase of the lower limb joints between affected and non-affected
sides. Differences in CoP amplitude were also observed between affected
and non-affected sides and between inphase and antiphase conditions.
Our results provide insight into the control mechanisms in multi-segmental coordination tasks and the role of the cerebellum in supporting
such movements.

Neuroanatomy
B122
ASSOCIATIONS OF BRAIN SIZE AND VERBAL PERFORMANCE
DEPEND ON HANDEDNESS Christine Chiarello1, Suzanne Welcome1,
Stephen Towler2, Ronald Otto3, Christiana Leonard2; 1University of California,
Riverside, 2University of Florida, Gainesville, 3Computerized Diagnostic
Imaging Center, Riverside — Brain volume is known to correlate with
some measures of cognitive performance. We report data from the Biological Substrates for Language project which included IQ and reading
measures, and RT and accuracy scores for a variety of lateralized visual
lexical tasks in 200 young adults. Composite scores across the 7 lexical
tasks were used to explore relationships with brain volume. Measurements of overall brain volume were made from structural MRIs. Across
the entire sample, brain volume positively correlated with IQ, word identification and passage comprehension subtests, and lexical task accuracy
and asymmetry. However, handedness (with sex partialled out) modified
some of these relationships. Consistent-handers (exclusive preference for
one hand, N = 103) and mixed-handers (N = 97) demonstrated different

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

81

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

relationships between brain volume and verbal performance. For consistent-handers only, brain volume correlated with RT VF asymmetry–
larger leftward asymmetries were observed in those with larger brains. In
contrast, for mixed handers, brain volume was associated with overall
(nonlateralized) accuracy in the lexical tasks, and reading subtests. These
findings suggest that the relationship between brain size and verbal performance is moderated by handedness. A strong phenotypic expression
of handedness is associated with stronger verbal lateralization only in
those with larger brains. In contrast, in those with a weaker expression of
handedness there is a positive association between brain volume and verbal performance that is independent of lateralization.
B123
CEREBELLAR INVOLVEMENT IN COGNITION? A DIFFUSIONWEIGHTED TRACTOGRAPHY STUDY OF FRONTAL LOBE
CONNECTIVITY WITH THE CEREBRAL PEDUNCLE Karl Doron1,
Chadd Funk1, Mitch Glickstein2, 1University of California, Santa Barbara, CA,
2University College London, London, UK, 3Sage Center for the Study of the
Mind, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA — Fiber
connections
within the brain have been studied extensively in non-human primates
using tract-tracing techniques and in humans through post-mortem analysis. Studies using diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) have begun to
examine the connections within the normal human brain in vivo. Such
studies have suggested that the cerebellum may participate in human
cognition based on the input it receives input from the frontal lobe. These
studies have not been sufficiently fine-grained to establish which areas
within the frontal cortex project to the pontine nuclei, hence to the cerebellum. Here we report the results of a probabilistic tractography study
in 20 human datasets in which the frontal lobe was divided into six subregions in order to determine the connectivity of each subregion with the
cerebral peduncle. Projections to the cerebral peduncle originate in dorsal
and medial regions of the superior frontal gyrus and precental gyrus,
with sparse projections from dorsal regions of the middle frontal gyrus.
Notably reduced or absent are connections with the middle and inferior
frontal gyri, cortical areas associated with activations in cognitive tasks.
Importantly, areas showing connectivity with the cerebral peduncle connect to the anterior third of the structure, an area known to carry fibers to
the pontine nuclei. Consistent with the monkey literature, areas showing
connectivity are associated with motor cortex and the frontal and supplementary eye fields. Based on these connectivity patterns we suggest that
the apparent involvement of the cerebellum in cognitive tasks relates to
the control of eye movements.
B124
RIGHTWARD HEMISPHERIC ASYMMETRIES IN PLANUM
TEMPORALE IN CHILDREN WITH AUTISTIC DISORDER: AN
ANATOMICAL MRI INVESTIGATION Nicole Gage1, Jenifer Juranek2,
Pauline Filipek1, Kathryn Osann1, A. Lisette Isenberg1, M. Anne Spence1;
1
University of California, Irvine, 2University of Texas Houston Medical
Center — A central goal of cognitive neuroscience is to understand the
relationship between brain structures and behavior. Here we assessed
hemispheric asymmetries in auditory language regions in children with
autistic disorder (AD) and language impairment. We conducted quantitative morphometric analyses of perisylvian regions in a sample (n=50) of
children with AD to determine if functional language deficits corresponded to structural anomalies in cortical language areas. A key region
of interest was the planum temporale (PT), which is larger in the left
hemisphere in most healthy individuals. We report two key findings: (i)
Heschl’s gyrus, planum polare, and posterior Superior Temporal Gyrus
showed hemisphere asymmetry patterns similar to previous findings for
children with AD and for typically developing controls; (ii) PT showed a
trend for rightward asymmetry that was significant when the sample was
constrained to right-handed boys (n=30). This result was due to smaller
left rather than larger right PT. Findings of reduced neural territory in left
PT are in sharp contrast to the observed pattern (left PT > right PT) for
most (70-80%) typical and many language disordered children and

82

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

adults. PT asymmetry was age dependent, with greater rightward asymmetry as a function of age. We also report lack of concordance in PT
asymmetry in a cohort of monozygotic twins, indicating that epigenetic
factors are involved in PT development. Results provide evidence for a
different maturational path for PT development for children with AD,
with both pre- and post-natal experience likely playing a role in PT asymmetries.
B125
BRAIN
STRUCTURAL
CORRELATES
OF
PHONETIC
EXPERTISE Narly Golestani1,2, Sophie Scott1, Cathy Price1; 1University
College London, 2University of Geneva — Previous work has shown that, in
healthy adults, the ability to learn to hear non-native speech sounds is in
part predicted by greater white matter volume of the left Heschl's gyrus
(Golestani et al, 2007) and a greater left > right asymmetry in the volumes
of the parietal cortices (Golestani et al, 2002, Golestani et al, 2007). In
addition, the ability to articulate foreign speech sounds is partly predicted by white matter brain structure in the left insula / pre-frontal cortex as well as in the inferior parietal cortices bilaterally (Golestani &
Pallier, 2007). Here, we were interested in understanding brain structural
characteristics underlying phonetic expertise. High-resolution structural
magnetic resonance imaging was used to compare brain structure in 17
phoneticians to that of 17 age, sex and education-matched healthy controls. Phoneticians were highly trained to listen to and transcribe speech
sounds and prosody, and also to articulate foreign and accented speech
sounds. Results revealed larger Heschl's gyri bilaterally, as well as a gross
morphological shape difference of left Heschl's gyrus between groups.
We also found that phoneticians have a larger left pars opercularis and
larger temporal poles compared to non-experts. Results demonstrate that
brain structure in important parts of language network, including ones
underlying auditory perception, language production (Broca's area), and
speech intelligibility (temporal poles) characterize phonetic expertise.
B126
DETERMINING NETWORK CONNECTIVITY OF THE SUPERIOR
COLLICULUS, FRONTAL Orion Keifer1, Paul Corballis1; 1School of
Psychology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Alanta, GA — The majority of
assumptions about human neuroanatomy and neurophysiology are
based on analogy with non-human primates. While there is a great deal
of commonality across primate species, it is always necessary to validate
conclusions that are extrapolated from one species to other species. The
combination of two magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) techniques, functional MRI (fMRI) and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) provides a potential for interspecies neuroanatomical comparison. Here we employed the
combination of these techniques to explore the proposed network of connections involving the superior colliculus (SC), the parietal eye field
(PEF), the frontal eye field (FEF), and the supplementary eye field (SEF),
shown in the macaque model. Several studies, using both PET and fMRI,
have revealed areas in humans that are proposed homologues of the
macaque eye fields. Such activation patterns associated with each of the
eye fields provides an opportunity to determine whether DTI-based
probabilistic tractography reveals the postulated visual network. We
functionally defined the regions of interest for tractography using an
fMRI paradigm previously shown to activate the PEF, FEF, SEF, and
superior colliculus. Probabilistic DTI tractography revealed a complex
network of distributions, including SC to PEF and FEF, PEF to SEF, and
FEF to SEF. These results corroborate the connections seen in the
macaque species, which helps to substantiate both the use of the macaque
as a model of the human saccade system and also to validate the combination of fMRI and DTI as a method for exploring human functional neuroanatomy.
B127
PHONOLOGICAL AND SEMANTIC PARAPHASIAS IN CORTICAL
STIMULATION MAPPING Brandon Loudermilk1, Todd Detwiler2,
George Ojemann2, James Brinkley2, David Corina1,3; 1University of California,

Poster Session B

Davis, 2University of Washington, 3Center for Mind and Brain, University of
California, Davis — The present study examines the nature and distribution of naming errors of patients undergoing electrical cortical stimulation mapping (CSM). CSM is an intraoperative procedure used to
identify the language, memory, sensory, and motor cortices of patients
undergoing awake neurosurgery. During the procedure, a small current
is applied to neural tissues in order to induce temporary functional
lesions and locate important areas for preservation. Under cortical stimulation, patients are shown slides of common objects and asked to name
them. Depending upon which regions are stimulated, this process can
result in paraphasias or language errors that fall into three broad categories: phonemic, semantic, and neologistic. This paper reports on a study
that examined the naming responses of n=110 patients undergoing cortical stimulation mapping. Specifically, it addresses the characteristics and
neuroanatomical distribution of phonological paraphasias, semantic
paraphasias, and apraxic errors. Aiding in this endeavor, we relied
heavily on a suite of web-based querying and imaging tools which enable
the aggregate mapping of stimulation sites to an “averaged” threedimensional brain. Recorded paraphasias were then visualized and analyzed by type and location using software developed by the Structural
Informatics Group at the University of Washington. Regarding neuranatomical distribution, we found wide-spread temporal and parietal
regions associated with semantic paraphasias; phonological paraphasias
were predominantly confined to the middle and posterior portions of the
superior and middle temporal gyrus; and apraxic errors converged on
the supramarginal gyrus. Findings suggest a distributed semantic network and implicate the supramarginal gyrus as part of a dorsal extension
to frontal regions.
B128
MAPPING
THE
FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY
OF
PRECUNEUS Daniel S. Margulies1,2,3, A. M. Clare Kelly1, Lucina Q.
Uddin1, Zarrar Shehzad1, F. Xavier Castellanos1, Michael P. Milham1, Michael
Petrides4; 1NYU Child Study Center, 2Berlin School of Mind and Brain,
3Berstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Berlin, 4Montreal
Neurological Institute — The involvement of precuneus in the default
mode network has brought it into central focus in recent years. Despite
this increased attention, current human imaging literature has yet to
appreciate the broad-reaching role for precuneus in associative integration of information across processing domains (sensory, motor, and affective), as suggested by non-human primate studies. Similarly, despite a
vast non-human primate literature highlighting functional and structural
heterogeneity in the precuneus, human imaging studies tend to lack such
specificity, commonly treating it as a unitary structure. This is unfortunate given the diverse patterns of connectivity both within and between
prefrontal and posterior parietal sub-regions previously appreciated in
animal studies. A recent study of the anterior cingulate cortex has demonstrated the promise of mapping functional connectivity for subdivisions in structurally and functionally complex regions such as this during
rest. Here, guided by anatomical connectivity previously examined in the
monkey, we simultaneously examine the functional connectivity of 20
precuneus/PCC subregions using 6.5 minutes of resting-state fMRI data
collected from 40 healthy adult subjects. We observed similarities
between differential patterns of functional connectivity across precuneus
subregions, and those previously reported in monkey tracing studies. We
also found that precuneus is parcellated into three main connectivitybased subdivisions: somatosensory/motor, visual, and limbic. As the
study of networks becomes increasingly integrated into cognitive neuroscience, the recognition of functional parcellation, as defined by differentiated connectivity patterns, will become central to defining cortical
function and addressing cortex with more accurate specificity.

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

B129
IMPROVING THE SPATIAL RESOLUTION OF TRACTOGRAPHY
BY COMBINING DIFFUSION WITH STRUCTURAL MRI Dirk
Neumann1, Matthew Thill1, Josef Parvizi2, Ralph Adolphs1; 1California
Institute of Technology, 2Stanford School of Medicine — While functions of
different brain structures has been intensely investigated, little is known
about how such structures communicate with one another. Past research
has used the anisotropy of water diffusion as a signal in diffusionweighted MR imaging (DWI) to study fiber bundles composed of axons
that connect disparate regions. In these studies, the restriction of diffusion of water is measured in multiple spatial directions and at multiple
locations in the brain. Deterministic and probabilistic fiber-tracking algorithms can then be used to identify pathways of fibers. While effective,
this method is limited by its low spatial resolution, making it difficult to
resolve small fibers as well as crossing fibers. Our study aimed to
improve the spatial resolution by combining DWI data with high spatial
resolution anatomical data from MRI scans into a fiber-tracking algorithm. The algorithm uses a global probabilistic search to identify potential fiber pathways between selected cortical regions, and a hierarchical
Bayes model of fiber geometry and the MR measurements to estimate the
certainty of the different fiber paths. The algorithm was tested on a
macaque brain, which was scanned post-mortem in a high field 9.4T MR
system. We found that the structural data itself is in many cases sufficient
to estimate the location of fiber pathways. We are currently working to
quantify the increase in spatial precision when the diffusion and structural information are optimally combined.
B130
ARCUATE FASCICULUS VOLUME IS INFLUENCED BY
HANDEDNESS AND IS CORRELATED WITH FUNCTIONAL
LANGUAGE LATERALIZATION Ruth Propper1, Lauren O'Donnell1,
Stephen Whalen1, Isaiah Norton1, Ralph Suarez1, Lilla Zollei2, Alexandra
Golby1; 1Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 2A. A.
Martinos Center, Massachusetts General Hospital — Previous
DTI/fMRI
research (Vernooij et al., 2007) found increased relative fiber density
(RFD) in arcuate fasciculus (AF) in left versus right hemisphere regardless of direction of participant handedness (left-versus right-handers).
There was no relationship between AF RFD and functional language lateralization in inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). Other work has found both
direction (left versus right) and degree (consistent versus inconsistent) of
hand preference influence brain organization; using a novel DTI AF segmentation method we examined AF volume (AFV) and fMRI functional
language lateralization in IFG in consistent-left (CLH), consistent-right
(CRH), and inconsistent-handed (ICH) individuals. Methods: fMRI and
DTI (N=26; CRH=8; CLH=7; ICH=11) were acquired. IFG language activation laterality was calculated using threshold-independent methodology (Branco et al., 2006). Group spectral fiber clustering (O'Donnell et al.,
2007) of whole-brain tractography (2mm grid, start: cL>=0.3, stop:
cL<0.15, RK2 integration) was used to simultaneously segment AF in all
subjects. AFV was defined per hemisphere as number of 1mm cubed voxels intersected by AF fibers. Results: AFV was larger in left versus right
hemisphere in CRH only (paired t-test, p<.05). Positive correlation
between left hemisphere AFV and IFG functional language lateralization
(r=.40, p=.05) was not affected by handedness group, but was eliminated
with inclusion of two right hemisphere language lateralized individuals.
Conclusion: Differences in AFV between CRH versus CLH and ICH suggest degree and direction of hand preference are important to consider in
studies of brain structure-function relationships. Additionally, structural
asymmetries in language networks may be related to functional lateralization of language.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

83

Sunday, April 13, 8:00 - 10:00 am

B131
INTERHEMISPHERIC COORDINATION IN THE ABSENCE OF
CORTICAL COMMISSURES: AN FMRI STUDY OF THE SPLITBRAIN AT REST Lucina Q. Uddin1, Eric Mooshagian2, Eran Zaidel2,
Anouk Scheres3, Daniel S. Margulies1, A. M. Clare Kelly1, Zarrar Shehzad1,
Jonathan S. Adelstein1, F. Xavier Castellanos1, Bharat B. Biswal4, Michael P.
Milham1; 1Owen Institute for Pediatric Neuroscience, New York University
Child Study Center, NY, 2University of California Los Angeles, CA,
3
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, 4University of Medicine and Dentistry of
New Jersey, Newark, NJ — Split-brain patients present a unique opportunity to address controversies regarding subcortical contributions to interhemispheric coordination. We characterized residual interhemispheric
coordination in a complete commissurotomy patient confirmed by structural MRI and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). By examining patterns of
low-frequency BOLD fMRI signal (<0.1 Hz), we assessed the extent to
which subcortical structures can support bilateral connectivity of resting
state networks. Resting-state (task-free) fMRI data and DTI data was collected from a 74-year-old commissurotomy patient (N.G.). A previously
collected sample of 42 healthy adult controls was used for comparison.
Using independent components analysis (ICA) and region-of-interest
(ROI) based functional connectivity analyses, we demonstrate bilateral
resting state networks in a patient lacking all major cerebral commissures. Compared to the control group, patient N.G.’s interhemispheric
correlations scores fall within the normal range for two out of three
regions examined. This study reports findings from an fMRI examination
of functional connectivity between the cerebral hemispheres in a patient
with a complete commissurotomy. We provide evidence for bilateral resting state networks in this patient, reflecting continued interhemispheric
interaction and suggesting that, at least in part, cortical networks in the
brain can be coordinated by subcortical mechanisms.

84

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session B

Poster Session C
Emotion
C1
INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES
IN
DISTRACTIBILITY
TO
Reiko
Graham1;
EMOTIONAL STIMULI Juliette
Hesselbrock1,
1Biobehavioral Undergraduate Research Project, Texas State University — Many
studies have noted the salience of emotional stimuli and their effects on
cognitive processes such as attention and memory. Negative emotional
stimuli, in particular, tend to grab and hold attention. The objective of this
study was to examine individual differences in distractibility to emotional
stimuli. A target identification task (the Emotional Interrupt Task, Mitchell
et al., 2006) where participants are required to identify targets flanked by
emotional pictures was adapted to examine interactions between emotion
and attention. Skin conductance response (SCR) was used as an index of
autonomic arousal, while the Wisconsin Card Sort Test (WCST) and the
Behavioral Rating Inventory of Executive Function- Self Report (BRIEFSR) were used to evaluate executive function. Analysis of the reaction time
data revealed that participants were significantly more distracted by negative pictures than neutral or positive pictures. In addition, SCR responses
were significantly larger to negative pictures than neutral or positive pictures. Furthermore, a subsequent regression analysis revealed that the
magnitude of attentional distraction by negative pictures could be predicted by performance on the WCST and the BRIEF-SR. Our results suggest that individuals who have poor organizational skills, who struggle
with making transitions, or are inflexible in the face of changes are more
easily distracted by negative stimuli. Together, these findings suggest that
attentional capture by emotional pictures is modulated by both rapid,
automatic processes and slower, more controlled, cognitive processes.
C2
MAPPING THE TIME COURSE OF INVOLVEMENT OF RIGHT
ANTERIOR STG AND RIGHT FPO IN VOCAL EMOTION
PROCESSING Marjolijn Hoekert1, Leonie Bais1, René S. Kahn2, André
Aleman1; 1BCN Neuroimaging Center, University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, The Netherlands, 2University Medical Center
Utrecht, The Netherlands — The right hemisphere is involved in processing
paralinguistic properties of speech that contain information about the
emotional state of the speaker, also known as emotional prosody. More
specifically, studies revealed that right frontal and right temporal regions
play a role in emotional prosody perception. In this study we used triplepulse rTMS to shed light on the precise time course of involvement of right
anterior STG and right FPO. Healthy subjects performed an affective prosody task, in which they were required to focus on prosody and decide
which emotion was expressed. During listening a triplet TMS pulses was
applied to one of the areas at various time points. Mean reaction time was
2277 ms. Results showed a significant main effect of time for right STG and
right FPO. A triplet of pulses given at 1300 ms from stimulus onset
resulted in the largest interference with task performance. This effect was
stronger for withdrawal emotions than for approach emotions. A further
experiment with the inclusion of the POz EEG location as an active control
condition, revealed a significant main effect of location with stronger
effects at FPO and STG relative to the POz location. Acoustic side effects
might however also have interfered with task performance. Results suggest that both right FPO and right STG are critical for the perception of
emotional prosody around 1300 ms after sentence onset. This is the first
TMS study on the temporal involvement of right FPO and right STG in the
processing of emotional prosody.

C3
OPTIMISTIC BIAS IN GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER (GAD)
AND GENERALIZED SOCIAL PHOBIA (GSP) Nick Garber Hollon1,
Jeffrey DeVido1, Matthew Jones1, Marilla Geraci1, James Blair1, Karina S. Blair1;
1Unit on Affective Cognitive Neuroscience, Mood and Anxiety Disorders
Program, National Institute of Mental Health — Optimistic bias (OB) involves
the tendency to underestimate the likelihood of experiencing negative life
events and to overestimate the likelihood of experiencing positive life
events. There have been suggestions that OB represents a cognitive
defense mechanism against increased anxiety levels (Weinstein, 1980).
Potentially alternatively, OB has been associated with increased reward
related activity within the amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal cortex
(vmPFC) in recent neuroimaging work (Sharot et al., 2007). The current
study investigated OB in 20 unmedicated individuals with Generalized
Anxiety Disorder (GAD), 20 unmedicated individuals with Generalized
Social Phobia (GSP), and 20 healthy controls. Both GAD and GSP are associated with increased levels of anxiety. However, whereas GSP is associated with increased amygdala responses to social threat, GAD appears to
be associated with reduced amygdala responding and indications of ruminative prefrontal-based “worry” (Blair et al., under revision). If OB reflects
a cognitive defense against anxiety, both patient groups might be expected
to show increased OB. In contrast, if OB relates to amygdala-vmPFC coding of reinforcement information, patients with GAD might be expected to
show reduced OB. The patients with GAD showed significantly less OB
than the patients with GSP and the healthy controls. These results suggest
that OB cannot be perceived purely in terms of a defense mechanism to
cope with increased levels of anxiety. Instead they are consistent with suggestions of inappropriate amygdala-vmPFC interactions in GAD and suggest that these may mediate the reduced OB and potentially increase risk
for depression that is seen in this disorder.
C4
AFFECT, STRESS, AND VISUOMOTOR BINDING: EVIDENCE FOR
A ROLE OF DOPAMINE IN INTEGRATING PERCEPTION AND
ACTION Bernhard Hommel1,2, Lorenza Colzato1,2, Nelleke van Wouwe1,2,
Wouter Kool1; 1Leiden University, Institute for Psychological Research, 2Leiden
Institute for Brain & Cognition — The primate cortex represents perceived
and produced events in a distributed way, which calls for a mechanism
that integrates their features and integrates them into coherent structures.
Animal, drug and patient studies suggest that the local binding of visual
features is under muscarinic-cholinergic control, whereas visuomotor integration seems to be driven by dopaminergic pathways. Consistent with
this picture, we present evidence that the binding of visual features and
actions is modulated by affect (induced by pictures of positive and negative valence), which induces phasic increases of the dopamine level, and
stress (induced by the cold pressure test), which causes an excessive
dopamine turnover in prefrontal cortex. Both manipulations selectively
affected visuomotor binding but not visual binding, supporting claims
that dopamine impacts long-distance integration; and only the task-relevant stimulus features were integrated, which is consistent with a connection between dopamine and working memory. The outcome pattern,
including the impact of the personality trait extraversion and measures of
the spontaneous eye-blink rate, suggests that the relation between dopamine level and visuomotor performance follows an inverted U-shaped function, with strongest binding being associated with average dopamine
levels.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

85

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

C5
FACIAL EXPRESSION PROCESSING DEPENDS ON STIMULUS
VISIBILITY: BEHAVIORAL AND ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
EVIDENCE OF PRIMING EFFECTS Shen-Mou Hsu1, William Hetrick1,
Luiz Pessoa1; 1Indiana University, Bloomington — The extent of facial
expression processing remains a matter of debate. Instead of focusing on
whether or not processing can take place without awareness, the emphasis of the present study was on investigating how facial expression processing differs as a function of stimulus visibility. We used a combination
of behavioral and electrophysiological measures to assess the depth of
processing while participants performed a priming task, during which
emotional faces served as prime stimuli and emotional words served as
targets. The prime-target pairs could be congruent (both were “fearful”
or “happy”) or incongruent. Two levels of prime visibility (“low” vs.
“high”) were obtained by varying the durations of backward-masked
faces. To probe a neural signature of the impact of the masked primes,
lateralized readiness potentials (LRPs) were recorded over motor cortex.
The results showed that during the high-visibility condition, responses to
word targets were faster when the prime-target pairs were congruent
than when they were incongruent, providing evidence of priming effects.
In line with the behavioral results, the electrophysiological data showed
that high-visibility face primes resulted in LRP differences between congruent and incongruent trials, suggesting that prime stimuli initiated
motor preparation during the high-visibility condition. Contrary to the
above pattern, no evidence for reaction time or LRP differences was
observed during the low-visibility condition. Overall, the present study
reveals that the depth of facial expression processing is modulated by
stimulus visibility.
C6
FEAR CONDITIONING IN A FULLY IMMERSIVE VIRTUAL
REALITY ENVIRONMENT Nicole Huff1, Jose Alba Hernandez1, David
Dzielinski2, Holton Thompson2, Rachael Brady2, Kevin LaBar1; 1Center for
Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, 2Pratt School of Engineering, Duke
University — For nearly a century, Pavlovian fear conditioning has been
used extensively to study the behavioral and neural basis of emotional
memory formation in nonhuman animals. Much cognitive neuroscience
research over the past decade has adapted conditioning paradigms to
study analogous mechanisms in humans. Emerging virtual reality (VR)
computational techniques provide a new opportunity to simulate fearful
experiences in virtual 3-D worlds that more closely approximate real-life
situations of fear acquisition in humans. Because VR technology is currently being employed during exposure therapy for the treatment of anxiety disorders, it is important to develop an experimental model of virtual
fear acquisition, extinction and recovery to provide a translational bridge
with basic neuroscience work. Here we describe a method for conducting
fear conditioning experiments in the Duke Immersive Virtual Environment (DiVE). This fully immersive, 6-sided, Digital Light Processing-projected facility is outfitted for concurrent psychophysiological recording.
Adjustments to standard VR presentation must be made to accommodate
the need for experimental control over presentation and timing of the
conditioned and unconditioned stimuli while participants navigate
through the virtual worlds. A pilot study of healthy adults was conducted in which they were conditioned to fear dynamic snakes and spiders paired with wristshocks while being guided through indoor and
outdoor contexts. Analysis of skin conductance responses indicated the
feasibility of acquiring, extinguishing, and recovering fear in the DiVE
with this technology. Our findings support the development and use of
fully immersive VR as a novel methodology for investigating emotional
learning and memory in humans.

86

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

C7
EVIDENCE OF A FUNCTIONAL LINK BETWEEN THE ANTERIOR
INSULA AND INFERIOR FRONTAL PREMOTOR CORTEX
DURING THE OBSERVATION OF EMOTIONAL FACIAL
EXPRESSIONS: DOES SUCH A SYSTEM MEDIATE EMOTIONAL
CONTAGION? Mbemba Jabbi1, Christian Keysers2; 1National Institutes of
Mental Health, Bethesda, MD, 2Social Brain Lab, BCN Neuroimaging Center,
University Medical Center Groningen, Antonius Deusinglaan 2, The
Netherlands — A growing body of evidence in social affective neuroscience suggests that a mechanism according to which action representation modulates emotional activity may provide an essential functional
architecture for empathy and emotion understanding1, 2. A role for the
anterior insula and premotor cortex in mediating such a mechanism has
been proposed1, 3. Here, we show anterior insula activation during both
the observation of facial expressions and the experience of gustatory disgust, suggesting a role for this structure in emotional contagion. Parallel
activation in the face fields of the inferior frontal premotor cortex were
shown during the observation of the observed emotional expressions,
implicating this region in mediating facial mimicry. Further, the anterior
insula and inferior frontal premotor cortex (among other regions), where
also shown to be predictive of individuals emotional arousability (a measure of interpersonal empathy)4 during the observation of facial expression of disgust5. Applying effective connectivity with the anterior insula
as a seed region6, we showed that only the face fields of the inferior frontal premotor cortex (active both during observation and execution of disgusted facial expressions) is effectively connected with the anterior insula
during the observation of disgusted as opposed to neutral facial expressions. These results provide empirical evidence for the idea that the foremost input to emotional contagion in the anterior insula is the motor
simulation of the observed facial expression in the inferior frontal gyrus.
References 1. Carr L, Iacoboni M, et al. PNAS. (2003) 100(9):5497-502. 2.
Keysers C, Gazzola V. Prog Brain Res. (2006) 156:379-401. 3. Dapretto M,
Davies MS, et al. Nat Neurosci. (2006) 9(1):28-30. 4. Davis, MH. Catal. Sel.
Doc. Psychol. 10 (1980), p. 85 (MS. 2124). 5. Jabbi M, Swart M, Keysers C.
Neuroimage. (2007) 34(4):1744-53. 6. Friston KJ, Buechel C, et al. Neuroimage. (1997) 6(3):218-29.
C8
ELEVATED CORTISOL LEVELS FACILITATE MEMORY FOR
NEGATIVE INFORMATION ONLY IN INDIVIDUALS SHOWING
AMYDGALA ACTIVATION Allison Jahn1,2, Simone Kern2,3, Richard
Davidson1,2, Jerry Halverson1, Clemens Kirschbaum3, Heather Abercrombie1;
1University of Wisconsin, 2Waisman Laboratory for Brain Imaging and
Behavior, 3Technical University of Dresden — The beneficial effects of cortisol on memory depend on the emotional state of the individual (Okuda et
al., 2004; Abercrombie et al., 2006). Thus, emotional arousal plays a permissive role in the effects of cortisol on memory. Animal data show that
amygdala activation is necessary for the facilitatory effects of corticosteriods on memory. Further, activation in the amygdala predicts memory for
emotionally intense but not neutral information (Canli et al., 2000). We
thus hypothesize that in humans cortisol facilitates memory only in individuals showing amygdala activation. We predicted that higher cortisol
levels (related to a moderate dose of cortisol given in the late afternoon)
would facilitate memory for negative words only in individuals who
showed greater amygdala signal change to negative compared to neutral
and positive words. Participants completed two placebo/cortisol counterbalanced fMRI sessions and a follow-up memory session. An ROI
analysis was used to examine amygdala activation while participants
viewed emotional words. Salivary cortisol samples were collected across
the scanning sessions. Using a linear regression (controlling for the day of
the scan), percent signal change while viewing negative words (negative
– neutral + positive words) in the left amygdala and cortisol level across
the scanning session (area under the curve) predicted free recall memory
for negative words. The interaction between amygdala activation and
cortisol levels (R2 = .25, p < 0.05) predicted memory for negative words

Poster Session C

such that the individuals with both greater amygdala activation and
higher cortisol elevations showed the best memory performance for negative words.
C9
THE COGNITIVE STROOP IN PARTICIPANTS WITH SYMPTOMS
OF DEPRESSION USING HIGH-DENSITY ERPS AND S-LORETA
Fern Jaspers-Fayer1, Isabel Taake1, Lisa Buchy2, Mario Liotti1; 1Simon Fraser
University, 2Neurological Sciences, McGill University — Finding
neural
markers of low mood may help to develop better treatments for depression (Mayberg, 2003). In the present study, 64-channel EEG was recorded
in 17 participants who scored high on the Beck Depression Inventory
(BDI-II), and 17 comparison participants who scored low, during a classic
Stroop Task. Reaction time (RT) interference occurred to incongruent
words ("red" written in blue), F(1,42)=174.71, p<.0001, but there was no
difference in RT or error rate between the groups. To localize the Stroop
interference effect in these groups, standardized Low-Resolution Electromagnetic Tomography (s-LORETA) was performed on the grandaverage
waveforms. Incongruent-Congruent paired sample t-tests were run for
both the low and high groups. Within the 200-400ms time-window, we
found participants with a low BDI score showed significantly greater current density activation (t>4.0) of the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
visual and premotor areas (compared to the congruent condition), while
the high BDI group showed significantly greater current density activations (t>4.0) of the right parietal cortex, the posterior cingulate (BA31)
and visual areas (as compared to the congruent condition). In addition to
these activations, the high group showed a number of deactivations. Specifically, dorsal Anterior Cingulate Cortex (dACC-BA24) and then the
right medial prefrontal cortex (BA9/32) showed a significant decrease in
the 200-400ms time window. This result is similar to the blunted anterior
cingulate and increased visual activity found in depressed subjects during fMRI studies (George, et al., 1997), and lends further support for the
theory that limbic and paralimbic activation is abnormal in depression.
C10
AUDITORY EMOTIONAL SIGNALS TRIGGER EXECUTIVE
CONTROL OF ATTENTION Philipp Kanske1,2, Sonja A. Kotz1; 1Max
Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 2Graduate Program:
Function of Attention in Cognition, University of Leipzig, Germany — Auditory emotional signals can signal salience in a specific stituation. We
asked the question which role attentional control plays in such situations.
To this end we presented angry and neutrally spoken words (female and
male speaker) in a version of the Simon spatial incompatibility task. Participants performed a voice decision task. An example of an incompatible
trial is a female voice in the left speaker that required a right side button
press. The same stimulus in the right speaker rendered a compatible trial.
RT results revealed a reduced conflict effect (incompatible – compatible)
for auditory emotional stimuli indicating more efficient attentional control. ERP data corroborate this finding. The conflict N200 indexing attentional control was enlarged for auditory emotional stimuli. Interestingly,
attentional control in anxiety and depression prone participants did not
adapt as efficiently as in low anxiety and depression participants. Effortful control in contrast, the skilled control of voluntary attention,
increased the benefit. These data are in line with our results from visual
emotional word presentation, suggesting an adaptation benefit of executive control of attention for emotional stimuli.
C11
THE IMPACT OF BASAL HPA-AXIS ACTIVITY ON AGGRESSION
AND INFORMATION PROCESSING Robina Khan1, Katja Bertsch1,
Ewald Naumann1, Menno Kruk2, Patrick Britz1, Michael Hermes1; 1University
of Trier, 2Leiden University — In animal studies, a negative relationship
was found between basal Hypothalamus-Pituitary-Adrenal (HPA)-axis
activity and aggressive behavior. Results from clinical samples are
ambiguous and experimental evidence is scarce. Furthermore, little is
known about the information processing in aggressive individuals and
its relationship to HPA-axis activity. We therefore induced aggressive

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

behavior in a healthy sample and analysed the relation to basal HPA-axis
activity and the processing of emotional faces. The cortisol awakening
response was measured as an index for basal HPA-axis activity prior to
the experimental session. Aggressive behavior was induced and measured with the Taylor Aggression Paradigm and the processing of angry,
fearful, happy and neutral faces was measured in an emotional Stroop
task. We found a significant negative correlation between the area under
the curve of the cortisol awakening response and aggressive behavior in
the experimental group. In the emotional Stroop task, the experimental
group and a non-provoked control group didn't differ with respect to the
reaction times. But within the experimental group, more aggressive subjects tended to react faster as well as those with lower basal cortisol levels. This study shows that healthy subjects with lower basal HPA-axis
activity can be provoked more easily. Also, the processing of stimuli
when provoked differs in subjects with lower basal cortisol levels from
those with higher levels. Information processing could therefore be an
important variable when studying aggression and the HPA-axis in clinical samples.
C12
FUNCTIONAL NETWORKS AND CORTICAL-SUBCORTICAL
INTERACTIONS IN EMOTION: A META-ANALYSIS OF
NEUROIMAGING STUDIES Hedy Kober1, Lisa Feldman Barrett2,3, Josh
Joseph1, Eliza Bliss-Moreau2, Kristen Lindquist2, Tor Wager1; 1Columbia
University, 2Boston College, 3Psychiatric Neuroimaging Research Program,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School — We performed
an quantitative meta-analysis of 162 neuroimaging studies of emotion
using a novel multi-level kernel-based approach, focusing on locating
brain regions consistently activated in emotional tasks and on their functional organization into distributed networks, independent of semantically defined emotion category labels (e.g., “anger,” “fear”). Such brainbased analyses are critical if our ways of labeling emotions are to be evaluated and revised based on consistency with brain data. Consistent activations were limited to specific cortical sub-regions, including multiple
functional areas within medial, orbital, and inferior lateral frontal cortices. Consistent with a wealth of animal literature, multiple consistent
subcortical activations were identified, including amygdala, ventral striatum, thalamus, hypothalamus, and periaqueductal gray. We used multivariate parcellation and clustering techniques to identify networks coactivated across studies. These analyses identified six large-scale distributed networks, including medial and lateral frontal networks, two posterior cortical networks, and paralimbic and core limbic/brainstem
networks. Specific follow-up analyses focused on periaqueductal gray
(PAG) and hypothalamic (Hy) activations, and identified frontal cortical
areas co-activated with these core limbic structures. A specific region of
dorsomedial frontal cortex (dmPFC, Brodmann’s Area 9/32) was the only
area co-activated with both PAG and Hy. Mediation analyses were consistent with a pathway from dmPFC through PAG to Hy. These results
suggest that medial frontal areas are more closely associated with core
limbic activation than their lateral counterparts, and that dmPFC may
play a particularly important role in the cognitive generation of emotional states.
C13
IMPLICIT PROCESSING OF EMOTIONAL AND MORAL
INFORMATION: AUDITORY FMRI EVIDENCE Sonja
A.
Kotz1,
Ulrike Altmann1, Tim Raettig1, Silke Paulmann1; 1MPI for Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences — While previous studies on social competence and
evaluation of social interactions have primarily focussed on social rules
and rule compliance (e.g., Singer et al., 2004), there is paucity of research
investigating dimensions of emotions (i.e., emotional or moral) in context
(but see Moll et al., 2005). In the current experiment we investigated the
neural correlates of emotional semantic and emotional prosodic dimensions in auditory language contexts. Of particular interest were brain
areas that have previously been reported in response to explicit evaluation such as the orbito-frontal gyrus (OFG), the medial prefrontal cortex

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

87

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

(mPFC), the anterior temporal cortex, the superior temporal sulcus (STS),
and the striatum. Here, participants listened to little stories that varied in
content (moral, emotional) and prosodic intonation (positive, negative,
neutral). Rather than evaluating the stories, participants engaged in a
voice detection task rending the task implicit. Results show that emotional content activates the right anterior temporal lobe (BA 38), the right
striatum, and the left mPFC. At a lowered threshold there is also activation for moral content in the right BA 38 and the middle temporal gyrus
(BA 21). The data suggest that a common denominator of emotional and
moral content is the right temporal pole region. Areas that seem to be primarily driven by explicit evaluation of moral/emotional content such as
the OFG are not activated under implicit processing conditions.
C14
“WORKING THROUGH” NEGATIVE LIFE EXPERIENCES: AN
FMRI STUDY OF THE NEURAL BASIS OF REGULATING AFFECT
ASSOCIATED
WITH
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL
NEGATIVE
EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCES Ethan Kross1, Matthew Davidson1, Nick
Weiler1,2, Kevin Ochsner1; 1Columbia University, 2Stanford University — Recent
years have seen an explosion of research examining the neural bases of
emotion regulation. For the most part, this research has used standardized experimental stimuli (e.g., emotionally arousing images and movies)
to elicit emotional reactions. Although these findings have helped elucidate the neural bases of people’s ability to cognitively regulate affective
responses, it remains unclear how they generalize to a variety of “real
world” situations requiring emotion regulation. In this vein, the present
research used functional magnetic resonance imaging to examine the
neural bases of people’s ability to regulate emotional responses generated
by thinking about negative autobiographical emotional experiences. Sixteen participants were scanned as they recalled a series of highly arousing negative autobiographical emotional memories and thought about
them using strategies designed to either maintain or decrease negative
affect. Findings indicated that participants displayed significantly lower
levels of self-report negative affect when thinking about their experiences
using the decrease vs maintain strategies. Contrasts comparing neural
activity on trials when participants were instructed to maintain vs.
decrease their negative emotional responses revealed elevated levels of
activity in ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) and subgenual ACC.
In addition, activity in VMPFC correlated negatively with drops in selfreport negative affect on decrease rather than maintain trials. In contrast,
a significant positive correlation was observed between activity in left
dorsomedial PFC and drops in negative affect. These findings extend
prior findings on the neural bases of emotion-regulation to memory
research. The basic science and clinical implications of these findings will
be discussed.
C15
HOW DO WE EMPATHIZE WITH SOMEONE UNLIKE US? AN
EVENT-RELATED AND EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY FMRI
STUDY ON PERSPECTIVE-TAKING AND EMPATHY FOR PAIN
Claus Lamm1,2, Jean Decety1,2; 1The University of Chicago, 2Center for Social
and Cognitive Neuroscience, The University of Chicago — Empathy enables
us to share and understand the affective states of others. Recent fMRI evidence suggests that we rely on our own sensory and affective experiences
in order to empathize with someone (Decety & Lamm 2006). But how do
we empathize with someone with whom we do not share the same bodily
experiences? We investigated this question in an fMRI experiment combining analyses of functional segregation (‘localization’) and integration
(effective connectivity). Participants were required to evaluate the pain
inflicted by surgical procedures performed on two groups of patients: 1)
patients with a neurological disease who reacted, unlike the observers,
with pain during normal touch and with no pain when undergoing needle injections; and 2) patients who reacted to these procedures in the
same way as the observers would react to them. Participants were clearly
able to evaluate the affective states of both patient groups. However,
behavioral and fMRI results revealed that evaluating needle injections in

88

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

patients who were unlike the observers represented the biggest challenge. A network consisting of dorso-medial prefrontal cortex, bilateral
ventral premotor and inferior posterior parietal cortices, and right anterior insula was predominantly associated with this type of evaluation.
Connectivity analyses indicated a distinct pattern of connectivity within
the pain matrix and the prefrontal cortex for this condition. Our results
suggest that empathy is a highly flexible mental function allowing us to
suppress our own prepotent responses in order to correctly infer and
share the actual affective states of others. Decety & Lamm, ScientificWorldJournal, 20, 1446-1163.
C16
ALTERATION OF MOOD USING AFTER PRESENTATION OF
MULTIMEDIA CONTENT DURING COGNITIVE TASK: AN EEG
STUDY Charles-Francois Latchoumane1, Eunyoung Lee2, Hyoseop Lee2,
Dong-Il Chung1, Sungmin Park2, Soyun Song2, Jiyun Shin4, Jeaseung Jeong1,2;
1
KAIST/Bio and Brain Engineering Department, 2KAIST/Culture and
Technology Department — Emotion and mood are major players in our
daily lives and clearly influence our decision as well as our cognitive performance. In that perspective, several therapies based on color, music
and other medias are being developed to provide a basis for better selfbeing, but also as a soft resolution of emotion/mood related disorders. In
this study, we developed multi-media contents designed to elicit three
specific moods (i.e. Relaxation, Happiness and Confidence), and based on
the knowledge of mood therapy. We investigated the response of 12 subjects (6 males and 6 females, mean age 22 year old) on their cognitive performance during a visual congruent continuous performance task (cCPT,
attentional task). We obtained that the subject perceived a mood change
quite clearly for the contents related to relaxation and happiness (i.e. selfevaluation questionnaire), and exhibited changes in their CPT behavioral
response as well as in their EEG power ration (i.e. alpha/beta, alpha/
gamma, and beta/gamma power ratio). We concluded that emotional/
mood induction using multi-modal (audio/video), and complex (e.g.
complex visual patterns and movements) contents could elicit changes in
attention, visible from a behavioral study, however milder in the electrophysiological response. Moreover, the correlation study between the contents climax and the EEG power showed that there was an
electrophysiological change in all subject showing positive valence of
emotion elicitation.
C17
COMMON AND DISTINCT BRAIN NETWORKS ASSOCIATED
WITH EXPLICIT EMOTIONAL EVALUATION: A METAANALYTIC STUDY Kyung Hwa Lee1,2, Greg Siegle1,2; 1University of
Pittsburgh, 2Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, University of
Pittsburgh — Brain mechanisms underlying explicit evaluation of emotion have been explored using different tasks including stimulus-focused
evaluation (“What is the emotionality of a stimulus/situation?”), evaluation of one’s own emotion (“How do you feel?”), and evaluation of others’ emotions (“How do other people feel?”). Yet, the extent to which
similar brain mechanisms underlie different evaluation tasks is unclear.
A meta-analysis of published neuroimaging studies of explicit emotional
evaluation was conducted to examine common and distinct brain mechanisms underlying these different explicit evaluation tasks. Activation
Likelihood Estimation (ALE), implemented in BrainMap (Laird et al.,
2005) was applied to 38 studies (58 contrasts). Results revealed that common regions including the amygdala, lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC),
and dorsomedial PFC were involved in all three evaluation tasks, which
may reflect engagement in similar mechanisms such as emotion-cognition interactions and evaluative processing. Distinct brain regions associated with each task were also identified: 1) the sensory cortex and
ventrolateral PFC were specifically associated with stimulus-focused
evaluation, possibly involved in perceptual and higher-order conceptual
processing, 2) the insula and rostral anterior cingulate cortex were specifically associated with evaluation of one’s own emotion, potentially associated with interoceptive and experiential processing, and 3) the superior

Poster Session C

temporal sulcus and temporoparietal-junction were specifically associated with evaluation of others’ emotions, potentially reflecting their roles
in Theory of Mind and empathy. These findings suggest that different
types of explicit evaluation may involve common and distinct brain networks. We therefore suggest caution in generalizing from the results of
any one explicit emotion evaluation task.
C18
WHEN PESSIMISM IS REWARDING: INCREASED PLEASANT
RELIEF AFTER THREAT OF PAIN Siri
Leknes1,
Irene
Tracey1;
1
Functional Magnetic Imaging of the Brain (FMRIB) Centre, University of
Oxford, UK — When a negative outcome is expected, a cue signalling its
absence (relief) may act as a reward. The level of surprise at a rewarding
(or aversive) counterfactual outcome is thought to increase its pleasantness (or unpleasantness). While optimism is associated with increased
well-being and life expectancy, the pessimist’s negative expectations may
lead to increased rewarding relief when these expectations are violated.
To test this hypothesis, 15 healthy volunteers participated in an fMRI
study where a visual cue predicted 5-second intense heat pain stimulation with 50% probability. A safety cue signalled the relief condition
where no heat was applied. The life orientation test (LOT-R) was used to
measure trait optimism/pessimism. During the scan, subjects were also
asked to imagine rewarding or neutral scenarios (e.g. your favourite meal
or an airplane meal). Both the safety cue and the pleasant scenarios were
rated as highly pleasant. Subjects also reported feeling dread during
anticipation of pain/relief. As predicted, pessimism correlated positively
with both dread and relief. When used as a regressor in the fMRI analysis, pessimism was associated with increased activation in the bilateral
amygdala and insular cortices during the anticipation period. Pessimists
also activated the ventral striatum more during relief, consistent with an
increased prediction error when the pain was omitted. BOLD signal in
the ventral striatum also correlated with the pleasantness ratings during
both relief and imagined reward scenarios. Overall, our findings support
a link between pessimism and pleasant relief, suggesting that optimism is
not the only route to positive affect.
C19
NEURAL CORRELATES OF REACTIONS TO INFLUENCE
ATTEMPTS FROM PARENTS AND FRIENDS Jared
Lessard1,
Chunhui Chen2, Chuansheng Chen1; 1University of California, Irvine, 2Beijing
Normal University — Both parents and peers engage in explicit attempts
to influence the behaviors of adolescents and young adults. However, the
neural bases of reactions to influence attempts are not well understood.
In this study, 19 Chinese undergraduate students completed a measure of
positive and negative influence attempts by social network members (e.g.
parents, peers) and also completed an fMRI scanning session. In this session, participants heard a series of statements about specific positive (e.g.
encouraging) and negative (e.g. using guilt induction) influence attempts,
and were asked to judge whether their parents, best friends, or classmates had influenced them in that way. The questionnaire measures indicated that parents used more influence attempts than did peers, and that
social network members used more positive influence attempts than negative attempts. The fMRI results indicated more bilateral superior temporal (BST) and left calcarine activation in the parent influence condition
relative to the friend influence condition. In contrast, there was more left
inferior parental activation in the friend influence condition. Collapsing
across the parent and friend conditions, more BST, middle cingulated
cortex, and left cerebellum activation was found in response to statements regarding positive influence relative to those regarding negative
influence. In contrast, more left inferior frontal, bilateral medial superior
frontal, and bilateral precuneus activation was found in response to negative influence statements. The activation of the BST in response to positive influence statements was correlated with the behavioral results. The
implications of these results will be discussed.

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

C20
EMOTIONAL VALENCE INDEPENDENCE: THE AVERSIVE SIDE
OF THE NUCLEUS ACCUMBENS CIRCUIT Liat
Levita1,
Todd
1,2
1,3
1
1
Hare , Henning Voss , BJ Casey ; The Sackler Institute for Developmental
Psychobiology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 2California
Institute of Technology, 3Citigroup Biomedical Imaging Center, Weill Medical
College of Cornell University — An increasing body of evidence supports
an expanded view of nucleus accumbens (NAcc) function that is valenceindependent, whereby the NAcc is engaged in both incentive/reward
processes and in adaptive responses to conditioned and unconditioned
aversive stimuli. Yet, it has been argued that NAcc activation to aversive
stimuli may be a consequence to the rewarding effect of termination of
aversive events, i.e., relief. To address this question an fMRI study was
designed to delineate brain activation to the initiation and termination of
auditory aversive and pleasant stimuli. The goal of this work was to test
the effect of differentially valenced emotional stimuli on activation of the
NAcc in the absence of learning. We found that NAcc activation in adults
did not solely occur to pleasant events, and that the degree of NAcc activation to the aversive sounds correlated with the degree of amygdala
activation to the same stimuli. Evidence of activation of the NAcc upon
termination of the aversive stimuli was not found. To further investigate
the functional significance of our findings we examined how self ratings
of anxiety and the likelihood to engage in risky behaviors correlated with
NAcc and amygdala responses over time. We found that sensitization of
amygdala activation to aversive stimuli correlated with greater trait anxiety in females, whereas NAcc activity to positive sounds was correlated
with subjects’ likelihood to engage in risky behavior in both males and
females. Our findings support the expanded view of NAcc function in
valence-independent behavioral modulation.
C21
SEEING EMOTION WITH YOUR FEELINGS: A META-ANALYTIC
REVIEW OF THE NEURAL REFERENCE SPACE FOR EMOTION
EXPERIENCE VS. PERCEPTION Kristen Lindquist1, Tor Wager2, Eliza
Bliss-Moreau1, Hedy Kober2, Josh Joseph2, Matthew Davidson2, Lisa Barrett1,3;
1Boston College, 2Columbia University, 3Massachusetts General Hospital,
Harvard Medical School — Must you feel sad to see sadness on another
person’s face? An embodied account of emotion would suggest so. It is
hypothesized that conceptual knowledge recruited during emotion perception is grounded by partial re-enactments of the affective and sensorimotor states that actually instantiate the online experience of
emotion. As a result, seeing emotion involves some degree of feeling. In
the present meta-analytic review, we summarize 163 neuroimaging studies of emotion (1990 to 2005) to compare the brain regions implicated in
experience and perception of emotion. Findings demonstrate partially
overlapping circuitry for experience and perception of emotion, with
more subcortical (e.g., hypothalamic and brainstem) activation supporting experience, and more amygdala, inferior frontal gyrus, and posterior
cortical activation in perception. The observed neural reference spaces for
emotion experience and perception are discussed.
C22
MOTIVATION-BASED MODULATION OF BEHAVIOR AND
BRAIN ACTIVITY DURING WORKING MEMORY: EFFECTS OF
INCENTIVE VALENCE AND CATEGORY Hannah
Locke1,
Todd
Braver1; 1Washington University in St. Louis — What are the psychological
and neural mechanisms by which an increase in motivation leads to performance gains? The current study addressed this question by examining
behavior and brain activity (sustained and transient) during performance
of a Sternberg-type working memory task. Thirty-one participants (ages
19-34, 14 male) were offered performance-dependent, matched reward
and penalty incentives (cash or liquids), in high, low, or zero magnitudes,
while engaging in the task. Incentive trials were associated with a large
improvement in performance (i.e., 200 msec faster reaction times with no
change in error rate), and these effects were further modulated by individual differences in personality (promotion vs. prevention focus).

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

89

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

Robust performance improvements were even observed on no-incentive
trials within incentive blocks, suggesting that a component of incentive
effect on performance might be contextual or tonic, rather than adjustable
on a trial-by-trial basis. There were no differences in the effect of incentive valence (reward vs. penalty) or category (cash vs. liquid) on the magnitude of performance improvement. Neuroimaging analyses isolate
whether effects of valence and category primarily impact sustained activation, or rather transient activity occurring at either the time of the cue
or the time of incentive delivery. Results are presented that contrast the
pattern of incentive-based modulation in brain regions associated with
cognitive control (e.g., lateral prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate)
versus reward processing (e.g., orbitofrontal cortex, basal ganglia).
Lastly, personality effects on brain activity under incentive conditions
will be presented.
C23
AN EMOTIONAL ILLUSION: DYNAMIC EXPRESSIONS BIAS THE
EVALUATION OF NEUTRAL FACES Diane E. Marian1, Arthur P.
Shimamura1; 1University of California, Berkeley — Visual illusions have
been studied for centuries because they are useful tools for investigating
top-down influences on perception. Here, we describe a new emotional
illusion in which facial expressions are perceived differently depending
on their context. We constructed short video clips of dynamic expressions
by morphing faces from happy to neutral expressions or from angry to
neutral expressions. Participants rated the initial expression of a happy or
angry face, watched the face change to a neutral expression, and then
rated the ending expression. The ending neutral faces were judged as displaying the emotion opposite that of the initial expression. That is, when
an expression changed from happy to neutral, the neutral face was rated
more negatively than a baseline neutral face. Moreover, when an angry
face changed to neutral, the neutral endpoint was rated more positively.
These results demonstrate a context-based emotional illusion in which
neutral faces seem to display different emotional expressions depending
upon their prior appearance. In many respects, this illusory effect is comparable to visual illusions in which a perceptual feature, such as size,
color, or orientation is affected by surrounding context.
C24
NEURAL CORRELATES OF TREATMENT IN ADOLESCENTS
WITH GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER Julie
Maslowsky1,
Karin Mogg2, Brendan Bradley2, Erin McClure Tone3, Monique Ernst4, Daniel
Pine4, Christopher Monk1; 1University of Michigan, 2School of Psychology,
University of Southampton, 3Georgia State University, 4National Institute of
Mental Health — Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD) is a prevalent and
debilitating psychiatric illness. Two forms of effective treatment typically
given for this disorder are cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and medication. The goals of this study were to: 1) examine neural correlates of
treatment in GAD youth, and 2) compare the treatment effects of CBT
and medication (fluoxetine). Fourteen youth with GAD and 10 age- and
gender-matched controls were included in the study. Of the patients, 7
were treated with CBT and 7 with medication. FMRI scans were performed before (Time 1) and after (Time 2) treatment. During the scan,
subjects performed a dot probe task that provided a measure of attention
bias toward or away from emotional faces. Based on previous results,
ROI analyses were performed in amygdala and right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC). Behavioral results showed greater decrease in
attentional bias to angry faces from Time 1 to Time 2 in the medication
versus CBT group (F=5.91, p<0.05). FMRI results showed increased
VLPFC activation, relative to controls, in both the medication group
(t=2.84, p<0.01) and CBT group (t=2.60, p<0.01). Bilateral increases in
amygdala activation were observed only in the CBT group (right
amygdala: t=2.74, p<0.05; left amygdala: t=2.60, p<0.05). These results
show significant change in patterns of neural activation in response to
angry faces following treatment for GAD, with some evidence for differential change by treatment type.

90

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

C25
GENDER DIFFERENCES IN EMOTION REGULATION: AN FMRI
STUDY OF COGNITIVE REAPPRAISAL Kateri McRae1, Kevin N.
Ochsner2, Iris B. Mauss3, John J.D. Gabrieli4, James J. Gross1; 1Stanford
University, 2Columbia University, 3University of Denver, 4Massachusetts
Institute of Technology — Despite strong popular conceptions of gender
differences in emotionality and striking gender differences in the prevalence of disorders thought to involve emotion dysregulation, the literature on the neural bases of emotion regulation is nearly silent regarding
gender differences. The purpose of the present study was to address this
gap in the literature. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), we asked 12 male and 12 female participants to use a cognitive
emotion regulation strategy (reappraisal) to down-regulate their emotional responses to negatively valenced pictures. Behaviorally, men and
women evidenced comparable decreases in negative emotion experience.
Neurally, however, gender differences emerged. Compared with women,
men showed (a) lesser increases in prefrontal regions that are associated
with reappraisal, (b) greater decreases in the amygdala, which is associated with emotional responding, and (c) lesser engagement of ventral
striatal regions, that are associated with reward processing. We consider
two non-competing explanations for these differences. First, men may
expend less effort when using cognitive regulation, perhaps due to
greater use of automatic emotion regulation. Second, women may use
positive emotions in the service of reappraising negative emotions to a
greater degree.
C26
BEAUTY IS IN THE EYE OF THE REMEMBERER: THE EFFECTS OF
MEMORY ON FACIAL ATTRACTIVENESS Dan Meegan1, Chris
Warren2, Jim Tanaka2; 1University of Guelph, 2University of Victoria — As
with many objects, faces tend to be judged more favorably following previous exposure. Fluency explanations for this ‘mere exposure effect’ suggest that it occurs because ‘old’ (i.e., perceptually-identical or
conceptually-similar to previous objects) objects are processed with more
fluency, and the experience that accompanies this fluency leads to a positive bias on tasks requiring an affective judgment about the objects. Evidence supporting a causal relationship between fluency and judgment
bias is indirect, however. We report an experiment designed to directly
test this hypothesis by manipulating the degree to which previously
exposed objects could be processed fluently. The high fluency condition
presented faces in an upright orientation and the low fluency condition
presented faces in an inverted orientation. As predicted by the fluency
hypothesis, attractiveness judgments were affected by previous exposure
only for the high fluency condition. We also report an experiment that
assessed recognition of old faces as a function of fluency condition. Previous research has reported that the mere exposure effect is smaller when
objects are recognized, perhaps because the feeling of fluency is more
likely to be correctly attributed to previous exposure rather than misattributed to affective judgments. Our results show the opposite pattern –
recognition, as with attractiveness, was higher in the high fluency than
the low fluency condition. We suggest that faces, unlike the affectivelyneutral stimuli typically used, encourage misattribution because people
are accustomed to having positive feelings about faces and do not typically question the source of those feelings.
C27
ROLE OF ATTENTION IN THE ESTIMATION OF EMOTIONAL
SOUND DURATION: AN ERP STUDY Nathalie
Mella1,
Richard
1
1
1
Ragot , Viviane Pouthas ;
Cognitive Neuroscience and Cerebral
Imaging_CNRS — The influence of emotion on time processing has been
investigated in previous studies, showing in particular that negative
events generate a lengthening of subjective duration. In the present
experiment, allocation of attention was manipulated in a duration comparison task. Twelve participants had to estimate the duration and emotional intensity of neutral and negative sounds from the IADS (Bradley &
Lang, 1999). Results showed that: (1) highly negative sounds were per-

Poster Session C

ceived as longer than neutral ones; (2) this effect was stronger when
attending to emotion than when attending to time. This lengthening of
subjective duration was associated to a higher level of skin conductance
response, and to a greater heart rate decceleration. Evoked related potential (ERP) results showed clear differences between highly negative
sounds and neutral ones, whichever the attentional instruction. A greater
N1 and a greater late parietal positivity were observed for highly negative sounds compared to neutral ones. Moreover, preliminary analyses
revealed an enhanced right prefrontal slow negative (CNV-like) component in the 350-700ms time window, for highly aversive sounds while
attending to emotion. Taken together, these results suggest that (1) the
early perceptual process and the late cognitive assessment are modulated
by emotional content even if attention is diverted away from emotion
and (2) that differences in duration judgments are reflected in the amplitude of the slow negative component: the longer the subjective duration,
the higher its amplitude.
C28
THE NEURAL BASES OF REGULATING ADDICTIVE IMPULSES
Peter Mende-Siedlecki1, Hedy Kober1, Ethan Kross1, Kevin Ochsner1;
1Columbia University — Problems of addiction are a serious public health
concern. Although much behavioral research suggests that a failure to
control appetitive impulses may underlie people’s dependence on
addicted substances, neuroimaging research has only recently begun to
address this issue. This study used fMRI to examine the neural bases of
cigarette smokers’ ability to regulate impulses generated in response to
viewing drug-related and non-drug related appetitive stimuli. Twenty
smokers were scanned while viewing images of drug-related appetitive
stimuli (e.g., pictures of cigarettes) and non drug-related appetitive stimuli (e.g., pictures of delicious looking, unhealthy foods). While viewing
these images, participants were instructed to think about either the (a)
immediate sensory experience, or (b) the long-term negative physical
health implications associated with consuming each item. Self-report ratings indicated that participants displayed statistically equivalent drops in
their desire to consume both drug-related and non-drug related stimuli
when focusing on their long-term physical health implications rather
than their immediate sensory experience. Contrasts examined neural
activity on trials when participants were instructed to focus on the longterm physical health consequences vs. immediate sensory experience
associated with consuming each type of stimulus. Results were consistent
with the hypothesis that regulating appetitive impulses depends upon
the effective recruitment of systems implicated in cognitive control that
modulate activity in systems implicated in reward. The basic science and
clinical implications of these findings will be discussed. This research was
supported by NIDA grant DA022541.
C29
TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP EMOTIONAL PROCESSING: THE
INTERACTION BETWEEN EMOTION GENERATION AND
EMOTION REGULATION Supriya Misra1, Kateri McRae1, James J.
Gross1; 1Stanford University — Current theories driving affective neuroscience indicate that emotions may be generated in at least two different
ways: bottom-up and top-down. Bottom-up emotion generation relies on
the properties of a stimulus itself through the perception of low-level
stimulus features, while top-down emotion generation relies on the
meaning given to a stimulus through high-level cognitive reappraisals.
The present study compares emotions generated in a primarily bottomup (perceptual) and a primarily top-down (cognitive) fashion. In particular, this study tested the hypothesis that top-down emotions are more
easily regulated than bottom-up emotions when using cognitive reappraisal. Cognitive reappraisal is a frequently investigated emotion regulation technique, in this case instructing participants to re-think the
emotion experience to reduce negative affect. Bottom-up emotional stimuli were fearful faces and top-down stimuli were negatively valenced
statements that imbued neutral faces with negative affect. Instructions
were either to respond naturally or to use cognitive reappraisal to

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

decrease experienced negative affect. Results confirmed the hypothesis
that emotions generated in a primarily top-down fashion were more successfully regulated than those generated in a primarily bottom-up fashion. This suggests that it may be easier to cognitively regulate emotions
generated in a cognitive rather than perceptual fashion. These results
have implications for developing more effective emotion regulation techniques depending on the emotion generation processes.
C30
ERP INDICES OF INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN SELFREGULATION: DIFFERENT TRAJECTORIES TOWARD PROBLEM
BEHAVIOR Ida Moadab1, Phan Luu1,2, Thomas J. Dishion1, Don M.
Tucker1,2; 1University of Oregon, 2Electrical Geodesic Inc. — Dysfunctional
emotion regulation has been linked to problem behaviors in youth,
resulting in the development of internalizing and externalizing disorders.
Internalizing symptoms and externalizing problems may actually reflect
different forms of pathological self-control. Individuals who respond to
negative emotion in an under-controlled manner may be more likely to
exhibit externalizing types of behaviors, while those who are more
responsive to negative feedback may display internalizing symptoms.
We measured two ERP components that have been shown to be sensitive
to individual differences in inhibitory control and evaluation of negative
feedback, the frontal N2 and the ERN respectively. Negative emotion was
introduced into a go/no-go task engaging neural mechanisms involved
in response inhibition and the evaluation of negative feedback. We predicted that when emotional responses had to be regulated, greater externalizing problems would correlate with smaller N2 amplitudes, indexing
under-controlled self-regulation, and larger ERNs would correlate with
increasing internalizing symptoms and anxiety, demonstrating increased
vigilance to errors. In a sample of seventy-five 9-14 year old children,
EEG was collected during the emotional go/no-go task, and parentreport of temperament (EATQ-R) and behavioral and emotional problems (CBCL) were assessed. As predicted, smaller N2 amplitudes were
significantly correlated with greater externalizing problems (r=-.309,
p=.010), indexing poor inhibitory control. Also as hypothesized, larger
ERN amplitudes were significantly correlated with greater internalizing
symptoms (r=.366, p<.01), indexing responsiveness to errors. The present
study indicates that utilizing ERP methodology in paradigms that elicit
cognition-emotion can provide insight into the regulatory deficits that
result in internalizing and externalizing problems.
C31
THE PROCESSING OF EMOTIONAL FACIAL EXPRESSIONS IN
PARKINSON’S DISEASE – AN EVENT-RELATED BRAIN
POTENTIAL STUDY Andreas Mühlberger1, Matthias J. Wieser1, Joseph
Classen1, Elisabeth Klupp1, Peter Weyers1, Paul Pauli1; 1University of
Würzburg — In addition to cognitive impairments, recent studies
revealed that patients suffering from Parkinson’s Disease (PD) show deficits in emotion recognition tasks. Particularly, they were found to have
difficulties in recognizing anger and disgust in facial expressions. In the
current study, the emotional processing of facial expressions was investigated by means of event-related brain potentials. PD patients and healthy
controls matched for sex, age, and educational status were investigated.
Participants viewed emotional facial expressions (angry, happy, disgusted, fearful, neutral, sad), which were displayed for 1000 ms in a randomized order. Additionally, participants rated facial expression in
terms of valence and arousal. The components P100, N170, the early posterior negativity (EPN), and the late positive potential (LPP) were
assessed to investigate group differences in emotional modulation. Overall, emotional expressions elicited larger P100 amplitudes compared to
neutral ones. Like in other studies, the N170 was not modulated by emotion. Interestingly, the PD patients did not show an enhanced EPN in
response to emotional compared to neutral facial expressions, whereas
this was found to be prominent in healthy controls for all emotional compared to neutral faces. No effects of emotion or group were detected in
the LPP. Furthermore, PD patients showed less pronounced valence rat-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

91

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

ings for emotional facial expressions. The results indicate that the early
visual perceptual processing of emotional facial expressions is blunted in
PD. This might point at a prominent role of dopamine for emotion processing.
C32
DISAMBIGUATING PROPERTIES OF AFFECT IN THE HUMAN
BRAIN Alyson Negreira1, Mariann Weierich1, Christopher Wright1,2, Lisa
Feldman Barrett1,3; 1Martinos Biomedical Imaging Center, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA, 2Division of Cognitive and
Behavioral Neurology, 3Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA — Affect, the neurophysiologic barometer of an individual’s relationship to the environment,
depends on three crucial properties: hedonic valence, arousal, and novelty. Previous neuroimaging experiments typically studied one or two
properties of affect, however no studies to date have manipulated all
three. The current study sought to simultaneously assess the effects of
valence, arousal and novelty during affective processing using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Sixteen young healthy participants
(8 females, 8 males; age M=22.25, SD= 2.32) viewed International Affective Picture System (IAPS) pictures within an event-related fMRI design.
Twelve distinct groups of IAPS pictures were created based on the
dimensions of hedonic valence, arousal, and novelty (e.g.. Familiar/High
Arousal/Negative group, etc). Each group contained 5 pictures (3.5s
each, jittered ISI run length= 270s) for a total of 60 pictures for each of the
5 runs. An individual participant anatomic region of interest (ROI)
approach identified voxels active to the task and percent signal change
measures were extracted from these voxels. Both right and left
amygdalae revealed a significant Time X Novelty X Valence X Arousal
interaction [Right: (F(9,135)=3.3, p=.001), Left: (F(9,135)=3.40, p=.001)],
indicating that these affective properties are expressed differentially
across the time course of the hemodynamic response. Our results suggest
that the affective response in humans can be disambiguated into 3 distinct properties: hedonic valence, arousal and novelty. Furthermore, the
relationship among these properties changes over time, indicating that
the affective process is dynamic and requires the assessment and integration of time, hedonic valence, arousal and novelty.
C33
LEARNING FROM MISTAKES: SEPARATING CUE AND
REINFORCEMENT-BASED RESPONDING IN A REVERSAL
LEARNING TASK Pamela Ng1,2, R. J. R. Blair1; 1National Institutes of
Mental Health, NIH, 2University of New South Wales — Reversal learning is
the ability to adapt as situations change by learning to suppress a previously rewarded stimulus following altered reinforcement contingencies.
Previous work has proposed that ventrolateral frontal cortex is critical for
guiding this behavioral flexibility. However in all prior work, there has
been no attempt to disentangle BOLD responses that relate to processing
the cue as opposed to the reinforcement in response reversal paradigms.
In the current study, we sought to determine: First, whether previous
reports of increased ventrolateral prefrontal cortex activity to punished
reversal errors (e.g., Budhani et al., 2006) are driven by cue, or as we predicted, reinforcement information. Secondly, whether findings of
increased ventrolateral prefrontal cortex activity are specific to reversal
errors or whether activity is also seen to punished errors in acquisition.
Eighteen healthy adults participated in an event-related fMRI study
using a unique probabilistic response reversal task. In the reversal learning task, cue- and reinforcement-mediated activity was differentiated
using a “jittered” temporal design. In line with predictions, increased
activity within ventrolateral prefrontal cortex during response reversal
appeared to relate to the recruitment of these structures following punishment to alter future responding. However, both structures showed
significantly greater activity not only to punished incorrect reversal trials,
but also to punished incorrect acquisition trials. These data suggest that
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex is recruited following unexpected punishment information to alter future motor responses and not only to overrule prepotent responses. Understanding the neural correlates governing

92

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

reversal learning will allow us to pinpoint more precisely the brain areas
which may be disrupted in disorders associated with deficits in reversal
learning. Impairments in reversal learning have been reported in several
disorders associated with irritability and reactive aggression, including
psychopathy and intermittent explosive disorder.
C34
NON-ARBITRARY CONNECTION BETWEEN VALENCE AND
BRIGHTNESS IN THE LEFT HEMISPHERE Matia Okubo1; 1Senshu
University — Positive words (e.g. faith) were processed faster and more
accurately when they were printed in a bright font than in a dark font
while the opposite was true for the negative words (e.g. enemy) (Meier et
al., 2005). The present study investigated a neural basis for this relationship between valence and brightness in a visual half-field experiment.
Positive and negative words were presented to the left visual field-right
hemisphere (LVF-RH) or to the right visual field-left hemisphere (RVFLH) in a dark or a bright font. Participants evaluated the word as positive
or negative. As was found in Meier et al. (2005), there was a cross-over
interaction between valence and brightness. However, this interaction
was qualified by a higher-order interaction. That is, the cross-over interaction was evident in the RVF-LH trials, but not in the LVF-RH trials,
suggesting that the left hemisphere is responsible for the non-arbitrary
connection between valence and brightness.
C35
ATTRIBUTIONS ABOUT OTHERS’ INTENTIONS AFFECT
EMOTIONAL LEARNING FROM THEIR ACTIONS Andreas
Olsson1, Christian Brodbeck2, Niall Bolger1, Kevin Ochsner1; 1Columbia
University, 2University of Zürich — We learn about others through the
aversive consequences of their actions. However, it is unknown how our
emotional learning about others is affected by our beliefs about their
causing or being responsible for aversive events. To address this question
we used a fear conditioning paradigm in which subjects were led to
believe that they participated in a multi-subject study, and had been randomly assigned to be the ‘student’, whereas the others were ‘teachers’.
The ostensive task of the ‘teachers’ was to deliver feedback (shocks) to the
‘student’ in order to improve their performance in an alleged implicit
learning task. The teachers, whose faces were presented simultaneously
with the shock, were believed to either (a) deliver shocks at will (causally
linked and responsible), (b) deliver shocks as being told by the experimenter (causally linked, but not responsible), or (c) being present when
shocks where delivered by a computer (neither causally linked, not
responsible). The presentation of the fourth ‘teacher’s face (d) was never
paired with a shock. Ratings and autonomic measures were collected
during the acquisition, extinction and renewal of teacher-shock associations. Although shock delivery was unrelated to performance on the
implicit learning task, and of identical number and intensity across teachers, the teachers elicited differential ratings and autonomic responses,
indicating that attributed causation and responsibility increased dislike
and prevented extinction of the conditioned fear response. The results
suggest that attributions about causation and responsibility can affect our
emotional learning about others.
C36
IS EMPATHY A KEY DETERMINANT IN THE ACTIVATION OF
EMBODIED SIMULATIONS DURING LANGUAGE PROCESSING?
EVIDENCE FROM AN APPROACH-AVOIDANCE PARADIGM
Adele Pacini1, Philip Barnard1, Tim Dalgleish1; 1MRC Cognition & Brain
Sciences Unit — A considerable amount of research interest has been generated by the discovery of mirror neurons in the premotor cortex (Rizzolatti, Fadiga, Gallese, & Fogassi, 1996), in particular the potential
contribution to social skills like empathy. This discovery fits well with
theoretical developments in embodied cognition, which assume that we
simulate other’s body states at a neural level to empathise with their
mental state. One important issue is how simulations used in empathy
might scaffold higher level embodied processing like language. We
present two experiments that investigate this, using a variation of an

Poster Session C

approach-avoidance paradigm (Brendl, Markman, & Messner, 2003),
which has been cited in support of embodied cognition theories. The
basic finding is that the evaluation of a positive word activates an
approach simulation towards the self, and an avoidance simulation away
from the self for negative words, resulting in a delay of around 200ms in
the incongruent task (Markman & Brendl, 2005). The key question was
whether empathy would mediate the activation of simulations in relation
to other people. In experiment 1 participant’s moved positive and negative words either towards or away from an unknown person’s name,
there was a delay of 150ms in the incongruent task. In experiment 2, participants moved words in relation to a hated person. There were no
embodied simulations; participants were equally fast to move positive
and negative words towards or away from the name. These data suggest
that the extent to which we activate embodied simulations in language
processing is dependent on empathy.
C37
UNCONSCIOUS CUE-VALUE LEARNING EVIDENCED IN THE
HUMAN BRAIN Mathias Pessiglione1,2, Predrag Petrovic1, Jean
Daunizeau1, Ray Dolan1, Chris Frith1; 1Wellcome Trust Centre for
NeuroImaging, London, UK, 2INSERM U610, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris,
France — How the brain uses success and failure to optimise future decisions is a long-standing question in neuroscience. One computational
solution involves updating the values of context-action associations in
proportion to a reward prediction error. Previous evidence suggests that
such computations are expressed in the striatum and, as cognitively
impenetrable, represent an unconscious learning mechanism. Here, we
formally test this by studying instrumental conditioning in a situation
where we masked contextual abstract cues, such that they were not consciously perceived. Behaviourally, we show that subjects nonetheless
developed a marked propensity to choose cues associated with winning,
compared to cues associated with losing money. Functional magnetic resonance imaging revealed that during conditioning, the monetary cue-values, generated from a computational model, specifically correlated with
activity in the ventral striatum. We conclude that even without conscious
processing of contextual cues, our brain can learn their reward values,
and use them to bias decisions.
C38
MANIPULATION OF ATTRIBUTIONAL STYLE MODIFIES
EMOTIONAL RESILIENCE TO STRESS Kelly D. Peters1, Joseph I.
Constans1,2; 1Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, 2Southeast Louisiana
Veterans Health Care System — Attributional style refers to a cognitive
process whereby individuals attribute specific causes to life events. Cognitive theories of depression hypothesize that a “depressogenic” attributional style, in which individuals attribute internal, stable, and global
causes to negative events, may causally affect vulnerability to depression.
Previous longitudinal studies have demonstrated a temporal precedence
for depressogenic attributional style and future depressive episodes;
however a causal role for attributional style in depression vulnerability
has yet to be established. The purpose of the current study was to 1)
examine whether attributional style in an unselected sample of college
students could be modified using a computer-based Cognitive Bias Modification (CBM) task, and 2) determine whether manipulations in attributional style would lead to changes in emotional resilience to stress. We
hypothesized that participants exposed to a CBM task promoting a positive attributional style (Resilience condition) would demonstrate a
decreased tendency to attribute internal, stable causes to negative events
compared to participants exposed to a CBM task promoting a depressogenic attributional style (Vulnerability condition). Additionally, we
hypothesized that modifications in attributional style would causally
affect emotional resilience following a stressful event. The results from
this study indicate that the CBM task was effective in modifying attributional style. Following the CBM task, Resilience participants were less
likely to attribute internal, stable causes to a negative event compared to
Vulnerability participants. Moreover, Resilience participants demon-

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

strated more emotional resilience following a stressful event compared to
Vulnerability participants. These findings offer support for the causal
role of attributional style in depression vulnerability.
C39
THE INFERIOR FRONTO-OCCIPITAL FASCICULUS MEDIATES
RECOGNITION OF THE FACIAL EXPRESSION OF EMOTIONS
Carissa Philippi1, Sonya Mehta1, Thomas Grabowski1, Ralph Adolphs2, David
Rudrauf1; 1University of Iowa, 2California Institute of Technology — Lesion
and neuroimaging studies have implicated multiple cortical regions in
the recognition of emotion from facial expressions, yet it remains
unknown how these regions communicate with one another. We hypothesized that visual representations of the face would need to be conveyed
to frontal regions that associate the face with its emotional meaning. To
test this idea, we isolated long-range association fiber tracts that might be
critical in this network and combined probabilistic fiber tract information
with the lesion-method. One hundred and four patients with stable, focal
brain lesions were tested on their recognition of six emotions (happiness,
sadness, fear, disgust, surprise, anger) from faces. For each hemisphere,
five association fiber tracts (uncinate, inferior and superior longitudinal,
and inferior fronto-occipital (IFOF) fasciculi, cingulum) from a probabilistic atlas were spatially normalized to a reference brain. Intersections of
the lesions with these tracts were used to compute probable disconnection. The general linear model was used to predict emotion recognition
impairments based on fiber tract information, covarying out lesion size,
implicated cortical regions, and concurrent fiber tract disruption. Disconnection of the right IFOF significantly predicted impaired emotion recognition scores, averaged across emotions and individually for sadness,
fear, surprise and anger. Furthermore, among the subjects, one had a
white matter lesion virtually restricted to IFOF, and had highly impaired
emotion recognition. Our findings strongly implicate the right IFOF as a
critical component of the large-scale neural system supporting the recognition of the facial expression of emotion.
C40
ATTENTION TO EMOTION: NEURAL RESPONSES DURING
EXPLICIT VERSUS IMPLICIT PROCESSING OF DYNAMIC BODY
SIGNALS OF THREAT Swann Pichon1, Beatrice de Gelder2,3, Julie
Grezes1; 1CNRS - Collège de France, Paris - France, 2Tilburg University - The
Netherlands, 3Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown — An important issue in
understanding how the brain reacts to emotional signals is whether such
signals can be processed in the absence of attention and awareness and to
what extent the activation level of the most critical brain areas is influenced by the task requirements. Several investigations of brain responses
to static facial expressions have suggested that emotional signals are
picked up even when attention is engaged elsewhere, whereas others
have argued that attention is a prerequisite for extracting emotional
information. So far this issue has been raised about static facial expressions. In contrast, the influence of attention on processing dynamic emotional signals from the body is not known. Recent investigations have
mapped the brain regions engaged during the passive perception of
dynamic body expressions of fear and anger. The present study
addresses the question whether task-related attentional effects modulate
the activity of the brain networks sustaining emotional body perception.
We designed a 2*2 factorial (Explicit-implicit & Threat-Neutral) fMRI
experiment in which participants were shown videos (3secs) of actors
expressing fear, anger or neutral attitudes with the face blurred. Depending on the task, they were instructed to report either the emotional
expression or the colour of a spot overlaid on the video and appearing for
40ms. The results show significant activations in sulcus temporal superior, anterior hippocampus / posterior amygdala, ventrolateral and
medial prefrontal cortex when contrasting explicit to implicit contexts.
Moreover, the interaction between explicit processing and emotion
reveals additional activity in superior colliculus. Supported by: EC-contract number FP6-NEST-2005-Path-IMP-043403

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

93

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

C41
MARKETING
ACTIONS
CAN
MODULATE
NEURAL
REPRESENTATIONS OF EXPERIENCED UTILITY Hilke
Plassmann1, John O'Doherty1, Baba Shiv2, Antonio Rangel1; 1California
Institute of Technology, 2Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford
University — Despite the importance and pervasiveness of marketing,
almost nothing is known about the neural mechanisms through which it
affects the decisions made by individuals. We propose that marketing
actions, such as changes in the price of a product, can affect the neural
computations associated with experienced utility. We tested this hypothesis by scanning 20 human subject brains (9f, 11m) using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while they tasted wines which, contrary
to reality, they believed to be different and sold at different prices. Our
results show that increasing the price of a wine increases subjective
reports of flavor pleasantness as well as the neural computations of subjective flavor pleasantness that are made in brain areas such as the medial
orbitofrontal cortex (mOFC). Importantly, we did not find evidence for
an effect of prices on areas of the primary taste areas such as the insula
cortex. A natural interpretation is that the top-down cognitive processes
that encode the flavor expectancies are integrated with the bottom-up
sensory components of the wine in the mOFC, thus modulating the
hedonic experience of flavor, but that the flavor expectancies generated
by the change in prices do not impact more basic sensory representations.
Interestingly, an analogous mechanism has been proposed for pain placebo effects. The paper provides novel evidence for the ability of marketing actions to modulate neural computations of pleasantness during the
consumption experience and for the mechanisms through which the
effect operates.
C42
EMOTIONAL AND REWARD PROCESSING DURING GAME
PLAYING IN NARCOLEPTIC PATIENTS: A FUNCTIONAL MRI
STUDY Aurelie Ponz1, Rositsa Poryazova2, Esther Werth2, Ramin
Khatami2, Peter Boesiger3, Claudio Bassetti2, Sophie Schwartz1; 1Neurosciences,
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University Hospital Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland, 3Biomedical Engineering, University of Zurich & Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich, Switzerland — Background: Narcolepsy with cataplexy (NC) is characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness, cataplexy episodes, caused by hypocretin/orexin (HCRT)
deficiency. This hypothalamic neuropeptide is involved in sleep-wake
and feeding regulation and, as recently described, in incentive motivation. Although NC-patients often report cataplexy episodes when playing games, it is unknown whether hypocretin depletion in humans might
selectively affect neural activity in reward systems. Methods: We
acquired event-related fMRI data on 12 NC-patients and 12-matched controls while they performed an incentive delay task. On each trial, subjects
were presented with a cue displaying the amount to be won/lost, followed by a target. Subjects pressed on a key as quickly as possible during
target presentation. Immediate feedback notified current gain. FMRI data
were acquired on a 3-T Philips INTERA system, preprocessed and analyzed using SPM2. Results: Regions involved in reward processing (ventral striatum, cingulate), motor preparation and visual attention were
more activated for larger cues in both groups. However, ventral midbrain, including the VTA, was modulated by the size of the cue presentation in controls but not in NC patients. Prefrontal cortex and nucleus
accumbens were more activated during winning compared to losing in
the controls only. Importantly, NC patients showed increased amygdala
response selectively to large positive reward. Conclusion: HCRT-deficiency is associated with a lack of modulation in ventral midbrain regions
for reward preparation, as well as an increase in bilateral amygdala activity in response to successful trials outcome. Our fMRI findings provide
evidence for altered limbic-striatal responses in hypocretin-deficient
patients during reward processing.

94

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

C43
EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIALS IN RESPONSE TO
ANGRY FACIAL STIMULI AT THRESHOLD PERCEPTION Erin
Ramage1, Joey Essoe1, Mark Geisler1; 1San Francisco State University — Increased amplitudes and shortened latencies of event-related potentials
(ERP's) in response to emotionally salient faces as compared to faces lacking emotion have been shown; however, the electro-physiological processing of emotional expression at threshold perception and the
relationship to behavioral measures has not been examined. This study
used a modified single-stimulus paradigm where male and female faces
were presented every 30 seconds in block randomization. Each face
expressed a different intensity of an angry expression, Neutral (NA),
Threshold Anger (TA), and Full Anger (FA); each defined by subjective
ratings of intensity prior to recording of the brainwaves. ERP waveforms,
reaction time, and subjective intensity ratings, were collected in 22 male
and 28 female college students. Results indicate that: (1) the intensity ratings increased as the intensity of the anger in the faces increased, (2) the
amplitudes and latencies for early sensory visual information processing
measured by the N1 and P2 ERP components were similar for all three
faces, (3) the amplitudes for cognitive processing implicated in the discrimination of visual stimuli for the N2 ERP component were similar for
the TA and FA conditions, and greater for NA, (4) the amplitudes for the
later cognitive visual information processing of the P3 ERP component
were similar for the NA and TA conditions, and greater for FA. Results
suggest that the greatest differences between the ERP's of NA and FA
intensities of angry faces are found during cognitive information processing of the N2 and P3 components.
C44
DOES ENGAGEMENT IN AN EMOTION REGULATION
STRATEGY IN RESPONSE TO A PREVIOUSLY CONDITIONED
STIMULUS RESULT IN ENDURING FEAR INHIBITION? Colleen
Ray1, Alfred Kaszniak1; 1University of Arizona — This study was designed
to determine whether engaging in cognitive reappraisal inhibits affective
responses 5 days after strategy engagement. On Day 1 eighty participants
underwent habituation training to a picture of a snake and a picture of a
spider. They were then conditioned using a simple discriminatory conditioning fear paradigm to one of the pictures with a 100db noise blast presented at stimulus offset. On Day 3 participants returned to the
laboratory and either i) engaged in a cognitive reappraisal strategy, ii)
underwent traditional unpaired conditioned stimulus presentation training, iii) engaged in a cognitive reappraisal strategy during traditional
unpaired conditioned stimulus presentation iv) or had an experience
unrelated to the conditioned stimulus (control group). On Day 8 participants returned to the lab and were exposed to both pictures paralleling
the Day 1 protocol. Psychophysiological measures (skin conductance
response, orbicularis and corrugator facial electromyography) and emotion self-report (valence and arousal) ratings were used to compare affective responses across conditions. Psychophysiological data demonstrated
that engagement in cognitive reappraisal, traditional unpaired conditioned stimulus presentation, as well as the combination of the two
reduced fear responses to unpaired conditioned stimulus presentation 5
days later as compared to the control group. The impact on self-report
measures was mixed. Thus, engagement in an emotion regulation strategy to a previously fear conditioned stimulus can result in enduring fear
inhibition. Implications of this study for current neurological and cognitive views of fear inhibition as well as the boundary conditions of fear
inhibition are discussed.
C45
CORTICAL GLUTAMATE IS LINKED TO REWARD RELATED
VENTRAL STRIATE ACTIVITY – A COMBINED FMRI AND 1HMRS STUDY Jan Reuter1, Nicola Klein1, Martin Voss1, Theresa Dembler1,
Florian Schubert2, Rüdiger Brühl2, Frank Seifert2, Andreas Heinz1, Jürgen
Gallinat1; 1Klinik für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie, Charité

Poster Session C

Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany, 2Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt,
Berlin, Germany — Processing of rewarding stimuli is associated with
increased firing rate of dopamine neurons in the ventral striatum, a core
region of the brain reward system. Psychiatric diseases with dysfunctional reward behavior, like schizophrenia, are associated with abnormal
dopaminergic neurotransmission and dysfunctional activation of the
ventral striatum. A close interaction between dopamine and glutamate
has been proposed to play an important role in reward processing and in
the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. In humans, aspects of dopamine
function may be reflected by the BOLD activity of the ventral striatum
during presentation of rewarding stimuli, and glutamatergic function
may be represented by absolute glutamate concentrations measured with
magnetic resonance spectroscopy. An interaction of dopaminergic and
glutamatergic neurotransmission has so far not been imaged in humans.
We hypothesize and find a correlation between the activity of the ventral
striatum (BOLD contrast during reward processing) and glutamate concentration in the anterior cingulate cortex in healthy subjects in a combined fMRI and MRS study.
C46
PERCEPTION IN EMOTIONAL DEFICIT Gwladys
Rey1,
Ken
2
3
1
1
Knoblauch , Marie Prévost , Roland Jouvent , Stéphanie Dubal ; 1CNRS UMR
7593, Centre Emotion, CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 2INSERM U864,
Institut cellule souche et cerveau, Bron, France., 3McGill University, Montréal,
Québec, Canada — Anhedonia is associated with a reduced experience of
positive emotion. This study examined emotion perception in physical
and social anhedonia under varying perceptual conditions. We used an
affective judgment task of photographs that included either sensory or
social content. The luminance contrast of positive pictures was varied
from 20, 40, 60, 80 or 100% of the initial contrast. Twenty-six subjects with
Physical Anhedonia, 10 with Social Anhedonia and 35 nonanhedonic
subjects rated the emotional intensity of the pictures. In all subjects, judgments of emotional intensity decreased with contrast attenuation. Low
contrast pictures are thus less arousing than high contrast pictures. Physical anhedonics reported decreased pleasure for sensory photos at all but
the lowest contrast level, and for social photos at high contrast levels.
Social anhedonics did not differ from controls in their ratings of sensory
photos, and reported decreased pleasure for social photos at all but the
lowest contrast level. The deficit of pleasure in anhedonia is selective for
the emotional modality; physical anhedonia relies more on the sensory
dimension of the test and social anhedonia relies more on the social
dimension. Despite lower global hedonic capacity, anhedonia is associated with a capacity to modulate emotional responses.
C47
EMOTION REGULATION IS ASSOCIATED WITH IMPROVEMENT
IN WORKING MEMORY PERFORMANCE Anne Richards1, Richard
Maddock1; 1University of California Davis — The goal of this ongoing study
is to gain a greater understanding of the behavioral, physiological, and
neural effects of emotion regulation on cognitive processes such as working memory. We hypothesized that giving subjects instructions to regulate their emotions would reduce interference caused by emotional
distracters. Undergraduate students performed a facial identity recognition working memory task with unpleasant and neutral photographic
distracters. In alternating blocks subjects were instructed to either
decrease their reaction to the distracter photographs using detachment or
to let themselves respond naturally. Skin conductance responses (SCR) to
the distracters and subjective ratings of unpleasantness were recorded. A
repeated measures ANOVA showed an interaction between distracter
valence and the effect of emotion regulation instructions on accuracy (df=
1,25, F=5.846, p = 0.0232). Working memory performance improved on
the trials with unpleasant distracters when the instructions were to regulate. Subjects rated the distracters as less unpleasant on the blocks when
the instructions were to regulate. A repeated measures ANOVA of SCR
amplitude found a main effect of regulation instructions (F=8.6, df=1,25,
p=0.007), a main effect of distracter valence (F=5.3, df=1,25, p=0.03), and a

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

non-significant trend for an interaction (F=1.6, df=1,25, p=0.22). The subjective ratings and SCR evidence suggest that subjects were successful at
regulating their emotions. The working memory performance evidence
suggests that regulating emotional responses improved memory accuracy even though no emotional interference was present without emotion
regulation. Imaging studies are planned to test our hypotheses about the
mechanism of this working memory improvement.
C48
ASSESSMENT OF EMOTION-MODULATED ATTENTIONAL
NARROWING USING EYE MOVEMENT MONITORING Lily
Riggs1,2, Doug McQuiggan1,2, Ella Pan1, Adam Anderson2, Jennifer Ryan1,2;
1Rotman Research Institute, 2University of Toronto — It is suggested that
emotional arousal leads to attentional narrowing such that memory for
central emotional items is enhanced at the cost of memory for surrounding peripheral items (Easterbrook, 1959). We assessed this hypothesis
using behavioral responses and eye movement monitoring (EMM). Participants viewed central negative and neutral IAPS scenes (CS) surrounded by three peripheral neutral objects (PO) across two study blocks.
Then, two test blocks were presented. In the first test block, participants
saw previously viewed peripheral, manipulated (one object was replaced
with a novel object), and novel objects. In the second test block, participants saw previously viewed and novel IAPS scenes. Participants indicated whether PO were old, manipulated or novel, and whether CS were
old or new. In the study block, participants viewed CS more than PO
regardless of arousal type, and this difference was enhanced for emotional CS. In the test block, duration of first fixation distinguished previously viewed from novel CS, regardless of arousal type. Participants
were more accurate in their recognition of emotional versus neutral CS.
There was increased viewing of the manipulated PO in manipulated
scenes compared to when it appeared in a repeated or novel scene. These
effects did not vary by arousal type. By contrast, participants were more
accurate in detecting a change in PO when they were previously paired
with a neutral versus an emotional scene. While, EMM results from study
block and behavioral data support the attention narrowing hypothesis,
this tradeoff was not observed for EMM data from test blocks.
C49
ARE EMOTIONAL SIGNALS UNIVERSAL? A CROSS–CULTURAL
INVESTIGATION OF VOCAL EXPRESSIONS OF EMOTIONS
Disa Sauter1,2,3, Frank Eisner4, Sophie Scott4; 1University College London,
2Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, 3Centre for Brain and
Behaviour, Birkbeck college, 4Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University
College London — The basic emotion account (Ekman, 1992) proposes that
some affective states are associated with distinct signals, which are universally recognized. This claim has been empirically verified for emotional facial expressions, but little work has investigated whether vocal
signals of emotions can be recognized cross-culturally. We report a set of
studies carried out with the preliterate Himba, a semi-nomadic people
who live in northern Namibia. This is the first investigation to examine
the perception of vocal emotional signals in both Western and non-Western participants. We present data from several tasks, including matching
of sounds to emotion vignettes, and same-different judgments, with both
Western and non-Western stimuli. Identification of non-verbal emotional
vocalizations is better than chance for both tasks with both types of stimuli and for some emotions individually. This work lends support to the
universalist account of emotional communication.
C50
EMOTIONAL STATES DIFFERENTIALLY BIAS EXTRASTRIATE
CORRELATES OF THE ATTENTIONAL SPOTLIGHT Taylor
Schmitz1,2, Matt Dixon1, Eve De Rosa1, Adam Anderson1; 1University of Toronto,
2University of Toronto, Collaborative Program in Neuroscience — Behavioral
research suggests that positive and negative emotional states may differentially influence visuospatial attention by broadening or narrowing,
respectively, the scope of attended information in one’s visual field. This
fMRI study examined whether positive and negative emotions differen-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

95

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

tially modulate the spatial scope of selective attention, as indexed by
changes in extra-striate visual processing. This was interrogated with a
block design experiment consisting of alternating blocks of affect induction (positive, neutral, negative IAPS images) and a visuospatial task. The
visuospatial task employed rapid presentations (300ms) of composite
face/place (center/surround) stimuli to distinguish category-selective
extrastriate regions. The central face was attended (gender decision task),
rendering the peripheral place unattended. The visuospatial task
included intra-block repetitions of the unattended place information,
affording assessment of repetition suppression effects as a metric of unintentional encoding. A post scan localizer was used to functionally define
face (FFA) and place (PPA) extrastriate regions of interest. Fourteen individuals (age=22.03±0.68; education=15.57±0.68) participated.. FMRI
parameters were as follows: TE=30 ms; TR=2000 ms; flip angle=270°;
matrix=64×64; FOV=200mm. Valence-dependent encoding patterns were
examined at the group level using factorial ANOVAs. Consistent with
predictions, positive affect increased extrastriate PPA encoding of the
unattended place information (i.e. broadened attention) and negative
affect decreased place encoding (i.e. narrowed attention). As a function of
the temporal separation between affect induction and visuospatial
blocks, affect induced changes in neural response during visuospatial
blocks were not attributable to exogenous stimulus-driven affective cues.
This study thus provides neurofunctional evidence that endogenous
emotional states alter the scope of attentional selection.
C51
THE ROLE OF SOMATOMOTOR REPRESENTATIONS IN THE
RECOGNITION OF AFFECTIVE PROSODY: AN ERP STUDY
Valery Sramko1, Mario Liotti1; 1Simon Fraser University — Recognition of
emotions has recently been the object of intense research. The somatic
marker hypothesis (Damasio, 2003) postulates that an individual’s
somatomotor representations not only play a central role in one’s own
emotional experience and expression, but also in the perception of others’
facial expressions. In the present study it was hypothesized that recognition of emotions conveyed through affective prosody would activate
speech premotor/motor areas in the listener. High-density brain electrical activity was recorded while twenty healthy females categorized
semantically neutral sentences presented in five different emotional prosodies (happy, sad, angry, fearful, and neutral). Accuracy was comparable
between emotions, but reaction time was significantly faster for angry
and fearful intonations. Event-related activity was selectively averaged
for the different emotions, time-locked to sentence onset. Scalp topography and global field power revealed an overall effect of affective prosody
with a main component peaking at 1 sec. sLORETA localized this activity
within the inferior part of the anterior temporal cortex (right greater than
left). Main event-related potential (ERP) differences between emotions
included an early effect peaking at 450 ms with increased activity in
response to fear and localized in right dorsal premotor cortex. A later
effect, peaking at 950 ms, showed sad-specific activity localized to left
inferior premotor cortex. These findings lend support to the hypothesis
that one’s own somatomotor representations may be activated during the
processing of emotions in speech in others. These results also suggest that
different emotions recruit distinct premotor regions during affective
prosody recognition.

Poster Session C

Neurology, 2Penn State College of Medicine, Radiology, 3Penn State College of
Medicine, Pediatrics, 4Penn State University, Human Development and Family
Studies, 5Penn State University, Sociology, 6Penn State University, Education
Policy Studies, 7Penn State University, Language Acquisition Center, 8Penn
State University, Social Sciences Research Institute, 9Penn State University,
Population Research Institute, 10Penn State University, Psychology — In this
case study, we tested the hypothesis that the neurodevelopmental bases
of mathematical cognition are altered in mathematical learning disability
(Math LD). We suspected these alterations would entail attenuated activity of crucial number neurons in the parietal lobe (intraparietal sulcus
region) and compensatory recruitment of additional frontal, cingulate,
and occipital regions subserving working memory, pattern recognition,
and problem solving. Studies in the 15 year old male participant with
Math LD were contrasted to a typically developing control sample (n =
16). Participants completed number calculation (addition and subtraction), coin calculation, and number n-back tasks while being scanned in a
Philips 3T magnet using a boxcar design with a non-computation number
processing baseline condition. Images were processed with SPM2 software. In comparison to healthy controls, the Math LD participant showed
significantly increased recruitment in frontal, occipital, temporal, and
cingulate regions to varying extents in number n-back, subtraction, and
coin calculations tasks, whereas neural recruitment in the addition task
was attenuated. Activity in the region of the intraparietal sulcus was
erratic across tasks and in comparison to controls. Findings suggest a pattern of neurodevelopmental pathophysiology in this case of Math LD that
prominently compromises parietal and frontal lobe networks for number
sense, working memory, and efficient processing operations. Recruitment of multiple cortical regions not usually associated with calculation
appears to represent compensatory attempts and strategies to handle
working memory load and computational operations efficiently.

Higher level cognition: Numerical
processing

C53
PARIETAL ACTIVATION
DURING
SYMBOLIC
NUMBER
PROCESSING DEPENDS ON AN EXPLICIT FOCUS ON
NUMERICAL MAGNITUDE Minna M Hannula1,3, Daniel Ansari2,
Bruce McCandliss3; 1University of Turku, Finland, 2University of Western
Ontario, Canada, 3Weill Cornell Medical College — A series of recent findings has suggested that the parietal cortex is involved in the processing
and representation of numerical magnitude, even when participants are
not told to explicitly focus on number. In contrast, other evidence suggests that the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) is not modulated by numerical
stimuli when these are irrelevant to the task. The present paper reports a
direct investigation of the extent to which parietal involvement in number processing depends on explicit task requirements for recruiting representations of numerical magnitude. Using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), we compared two cross-modal number judgment tasks, which varied in the degree to which number magnitude representations needed to be deliberately engaged. An additional crossmodal control task involved matching equally familiar symbols, i.e. visually presented letters, with corresponding auditory letter names. During
the number comparison task, bilateral regions of the IPS and right precentral gyrus were modulated to a greater extent than during either the
number or letter matching tasks. In contrast, number matching did not
modulate any regions to a greater extent than letter matching. These findings suggest that the degree of parietal activation during numerical tasks
is dependent on the degree to which participants are required to explicitly focus on numerical magnitude, thereby calling for greater attention to
the specific task situations under which parietal activation during number processing is observed.

C52
ALTERED ACTIVITY OF NEURAL SYSTEMS UNDERLYING
CALCULATION IN MATH LEARNING DISABILITY: A CASE
STUDY Paul Eslinger1,2,3, Melissa Long1, Clancy Blair4,9, JianLi Wang2,
Jennifer Realmuto1, Dave Baker5,8, Steven Thorne7, David Gamson6, Erin
Zimmerman1, Qing Yang2, Lisa Rohrer10; 1Penn State College of Medicine,

C54
DEVELOPMENTAL SPECIALIZATION FOR SYMBOLIC NUMBER
PROCESSING IN THE LEFT SUPRAMARGINAL GYRUS – AN FMRI
STUDY Ian Holloway1,2, Gavin Price3, Daniel Ansari1,2; 1Dartmouth
College, 2University of Western Ontario, 3University of Jyvaskyla — Like the
ability to access sounds from letters, the ability to access the numerical

96

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

quantity represented by abstract numerical symbols (e.g. Arabic numerals) is crucial for scholastic and employment success. A growing number
of neuroimaging studies have begun to elucidate the neural representations of quantity and their typical and atypical developmental trajectories. However, the brain mechanisms underlying the ontogenetic process
of connecting abstract symbols with their quantitative referents have yet
to be systematically examined. To address this open question, we conducted a functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging study in which 7-9 year
old children and adults compared the relative magnitude of symbolic
(Arabic numerals) and nonsymbolic quantities (arrays of squares). By
contrasting the neural activation elicited by symbolic comparison with
that of non-symbolic comparison, we isolated brain regions which
responded differentially as a function of numerical format. Furthermore,
in a whole-brain voxelwise analysis of the interaction between numerical
format (symbolic-nonsymbolic) and age (adults-children), we delineated
brain regions whose response to numerical format differs as a function of
age. This analysis revealed two regions that showed greater modulation
of numerical format in adults relative to children: the left Supramarginal
gyrus (SMG) and an area in the right Insular cortex. Importantly, activity
in the left SMG was found to predict participants’ performance during
numerical comparison. The results suggest that the SMG may be a key
brain region involved in the developmental process of mapping numerical symbols onto their quantitative referents.
C55
THE TIME-COURSE OF NUMERICAL-SPATIAL INTERACTIONS
Edward Hubbard1, Mariagrazia Ranzini1, Manuela Piazza2, Stanislas
Dehaene1,3; 1INSERM Unit 562 Cognitive Neuroimaging Gif-sur-Yvette,
France, 2Center for Mind Brain Sciences, Rovereto, Italy, 3Collège de France,
Paris, France — Over the past 15 years, behavioral, neuroimaging and
patient studies have suggested that human numerical abilities depend, in
part, on an automatically elicited left-to-right oriented mental number
line. Using fMRI, we have previously found that posterior parietal cortex
(PPC) regions which respond more to contraversive than to ipsiversive
saccades also respond more strongly to numbers associated with the corresponding side of space (i.e., small numbers = greater activation in right
PPC; large numbers = greater activation in left PPC). The current study
used event-related potentials to explore the timecourse of these effects
and to further explore the functional similarities between numerical and
spatial processing. We collected EEG data using a 256-channel EGI system while subjects performed a standard cued target-detection task. On
each trial, a non-informative (50% valid) arrow (leftwards or rightwards)
or number (1, 2, 8 or 9) cue was presented at fixation, followed after a
variable SOA by a left- or right-sided target, to which subjects responded
as quickly as possible. Arrows led to a greater negativity over contraversive parietal and central electrodes at approximately 250 – 400 ms after
cue onset (the early directing attention negativity; EDAN), even for noninformative arrow cues. Frontal sites exhibited a similar pattern in the 250
– 450 ms time window, possibly reflecting a mix of the EDAN and the
anterior directing attention negativity (ADAN) effect. Numerical cues led
to similar, albeit weaker, EDAN and ADAN effects, consistent with the
suggestion that numerical and spatial processing share mechanisms of
automatic spatial orienting.
C56
NUMBER IMPAIRMENT IN CORTICOBASAL DEGENERATION
Shira Koss1, Luisa Vesely1, Murray Grossman1; 1University of
Pennsylvania — We investigated acalculia and impaired number knowledge in corticobasal degeneration (CBD). CBD patients diagnosed
according to clinical-pathological criteria (Murray et al, 2007) were compared with matched healthy controls. We investigated number knowledge by administering written Arabic numeral or visual dot-pattern
probes in which subjects judged the fit of a target value between two
boundary values (e.g. whether target value “3” was between “2” and
“5”). We manipulated the small (1, 2, 3), medium (4, 5) or large (6, 7) distance between boundary values. To examine a resource-related compo-

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

nent, we administered the boundary values in forward or reverse order.
CBD (73.8% correct) are significantly impaired compared to controls
(96.6% correct). CBD (6875.2 msec) also take significantly longer than controls (2348.8 msec). CBD are equally impaired with Arabic numerals
(74.3% correct) and dot-patterns (73.3% correct). While accuracy
improves in controls as distance increases (small: 94.6%; medium: 99.1%;
large: 99.6% correct), CBD shows the opposite effect (small: 81.4%;
medium: 66.0%; large: 60.2% correct). Reverse presentation order impairs
performance in CBD (forward: 83.1%; reverse: 64.0% correct), but not in
controls (forward: 98.5%; reverse: 94.6% correct). CBD thus have a modality-independent number knowledge impairment. As the amount of numbers in the gap between two boundary numbers increases, CBD become
less able to process the larger segment of the number line. This reflects
degradation of number knowledge following parietal disease in CBD.
CBD are less accurate while managing a number line in reverse order,
consistent with executive difficulty and frontal disease.
C57
NUMERICAL BLINK – DISTANCE MATTERS Sharon
Naparstek1,
1
1
1 1
Neta Shachar , Yoav Kessler , Avishai Henik ; Zlotowski Center for
Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev — In the attentional blink
(AB) paradigm, participants are presented with a stream of stimuli in a
rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) and are asked to report two targets. Typically, when the second target appears 2-4 lags after the first target, accuracy rates for reporting T2 are impaired. A common explanation
is that the two targets compete for the same attentional resources. To
examine whether AB can be modulated by target meaning, the numerical
distance between two number targets was manipulated. Participants
were presented with 18 letter distractors and 2 digit targets and were
asked to report the targets according to the order of presentation. Three
variables were manipulated: the number of lags between the targets (1-6
lags), the numerical distance (D) between the targets (D1: e.g., 1-2; D2:
e.g., 1-3; D5: e.g., 1-6) and the order in which the targets were presented
(ascending: e.g., 3 then 4; descending: e.g., 4 then 3). The results revealed
that numerical distance modulated AB. Namely, accuracy rates for
reporting the second target were higher for small distances (distance 1 &
2) than for the large distance (distance 5). Furthermore, it seems that the
order of targets also modulated AB. That is, participants were more accurate in responding to ascending than to descending presentations. These
results imply that AB is not purely attentional and that semantic processing occurs in a pattern indicative of the existence of the classical mental
number line.
C58
COMPREHENSION OF MASS VS. COUNT NOUNS IN PATIENTS
WITH CORTICOBASAL DEGENERATION John Nguyen1, Vanessa
Troiani1, Jonathan Peelle1, Peachie Moore1, Murray Grossman1; 1University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine — The linguistic difference between mass
and count quantifiers is linked to both semantic concepts as well as syntactic constraints. We have previously found the semantics of quantifier
knowledge to rely on inferior parietal cortex. In the current study, we
investigated mass/count comprehension in patients with corticobasal
degeneration (CBD), a neurodegenerative condition affecting the parietal
lobe. These patients have impaired numerical and quantifier comprehension, but intact object naming and sentence comprehension. CBD patients
(N=8) and healthy age-matched adults (N=9) completed a self-paced
computer task during which they viewed 240 quantifier statements
paired with a corresponding image. Participants were asked to assess
whether the corresponding quantifier statement accurately described the
picture. Half of the stimuli contained discrete, countable images and half
were composed of uncountable images probing mass concepts. CBD
patients were impaired on both mass and count concepts when compared
to controls. This is consistent with their limited parietal semantic support.
Elderly controls demonstrated a reaction time pattern consistent with
previous research, with faster responses to countable items. Patients
showed a similar pattern, most likely due to reliance on preserved syn-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

97

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

tax. These data suggest that the mass/count distinction relies on a parietal semantic network that is additionally supported by rules of syntax
that accompany quantifier meaning.
C59
ADAPTATION FROM SYMBOLIC MAGNITUDES IN THE
PARIETAL CORTEX: THE NEURAL ORIGIN OF THE QUANTITY
PRIMING EFFECT Karolien Notebaert1, Mauro Pesenti2, Bert Reynvoet1;
1University of Leuven, 2University of Louvain-la-Neuve — Numerical magnitudes are known to be processed in the intraparietal sulci (IPS) of the
brain. We used an fMRI-adaptation paradigm to investigate how they are
actually encoded at the neural level. In order to uncover the neural origin
of the behavioral quantity priming effect, i.e. faster latencies for smaller
numerical distances between prime and target, we manipulated the notation (Arabic and verbal numerals) and the numerical distance between a
prime and a target symbolic number in a number identification task. A
whole brain group analysis resulted in bilateral activations of the intraparietal sulci. In a region of interest (ROI) analysis, the recovery of activation in both IPS was found to be positively correlated with the numerical
distance between the prime and the target. These findings support the
idea of a notation-independent magnitude representation with overlapping tuning curves of number sensitive neurons in the left and right IPS
and reveal for the first time the neural origin of the quantity priming
effect, using a design closely matched to behavioral priming studies.

Poster Session C

onto the surface of the stimulus. The authenticity of TD’s subjective
reports was established using Stroop-like paradigms. The case challenges
previous speculations suggesting a systematic relationship between the
level at which synaesthesia arises, and the spatial extent of synaesthetic
colour imagery. We argue that TD’s case is best explained by a model we
recently proposed to account for phenomenological and behavioural differences among synaesthetes (Ward, Li, Salih, & Sagiv, in press; Consciousness & Cognition).
C62
NUMBERS IN THE BLIND MIND´S EYE Elena Salillas1, Alessia Graná1,
Radouane El-Yagoubi1, Carlo Semenza1; 1University of Trieste — Increasing
evidence signals a relationship between number representation and
space (Hubbard et al., 2005). It has been suggested that a number representation with spatial characteristics is hardwired (Spelke and Dehaene,
1999). Thus, the lack of visual experience should somehow end in a similar space-linked representation. In this study blind and sighted populations were compared in an auditory paradigm based on the work of
Fischer et al. (2003), where low numbers (1 and 2) facilitate the detection
of left-lateralized targets and high numbers (8 and 9) facilitate the detection of right-lateralized targets (congruent conditions). In two experiments, behavioural (Experiment 1) and electrophysiological measures
(Experiment 2) were collected. Specifically, an auditory number preceded
a lateralized auditory target through dicothic listening. This target had to
be detected right after the target (Experiment 1) or in a delayed detection
task (Experiment 2). Both blind and sighted population presented lower
RTs for congruent number-target location pairs than for incongruent
ones. Nevertheless, the processes underlying this congruency effect were
diverse between the two populations as signalled by the ERPs. While the
sensory component N100 was modulated by congruency in sighted participants, only the more controlled and amodal component P300 was
modulated by congruency in blind population. Therefore, although the
left-to-right organization of the mental number line seems similar in both
populations, unlike sighted participants, the blind group seems to use an
amodal representation which needs higher cognitive control.

C60
NUMERICAL MAGNITUDE PROCESSING IMPAIRMENTS IN THE
DEVELOPMENTAL DYSCALCULIC BRAIN Gavin
Price1,
Ian
Holloway2, Pekka äsänen3, Manu Vesterinen1, Daniel Ansari2; 1Agora Center,
University of Jyvaskyla, Finland, 2University of Western Ontario, 3Niilo Maki
Institute, Jyvaskyla, Finland — Developmental Dyscalculia (DD) is a specific learning disability affecting the acquisition of school level mathematical abilities in the context of otherwise normal academic achievement,
with prevalence estimates in the order of 3–6%. It has been suggested that
deficits in higher-level mathematical skills may stem from impaired representation and processing of basic numerical magnitude. We show that,
in children with pure DD, the right intraparietal sulcus, a key region for
the representation and processing of numerical magnitude, is not modulated in response to numerical processing demands to the same degree as
in typically developing children. Eight right-handed children diagnosed
with DD were compared to eight right-handed, typically developing, age
matched peers. Participants selected which of two sets of squares contained more items. Set pairs were assigned to either close (1–3) or far
numerical distance (5–8) conditions. Significant group x distance interactions were observed at cluster corrected threshold of p < 0.05 in the right
intraparietal sulcus, left fusiform gyrus and left medial prefrontal cortex.
The interaction in the IPS was characterized by a stronger distance effect
in the control group than in the DD group, suggesting a lack of modulation of parietal numerical processing mechanisms in response to increasing numerical task demands in DD children. These results provide
evidence for a link between brain mechanisms underlying basic numerical magnitude processing and the development of higher level mathematical skills and are the first to provide direct evidence of parietal
dysfunction in DD.

C63
DIFFERENT PATHWAYS FOR SYMBOLIC AND NONSYMBOLIC
QUANTITY PROCESSING IN THE HUMAN BRAIN Seppe Santens1,
Wim Fias1, Tom Verguts1; 1Ghent University — There is now converging
evidence for the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) as the neural substrate for an
abstract, supramodal representation of quantity. However, it is still
largely unknown what other brain areas contribute to numerical processing and what their specific role is. In this study, we aim to investigate the
pathways involved in processing symbolic and nonsymbolic quantities.
In a blocked fMRI design, quantities from 1 to 5 are presented either in a
symbolic format (Arabic digits) or a nonsymbolic format (sets of dots).
Structural equation modelling is used to model the time series of three
areas in the left hemisphere: primary visual cortex (V1), posterior parietal
cortex (PPC) and middle IPS. Results show that V1 and middle IPS are
connected when symbolic quantities are presented, whereas a different
pathway (V1 – PPC – middle IPS) is activated for nonsymbolic quantities.
The results are discussed in the light of recent neuroimaging findings and
existing models of number processing.

C61
NUMERICAL COGNITION IN COLOUR: SYNAESTHESIA FOR
FINGER COUNTING AND DICE PATTERNS Noam Sagiv1, Jamie
Ward2; 1Centre for Cognition and Neuroimaging, Brunel University, UK,
2University of Sussex, UK — Numbers are common inducers of synaesthetic colour experience. While a number of studies suggested that number meaning elicits the colour, it is usually the graphemic representation
that is perceived in colour. We report a rare case of a synaesthete (TD)
who perceives colours not only when viewing digits, but also when seeing dice patterns and his own fingers while counting. Importantly, the
colours are the same across numerical representations as long as they
share the same numerosity (number meaning), and projected externally

C64
LATERALIZATION
OF
FUNCTION
IN
NUMEROSITY
PERCEPTION? Mark Schmidt1, Christopher Brogdon1, Ladolgy Webster1;
1
Columbus State University — Two proposed mechanisms for numerosity
perception are subitizing and preverbal counting. Lateralization studies
have produced mixed results. We investigated lateralization of function
within and beyond the subitizing range. In Exp 1 (N=33) 1-9 white dots
were presented for 200 ms in either the left or right visual field (LVF;
RVF). Visual angle was 2.5 degrees. Response times (RT) were recorded
via voice key. With 3 and 4 dots (i.e., subitizing range) the right hemisphere (RH) produced faster RTs. The RH also produced greater accuracy
at 4 dots. There were no hemispheric differences in reported number, but

98

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

response compression occurred between 6–8 dots in both hemispheres. In
Exp 2 (N=32) presentation time was reduced to 150 ms and visual angle
increased to 3.0 degrees. With 3 and 4 dots, the RH again produced faster
RTs. The RH also produced greater accuracy at 2 dots, and showed
greater response compression at 3, 4, 7, and 8 dots. In Exp 3 (N=12) we
tested the possibility that use of verbal responses may have given the LH
an advantage, which minimized the hemispheric differences found in
Exps 1 and 2. A small white square was presented for 150 ms in the LVF
or RVF to test simple verbal RT. No hemispheric differences were found.
The differences obtained in Exps 1 and 2 were consistent, suggesting that
lateralization of function in numerosity perception exists, with the RH
superior to the LH. Results are discussed in terms of theories of hemispheric specialization.
C65
LEFT
TEMPORO-PARIETAL
WHITE
MATTER
MICROSTRUCTURE “MATTERS” FOR BOTH READING AND
MATHEMATICAL
ABILITIES:
CORRELATION
BETWEEN
FRACTIONAL ANISOTROPY VALUES IN THE LEFT SUPERIOR
CORONA RADIATA AND CHILDREN'S MATH SCORES Lucia van
Eimeren1,2, Sumit N. Niogi3, Bruce D. McCandliss3, Ian Holloway1,2, Daniel
Ansari1,2; 1Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, 2University of Western Ontario,
London, ON, Canada, 3Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology,
Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY — Over the past
decade, an increasing number of studies have used Diffusion Tensor
Imaging (DTI) to understand the relationship between white matter
microstructure and cognitive abilities. These studies have revealed that
left temporo-parietal white matter regions, in particular the left superior
corona radiata (SCR), are associated with reading abilities in children and
adults. Whereas DTI has been successful in clarifying the role of connectivity between functional brain regions and reading, it has not yet been
used to characterize the white matter organization associated with the
typical development of mathematical competence. To address this open
question, we collected DTI data from 13 typically developing children (79 years old). Fractional anisotropy (FA) values were extracted from
regions of interests using the Reproducible Objective Quantification
Scheme (ROQS) to investigate the relationship between the strength of
white matter tract connectivity and children’s math scores (Subtests
Numerical Operation and Mathematical Reasoning from WIAT-II). The
results revealed that individual differences in children’s mathematical
abilities are correlated with FA values in the left SCR. These data suggest
a relationship between typically developing children’s math competence
and white matter integrity in the same region that has previously been
associated with individual differences in reading ability. Furthermore,
we found that the lateralization of this white matter tract microstructure
was systematically correlated with mathematical abilities. These findings
provide the first direct evidence to suggest that the development of verbal mathematical and reading abilities may share common white matter
tracts in the left temporo-parietal cortex.
C66
IMPLICIT PROCESSING OF NON-SYMBOLIC NUMEROSITY IN
THE ABSENCE OF AWARENESS Petra Vetter1, Eva Spolaore1, Brian
Butterworth1, Geraint Rees1,2, Bahador Bahrami1,2; 1Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, University College London, 2Wellcome Department of Imaging
Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, University College London — We investigated the explicit and implicit judgement of small numerosities in the
absence of awareness. Numerosity stimuli (1, 2 or 3 gabor patches) were
presented to one eye but suppressed from awareness by continuously
flashing a mask in the other eye. In the first experiment, subjects were
unable to explicitly judge discrete numerosities in a 3-alternative forced
choice task when they were unaware of the suppressed stimulus. In the
second experiment, the number of suppressed and invisible stimuli
(prime) affected the speed of numerosity judgment for visible targets presented subsequent to the invisible primes. Reaction times to the target
increased with numerical distance between prime and target. These

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

results suggest that extraction of non-symbolic numerosity information
occurs in the absence of awareness. Although this information is not
available to explicit judgement, it could be traced by its implicit effect.
C67
THE DEVELOPMENT OF NUMERICAL PROCESSING IN THE
FIRST YEARS OF FORMAL SCHOOLING: EVIDENCE FROM
EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS
AND
CLASSROOM
ACTIVITIES Sonia White1, Denes Szucs1,2, Fruzsina Soltesz1; 1University
of Cambridge, Faculty of Education, Centre for Neuroscience, 2Hungarian
Academy of Sciences — The purpose of this study was to establish direct
links between cognitive neuroscience and education for the domain of
number processing. The aim was examine the transition from informal to
more abstract, formal numerical processes, acquired through education.
To this end, the study focused on the developmental relationships
between magnitude and symbolic representations for children in Years 1,
2 and 3. In order to provide a detailed image and link the two fields the
methods first utilised the numerical Stroop paradigm, and evaluated
amplitude, temporal and spatial aspects of event-related brain potentials
(ERPs). The ERPs were able to reveal key number processing characteristics such as the distance effect and size congruity effect. Extending the
analysis and incorporating educational elements, associations were
drawn to a behavioural parity judgement task and a classroom based
number line activity. These inclusions proved to be very fruitful, with the
results demonstrating variations of number processing that were task
dependent. The results highlight the importance of context when assessing the relationships between magnitude and symbolic representations in
young children. Overall, the study supports the need for a multi-disciplinary approach when applying cognitive neuroscience findings to an
educational context. The fine grained understanding that this type of
research provides will make vital contributions to the development and
support structures of mathematics education.

Higher level cognition: Other
C68
SEEING THE FOREST AND THE TREES: EXPLORING THE
NEUROLOGICAL UNDERPINNINGS OF GIST AND DETAIL
PROCESSING Raksha Anand1, Mandy Maguire1, Sandra Chapman1, John
Hart1; 1The University of Texas at Dallas — Efficient information processing entails the ability to rapidly and accurately process both gist (global
meaning) and details (specific contents) of an ongoing stream of information. Past research has shown that regardless of the efficiency of processing, over time, there is a tendency to remember the gist of information
better than the details. The question that remains largely unexplored is
whether there are underlying differences in neurological underpinnings
of gist and detail processing. This study examined differences in online
processing of gist and details using event-related potentials (ERPs) in 20
cognitively normal young adults (18 - 35 years). Participants were asked
to judge (yes/no) whether a given statement corresponded to gist or
details conveyed in a picture. A total of 240 statement-picture pairs were
used. ERPs and behavioral response in terms of reaction time (RT) and
accuracy were recorded during this task. Participants showed no RT and
accuracy differences between gist and details. Spatio-temporal Principal
Components Analyses done on ERP data revealed anterior-posterior and
hemispheric differences in processing of gist and details at 700-1080ms
(p<.001). These results demonstrate neurobiological differences in online
processing with potential implications in evaluating theories of information processing. In addition, these findings serve as a baseline to further
examine the effects of normal aging and brain disease on gist and detail
processing.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

99

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

C69
THE N400 AS A MEASURE OF CULTURAL DIFFERENCES IN
SCENE PERCEPTION Yumi Ando1,2, Alicia Yee1, Carol Huang1, Sharon
Goto1,2, Richard Lewis1,2; 1Pomona College, 2Program for Neuroscience,
Pomona College — Accumulating evidence demonstrated that European
Americans allocate relatively more attention to foreground objects,
whereas East Asians disperse their attention across foreground and background objects (Chua et al., 2005). East Asians’ greater focus on background objects is consistent with their greater context sensitivity found
across neural, cognitive, and social domains (Lewis, Goto, & Kong, 2007).
Ganis and Kutas (2003) have demonstrated that the processing of a background visual scene influences the subsequent processing of target
objects. The morphology and time course of the resulting ERPs suggest
that the neural processing of the meaning of visual scenes is similar to the
N400 semantic context effect. We presented a modification of the Ganis
and Kutas (2003) task to European Americans and East Asian Americans.
If the Asian Americans disperse their attention across background and
target objects to a greater degree than European Americans, they should
show a greater N400 relative to the European Americans. To date 36
European Americans and 20 East Asian Americans have been tested. As
is typical in our samples, the East Asian Americans were more collectivistic on the Triandis IND/COL scale than the European Americans (p <
.05), but equally individualistic. As hypothesized the East Asian Americans showed a greater N400 to incongruent background-object pairings
than the European Americans. The morphology and time course of the
ERPs are consistent with the N400 sentence context effect. This suggests
that East Asian Americans are showing greater semantic context sensitivity to the processing of visual scenes than European Americans.
C70
MENTAL TIME TRAVEL TO PAST AND FUTURE: EVIDENCE
FROM BRAIN LESIONS BEFORE AND AFTER TREATMENT AND
INTRACRANIAL RECORDING Shahar Arzy1,2, Olaf Blanke1,3; 1Brain
Mind Institute, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne,
Switzerland, 2Hadassah Hebrew University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel,
3University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland — Introduction:
The human
mind is continuously involved in processing of past memories and prediction of future occurrences, a cogitation that has been called “mental
time travel” (MTT). Recently, we demonstrated that MTT involve egocentric perspective taking to past, present or future time-points (absoluteMTT) and independently, future orientation in each time-point (relativeMTT), activating a network consisting mainly of antero-medial temporal
and occipito temporal cortex. Methods: We used a novel cognitive paradigm employing concepts from memory research, mental imagery and
self-processing to investigate MTT. This paradigm asks subjects to
change their egocentric perspective in time to Past, Now or Future and
only then to memorize or predict events. We used behavioural measures
in two neurological patients before and after having a lesion in the
antero-medial temporal and occipito temporal cortex. We also recorded
intacranially local field potentials during task performance. Results:
Damage to middle-temporal or occipito-temporal cortex does not impair
MTT to past and future (absolute-MTT) but causes moderate memory
deficits and disrupts future orientation (relative-MTT). These deficits
were detected only with lesion presence. Brain activation related to MTT
also differentiated between absolute-MTT (found in electrodes at the
right temporoparietal junction) and relative-MTT (found at the right
occipitotemporal cortex). Conclusions: MTT is composed from two independent components: absolute-MTT (to different time-points) and relative-MTT orientation (in each time-point). MTT and self-processing in
time were found to be disentangled, at least partially, from memory function. MTT is more robustly associated with future forecasting than past
recollection, relying on activations of middle-temporal and occipito-temporal cortices.

100

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

C71
MESOLIMBIC REGIONS ARE DIFFERENTIALLY SENSITIVE TO
MAGNITUDE AND DELAY IN A DELAY-DISCOUNTING TASK
Kacey Ballard1, Brian Knutson1; 1Stanford University, Stanford, CA — “Delay
discounting” refers to a phenomenon in which individuals discount the
value of delayed gains relative to immediate gains. Prior functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have documented greater
mesolimbic activation when people consider choices involving immediate gains versus delayed gains (McClure et al, 2004) and have also related
mesolimbic activation to individual differences in valuing delayed gains
(Kable & Glimcher, 2007). However, researchers have not yet determined
how mesolimbic activation represents the magnitude and delay of gains,
and whether this activation can be used to predict individuals’ preferences for delayed versus immediate outcomes. We scanned 16 subjects (8
female) with FMRI (GE 1.5 T scanner, voxel size = 4 mm cubic, TR = 2000
msec, spiral in/out pulse sequence) as they engaged in a delay-discounting task. A novel temporally distributed task design separated presentation of information related to the immediate gain, magnitude of the
delayed gain, delay of the delayed gain, and choice. Findings indicated
that magnitude of the delayed gain elicited proportional activation in
nucleus accumbens (NAcc), medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), and anterior and posterior cingulate, while delay of the delayed gain elicited proportional activation only in MPFC and posterior cingulate. Logistic
regression analyses further indicated that NAcc activation in response to
magnitude and MPFC and cingulate activation in response to delay predicted choice of the delayed gain. These findings suggest that activation
in different mesolimbic regions is differentially sensitive to magnitude
versus delay information and can be used to predict choice of delayed
versus immediate gains.
C72
DECISION MAKING IN APPROACH AVOIDANCE CONFLICTS
Ulrike Basten1, Guido Biele2, Christoph Stippich1, Hauke R. Heekeren2,
Christian J. Fiebach1; 1University of Heidelberg, Germany, 2Max Planck
Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany — In many decision
making situations available options are associated with both costs and
benefits. To resolve the conflict between the resulting approach and
avoidance-related behavioral tendencies, costs and benefits need to be
integrated to assess the overall value of an option. Here, we determined
the neural processes associated with this integration by identifying brain
regions whose activity covaries with the difficulty of the required integration. Twelve subjects were trained to associate characteristics of a
stimulus (color, shape) with financial consequences (gain, loss). In a subsequent fMRI study, participants decided to either accept or reject the
financial consequences of three types of stimuli offered: pure gain, pure
loss, or a combination of different amounts of gain and loss. Comparing
pure gain and loss trials with integrative trials showed that decisions
about pure outcomes activated the ventromedial and anteromedial prefrontal cortex (PFC) stronger, whereas decisions about combined outcomes activated medial (pre-SMA) and dorsolateral PFC. Decision
difficulty, determined by the difference between gain and loss associated
with a stimulus, modulated response times and brain activation independent of the absolute gain or loss magnitude and behavioral choice. The
more difficult the integrative decision was, the more activation was
observed in medial and lateral prefrontal performance monitoring
regions. In contrast, the easier an integrative decision was, the stronger
were the activations in the anteromedial and ventromedial PFC. Weighing the costs against the benefits of behavioral options, thus, relies on the
integrated processing of prefrontal performance monitoring systems and
ventromedial PFC representing reward value.

Poster Session C

C73
THE CHRONO-ARCHITECTURE OF LOVE REVEALED BY HIGHDENSITY ELECTRICAL NEUROIMAGING Francesco
BianchiDemicheli1, Stephanie Ortigue2, Scott Grafton2; 1University Hospital of
Geneva, Switzerland, 2UCSB Brain Imaging Center, Sage Center for the Study
of the Mind — Recent brain imaging of love suggest the recruitment of a
distributed subcortico-cortical reward, motivation, emotion system as
well as higher-cognitive brain areas, in particular the angular gyrus.
However, little is known about the time course by which this cascade of
brain activations occurs during love processing. We assessed this question in 20 participants in high (N=10) and low (N=10) passionate love,
using high-density event-related potentials while participants were performing a standard lexical decision task embedded in a subliminal affective priming paradigm with a beloved’s and a neutral’s name as primes,
and non-words and positive emotional words as targets (BianchiDemicheli et al., 2006). The reaction time (RT) results confirmed an affective priming effect, with faster responses to affectively congruent trials
(love prime-target pairs; 623ms +/-12.9) than affectively incongruent trials (neutral prime-target pairs; 698ms +/-29.3) in participants in high passionate love only. A delayed N400 for word prime-target pairs matched
the RT results with larger negative amplitudes for affectively incongruent
than congruent pairs pattern (p< 0.05). Importantly, distinct scalp topographies were also observed earlier (i.e., over the 80-120ms, and 120-220ms
periods) between participants in high versus low passionate love. A distributed linear source estimation (LAURA) of this time progression suggested a recruitment of a distributed neural network over time, notably
an activation of the angular gyrus followed by the fusiform gyrus in the
early steps of love processing. Thus these data shed some lights on the
chrono-architecture of love, as a subliminal prime, at a very early processing stage.
C74
DYNAMICS OF CONDITIONAL INFERENCE AND TOP DOWN
EFFECTS : A MEG STUDY Mathilde Bonnefond1, Anne Cheylus1, Claude
Delpuech2, Françoise Leçaignard2, Olivier Bertrand3, Ira Noveck1, Jean-Baptiste
Van der Henst1; 1CNRS Université de Lyon, 2CERMEP, 3Inserm U 821 — Conditional reasoning occurs when a minor premise (A) is integrated to a
major conditional premise (If A then B) to produce a conclusion (B). This
magnetoencephalography study aims to investigate the dynamics of premises and conclusion integration in reasoning with a specifically
designed paradigm. Each trial consisted of a major premise such as If
there is a square then there is a low sound followed by a visual stimulus
(minor premise) and an auditory one (conclusion). The minor premise
could match (Inferential Condition, IC) or not (Non Inferential Condition,
NIC) the antecedent of the major premise. We conducted an Evoked Field
analysis and a source estimation on these data. The VIC, as compared to a
control condition, shows a M400 component followed by a M450 component and by slow components from 550ms to the presentation of the
sound. According to preliminary results on source estimation, the latter
component originates from the auditory cortex. The NIC shows a M315
which seems to originate from the anterior cingular cortex, known to be
involved in conflict monitoring. Three conclusions can be drawn from
these results. First, the conflict effect arising when premises mismatch
indicates that the major premise elicits expectations about the subsequent
premise. Second, the presentation of second premise, granted that it
matches the antecedent of the major premise, generates two components:
M400 (integration) and M450 (encoding of the conclusion). Third, the
activation of the auditory cortex following the integration of the two premises indicates expectations regarding the conclusion.
C75
THETA BURST STIMULATION OF INFERIOR FRONTAL GYRUS
DISRUPTS AUTOMATIC IMITATION OF FINGER MOVEMENTS
Caroline Catmur1,2, Vincent Walsh1,2, Cecilia Heyes1; 1University College
London, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London — In
order to imitate an action, the imitator must solve the “correspondence

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

problem” (Brass and Heyes, 2005) to establish which set of motor commands to their own muscles will produce an outcome that visually
matches the imitated action. Both behavioral and neurophysiological evidence (Stürmer et al., 2000; Fadiga et al., 1995) suggest that solving the
correspondence problem is a process which occurs without intentional
control, and thus that observed movements are imitated automatically.
This is thought to be as a result of previous sensorimotor experience
(Heyes et al., 2005; Catmur et al., 2007). It has been hypothesized that
automatic imitation involves “mirror neurons” located in the inferior
frontal gyrus (by homology with monkey area F5; di Pellegrino et al.,
1992; Rizzolatti et al., 1996), but it has not yet been shown that this brain
area is necessary for automatic imitation (i.e. imitation not under intentional control). We used theta burst transcranial magnetic stimulation
(Huang et al., 2005) to disrupt processing in the inferior frontal gyrus
during a behavioral automatic imitation task. In baseline and control site
conditions, participants showed automatic imitation of task-irrelevant
finger movements: reaction times to perform finger movements in
response to an imperative stimulus were faster when a compatible finger
movement accompanied the imperative stimulus than when an incompatible finger movement accompanied it. Following theta burst stimulation to inferior frontal gyrus, this automatic imitation effect was
abolished. This suggests that the inferior frontal gyrus is required for
automatic imitation of movements.
C76
CORPUS CALLUSOM CONTRIBUTIONS TO CREATIVITY: A
DIFFUSION TENSOR IMAGING STUDY Robert Chavez1,2, Arvind
Caprihan1, Rebecca England2, Shirley Smith1,2, Judith Segall1, Ranee Barrow1,
Rex Jung1,2,3; 1The MIND Research Network, 2University of New Mexico — A
broadly accepted definition of creativity refers to the production of something both novel and useful within a given social context (Flaherty, 2005).
Neuroimaging studies of creativity are sparse, and none have specifically
looked at the contribution of the corpus callosum (CC), linking the two
hemispheres. Indeed, given the “left brain – right brain” dichotomy
underlying popular conceptions of creativity, extending to the work of
Gazzaniga, inquiries regarding the hemispheric connectivity underlying
creativity are warranted. We hypothesized that measures of CC volume
and diffusivity (obtained from Diffusion Tensor Imaging) would relate to
measures of "divergent" reasoning (i.e., Alternate Uses Test, Free Drawing, Four Line Drawing) central to creativity. MRI and creativity measures were obtained in a cohort of 50 neurologically and psychiatrically
normal subjects (24 males, 26 females) ranging in age from 18 to 39. Independent judges ranked the creative products of each subject, with high
inter-rater reliability (ICC = .84 - .95), from which a “Composite Creativity Index" (CCI) was compiled. We used the Frahm method (2006) to segment the CC into five discrete regions. We found that a model that
included volume and mean diffusivity of the anterior midbody of the CC
predicted performance on the CCI (F= 8.16, p= .001, R2= .26). Interestingly, volume was negatively (r= -.41) and MD was positively (r= .11)
correlated with CCI. To our knowledge, this is the first report assessing
the relationship between CC macro- and micro-structural morphology
and creativity in a cohort comprised exclusively of normal, healthy subjects.
C77
NEURAL BASIS OF INDIVIDUALISTIC AND COLLECTIVISTIC
VIEWS OF SELF Joan Chiao1, Tokiko Harada1, Hidetsugu Komeda2, Zhang
Li1, Yoko Mano2, Daisuke Saito2, Norihiro Sadato2, Tetsuya Iidaka3;
1Northwestern University, 2National Institute for Physiological Sciences,
3
Nagoya University — Individualism and collectivism refer to a fundamental psychological dimension often used to explain differences in how
individuals from Western and Eastern cultures construe themselves and
their relation to the world. Individualists perceive themselves as stable
entities, autonomous from other people and their environment, while collectivists view themselves as dynamic entities, continually defined by
their social context and relationships. Using cross-cultural neuroimaging,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

101

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

we investigated whether neural processing during self judgments varies
as a function of individualism and collectivism. Results demonstrate that
neural activity within ventromedial prefrontal cortex during self judgments positively predicts how individualistic or collectivistic a person is
across cultures.
C78
SELF RESPONSES ALONG CINGULATE CORTEX REVEAL
QUANTITATIVE
NEURAL
PHENOTYPE
FOR
HIGH
FUNCTIONING AUTISM Pearl Chiu1,2,3, Amin Kayali1,2, Ken
Kishida1,2, Damon Tomlin1,2, Laura Klinger4, Mark Klinger4, Read
Montague1,2,3; 1Baylor College of Medicine, 2Department of Neuroscience,
3Department of Psychiatry, 4University of Alabama Tuscaloosa — Attributing
behavioral outcomes correctly to oneself or to other agents is essential for
all productive social exchange. We have approached this issue in highfunctioning males with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) using two separate fMRI paradigms. First, using a visual imagery task, we extract a basis
set for responses along cingulate cortex of control subjects that reveals an
agent-specific eigenvector (self eigenmode) associated with imagining
oneself executing a specific motor act. Second, we show that the same self
eigenmode arises during one’s own decision (the self phase) in an interpersonal exchange game (iterated trust game). Third, using the same
exchange game, we show that ASD males exhibit a severely diminished
self eigenmode when playing the game with a human partner. This
diminished response covaries parametrically with their behaviorally
assessed symptom severity suggesting its value as an objective endophenotype. These findings may provide a quantitative assessment tool for
high functioning ASD.
C79
ANTICIPATORY SKIN CONDUCTANCE RESPONSES IN
CATEGORY LEARNING: DECISIONAL UNCERTAINTY OR
SOMATIC MARKERS? Tyler Davis1, Bradley Love1, W. Todd Maddox1;
1
University of Texas at Austing — One of the more intriguing findings supporting the Somatic Marker Hypothesis (SMH; Damasio, Tranel & Damasio, 1991) is the presence of anticipatory skin conductance responses
(SCR’s) in normal subjects prior to their making risky decisions. The
favored interpretation of these SCR’s by proponents of the SMH is that
they play a critical role in drawing subjects toward making advantageous
decisions, and reflect the influence of emotion on everyday decision making. We offer another interpretation, motivated by findings demonstrating that these SCR’s arise due to variability in outcome. This suggests that
these SCR's may be orienting responses that reflect decisional uncertainty, and as such are likely involved in learning difficult stimulus-outcome contingencies. We provide support for this account by using a ruleplus-exception category learning task (Palmeri & Nosofsky, 1995), which
contains exceptions that are difficult to learn, and therefore subjects’ decisions to treat an item as an exception are made under uncertainty. The
results show that anticipatory responding is higher on trials in which
subjects decide to treat items as exceptions by reversing the category rule
(i.e., correct trials for exception items and incorrect trials for rule-following items) then on trials in which they are treated as rule following items.
These results are inconsistent with the SMH, because rather than being
implicit processes locked to a particular stimulus (i.e., the exceptions),
they reflect cognitive processes related to making a type of decision. In
addition, we show that this pattern of orienting toward uncertain decisions is predictive of learning in the task.
C80
NEURAL BASIS OF HYPNOTIZABILITY REVEALED BY RESTING
STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY AND DIFFUSION
TENSOR FIBER-TRACKING Emily Dennis1,2, John Gabrieli3, Susan
Whitfield-Gabrieli3, Brian Haas1, David Spiegel4, Fumiko Hoeft1; 1Center for
Interdisciplinary Brain Sciences Research, (CIBSR), Stanford University School
of Medicine, 2Whitman College, 3Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, 4Stanford
University School of Medicine — Hypnosis is a form of attentive receptive
concentration that allows one to meaningfully alter perception and expe-

102

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

rience of the environment. While hypnotic induction and suggestion
modulate activity in brain regions associated with the cognitive processes
being manipulated (e.g. pain), the neural mechanism of hypnotizability
itself remains unknown. We performed functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) during resting state, diffusion tensor imaging for fibertracking and high resolution structural MRI to examine voxel-based morphometry (VBM) of gray and white matter in 12 highly hypnotizable participants (HIGH) and 12 low hypnotizable participants (LOW). The
HIGH group showed increased salience network functional connectivity
in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) and the left dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) as compared to the LOW group. Whole-brain
Cohen’s d map showed large effect size in the left DLPFC and dACC
when comparing HIGH and LOW groups. While examining the fibertracts of the ACC, we found that the HIGH group but not the LOW group
showed significant positive correlation with Hypnotic Induction Profile
scores and white matter integrity. These findings were not due to morphometric differences in regional gray and white matter volumes
between the HIGH and LOW groups. The results suggest that connectivity of these prefrontal regions underlie hypnotizability, consistent with
the role of executive attention and dopamine function in hypnotizability.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT This study was supported by grants from the
Nissan Research Center.
C81
SPACE
MATTERS:
EVIDENCES
FROM
MONTH-FORM
SYNAESTHESIA Liana Diesendruck2, Limor Gertner1, Liat Goldfarb3, Lior
Botzer2, Avishai Henik1; 1Zlotowski Center of Neuroscience, Ben Gurion
University of the Negev, Israel, 2Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Israel,
3Center for the Study of Brain, Mind, and Behavior, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey — Month-form synesthetes experience months as
unique sequence patterns in spatially defined locations, such as circles or
ellipses. Among month-form synesthetes months automatically trigger a
shift of attention to specific spatial locations (Smilek et al., 2006). The aim
of this study was to test this condition through the generation of a scene
that simulates the synesthete experience in the most tangible way. Two
month-form synesthetes and 5 controls performed a Stroop-like task
using a combined haptics and virtual reality system. In the experiment, a
circle and a word were simultaneously presented. The word consisted
either of a month name or a direction name (e.g., down, right) and was
located at the center of the screen, while the circle was displayed in one of
four peripheral positions &#8722; right, left, top or bottom. When the
synesthetes were asked to ignore the word and reach for the circle, no
effects were found. In contrast, when told to ignore the circle and reach
for a location indicated by the word, a congruency effect was found for
both months and directions. That is, synesthetes were faster when the
word was congruent with the location indicated by the circle than when
the two dimensions were incongruent. In order to examine actual movement and not only reaction time, the participants' initial hand velocity
and path angle deviation were also analyzed. Our findings suggest that
month-form synesthesia is a genuinely experienced phenomenon, as
months elicit spatial locations in a similar manner as directions do.
C82
INSTRUCTIONAL CONTROL OF PROBABILITY LEARNING: A
NEURAL NETWORK ACCOUNT Bradley Doll1, Michael J. Frank1, W.
Jake Jacobs1, Alan G. Sanfey1; 1University of Arizona, Cognition and Neural
Systems — Subjects chose probabilistically rewarded stimuli from three
pairs. A test phase followed in which they chose from novel pairings of
the same stimuli without feedback. Those who were misinformed about
the probabilistic contingencies in the task before training tended to
choose in accordance with the inaccurate instructions in the training and
test phases, despite the repeated negative feedback that resulted from
such choices. Evidence suggests the striatum is the neural substrate of
accurate learning of the standard version of this task. We augment a neural network model of the striatum (Frank 2004) to provide two alternative
accounts of this effect: 1. Inaccurate instruction representations in the pre-

Poster Session C

frontal cortex incorrectly train the striatum 2. The striatum learns the correct contingencies, but output is overridden by the instruction
representations in the prefrontal cortex.
C83
EFFECTS OF A POINTING RESPONSE MEASURE ON THE
NEURAL SUBSTRATE OF IMAGINED SELF-ROTATIONS
Catherine Flynn1, Maryjane Wraga1; 1Smith College — Previous behavioral
suggests that pointing response measures serve to "anchor" observers to
their physical body during spatial reasoning tasks (Wraga, 2003). The corollary to this hypothesis is that tasks involving pointing response measures may engage motor and spatial areas of the brain more readily than
those that do not. In this study we directly compared activation found in
two imagined self rotation tasks, using verbal and pointing responses.
For the verbal task, participants viewed images of 3D objects situated
within a sphere. They then imagined rotating themselves to a cue outside
of the sphere, and judged whether a textured portion of the object would
be visible from the imagined viewpoint. The button presses in this task
indicated "yes" and "no.” In the pointing task, participants imagined
rotating to the external cue and then “pointed” to the location of the textured cube by pressing button keys depicting "left" and "right" arrows. A
direct comparison of neural activation in both task revealed distinct neural signatures. The Verbal - Pointing contrast yielded activation in medial
temporal gyrus (BA 21) and medial frontal gyrus (BA 8). We also found
activation in the parahippocampus (BA 28), which increased as a function
of rotation magnitude. In contrast, the Pointing - Verbal contrast revealed
activation in visual areas (BA 18) and Premotor Area (PMA: BA6), and
several spatial processing areas (BAs 7, 40) that increased with rotation
magnitude. These findings support the hypothesis that pointing
responses have an anchoring effect on spatial reasoning tasks.
C84
ROLE OF THE BASAL GANGLIA IN WEIGHTING SPEED VERSUS
ACCURACY: EMPIRICAL DATA AND A FORMAL MODEL Birte U.
Forstmann1, Gilles Dutilh1, Jane Neumann2, K. Richard Ridderinkhof1, Scott
Brown3, Eric-Jan Wagenmakers1; 1University of Amsterdam, 2Max Planck Institute
for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 3University of Newcastle — Regardless
of whether people are shopping, playing basketball, or participating in an
elementary cognitive experiment, they always have to strike a balance
between making fast but error-prone decisions versus slow but accurate
decisions. In other words, people continuously need to decide when to
stop deliberating and execute a response, with the associated risk of committing an error. Here we used functional MRI to determine the neural
correlates of this so-called speed-accuracy trade-off. In a cuing version of
the moving-dots paradigm, participants were motivated to pay attention
mainly to speed, mainly to accuracy, or both. We also used the Ratcliff
diffusion model to inform the fMRI data analysis and to confirm that the
experimental manipulation selectively affected the setting of response
thresholds. The Ratcliff diffusion model is one of the most successful
models for two-choice reaction time tasks (Ratcliff & Smith, 2004). The
behavioral data and the model analysis showed that the manipulation
had the intended effect. The imaging data showed that presentation of a
cue for speed was associated with a focused activation of the basal ganglia. This result strongly suggests that the basal ganglia play a key role in
the regulation of the speed-accuracy trade-off. This empirical finding is
consistent with formal neural models of speeded decision making that
have anticipated the basal ganglia to be involved in the setting of
response thresholds.
C85
MUSICAL METRIC INTERPRETATION MODULATES THE
AUDITORY EVOKED MAGNETIC RESPONSE Takako
Fujioka1,
1
1
1
Benjamin Zendel , Bernhard Ross ; Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest,
University of Toronto — In music, time can be parsed in two ways, via
rhythm and meter; both which are relevant to auditory-motor synchronization. Rhythm describes the temporal pattern of a series of auditory
events, while meter is an interpretation of that pattern into a global struc-

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

ture of strong and weak accents. Thus, identical rhythmic patterns (e.g.,
regular beats) can be interpreted in different meters (e.g., 2-beat or 3beat). The current study investigated how metrical structure influences
brain activity, and related performance on an auditory-motor synchronization task. Magnetic brain activity was recorded via 151-channel MEG
from expert musicians while they tapped to a metronome-like auditory
click stimuli with their right index finger. In one condition subjects
tapped to every second click (2-beat), and in the other, to every third click
(3-beat), thereby manipulating meter without altering the stimulus or
rhythm. In both conditions tapping periods alternated with resting periods every twelve clicks, forcing subjects to maintain the imposed metric
structure without tapping. Behavioral findings indicate smaller asynchrony between tap and click in the 2-beat condition compared to the 3beat condition. Auditory evoked magnetic-fields were separately averaged for clicks that represented strong and weak accents during resting.
Equivalent current dipoles were estimated for the peak around 80ms in
bilateral auditory cortices. The peak amplitude was larger, and occurred
later in the 3-beat condition. Moreover, the peak was smaller to the clicks
for the strong accent regardless of meter. These findings suggest that metric interpretation has a top-down effect on auditory processing.
C86
NEURAL BASIS OF SOCIAL PERCEPTION OF A HUMAN VERSUS
VIRTUAL HUMAN Jessica Gayda1, Andrea Tartaro2, Zhang Li1, Justine
Cassell2, Joan Chiao1,3; 1Northwestern University, 2Center for Technology and
Social Behavior, Northwestern University, 3Institute for Neuroscience,
Northwestern University — Are virtual humans socially understood as
human? To investigate this question, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to measure the neural correlates of perception and
social evaluation of two types of agents: an Embodied Conversational
Agent (ECA or virtual human) and a real human. Fourteen participants
viewed static images of both the human and ECA, rated each image for
emotional valence, and completed a post-scan survey on social impressions of the two agents. No significant differences were found in behavioral measures of rating or reaction time, although the real human was
rated as more socially relatable in three dimensions. Viewing either kind
of agent relative to rest elicited neural activity in a network of brain
regions previously associated with social judgments, including left superior temporal sulcus and right fusiform gyrus. Viewing the ECA relative
to human resulted in increased activation in superior temporal sulcus,
anterior cingulate gyrus, left precuneus, right angular gyrus, and left
inferior frontal gyrus, areas associated with social perception, attention,
and cognitive control. The condition of human relative to ECA revealed
no areas of significant activation. Interestingly, this finding stands in contrast to previous research which suggests passive viewing of humans but
not virtual humans elicits greater neural activation in regions associated
with social judgment and mentalizing. Our results suggest that while
accurate social judgments can be made of either real humans or virtual
humans, it appears the latter might require heightened cognitive processing, perhaps because of the novelty and unfamiliarity of virtual humans.
C87
THE IMPACT OF COGNITIVE RESERVE ON COGNITIVE
FUNCTIONING OF RETIRED PERSON Sophie Germain1, Thierry
Meulemans1, Fabienne Collette1; 1University of Liège, Neuropsychology
Unit — The cognitive reserve concept postulates that some life experiences (such as leisure activities or occupational experience) permit the
constitution of a “reserve” which could delayed the manifestation of the
cognitive decline appearing during normal aging (Stern, 2002). For example, some studies (e.g., Hultsch et al., 1999) have shown a correlation
between the level of participation in intellectual activities and the cognitive functioning in the elderly. During adulthood, retirement is a critical
period (because of deep modifications of daily-living habits) during
which some people demonstrate a more important cognitive decline than
others. A plausible explanation of this discrepancy is the importance of
their cognitive reserve. In this study, we have explored the link between

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

103

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

the level of cognitive reserve, measured by the engagement level in occupational activities during adulthood, and the cognitive functioning three
years after retirement. Our hypothesis was that elderly people who were
engaged in more activities should show a better cognitive functioning
than people with a lower activity level. In order to test this hypothesis,
we have administered to 40 elderly subjects, retired for 3 years, an activity questionnaire and a neuropsychological test battery, exploring memory, attention and executive functioning. Stepwise regression analyses
demonstrated that several activities (such as social, physical, domestic,
and leisure activities) are significant explicative variables of cognitive
functioning in retired people. These results highlight the importance of
being active in order to delay the manifestation of the cognitive decline
during aging.
C88
FRIEND
OR
FOE:
ALPRAZOLAM'S
EFFECTS
ON
COOPERATION? Joshua Gowin1, Scott Lane1; 1University of Texas Health
Science Center — Social interaction and cooperation can be modified by
changes in both social context and the neurobiological state of the individual. One example of neurobiological modulation is the acute effect of
drugs, which can alter patterns of social behavior. The benzodiazepine
alprazolam is a widely used prescription drug typically taken to relieve
anxiety. However, epidemiological data indicate that misuse of alprazolam (and other benzodiazepines) may produce an increase in maladaptive social behavior, e.g., sexual assault and violence. We investigated the
acute effects of alprazolam on human social behavior under controlled
laboratory conditions using a well-known game theory model of social
interaction known as the prisoner’s dilemma. Nine healthy adults
received doses of placebo, 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 mg alprazolam in counterbalanced within-subject design. Our data suggest that alprazolam can in fact
engender behavior that is self-serving and less cooperative. Our findings
indicate that the alprazolam decreases social cooperation in a dosedependant manner.
C89
NEURAL CORRELATES OF CREATIVITY IN REASONING Adam
Green1, David Kraemer2, Jonathan Fugelsang3, Jeremy Gray1, Kevin Dunbar4;
1Yale University, 2University of Pennsylvania, 3University of Waterloo,
4University of Toronto — The best ideas are not only creative; they are also
well reasoned. Brain function at the intersection of reasoning and creativity, however, has been understudied. Brain-imaging studies of reasoning
have not examined creative demand as a parameter. Likewise, creativity
research has focused on generation of creative ideas outside the constraints of formal reasoning tasks. Thus, critical questions remain regarding the generation of ideas that are not only creative in the sense of being
divergent, but are also useful in the sense of providing appropriate solutions to problems. Here, during fMRI, we constrained creative generation
within the context of an analogical reasoning task in order to test two
hypotheses: 1) The parameter of creative demand in reasoning will positively modulate activity in an a priori region of left frontopolar cortex,
which we have implicated in previous investigations, and 2) The generative component of analogical reasoning – as compared to evaluation of
analogies – will be associated with increased demand for hypothesis generation and selection. Results supported both hypotheses. Analogies
rated as more creative elicited parametrically increasing recruitment
within the predicted ROI. In addition, the analogy generation task preferentially recruited areas of right prefrontal cortex implicated in previous
studies of hypothesis generation and selection. These data support an
emerging picture of left frontopolar cortex as a mediator of creativity in
reasoning. Additionally, these findings provide a new elucidation of how
analogical thinking is used to solve problems because they represent a
first account of the neural basis of generation in analogical reasoning.

104

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

C90
CULTURE-INVARIANT AND CULTURE-SENSITIVE NEURAL
SUBSTRATES OF CAUSAL COGNITION: NEUROIMAGING OF
FOUR CULTURES Shihui Han1; 1Peking University, Beijing — Humans
from different cultures make similar inference of cause-effect relationship
when observing object interactions determined by universal physical
laws. However, whether identical neural processes are recruited in causality judgment of physical events in brains cultivated in distinct cultures
remains unknown. To investigate this, we imaged Chinese, American,
German, and Korean subjects, using functional magnetic resonance imaging, who judged causes of object movement changes. We show that causality judgments activated a neural network consisting of cultureinvariant components (e.g., the medial prefrontal cortex) and culture-sensitive components (e.g., the left parietal cortex). We further demonstrate
that the medial prefrontal activation underpins the process of inference
reasoning whereas the left parietal activation mediates the context processing involved in causality judgments. Our findings provide neural
basis for understanding cultural uniformity and variation in causal attribution of the physical world.
C91
DISSOCIATING GOAL VALUES, DECISION VALUES, AND
PREDICTION ERRORS IN THE HUMAN BRAIN Todd Hare1, John
O’Doherty1, Colin Camerer1, Wolfram Schultz2, Antonio Rangel1; 1California
Institute of Technology, 2University of Cambridge — In order to make sound
decisions, the brain needs to carry out several value related computations. Among them are the computation of goal values, decision values,
and prediction errors. Goal values measure the predicted reward that
will be obtained from the outcomes associated with the actions under
consideration. Decision values measure the net value of taking the different actions (i.e, the benefits minus costs) and are critical for making decisions. Prediction errors measure the change in the individual's overall
reward level and are used to improve future computations of goal values.
In this study, we use fMRI and a novel decision-making paradigm to dissociate the neural basis of these three computations. Our results suggest
that they are supported by different neural substrates: goal values where
correlated with activity in medial orbitofrontal cortex, decision values
where reflected by activity in central orbitofrontal cortex, and prediction
errors are expressed in ventral striatum. Our results also suggest that the
standard view that activity in the ventral striatum encodes for goal values is mistaken – this activity is related to prediction error signals that in
most experimental paradigms are confounded with goal values.
C92
NEURAL
CORRELATES
OF
REWARD-RELATED
SELFDELUSION Trey Hedden1, Drazen Prelec1, Danica Mijovic-Prelec1, John D.
E. Gabrieli1; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology — Cognitive control and
reward processing were hypothesized to interact to determine behavior
in an economic context. To investigate this, participants (20 young adults)
viewed abstract figures prior to scanning, classifying each as possessing a
male or female quality. Participants received a small reward for classifications that matched the majority response of a reference sample. During
a subsequent functional MRI scan, participants viewed the abstract figures again. Before each figure was presented, participants predicted the
gender of the upcoming figure. If participants were better than average in
their predictions, they received a large reward. When the figure was presented, participants made a second gender classification, again receiving
a small reward for matching the reference sample response. This dual
reward structure led the majority of participants to experience cognitive
conflict. Ideally, participants should ignore their prediction and attempt
to receive the small classification reward on each trial. However, for stimuli on which their prediction did not match their prior classification, participants may be influenced by a desire for the large prediction-related
reward, leading them to change their second classification to be consistent with the prediction. We refer to this alteration to conform to the prediction as “reward-related self-delusion”. Large individual differences

Poster Session C

were observed in the extent of reward-related self-delusion. Functional
MRI revealed neural correlates of reward-related self-delusion associated
with the extent of self-delusion behavior across participants. These
regions were localized to reward areas, including ventral striatum and
medial orbitofrontal cortex, and to cognitive control regions, including
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
C93
DOES
THE
VENTROMEDIAL
PREFRONTAL
CORTEX
REPRESENT IMPLICIT SOCIAL KNOWLEDGE, STIMULUS
VALENCE, OR SOME COMBINATION OF THE TWO? IMPLICIT
ASSOCIATION TEST (IAT) EFFECTS AFTER VENTROMEDIAL
PREFRONTAL DAMAGE Alexandre Henri-Bhargava1, Andrea S.
Heberlein2, Katie Lancaster2, Mahzarin R. Banaji2, Lesley K. Fellows1; 1McGill
University, Montréal, Canada, 2Harvard University, Cambridge — The
implicit association test (IAT) is a sensitive measure of implicit cognitive
associations, and has been widely used in social psychology to study
prejudices and stereotypes. A previous study purported to find a reduction of the IAT effect in patients with damage to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMF) performing an IAT of valenced (or evaluative)
gender stereotypes. It was hypothesized that damage to VMF degraded
implicit social knowledge representations. Other research argues that
VMF plays an important role in flexibly tracking the value of stimuli in
non-social contexts, or of responding to breaches of expectation quite
generally. This raises the question of whether this region of the cortex is
critical in representing valenced social associations in particular,
valenced associations in general, social knowledge independent of
valence, or implicit cognitive associations of any kind. We addressed this
question by administering eleven computer-based IATs to patients with
VMF damage and control subjects, probing four categories of implicit
associations: social and valenced, non-social and valenced, social and
non-valenced, and non-social and non-valenced. Preliminary data from
two patients with VMF damage suggest that even extensive bilateral
VMF damage does not necessarily result in consistent loss of the IAT
effect in any of these categories. The IAT likely captures several underlying processes. This design allows us to characterize these processes, and
determine which, if any, rely critically on ventromedial prefrontal cortex.
C94
NEUROTICISM
PREDICTS
NEURAL
RESPONSE
TO
UNCERTAINTY Jacob B. Hirsh1, Michael Inzlicht1; 1University of
Toronto — Individuals differ in the extent to which they respond negatively to uncertainty. While some individuals feel little discomfort when
facing the unknown, others find it aversive. The current study examined
neurophysiological responses to uncertainty using the event-related
potential (ERP) technique. We used electroencephalography recordings
to monitor the neural activity of 36 participants while they completed a
time-estimation task. Specifically, we looked at the feedback-related negativity (FRN), an ERP component that peaks approximately 250 ms after
the receipt of feedback information, and is thought to reflect the negative
evaluation of self-relevant information. We examined the FRN at midline
electrode locations following positive, negative, and uncertain feedback.
The magnitude of these responses was then analyzed in relation to individual differences in the personality trait of Neuroticism. As expected, a
larger FRN was observed after negative feedback than after positive feedback for all participants, replicating the standard FRN effect. For individuals who scored highly on trait Neuroticism, however, uncertain
feedback produced a larger neural response than did negative feedback.
The FRN in response to uncertain feedback was significantly predicted
by Neuroticism at both Cz (B = -.45, p < .01) and Fz (B = -.55, p < .01) electrode locations. Highly neurotic individuals thus appear to have a stronger aversive reaction to uncertainty than to clearly negative information.

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

C95
THE EFFECT OF EMOTIONAL CONVERSATION ON VISUAL
DETECTION DURING SIMULATED DRIVING: AN ERP STUDY Li
Hsieh1, Sean Seaman1, Richard Young2; 1Wayne State University, 2School of
Medicine, Wayne State University — We used behavioral, event-related
potential (ERP) and other measures to assess performance and physiological differences among three conditions of multitasking situations: driving without cellular conversations, driving with cellular conversations
spoken in a neutral tone, driving with cellular conversations spoken in an
angry tone. We employed a validated event-detection paradigm with
lane-tracking to measure driving performance. 20 participants viewed a
video recording of a driving scene while using a foot pedal to respond to
visual events occurring in the periphery of the display. Lane-tracking,
using a steering wheel, was employed to ensure participants were
engaged with the video recording. RTs to visual events were recorded,
while ERPs of individual brain activations were averaged on these
events. Behavioral analyses based on 20 subjects showed that the conversation conditions had slightly longer RTs than the driving only condition.
In addition, the emotional tone of the conversation seems to moderate the
changes in RTs; events occurring during angry conversations were
responded to significantly faster than events occurring during neutral
conversations, and were only marginally slower than events occurring in
driving only condition. Preliminary ERP analysis confirms this distinction between events occurring during angry and neutral events. N200
and P300 with the amplitude with a minimum of 5 µV were found in the
visual detection during angry and neural conversations in the anterior
and posterior cortical locations, respectively. Implications for theories of
multitasking and emotional modulation of visual processing are discussed.
C96
BIOCHEMICAL CORRELATES OF CREATIVITY Rex Jung1,2, Ranee
Barrow1, Robert Chavez2, Shirley Smith2, Chuck Gaspoarovic1; 1The MIND
Research Network, 2University of New Mexico — A broadly accepted definition of creativity refers to the production of something both novel and
useful within a given social context (Flaherty, 2005). Neuroimaging studies of the construct of creativity are sparse in the research literature, and
largely focus on frontal and temporal lobe contributions, based on studies of patients with neurological and psychiatric disorders. We hypothesized that measures of N-acetylaspartate (NAA) obtained within
superventricular white and gray matter regions would relate to measures
of "divergent" reasoning (i.e., Alternate Uses Test, Free Drawing, Four
Line Drawing) central to creativity. MRI and creativity measures were
obtained in a cohort of 64 neurologically and psychiatrically normal subjects (34 males, 30 females) ranging in age from 18 to 39. Independent
judges ranked the creative products of each subject, with high inter-rater
reliability (ICC = .84 - .95), from which a “Composite Creativity Index"
CCI was compiled. Using Gasparovic (2006) convolution of segmented
images with the spectroscopic image point spread function, estimates of
metabolite concentrations was evaluated in gray and white matter quadrants (left/right; anterior/posterior). We found that a model that
included right and left anterior NAA was inversely related to the CCI (F
= 6.42, p = .003, R2 = .20), and that this relationship was substantially
stronger in males (R2 = .19) as compared to females (R2 = .00). To our
knowledge, this is the first report assessing the relationship between biochemical substrates of neuronal health (i.e., NAA) and creativity in a
cohort comprised exclusively of normal, healthy subjects.
C97
THE EMBODIED NATURE OF SPATIAL PERSPECTIVE TAKING
Klaus Kessler1, Lindsey Anne Thomson1; 1Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging
(CCNi), University of Glasgow, United Kingdom — Humans are able to
mentally adopt the spatial perspective of others and “see the world
through their eyes”. We claim that spatial perspective taking (SPT) could
have developed from the physical alignment of perspectives. That is,
hominids might have realised at some point of evolution that physically

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

105

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

adopting the same perspective as a conspecific was essential for detecting
danger or food. With increasing brain capacity the actual movement
might have evolved into a mental re-alignment that provided more flexibility. In a series of three behavioural experiments we found substantial
evidence for the claim that SPT might still be rooted in embodied representations. We further conclude that the embodiment of SPT is actionrather than perception-related, although we found evidence for both.
This supports Zacks and Michelon’s (2005) conclusion that motor areas
are part of the underlying neural substrate of SPT. Finally, our results
reveal what the next step after automatic “mirroring” of conspecifics (e.g.
di Pellegrino et al., 1992; Gallese, 2007, Kessler et al., 2006) may have been
in social understanding: the mental alignment of perspectives and the
understanding of the visuo-spatial world from another viewpoint. Such
an embodied but conscious and deliberate transformation of the self
could have then generalised to more sophisticated alignments of sociocognitive perspectives encompassed by the notion of theory of mind. This
clarifies the recently proposed transition from automatic to conscious
understanding of others by means of a shared view of the world (Frith &
Frith, 2007).

Linguistic processes: Other
C98
HOW DOES SINGLE WORD READING DIFFER BETWEEN
PHONOGRAPHIC AND LOGOGRAPHIC SCRIPTS AT A NEURAL
LEVEL? Maki Koyama1, John Stein1, Peter Hansen1,2; 1Anatomy and
Genetics, University of Oxford, UK, 2School of Psychology, University of
Birmingham, UK — Recent imaging studies of single word reading in Japanese have reported that phonographic Kana and logographic Kanji elicit
differential levels of brain activation in specific cortical areas. However,
the origin of the differences between these two scripts remains unclear.
Therefore, we used Kana and Kanji words which differed only visually
and were matched on their phonological and semantic representations as
well as visual familiarity, and conducted an fMRI experiment to identify
neural differences in visual-orthographic representations between the
two scripts during a one-back visual task. In native Japanese readers,
BOLD activation levels, rather than activation loci, differed between
Kana and Kanji; Kanji elicited greater activation than Kana in the midposterior part of the fusiform gyrus, precuneus and cerebellum bilaterally, as well as in the right middle/inferior occipital gyrus and superior
parietal lobule. Similar activation patterns were observed in a control
group of native English readers who could process both scripts only visually. In contrast, no brain area showed greater activation for Kana than
Kanji in either group. Additionally, ROI analyses revealed that the majority of the areas that were more responsive to Kanji than to Kana were
most strongly activated by a control script that was equally unfamiliar to
both groups and thus were processed only visually. These results suggest
that there is no distinctive brain network specific only to one type of
script, but greater visual processing is required for logographic Kanji that
is visually more complex than phonographic Kana, thus leading to the
observed differences in BOLD activation.
C99
NO DISSOCIATION IN THE PRODUCTION OF REGULAR AND
IRREGULAR
PAST-TENSE
VERBS
IN
LEFT
FRONTAL
PATIENTS Jary Larsen1,2, Timothy Justus3, Paul de Mornay Davies4, Diane
Swick1,2; 1University of California, Davis, 2VA Northern California Health
Care System, 3California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, 4Middlesex
University — The cognitive and neural mechanisms involved in morphological processing are not well understood. Dissociations in generating
the past tense of English regular and irregular verbs have been reported
in patients with Broca's aphasia, with worse performance on regulars
than on irregulars (Tyler et al., 2002; Ullman et al., 1997). Some theorists
have taken this as evidence that Broca's area, located in the left posterior

106

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG), is responsible for applying a rule ("add -ed")
in generating regular past-tense verbs. However, not all studies have concurred (Bird et al., 2003), and a recent meta-analysis of 75 aphasic patients
determined that no consistent pattern of performance emerged. In sentence completion tasks, 13% of patients were worse on regulars, 33%
were worse on irregulars, and 54% showed no difference (Faroqi-Shah,
2007). Here, we report results from 10 new patients with lesions that
include LIFG and the insula. The stimulus list contained the items used
by Ullman et al. and Bird et al. Participants produced the past tense of
each present tense verb, which was spoken aloud and used in an example
by the experimenter. No significant differences between regular and
irregular verbs were observed. In a limited battery of 48 items (n=10),
accuracy rates were 61% for regular and 59% for irregular verbs. In a
longer battery of 105 items (n=8), accuracy was 72% for regulars and 65%
for irregulars. These results provide additional evidence that LIFG does
not make differential contributions to the processing of regular and irregular verbs.
C100
DISRUPTION OF SPELLING-TO-SOUND CORRESPONDENCE
MAPPING DURING SINGLE WORD READING IN PATIENTS
WITH LEFT TEMPORAL LOBE EPILEPSY: IMPLICATIONS FOR
MODELS OF READING Kerry Ledoux1,2, Nathan Crone2, Dana
Boatman2, Barry Gordon1,2,3; 1Cognitive Neurology/Neuropsychology, The
Johns Hopkins University, 2The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
3
The Johns Hopkins University — The nature of the processes engaged during the oral reading of single words has long been a contentious issue in
cognitive neuroscience, in part because it may presage much broader
questions about the processing of high-level information. The two major
classes of reading models (dual-route and connectionist) differ in their
predictions about the processing of spelling-to-sound correspondence.
Examining such processing in patients with neural disorders might further discriminate between the two types of reading models, and contribute to our understanding of the neural representation of reading
processes. To this end, we tested two groups of patients with epilepsy on
a single-word oral naming task using words that varied in the frequency
of their spelling-to-sound correspondence. The first group (LTL) consisted of patients with intractable epilepsy in whom video-EEG monitoring had localized the epileptic focus to the dominant (left) temporal lobe;
the second group (non-LTL) was composed of patients with epileptic foci
outside this region. Patients were asked to name single printed words
aloud. Overall, reaction times (RTs) for both patient groups were generally slower than those observed previously for normal participants. For
the non-LTL group, RTs showed the same pattern across spelling-tosound correspondence conditions as those previously reported for normal participants. For the LTL group, however, the pattern of RTs suggested a greater relative influence of orthographic frequency and a lesser
relative influence of rime frequency. These results are difficult to reconcile with dual-route models of reading, and supportive of interactive connectionist models.
C101
A MODEL FOR FUNCTIONAL SEGREGATION OF MIDDLE AND
POSTERIOR REGIONS OF THE SUPERIOR TEMPORAL SULCUS
FOR SPEECH PERCEPTION: A META-ANALYSIS OF THE
NEUROIMAGING LITERATURE. Einat Liebenthal1, Rutvik Desai1, Lisa
Conant1, Merav Sabri1, Colin Humphries1; 1Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee — A functional segregation along an anterior to posterior axis
in the superior temporal sulcus (STS) for speech and auditory perception
is supported by neuroimaging findings of differential responses to
speech and speech-like sounds in the left STS ventral (mSTS) and posterior (pSTS) to HG. However, the respective role of these regions remains
elusive. The left mSTS appears to be more responsive to familiar sounds
including human and animal vocalizations and in particular speech,
whereas the pSTS is more sensitive to the perception of unfamiliar
sounds. In addition, regions in pSTS overlapping those responsive to

Poster Session C

unfamiliar sounds appear to be involved in phonological processing,
whether from visual or auditory input. Here, we propose a model in
which the main factor driving the differentiation between middle and
posterior STS regions is the affinity of the former to holistic representations and of the latter to chronological representations of sounds. We
hypothesize that prelexical, holistic and long-term representations of
highly-familiar and over-learned sounds are coded in a ventral pathway
originating in HG and projecting to the left mSTS. The left mSTS stores
representations that can be accessed and processed for meaning by ventral and anterior temporal regions and the angular gyrus. In contrast, atomistic and transient representations retaining the chronological
dimension of sounds are stored in left pSTS. The left pSTS acts as a shortterm memory buffer that mediates processes relying on the sequential
form of sounds such as categorization of unfamiliar sounds (for which
holistic representations have not been formed) and phonological processing.
C102
HESITATIONS AFFECT LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION, BUT
THE TYPE OF HESITATION MATTERS. Lucy MacGregor1, Martin
Corley1, David Donaldson2; 1Philosophy, Psychology and Language Sciences,
University of Edinburgh, 2University of Stirling — Disfluencies in speech,
including hesitations such as “uh”, are known to affect listeners. Here we
ask whether disfluent repetitions of words, used to buy time when planning speech (e.g., Blackmer & Mitton, 1991), also affect language comprehension. We focus on the processing of, and memory for, the word
immediately following disfluency. Corley et al. (2007) used ERPs to demonstrate that when participants listen to utterances, an N400 effect elicited in response to words which were unpredictable in context relative to
predictable controls was attenuated when an “uh” hesitation preceded
the target. Targets which had been preceded by disfluency were also better recognised during a subsequent memory test. The present study
examines disfluent repetitions using a similar paradigm. Participants
(n=16) listened to utterances ending in predictable or unpredictable target words. Half of the materials included a disfluent repetition of the pretarget word, for example “Everyone’s got bad habits and mine is biting
(my) my NAILS/TONGUE.” ERPs relative to target onsets revealed that
both fluent and disfluent utterances elicited a standard N400; the presence of a repetition, unlike an “uh”, did not attenuate the effect. A surprise recognition memory test showed that target words were better
recognised when they had been unpredictable in context. However,
unlike an “uh”, repetition of a word did not affect memory for the subsequent target word. Considered together with findings from Corley et al.
(2007), our data show that hesitations do affect language comprehension,
but that different types of hesitation exhibit distinct effects.
C103
PHONOLOGICAL PROCESSING OF WRITTEN WORDS BY DEAF
AND
HEARING
ADULTS:
EVIDENCE
FROM
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY Mairead MacSweeney1, Usha Goswami2, Helen
Neville3; 1University College London, 2University of Cambridge, 3University of
Oregon — Using fMRI we have previously shown that deaf adults recruit
similar neural systems as hearing adults when deciding whether picture
pairs rhyme (MacSweeney et al., submitted). In the current study we
used electrophysiology to determine whether the timecourse of this neural activity is similar across groups. Deaf native signers of ASL and hearing non-signers were presented with a sequence of two written words
and decided whether the second word rhymed with the first. All rhyming trials were orthographically inconsistent (e.g., might – write). All nonrhyming trials were matched to rhyme trials for orthographic overlap
(e.g., skirt – write). Behavioral performance by hearing participants was
at ceiling and they demonstrated a robust enhanced negativity (N450) to
non-rhyming in contrast to rhyming pairs. As demonstrated in previous
studies (e.g., Rugg, 1984), this was greatest over the posterior regions of
the right hemisphere. Behavioural performance by the deaf group as a
whole was above chance level but was significantly poorer than hearing

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

participants. Nevertheless, analysis of the ERPs, during correct trials
only, indicated a greater N450 to non-rhymes than rhymes that was
greatest over posterior electrodes. However, unlike the hearing group,
this effect did not differ across hemispheres. Group differences were of
borderline significance, suggesting that the N450 was larger in hearing
than deaf participants. These group and individual differences will be
further explored in relation to rhyming and reading ability.
C104
EXPERIENCE-, GENDER- AND PERSONALITY-DEPENDENT
PROCESSING OF INFANT-DIRECTED SPEECH IN ADULTS: AN
FMRI STUDY Yoshi-Taka Matsuda1, Ken'ichi Ueno2, R. Allen Waggoner3,
Donna Erickson4, Yoko Shimura5, Keiji Tanaka3, Kang Cheng2,3, Reiko
Mazuka1,6; 1RIKEN Brain Sci Inst, Wako, Japan, 2Support Unit for Functional
MRI, RIKEN Brain Sci Inst, Wako, Japan, 3Lab for Cognitive Brain Mapping,
RIKEN Brain Sci Inst, Wako, Japan, 4Showa Academia Musicae, Kawasaki, Japan,
5
Saitama University, Saitama, Japan, 6Duke University, Durham — Adults
address infants with typical modification of lexicon and prosody. This
infant-directed speech (IDS) can be observed across languages and cultures, however, it is still unclear to what extent the processing of IDS
depends on experience of rearing, gender and/or personality. This possibility was tested with Japanese parents (n=35, 20 mothers), who have had
their first babies within one year (8±2 months old), and age-matched nonparents (n=30, 15 females) using fMRI (Varian 4T MRI system) in an
event-related design. IDS effects were determined by measuring differential activity when the subjects discriminated auditorily presented IDS
stimuli from adult-directed speech (ADS) stimuli, selectively attending to
either the prosody or lexicon, and followed by the mental rehearsal of the
percept. The following three results were revealed in the random-effects
analysis of multiple comparisons with GLM. 1) Listening to both prosodic and lexical IDS stimuli compared to ADS stimuli increased the
BOLD signal only in mothers’ (left hemisphere) language areas (left
BA44/45 and area Spt), which corresponds to the articulatory network in
auditory dorsal pathway. 2) Mothers’ personality scores of extraversion
showed strong correlations with activation of the left-lateralized motorrelated areas involved in speech production when listening to prosodic
IDS. 3) These activations, observed in mothers with pre-verbal infants,
disappeared when mothers (n=18) ceased to use IDS to their children,
who developed to school ages (7.1±0.4 years old). These results suggest
that mothers process IDS in personality- and use-dependent manners.
C105
INVOLVEMENT OF LEFT-LATERALIZED FRONTAL AND MIDDLE
TEMPORAL REGIONS IN ABSTRACT MATCHING OF
AUDIOVISUAL WORD FORMS Urs Maurer1,2, Jason D. Zevin1, Yuliya
N. Yoncheva1, Henning U. Voss3, Bruce D. McCandliss1; 1Sackler Institute for
Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
2
University of Zurich, 3Citigroup Biomedical Imaging Center, Weill Medical
College of Cornell University — Combining specific visual-orthographic
information with specific phonological information associated with auditory word perception is a critical component of the reading process. Here
we explore an experimental approach to probing the functional architecture of reading by manipulating both the modality of presentation and
the abstract match between visual and auditory word forms. During
functional magnetic resonance imaging, we presented words and
pseudowords either unimodally (spoken or printed) or bimodally. The
bimodal presentation comprised conditions in which stimuli presented
on the screen and over the headphones represented either the same (congruent) or different (conflicting) abstract word forms. Effects of abstract
word form matching were defined as a differential response between
congruent and conflict conditions (p<0.001, uncorrected). Results
revealed inferior frontal and middle temporal regions in the left hemisphere that showed increased activation for conflicting compared to congruent presentations, whereas the reverse contrast revealed no significant
effects. A region of interest analysis including the corresponding righthemisphere regions confirmed increased conflict effects in the left com-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

107

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

pared to the right hemisphere for both regions (p<0.05). The results indicate that frontal and middle temporal regions of the left-lateralized
language network respond most to conflicting audiovisual information of
word form stimuli, and suggest that these regions may also constitute a
system that provides phonological feedback during visual word recognition. This left-lateralized system may be especially involved in processing
complex visual and auditory word forms, as previous studies using more
elementary letter and phoneme-sound representations reported mainly
bilateral effects for the reverse contrast in more posterior brain regions.
C106
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN LANGUAGE PRODUCTION
Kai Miller1, Felix Darvas1, Jeffrey Ojemann1; 1University of Washington — We
examined electrocorticographic recordings with simultaneous coverage
of left frontal, parietal, and temporal cortex in classical speech regions
(Wernicke's, Broca’s, and primary motor) in 6 subjects and examined the
correlation between them during fixation, noun reading, and verb generation (Binder, 1997, JNeurosci). We examined the time series of the power
law in the cortical spectrum (Miller, 2007, NeuroImage), and examined
correlational asymmetries to reveal functional directionality in the relationship between speech areas. Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas are most
highly correlated nearly simultaneously, suggesting that they may work
in concert, or at least in parallel, rather than one clearly preceeding the
other. Wernicke’s area activity is most highly correlated with activity in
premotor cortex 30-50 ms later, while Broca’s area activity is most highly
correlated with activity in premotor cortex 20-30ms later. The picture
suggested by the analysis is that the two language areas work together,
followed by flow to the motor intent regions 20-50ms later. We also found
significant phase-power coupling between delta, theta and alpha phase
with the power law changes in the cortical spectrum that were significantly less during periods of noun reading than verb generation in Wernicke’s and Broca’s areas, but not in primary motor cortex. All three areas
showed diminished phase-power coupling with speech production than
fixation, suggesting that this metric is a robust correlate of local cortical
activity.
C107
AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY OF THE PERCEPTUAL
MAGNET EFFECT IN SPEECH PERCEPTION Sharon Miller1, Yang
Zhang1,2; 1University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 2Center for
Neurobehavioral Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis — The
present study used behavioral and ERP measures to examine the controversial “Perceptual Magnet Effect” (PME) in speech perception. Three
issues were investigated: (1) whether listeners could consistently judge
the category goodness of individual speech tokens, showing that certain
variants are better representatives of one phonetic category, (2) whether
category goodness would strongly influence listeners’ sensitivities to
within-category differences, showing reduced sensitivity near the best
instance and increased sensitivity in the vicinity of a poor exemplar, (3)
whether PME is unique to speech perception. Twenty adult American
English speakers participated in the study. The stimuli were synthesized
vowels for /a/ and their nonspeech analogs by systematically varying
the first two formants. Behavioral experiments used identification, goodness rating, and discrimination tasks. ERP experiments were conducted
in four oddball conditions: (1) prototypical /a/ served as the standard
and its four variants served as deviant, (2) nonspeech match of the first
condition, (3) nonprototypical /a/ served as the standard and its four
variants served as deviant, and (4) nonspeech match of the third condition. Behavioral results showed strong evidence that individual subjects
rated vowel category goodness based on the F2/F1 ratio. Mismatch negativity amplitudes in the speech conditions showed an overall pattern consistent with the PME prediction, but a similar trend was observed in the
nonspeech conditions. Large individual differences were observed,
showing either the presence or absence of PME predictable from behavioral data. The results collectively indicated the perceptual organization

108

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

of within-category variations based on both phonetic knowledge and
acoustic analysis.
C108
SEX DIFFERENCES IN LANGUAGE: EVIDENCE FROM EVENTRELATED POTENTIALS Robbin
Miranda1,
Michael
Ullman1;
1Georgetown University Department of Neuroscience — We investigated sex
differences in event-related potentials (ERP) elicited by subject-verb
agreement and semantic violations in naturally spoken sentences. Agreement violations elicited an early left-lateralized negativity (ELAN) with
an anterior scalp distribution in men and a broad scalp distribution in
women. Semantic violations elicited a negativity (N400) with an anteriorcentral scalp distribution in men and a more posterior distribution in
women. Both types of violations additionally elicited a late posterior positivity (P600) that did not differ in amplitude or scalp distribution
between males and females. The observed sex differences may reflect a
female advantage in declarative memory, although such a conclusion
should be considered tentative.
C109
ARE ABSTRACT LETTER REPRESENTATIONS INDEXED BY THE
P260 EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL? Priya Mitra1, Donna Coch1;
1Dartmouth College — Results of a previous event-related potential study
with single letters suggest that the P260 indexes abstract letter representations in the adult brain (Petit, Midgley, Holcomb, & Grainger, 2006).
Whether novel stimuli that are visually similar to letters can elicit this
effect has not been tested. In a forward- and backward-masked priming
paradigm, we presented college students with letter-letter and false fontfalse font (letter-like stimuli controlled for visual elements) pairs in which
the targets did (e.g., a-a) or did not (e.g., a-b) match the masked primes
preceding them. Participants responded to each trial by pressing buttons
indicating whether each target was or was not a real letter. Preliminary
analyses with half (n = 9) the anticipated participants show a significant
difference (p < .05) in mean amplitude (220-300 ms) between matching
and non-matching targets in the letter condition, replicating the pattern
in Petit et al. despite task differences. They also show a trend toward a
similar pattern in the false font condition (p = .06) in the same epoch. The
suggestion of an analogous effect in the false font condition (comprised of
novel stimuli that should not have abstract neural representations) may
call into question the hypothesis that the P260 specifically indexes
abstract letter representations, and may suggest that it reflects more basic
visual processing.
C110
EARLY AUDITORY SENSITIVITY TO FORMANT RATIOS IN
VOWEL PERCEPTION: MEG EVIDENCE Philip Monahan1, William
Idsardi1,2; 1University of Maryland, 2Neuroscience and Cognitive Science
Program, University of Maryland — We present evidence that formant (F)
ratios (Miller 1989) provide a neuropsychologically plausible mechanism
for eliminating acoustic variability in speech. Our magnetoencephalographic (MEG) findings indicate that the auditory perceptual system is
sensitive to F1/F3. The latency of the M100, an early automatic auditory
evoked component, reflects differences in F1 (/a/ elicits faster latencies
than /u/; Poeppel, et al. 1997). Reinterpreting those results, M100 could
follow the F1/F3 ratio. Larger F1/F3 ratios (/a/) should elicit earlier
M100 latencies. We present findings from two MEG studies. In Experiment 1, we synthesized two tokens each of /&#603;/ and /&#601;/ modulating the F3 values to obtain an 8% difference in mel (F1/F3) space
between within category partners. Participants passively listened to randomly presented vowel tokens. A significant effect of M100 latency was
found for /&#603;/ with a large F1/F3 ratio (p<0.05,r=.57) but not /
&#601;/ (p=0.17,r=.27). Experiment 2 tested the hypothesis that the
asymmetric results could be attributed to a greater sensitivity to ratios in
more crowded regions of vowel space. Aiming to replicate the finding of
/&#603;/ with /o/ and the null effect for /&#601;/, we synthesized two
tokens of /o/ differing 8% in mel (F1/F3) space and reran the /&#601;/
tokens. As predicted, we found a significant M100 latency facilitation for

Poster Session C

/o/ with a large F1/F3 ratio (p<0.02,r=.75), and not /&#601;/
(p=0.13,r=.38). These results demonstrate that formant information can
be rapidly extracted from the speech signal and that formant ratios have a
neuropsychological basis as a viable solution in speaker normalization.
C111
OFF-LINE SENTENCE PROCESSING: WHAT’S INVOLVED IN
ANSWERING A COMPREHENSION PROBE? Sharlene
Newman1,
Donghoon Lee1, Kristen Ratlif1; 1Indiana University, Bloomington, IN — A
distinction has been made between on-line and off-line sentence comprehension processing. On-line processes are involved in extracting the
meaning of the sentence while off-line processes are those related to
using that extracted meaning for a task (e.g., answering a comprehension
question). In addition, there is some debate as to the role of working
memory in sentence comprehension. This fMRI study was designed to
examine the role of working memory during off-line processing. Here,
conjoined active and object-relative sentences were presented, each followed by a comprehension probe. To disassociate the activation related
to the sentence from that of the probe, a six second delay was placed
between them. There were three different probe types: short distance,
long distance and false statements, each varying the load placed on working memory (e.g., The pilot scared the escort and broke the mirror on the
closet. short: The pilot scared the escort?; long: The pilot broke the mirror?). The results revealed significant differences as a function of probe
type when the probe followed conjoined active sentences. The reaction
time was longer for the long distance condition and greater activation of
the inferior frontal and parietal areas (regions associated with working
memory) was observed. Also, activation of the inferior parietal cortex
was shown to be greater during the presentation of the probe compared
to the sentence for the conjoined active condition. No differences in probe
type were observed for the object-relative condition. These results suggest that working memory plays an essential role in off-line processing.
C112
CAUDATE ACTIVITY DURING VERB INFLECTION IN EARLY VS.
LATE BILINGUALS Tomasina Oh1, Philina Ng1, Ing Berne Yeh2, Steven
Graham1; 1National University of Singapore, 2Diagnostic Imaging, National
University Hospital — It has been suggested that our language system
comprises a lexicon plus a grammar/computational component, the latter being subserved by fronto-striatal structures. Second language (L2)
grammar is thought to depend less on fronto-striatal structures as L2 age
of acquisition (AoA) increases. METHODS: 22 highly proficient Mandarin-English bilinguals who acquired English(L2) either EARLY (mean age
4.6; n=11) or LATE (mean age 10.5; n=11) were scanned while generating
(GEN) past tenses of regular (rule-based) and irregular (stored in lexicon)
verbs compared to baseline reading (READ) regular/irregular tasks. We
also included a second fixation baseline which appeared between words.
Functional images were processed using BrainVoyager QX (v1.99) prior
to computation of group-level random effects GLMs (thresholded at corrected false discovery rate q<0.05). RESULTS/DISCUSSION: Relatively
less right caudate activity for LATE participants when inflecting versus
reading regular verbs is consistent with the idea that aspects of L2 computation is less dependent on basal ganglia structures for LATE AoA.
However, further analyses revealed that this effect was largely due to
increased READ baselines for LATE and decreased READ baselines for
EARLY participants. We suggest that decreased baseline activation for
READ in the EARLY group might in part reflect task-switch costs similar
to “reverse Stroop” effects, which would be stronger in the EARLY group
due to their increased L2 automaticity and their greater need to suppress
generating in the READ condition. CONCLUSION: It is important to consider both baseline and experimental task activations when interpreting
AoA effects in L2 grammar.

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

C113
DIFFERENCES IN THE MISMATCH NEGATIVITY RESPONSE FOR
MONOLINGUAL ENGLISH AND BILINGUAL SPEAKERS USING A
MULTIPLE DEVIANT ODDBALL PARADIGM Silvia Ortiz-Mantilla1,
Naseem Choudhury1, Barbara Alvarez1, Nathalie Guthrie1, April A. Benasich1;
1
Center for Molecular & Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey — Little is known about how monolinguals and
bilinguals differ in processing of basic auditory stimuli that have been
shown to be associated with language, but are not linguistic. In this
study, normal hearing adults ages 20 to 40 years old were placed in three
different groups: one monolingual (English) and two bilingual (SpanishEnglish and Other Language-English). Brain event related potentials
from 128 electrodes were recorded while participants received a passive
multiple deviant oddball paradigm. The mismatch negativity (MMN)
response, which is elicited when an auditory change is detected between
standard and deviant stimuli, was used to assess auditory discrimination.
Four deviant stimuli were presented interspersed in a sequence of identical standard stimuli (70 ms 800 Hz tones). Deviant conditions were: frequency (1200 Hz, 70ms), duration (800 Hz, 30 ms), gap (20 ms silent gap
within a 70 ms 800Hz tone), and sweep (linear modulation from 800 to
1200 Hz). The MMN for all three groups was similar in latency and
amplitude for the gap and sweep conditions. However, in the frequency
condition, the MMN for the bilinguals peaked later with a more robust
peak as compared to the monolinguals. In the duration condition, the
morphology of the waveform for the bilinguals also differed as compared
to monolinguals; bilinguals had more robust peaks and an additional
peak immediately following the MMN. These findings suggest subtle differences in cortical response between monolinguals and bilinguals when
processing basic non-linguistic stimuli that may underlie differences in
decoding language (i.e., phonemes, words, sentences).
C114
SEPARATING THE EFFECTS OF HAND DOMINANCE AND
LANGUAGE
LATERALIZATION
IN
MANUAL
ACTION
REPRESENTATION Dafna
Palti1,
Zohar
Ben-Moshe2,
Yael
Schwartzman2, Uri Hadar2, John Gabrieli1; 1Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 2Tel Aviv University — In right handed humans, the left cerebral hemisphere is specialized for both motor control of the dominant
hand and the representation of skilled manual actions, but it is unclear
whether these two capacities share a single mechanisms. One line of evidence proposes that manual skill representation resides together with the
control of the dominant hand. Other evidence suggests that skilled movements is represented independently of hand dominance and may be
more closely associated with laterality of language. To test this, 34 right
and left-handed subjects were scanned with fMRI while generating
words of either actions (A), tools (T) or non-tools (NT) words, thus creating a gradient of manual-action relatedness. Individual statistical brain
maps, containing regions that were activated by the action-related gradient (A>T>NT), were created. A group regression analysis was employed
on the individual action gradient maps, while indices of either hand
dominance or language lateralization were used as covariates. The results
showed that within the action-representation network, hand dominance
correlated with inferior parietal and posterior temporal regions, while
language dominance was mostly correlated with frontal regions, including the premotor cortex. These results suggest that some of the effects
associated with manual action representation are related to motor experience, while others are more linked to conceptual representations associated with the language system. The link between manual skill
representation and language representation is particularly intriguing in
light of ideas that these two systems share a single mechanism of temporal sequencing, and possibly a common evolutionary origin.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

109

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

C115
AN FMRI STUDY OF PHONEME PERCEPTION IN YOUNG AND
OLD ADULTS Haeil Park1, Hae-Jeong Park2,3, Byung Sik Seo2, Gregory
Iverson1,4; 1University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 2Research Institute of
Radiological Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 3Yonsei University
College of Medicine, 4Center for Advanced Study of Language, University of
Maryland — In the current study, we used functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to examine differences in brain activational patterns between younger and older speakers of Korean in their perception
of the unusual three-way laryngeal phoneme contrasts of tense /p’ t’ k’/
vs. lax /p t k/ vs. aspirated /ph th kh/. 7 younger speakers and 3 older
Korean speakers were asked to indicate which among the three laryngeal
consonants (or a vowel) they heard by pressing one of four buttons using
the left thumb. Subtraction of the fMRI signal for vowel-initial syllable
perception from that for laryngeal consonant-initial syllable perception
should index processes only involved with the perception of these phonetic categories. Such subtractions for younger Korean speakers were
found to be associated with strong activation bilaterally in the cuneus, the
right middle frontal gyrus (BA 10), the left SMG (BA 40), and the right
precuneus. For older Korean speakers, however, significant activation
was seen in the left SMG (BA 40), the DLPFC (BA 9), insula (BA 13), and
inferior frontal gyrus (BA 47). The results that the cuneus and the right
middle frontal gyrus (BA 10) were uniquely activated in younger speakers’ perception of the Korean laryngeal distinctions are consistent with
Silva’s (2006) claim that only younger speakers, as opposed to older ones,
are using pitch differences to distinguish Korean laryngeal contrasts,
given that those two areas have been reported to be involved with pitch
discrimination (e.g., Zatorre et al., 1992; Wong et al., 2004).
C116
BRAIN RESPONSES TO ORTHOGRAPHIC VIOLATIONS BY
SECOND-LANGUAGE LEARNERS OF FINNISH Ilona
Pitkänen1,
Geoffrey Valentine1, Lee Osterhout1; 1University of Washington — Sometimes second-language (L2) learners are faced with L2 orthographic/phonological word-formation rules that differ from their native language. For
example, English speakers studying Finnish must learn Finnish vowel
harmony that prohibits co-occurrence of front and back vowels within a
word. We examined when and how native English speakers learning
Finnish acquire L2 orthographic restrictions by longitudinally measuring
their ERPs and lexical decisions to Finnish words, orthographically legal
pseudowords, and words and non-words with vowel harmony violations. In ERP studies with native speakers, orthographically legal
pseudowords elicited an N400 effect (Bentin, 1987), misspelled words
elicited a P600-like effect (Münte et al., 1998), and orthographic irregularity of pseudowords increased P600 amplitude, possibly reflecting
increasing difficulty of structurally processing infrequent, unexpected
orthographic combinations (Kim et al., in prep). In the current study, an
N400 effect to legal pseudowords is seen in native Finnish controls and in
learners after 1-2 months of instruction. In the learners, orthographically
illegal stimuli also initially elicit an N400-like effect. However, this effect
is later replaced by a P600-like effect. This effect is only seen with graphemes common to Finnish and English. Non-English graphemes (ä, ö)
elicit no ERP effect in learners. Native Finns show a P600 effect to all illegal forms. We suggest that learners may initially process orthographically illegal forms as pseudowords that lack meaning but violate no
expectations of orthographic structure, but in later stages of learning illegal L2 stimuli are processed as violations of L2 orthographic expectations
and thus elicit an enhanced P600.
C117
PROSODIC COMPREHENSION IN PARKINSON'S DISEASE
Lauren L. Richmond1, Luisa Vesely1, Murray Grossman1; 1University of
Pennsylvania — Background: Prosody is an integral component of speech
that is comprised of both the stress and intonation of one’s voice. Deficits
in prosody production in patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD) have
been demonstrated. However, it is unclear whether prosodic comprehen-

110

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

sion is compromised, or if this is related to impaired emotional perception. To assess prosody comprehension in PD, we examined
comprehension of propositional and emotional prosody with a novel
measure. Design: We compared 30 non-demented, non-depressed PD
patients and 13 age- and education-matched controls. Prosody comprehension was assessed using a 91-item distance comprehension task and a
91-item emotion comprehension task. In both tasks, participants hear
either a male or female voice stating multisyllabic numbers or dates along
one of two continua: 1) dominant-to-submissive emotion; 2) near-to-far
proposition. Participants judge the characteristic of the prosodic stimulus
on a 5-point scale. Errors were coded as either small (1 point above and 1
point below the target answer) or large (more than 1 point above and
below the target answer). Results: PD patients were significantly
impaired in their judgments of emotional prosody compared to controls
(t(41)=3.04, p<.01; PD accuracy: 55%, control accuracy: 73%), but did not
differ from controls on propositional judgments. PD also showed significant impairment judging dominance compared to distance (t(29)=5.914,
p<.001). Propositional judgment errors were generally small in PD
(t(29)=4.442, p<.001), but this was not found in emotional judgment
errors. Conclusion: PD patients are impaired judging emotional prosody
on a dominant-to-submissive scale, but are unimpaired judging propositional prosody.
C118
A COMBINED ERP AND NEAR-INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY
STUDY ON PHONOTACTIC SENSITIVITY Sonja
Rossi1,
Ina
Jürgenson1, Adriana Hanulikova2, Hellmuth Obrig1, Isabell Wartenburger3; 1Berlin
Neuroimaging Center, Charitè University Medicine Berlin, Germany, 2Humboldt
University Berlin, Germany, 3University of Potsdam, Germany — Possible combinations of different phonemes within a word of a specific language are
characterized by phonotactic rules. These rules play an important role in
both phonology as well as in lexical activation. In the present study we
simultaneously measured event-related brain potentials (ERPs) and the
cortical oxygenation changes by near-infrared spectroscopy while participants listened to pseudowords which were either phonotactically legal or
illegal with respect to German. Illegal ones, however, were controlled for
legality with respect to another language, namely Slovak. ERP results
showed an N400 effect for legal compared to illegal pseudowords. The
neurovascular signals show a stronger left-hemispheric lateralization for
legal compared to illegal pseudowords whereas illegal ones result in a
stronger right-hemispheric response over temporal regions. The results
suggest that pseudowords following the rules of participants` native language recruit language-related neuronal networks, both from an electrophysiological and a vascular perspective, as the familiar phonotactic
rules were extracted even from words without any meaning. The present
evidence is important with respect to the universality or diversity of phonotactic processing mechanisms across different languages. As little is
known about the neurocognitive aspects associated with the acquisition
of phonotactic knowledge during infancy, we just conduct the same
study in infants below the sixth month of age.
C119
ACTION-PERCEPTION NETWORKS AS A BASIS FOR LEFTLATERALISED
LANGUAGE
FUNCTION:
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL BRAIN RESPONSES TO NEWLY LEARNT
SPOKEN PSEUDOWORDS Yury Shtyrov1, James Kiff1, Friedemann
Pulvermuller1; 1Medical Research Council, Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit,
Cambridge, UK — Cortical laterality of language may be influenced by the
learning of cortical memory networks binding information about wordform-related actions and perceptions. We explored this postulate by
applying a learning task which used phonetically legal syllables precisely
matched for acoustic and psycholinguistic features and concatenated into
pseudowords. Subjects learnt pseudowords (1) in a perceptual learning
paradigm to build acoustic representation and (2) by articulating/repeating auditorily presented pseudowords to build perception-action networks. After learning, auditory event-related responses to both types of

Poster Session C

learnt stimuli and to matched controls were recorded using high-density
EEG. Neurophysiological data revealed that learning conditions produced larger early negative ERP amplitude (latency: 200ms) than the control condition. Critically, articulatory learning led to significantly leftlateralised fronto-central ERPs, whereas symmetric brain responses were
seen over the hemispheres after perceptual learning. These data demonstrate that binding between acoustic and articulatory representations has
an impact on the functional laterality of language processing and therefore challenge theories viewing laterality as a product of physical or phonological properties of acoustic signals only.
C120
COST OF COREFERENTIAL PROCESSING WITH REPEATED
NAMES: AN ERP STUDY Tamara Swaab1, Natalie Kacinik1, Peter
Gordon2; 1UC Davis, Center for Mind and Brain, 2UNC Chapel Hill — In this
study we used ERPs to examine the underlying bases of the “repeated
name penalty (RNP)”, which is the finding of a cost in processing during
comprehension when a coreferential name is preceded by a name in discourse focus (e.g., “Suzie went to the pet store because Suzie wanted to
by a hamster”, where the second Suzie would suffer from the RNP). In
our previous work we have shown that these infelicitous repeated names
yield an N400 effect. In the present study we were interested in determining under which circumstances processing might be sufficiently altered
such that the RNP would be reflected as a grammatical or syntactic difficulty, manifested as a P600. Participants were presented with sentences
in which prominence and grammaticality was manipulated as in the following examples: Prominent Name Condition: Suzy went to the pet store
to buy Suzy a hamster/ herself a hamster/ himself a hamster. Non-Prominent Name Condition: Suzy’s brother went to the pet store to buy Suzy a
hamster/ himself a hamster/ herself a hamster. ERPs were recorded to
the critical names and reflexives and participants were asked at the end
of each sentence to make a judgment about its acceptability (good/bad).
Violations of the reflexives yielded the expected P600 effect. But, in contrast to previous work, the repeated name penalty took the form of a
P600. This shows that repeated names can yield a P600 under conditions
that mirrors violations of Principle A (when there is an ungrammatical
reflexive).
C121
A COHERENCE ANALYSIS OF EEG RESPONSE TO SPEECH
MODULATED BY M-SEQUENCE Hiroshige
Takeichi1,2,5,
Sachiko
Koyama3,5, Brett Foster4, David Liley4; 1RIKEN, 2University of Tokyo,
3
Hokkaido University, 4Swinburne University of Technology, 5RISTEX,
JST — We have developed a technique for assessment of natural verbal
comprehension, using electroencephalography (EEG) and m-sequence
modulation (Takeichi et al., Neuroscience Research, 57, 314-318). The
technique is superior to the conventional averaging methods in that it is
less susceptible to measurement artifacts, efficient without repeated presentations for signal averaging, and suitable for non-time-locked continuous mental processes. Scalp EEGs were recorded from eight right-handed
Japanese speakers while they were listening to 51s-long news, in Japanese and Spanish, with and without modulation in amplitude timed by
an m-sequence (a binary pseudorandom sequence). Correlation functions
were computed between the m-sequence and the EEG. Then, independent component analysis (ICA, AMUSE, delta=1) was applied to the correlation functions to find critical components to discriminate between
comprehensible and incomprehensible stimuli. In the present study, we
focused on the EEG coherence between recording electrodes. The original
EEGs were convolved with the Fourier transform of the critical ICA component function, in order to maintain only the critical component. Coherence values were computed for each electrode pair and individual
frequency bands including theta, alpha, beta, gamma, and were averaged
across subjects for each frequency band. The coherence value for the Japanese speech without modulation increased between T7 (left temporal)
and the other electrodes in the alpha (4-13Hz) band. For the modulated
Japanese coherence increased between T7 (left temporal) and the other

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

electrodes, and F8 (right frontal) with other electrodes in the high-gamma
(70-100Hz) band. Such coherence changes were not found for either nonmodulated or modulated Spanish speech.
C122
NEAR-INFRARED-SPECTROSCOPY
REVEALS
HEMISPHERIC
ASYMMETRY FOR PROCESSING TEMPORALLY VARYING
ACOUSTIC STIMULI IN NEWBORNS Silke Telkemeyer1,2, Hellmuth
Obrig1, Sonja Rossi1, Jens Steinbrink1, Isabell Wartenburger1,3; 1Berlin
NeuroImaging Center, Charité University Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 2HumboldtUniversity Berlin, Germany, 3University of Potsdam, Germany — The ability to
decode different temporal features of the auditory stream is mandatory
during language acquisition. Despite its relevance little is know about the
underlying pathways and the development of interhemispheric specialization for processing auditory information from birth on. Functional
imaging studies suggest a left hemispheric dominance for the processing
of normal compared to reversed speech in newborns and 3 month olds
(Pena et al., 2003; Dehaene-Lambertz et al., 2002). A right-hemispheric
dominance for processing sentence prosody in 3 month olds as well as in
four year olds has also been demonstrated (Homae et al., 2006; Wartenburger et al., 2007). The Asymmetric Sampling in Time Model (Poeppel,
2003) suggests that the hemispheric lateralization is based on the acoustic
properties of the speech-signal. The speech-signal contains rapid transitions (<25 ms) like the variation between formants but also slower temporal transitions (> 300 ms) like prosodic modulation. We focus on the
lateralization of processing temporally different acoustic stimuli in newborns. We used identical stimulus as Boemio et al. (2005) had used in
adults and presented these slowly and fast modulated acoustic stimuli to
24 neonates (age 3.58 days, 12 boys). We simultaneously recorded the
hemodynamic response using Near-Infrared-Spectroscopy as well as the
electrophysiological response using EEG. Our results reveal a significantly stronger hemodynamic response for fast as compared to slowly
modulated stimuli in left superior temporal areas. Slowly modulated
stimuli lead to a stronger right hemispheric activation. These data suggest an asymmetric sampling of temporal features already to be present
in newborns.
C123
DYSLEXIA: A SINGLE OR DOUBLE CORE DEFICIT? MAIN
ASSUMPTIONS OF THE DD HYPOTHESIS TESTED IN A
NATION-WIDE SCHOOL POPULATION anniek Vaessen1,2, Leo
Blomert1,2; 1University of Mastricht, Netherlands, 2Maastricht Brain Imaging
Centre, Netherlands — A large proportion of dyslexic readers show difficulties with speeded naming of well-known visual items. As an explanation, Bowers and Wolf (1993) proposed the double deficit (DD)
hypothesis which states that naming speed difficulties reflect a second
core deficit in dyslexia, independent of a phonological deficit. However,
even after a decade of research on this topic, evidence for the existence of
a second core deficit is inconsistent. Therefore, other researchers have
suggested that naming problems are a consequence of a phonological
deficit (single deficit hypothesis). The present study tested the main
assumptions of the double deficit hypothesis within-subject in a nationwide sample of 2300 schoolchildren, their reading ability ranging from
very poor to good. First, we investigated whether naming speed uniquely
contributes to literacy performance. Second, we examined whether children with a double deficit have more severe literacy problems, since both
deficits are assumed to independently contribute to poor literacy skills.
Finally, we investigated the relationship between phonological and naming speed performance, since the DD hypothesis assumes that these two
skills are independent and thus not related. Results showed that naming
speed only uniquely related to (pseudoword) reading speed and not to
other literacy measures. Furthermore, children with a double deficit were
only more impaired in reading speed and not in reading accuracy or
spelling. Moreover, there was a significant relationship between phonological processing (especially speed of phonological processing) and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

111

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

naming speed. The implications of the results for the double and single
deficit hypotheses are discussed.
C124
MONITORING IN LANGUAGE PERCEPTION: MILD AND
STRONG CONFLICTS ELICIT DIFFERENT ERP PATTERNS Nan
van de Meerendonk1, Constance Th.W.M. Vissers1,2, Dorothee J. Chwilla1,
Herman H.J. Kolk1; 1NICI Radboud University of Nijmegen, 2UMC St Radboud
Nijmegen — Although error monitoring has been exclusively studied in
production, we also make perceptual errors and are able to detect them.
So far, no attempt has been made to explain how perceptual errors are
monitored for. We propose that a strong conflict between what is
expected and what is observed triggers reanalysis to check for possible
perceptual errors, a process reflected by the P600. This is at variance with
the dominant view that the P600 merely indicates the presence of some
syntactic obstacle, a grammatical violation or ambiguity. The hypothesis
is able to account for the fact that P600 effects have been found in a wide
variety of circumstances: after syntactic anomalies, garden path sentences, semantic reversal anomalies, semantically anomalous sentences
which are partially plausible, misspelled words in high cloze-contexts
and sentence-picture mismatches. A question is why typical N400 sentences like ‘He spread the warm bread with socks’ (Kutas & Hillyard,
1980) do not elicit a P600? We hypothesized that when a critical noun is
medium implausible in the context, a mild conflict arises between the
expected and unexpected event; the language system can still interpret
the unexpected event and an N400 effect is elicited. When the noun is
highly implausible however, a strong conflict arises; integration fails and
a monitoring process is triggered, eliciting a biphasic N400-P600 pattern.
An ERP study confirmed this hypothesis, showing that only when the
conflict between the expected and unexpected event is strong enough, a
monitoring process is triggered.
C125
DO
SECOND
LANGUAGE
LEARNERS
ACTIVATE
L1
GRAMMATICAL FEATURES DURING L2 READING? AN ERP
STUDY OF CODE-SWITCHING Maartje van der Meij1,2, Manuel
Carreiras2,3, Fernando Cuetos1, Horacio A. Barber2,3; 1University of Oviedo,
Faculty of Psychology, 2University of La Laguna, 3Instituto de Tecnologías
Biomédicas (ITB) — Code switching was used to investigate if beginners
and more advanced late second language learners showed qualitative
differences of brain activity when reading in their second language. In
particular, we investigated if the level of knowledge of the second language influenced the activation of grammatical features of the first language (Spanish) when reading in their second language (English). Eventrelated potentials were used to compare switches from L2 to L1. English
sentences included an adjective that was presented either in English or in
Spanish. The Spanish adjective either agreed or disagreed in grammatical
gender with the preceding noun phrase (e.g. The lake was frozen/
helado(masc)/ *helada(fem); The Spanish word for lake –lago– is masculine, so the correct adjective would be "helado" to agree in gender). Since
English does not contain grammatical gender, a disagreement effect
would show the pre-activation of L1 features during L2 reading. The
advanced group showed an enhanced negativity in the N400 time window and a late positive complex (LPC) in response to the code switching,
while the beginners showed only a sustained positivity starting around
300 ms. In addition, gender disagreement modulated the sustained positivity amplitude in the group of beginners. In contrast, gender disagreement modulated the N400 effect but not the LPC effect in the advanced
group. These results suggest that the level of English changes the brain
activity related to code switching and the sensitivity to grammatical features of the first language.
C126
THE NEURAL BASIS OF LEFT-LATERALIZED AND BILATERAL
LANGUAGE FUNCTIONS IN CHILDREN AND YOUNG ADULTS
Jennifer Vannest1,3, Jerod Rasmussen1, Jerzy Szaflarski2, Katherine Szalewski3,
Vincent Schmithorst3,1, Scott Holland3,1; 1Cincinnati Children's Hospital

112

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

Medical Center, 2University of Cincinnati Academic Health Center, 3Pediatric
Neuroimaging Research Consortium, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center — A left-lateralized neural basis has been well-documented for
many language skills; e.g. semantic retrieval. However, other language
functions such as linguistic prosody perception have been associated
with bilateral mechanisms. These networks have not been previously
studied in detail in children. Nine children and young adults ages 11-29
completed two block-design fMRI tasks. First, a semantic decision task
(active condition: semantic decision regarding auditorially-presented single words; control condition: decision regarding tone sequences). Second,
a prosody discrimination task (active condition: judge, via prosody,
whether audiovisually presented sentences were statements or questions;
control condition: semantic judgment about similar sentences). fMRI data
were analyzed using a general linear model to identify active voxels in
each task for each participant. After Talairach transformation, randomeffects analysis was performed to determine group activations, thresholded at z &#8805; 3.1, with clusters > 10 (p<.01 corrected). We also calculated lateralization indices in active regions. For semantic decision, a leftlateralized network emerged, including left inferior frontal (IFG, mean
LI=.44) and left superior temporal / supramarginal gyri (STG, mean
LI=.33). In contrast, prosody discrimination activated these regions plus
their right hemisphere homologues (IFG, mean LI= -.21; STG, mean LI=.004). The tasks differed significantly in lateralization (t-tests in each
region, ps<.05).Our preliminary results demonstrate different lateralization/localization for specific language skills: semantic retrieval engages
left hemisphere language mechanisms while prosody discrimination
evokes bilateral activation. This pattern was consistent across children
and young adults, and overall suggests a complex interaction of brain
regions across hemispheres for effective language comprehension.
C127
ERP COMPONENTS THAT REVEAL ATTENTION ALLOCATION
TO WORD PARTS Man-Ying Wang1, Bo-Chen Kuo2, Chia-Ying Lee3,
Shih-Kuen Cheng4, Chia-Wei Hsu1, I-Chung Han1; 1Soochow University,
Taiwan, 2National Taiwan University, Taiwan, 3Institute of Linguistics,
Academia Sinica, Taiwan, 4Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National
Central University, Taiwan — The effects of attention allocation to word
components on event-related potentials (ERP’s) were investigated in two
experiments. Participants viewed a Chinese character composed of two
horizontally aligned components while their attention allocation to the
two components was probed by a dot probe task. A lexical decision task
followed the dot probe in Experiment 2 (but not in Experiment 1) in order
to impose recognition demands. It was hypothesized that attention was
directed to components located on the right due to their high information
value. A difference wave was thus computed by subtracting ERP’s elicited by dots on the left from those on the right. A contralateral, occipitotemporal selection negativity (SN) component with an onset at 150ms
after the dot was found. It was sensitive to whether the character is real
and regularly structured. The sensitivity of the SN component to word
characteristics, however, was restricted to Experiment 2. These findings
suggest that attention allocation to word components was modulated by
recognition demands.
C128
RELATIONSHIPS
BETWEEN
PERFORMANCE
AND
HEMIPSHERIC ASYMMETRY ON LEXICAL TASKS Suzanne
Welcome1, Chrisine Chiarello1, Laura Halderman2, Christiana Leonard3;
1
University of California, Riverside, 2University of Pittsburgh, 3University of
Florida, Gainesville — Most individuals show a left-hemisphere advantage
for processing verbal stimuli. Deviations from this modal pattern of
asymmetry have been proposed to characterize disorders such as dyslexia (Shaywitz, et al, 2007) and schizophrenia (Sommer, et al., 2001).
However, within the normal population, there is great variability
between individuals in the degree of behavioral asymmetry. It is unclear
whether these individual differences are associated with variations in
cognitive performance on standardized measures of verbal ability. We

Poster Session C

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

report data from the Biological Substrates for Language Project which
collected standardized measures of reading ability and IQ, and asymmetry data from 7 divided visual field tasks in 200 young adults. In order to
explore relationships between individual differences in asymmetry and
performance, asymmetries in accuracy and reaction time on individual
tasks were used to predict performance on standardized measures. For
some of the lexical tasks, asymmetries were correlated with reading ability and IQ. In all cases, greater asymmetry predicted better performance
on the standardized measures. Variation in asymmetries accounted for
up to 9.5 percent of the variance in the standardized measures. These
data suggest that in the normal population, a greater degree of behavioral
lateralization may confer an advantage in the processing of verbal information.

get sentence verb, we observed a broadly distributed positivity (400-550
ms) for sentences involving a dropped subject. This effect was most pronounced when two referents had already been introduced in the discourse and least pronounced with a context introducing only the
(dropped) subject or a context without any referents. The finding of a
positivity rather than an N400 is in line with previous results from German, which also reported positivities in connection with reference establishment processes (Burkhardt, 2006, 2007). Altogether, our findings
indicate that subject drop is least costly when the referent of the dropped
argument is unambiguously identifiable (i.e. either uniquely determined
by the context, or inferred as the speaker in the absence of contextual
cues), and most costly when the context permits several competing
potential subject referents.

C129
TIME-COURSE AND TEMPORAL ASYNCHRONY OF LETTER/
SPEECH-SOUND INTEGRATION IN FLUENT READERS Gonny
Willems1,2, Hanne Poelmans1,2, Leo Blomert1,2; 1Maastricht University, The
Netherlands, 2Maastricht Brain Imaging Center, The Netherlands — Learning and automatizing letter/speech-sounds relations via cross-modal
integration is a crucial step in literacy acquisition. Recently, an fMRIstudy revealed the network of brain regions for letter/speech-sounds
integration in adults (1). Furthermore, a recent ERP-study using a passive
paradigm demonstrated early and automatic influence of letters on
speech-sound processing, with strong temporal constraints (2). In the
present study, we further explored the time-course and temporal constraints of letter/speech-sounds integration using a different ERP-paradigm (N1/P2), which allows employing an active task and further
exploring SOA (stimuli-onset-asynchrony). Letters and speech-sounds
were presented unimodally (A,V) and bimodally (AV: congruent/incongruent combinations), either simultaneously or with the letter preceding
the speech-sound by 200, 300 or 400ms. Cross-modal integration was
assessed via the additive model, assuming bimodal responses to differ
from the sum of the two unimodal responses (AV&#8800; A+V). Furthermore, we expected congruent visual information to modify speech-sound
processing differently than incongruent visual information (AVcon
&#8800; AVinc). The results showed a suppressed auditory-evoked N1/
P2 in cross-modal as compared to auditory-only conditions at SOA 200,
300, 400ms, but not at 0ms. This suppressed response suggests a modified
auditory speech-sound processing by the visually presented letter. The
absence of a suppression effect at 0ms might indicate that N1/P2 reflects
a mechanism in which predictability of visual information is critical for
early letter/speech-sounds integration. Additionally, P2 responses to
congruent and incongruent pairs seem to differ, suggesting that integration is driven by learned letter/speech-sound associations. (1) van
Atteveldt ea., 2004, Neuron, (43), 271 (2) Froyen ea., in press, Neuroscience Letters

C131
PREDICTING GAINS IN READING ABILITIES USING DIFFUSION
TENSOR IMAGING (DTI) IN ADOLESCENTS WITH DYSLEXIA
Nahal Zakerani1,2, McCandliss Bruce3, Ho Candy1, Heitzmann Joshua1, Black
Jessica M.1, Ojo Xavier, R.1, Gabrieli John DE,4, Reiss Allan, L.1, Hoeft
Fumiko1; 1Stanford University School of Medicine - Center for Interdisciplinary
Brain Studies Research, 2Pacific Graduate School of Psychology, 3Sackler
Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, 4Brain and Cognitive Sciences,
MIT — The present study investigated the relationship between white
matter integrity and individual differences in reading gains in adolescents with dyslexia. We performed DTI and a battery of behavioral tests
in 20 children (age 14.1 + 1.9) with dyslexia and followed them for 2.5
years. Individual differences in baseline fractional anisotropy (FA) measured by Reproducible Objective Quantification Scheme (ROQS) and
reading scores (in 67 typical and poor readers) replicated findings from
Niogi & McCandliss (Neuropsychologia 2006); single word reading
scores correlated positively with left Centrum Semiovale FA values. As a
group, children with dyslexia showed significant gains in standard scores
of reading over 2.5 years (5 + 7.3, p = 0.007). Greater gains in decoding
regressing out baseline age, IQ and decoding scores, were predicted by
greater FA values of the bilateral Superior Coronal Radiata (SCR; right (r
= 0.64) > left) (r = 0.59), not significantly different between hemispheres),
but not FA of other fibers. These findings provide evidence of white matter pathways that may be associated with the development of compensatory mechanisms in dyslexia.

C130
UNDERSTANDING
“MISSING”
ARGUMENTS:
AN
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION OF SUBJECT DROP
IN JAPANESE Susann Wolff1, Matthias Schlesewsky2, Kaoru Horie3, Ina
Bornkessel-Schlesewsky1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and
Brain Sciences, Germany, 2University of Marburg, Germany, 3Tohoku
University, Japan — Most of our knowledge about how sentential constituents are integrated with one another – and the neurocognitive processes
underlying this integration – stems from experimental settings in which
the constituents were all present in the input. Many languages of the
world, however, allow sentence constituents to be omitted quite freely in
natural discourse. To examine how sentential meaning is computed
under these circumstances, the present ERP study investigated contextual influences on the processing of sentences with a dropped subject in
Japanese. Native speakers of Japanese (n=26) read two types of transitive
target sentences (subject-object-verb and object-verb) in four different
contexts (both arguments of target sentence introduced, subject introduced, object introduced, neither introduced). At the position of the tar-

C132
SUPRAMARGINAL AND ANGULAR GYRI RESPOND TO
ACOUSTIC CHANGES THAT ARE ALSO PHONETIC BUT NOT
BECAUSE OF HABITUATION TO PHONEME IDENTITY Jason
Zevin1, Jamie Ferri1, Jeremy Skipper1, Bruce McCandliss1; 1Sackler Institute for
Developmental Psychobiology, Weill-Cornell Medical College — Many studies of phonetic perception depend on the logic of habituation: Responses
to trains of repeated stimuli are compared with responses to trains of
stimuli containing a phonetic change in order to isolate regions that
respond preferentially to change. Here we test habituation directly by
examining temporal properties of passive BOLD responses to long (15s)
blocks of stimuli in a "no change" condition -- with all stimuli drawn from
the same phonetic category -- and a "change" condition in which stimuli
were drawn alternately from two categories. In both conditions, all ten
stimuli were recordings of unique productions drawn from sets that varied in fundamental frequency, amplitude, harmonicity and other nonphonetic properties. A t-test comparing the change and no change conditions revealed a change-specific response in a wide region posterior to the
planum temporale, encompassing portions of both supramarginal and
angular gyri, consistent with previous findings from shorter stimulation
paradigms. In contrast to earlier studies, however, the response was
strongly bilateral. Furthermore, inspection of the time series for these
regions provided no evidence of a response to speech that habituates to
successive stimuli from the same category. Instead, a robust response to
the change condition was observed to contrast with a null response in the
no change condition.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

113

Sunday, April 13, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

114

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session C

Poster Session D
Higher level cognition: Executive functions
D1
ROLE OF STRATEGIC SELF-REGULATION AND EXECUTIVE
ATTENTION IN FIRST EPISODE OF SCHIZOPHRENIA. Gricel
Orellana1, Andrea Slachevsky2, Marcela Peña3; 1University of Chile, Chile,
2
Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, 3School of Psychology, University
Catholic, Chile — Objective: Contribute to explain the mechanisms of
behaviour disorders in schizophrenia, specifically disexecutive behaviour.
Two functions have not been completely studied in schizophrenia: executive attention and strategic self-regulation of behavior. The aim of our
study is to determine which of the three attentional networks – alert, orientation and executive attention – works abnormally in schizophrenia and if
patients present an upheaval the self-regulation. We also study the relation
between troubles in these functions and the existence of psycho-social
problems. Methods: 20 patients, of both sexes, aged 18 to 30 years, each
with only one psychotic episode treated. The following tests were applied:
Test of Raven to evaluate IQ; ANT to evaluate attentional networks; Mattis’s Dementia Rating Scale, WCST and FAB to evaluate executive functions and Six Element Test to evaluate strategic self-regulation. The
disexecutive behaviour was evaluated the DEX and the Grefex’s questionnaires. In order to evaluate squizophrenia symptoms, we applied PANSS.
A group of 20 healthy controls matched by sex, age and educational level
was included in the study. Results: our results revealed that patients presented a disorder of the three attentional networks, especially the executive attention, and poor performances in the Six Elements Tests – they
applied non efficient strategies during the execution of the task. Moreover,
patients presented statistical differences with controls in Raven, WCST,
Mattis' s Dementia Rating Scale, FAB and disexecutive questionnaires. Performances in frontal cognitive tests are not correlated with the disexecutive behaviours. Conclusions: Our results suggest that troubles in
executive attention and strategic auto-regulation could explain some patological behaviours in schizophrenia.
D2
THE PERCEPTUAL SIMILARITY OF STIMULI IN THE FLANKER
TASK AFFECTS THE ERN/NE. Joseph Orr1, Subhratha Muthusamy1,
William Gehring1; 1University of Michigan — Theories of performance monitoring differ as to whether the ERN/Ne component of the event-related
brain potential reflects a performance monitoring process concerned primarily with response conflict, overt errors, violations of predicted reward,
or some other event. One difficulty in comparing these theories is that they
are not specific about whether a stimulus must be completely evaluated
before the reward properties or conflicting response attributes affect the
performance monitoring system. In the present study we tested whether
the presence of a distinctive visual stimulus feature corresponding to the
correct response affects the ERN/Ne. Eighteen subjects performed a variant of the flanker task where, in one condition, the target and flanker stimulus did not differ in any basic visual feature (e.g., FFEFF). In the other
condition, a salient visual feature discriminated the target and flanking letter (XXOXX). The ERN/Ne was larger on error trials where the stimulus
corresponding to the error response and that corresponding to the correct
response were distinguished by a salient visual feature than when there
was no such feature present. While this finding might be accommodated
by further elaborations of the reinforcement-learning and conflict-monitoring theories, we suggest a variant of the error-detection (mismatch)
hypothesis, namely that when producing a response, the brain predicts the
elementary perceptual information that stimulus evaluation should have

yielded at the moment the response occurs. The more perceptually distinct
the predicted information and that present at the moment of response, the
larger the error signal.
D3
A COMMON MEDIAL FRONTAL CORTICAL NETWORK FOR THE
STROOP AND ANTI-SACCADE TASKS BUT NOT FOR THE
SUBCORTICAL AREA IN THE PUTAMEN. Shima Ovaysikia1, James
Danckert2, Joseph DeSouza1,3; 1York University, Toronto, Canada, 2University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, 3York Center for Vision Research, Toronto,
Canada — A medial frontal cortex structure called the anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC) is thought to be involved in monitoring response conflicts
and/or directing adjustments needed for control of behavior. Ford et al.
(2005) showed increased activation in ACC related to anti-saccade errors
and during incongruent Stroop tasks, MacDonald et al. (2000) showed
increased activity. Thus, we sought to discover a more precise location of
cingulate cortex activation for these two tasks, both of which involve suppression of a natural behavior. One hypothesis states that suppression is a
general phenomenon that is not task specific, whereas others have demarcated ACC into distinct areas involved in language and motor behaviors.
We averaged across subjects to examine the specific anatomical locations
with a focus on the frontal cortex using fMRI. In accordance with the first
proposed hypothesis, our analysis shows similar activation of the medial
frontal structures (including ACC) for both the Stroop and anti-saccade
tasks with the Stroop activation extending more anterior along the medial
frontal activation than the anti-saccade activations. Both tasks involved
other frontal brain regions&#894; frontal eye fields bilaterally, supplementary eye fields, dorsal and ventral prefrontal cortex and putamen activations. The putamen activation was bilateral for the anti-saccade task but
only localized to the left hemisphere for the Stroop task. Although the
medial frontal activations were bilateral for both tasks there may be a different subcortical mechanism being used.
D4
SPATIAL ATTENTION IS AFFECTED BY MENTAL ROTATION IN
A DUAL TASK Merel Pannebakker1, Wessel van Dam1, Pierre Jolicœur2,
Guido Band1, Richard Ridderinkhof3, Bernhard Hommel1; 1Leiden University,
2University of Montreal, 3University of Amsterdam — Within
a dual-task,
encoding and motor processes are generally considered to take place
unimpeded, but central processes such as decision making or mental rotation may be sensitive to capacity limitations. In this experiment, we used a
dual task to investigate whether mental rotation (T1) affects the onset and
intensity of attention in T2 using event-related potentials like the N2pc.
The N2pc is a contralateral visual-spatial measure of attention that reaches
its peak on the posterior lateral sides of the head. If a more difficult mental
rotation takes up more capacity, would this influence the attention of T2 as
measured by the N2pc, or is the capacity of visual-spatial attention without any significant limitation? We manipulated the available capacity in
two ways: for S1, we varied the angle from upright position to induce a
smaller or a larger mental rotation. Second, we varied SOA to induce different amounts of task overlap. Results show that in case of an increased
angle from upright position for S1 as well as for increased task overlap
(short SOA), the N2pc at S2 was attenuated. This would argue against
views that attention is not modulated because its capacity is hardly limited.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

115

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

Poster Session D

D5
UPDATING SENSORY AND TASK-SET REPRESENTATIONS
DURING TASK-SWITCHING: AN ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIORAL
COSTS AND COGNITIVE BRAIN POTENTIALS IN HUMANS Jose
Antonio Perianez1, Francisco Barcelo1; 1Institut Universitari d'Investigacio en
Ciencies de la Salut (IUNICS) University of the Balearic Islands, Palma de
Mallorca, Spain — Human cognitive control depends on both bottom-up
and top-down influences along a hierarchy of neural representations in
the brain. Task-cueing paradigms have suggested that the updating of
sensory cues (i.e., bottom-up control) and the updating of task-set representations (i.e., top-down control) both contribute to overall behavioral
task-switching costs (i.e., Forstmann et al. 2007). Few studies have
explored the fast temporal course of brain activations underlying these
bottom-up and top-down modes of cognitive control underlying behavioral switch costs. Here we used a 2:2 cue-to-task mapping in order to dissociate the behavioral and event-related potentials (ERP) indicators
associated with the updating of sensory and task-set representations
through an orthogonal manipulation of cue- and task-related switches
and repetitions. Task switches enhanced the amplitude of centrally distributed early cue-locked P3 activity (180-220 ms), and mirrored behavioral task-switch costs. In turn, cue switches evoked reduced centrally
distributed N2 (255-295 ms) amplitudes, and paralleled behavioral cueswitch costs. Importantly, both task- and cue-updating enhanced the
amplitude of parietally distributed late cue-locked P3 activity (300-340
ms), suggesting that only this late P3 component was modulated by the
updating of both sensory and task-set representations. These results suggested a joint contribution from both sensory and task-set representations
to behavioral switch costs, which could not be completely captured by
any isolated index of brain activation. In line with recent models, we conclude that cognitive control emerges from mutual interactions between
exogenous and endogenous sources of information.

D7
THE EFFECT OF PREFRONTAL CORTICAL LESIONS ON
CATEGORY SELECTIVITY IN VISUAL ASSOCIATION CORTEX
Suraj Pradhan1, David Fegen2,3, Mark D'Esposito2,3,4; 1Northwestern
University, 2Henry H. Wheeler Jr. Brain Imaging Center, University of
California, Berkeley, 3Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of
California, Berkeley, 4University of California, Berkeley — Although numerous theoretical models implicate the prefrontal cortex (PFC) as a source of
top-down control signals, this speculation is largely driven by suggestive
findings rather than direct empirical evidence. This is predominantly due
to the methodological challenges in detecting causal interactions across
cortical regions (Miller & D’Esposito, 2005). Previous studies have shown
that subregions of visual association cortex (VAC) exhibit specificity for
particular categories of complex visual objects. For example, processing
of face and scene stimuli preferentially engage the fusiform face area
(FFA) and the parahippocampal place area (PPA), respectively. The aim
of the current fMRI study was to examine whether disruption of PFC topdown signals would effect the tuning of these VAC category-specific
regions. During scanning, five patients with unilateral lateral PFC lesions
performed a 1-back task that included 16 second blocks of either face or
scene images. Face-selective (i.e. FFA) and scene-selective (i.e. PPA)
regions were defined in each hemisphere. There were two main findings.
First, an overlap analysis revealed that category selectivity was reduced
in the FFA and PPA on the same side of the PFC lesion as compared to
the non-lesioned hemisphere. That is, these regions became less selective
to their preferred category. Second, using a neural network backpropagation algorithm, a pattern-classifier was less accurate in predicting category membership in the FFA and PPA on the same side of the PFC lesion
as compared to the non-lesioned hemisphere. These findings provide
direct evidence for a top-down modulatory effect of the PFC on visual
association cortex.

D6
MIRRORING
AND
SOCIAL
COGNITION:
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
AND
TRANSCRANIAL
MAGNETIC
STIMULATION
EVIDENCE
FOR
DISSOCIABLE
SUBCOMPONENTS OF THEORY OF MIND Jaime Pineda1,2, Erin
Hecht2, Brang David1, Agmon Eran2, Elfenbein Hanie2, Davis Jena2; 1UCSD,
2Emory University — A distinction is made between social-perceptive
components of theory of mind (ToM), involving judgments of mental
state based on facial and bodily expressions, and social-cognitive components, which are more representation-based and linked to language. This
is similar to the distinction between representing the mental state of
another as if it were one's own (simulation theory), requiring involvement of the mirror neuron system (MNS), and explicit reasoning about
mental states (theory theory), which does not. The MNS, located in part
in the pars opercularis of the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), is thought to be
involved in producing shared neural representations about the self and
others, including ToM. Furthermore, evidence that mu rhythms over sensorimotor cortex are suppressed during MNS function allowed testing of
this componential view of ToM. In Study 1, participants performed an
emotion recognition task, assumed to engage the social-perceptual component, while a cartoons task was assumed to engage the social-cognitive
component. In Study 2, a 1 Hz repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) pulse was applied to the left IFG for 5 minutes prior to task
performance. In Study 1, mu suppression was positively correlated with
accuracy on the social-perceptual but not the social-cognitive task. In
Study 2, rTMS inhibited mu suppression. Furthermore, it had little effect
on performance on the social-cognitive task, while significantly decreasing accuracy and increasing response latency on the social-perceptual
task. These results are consistent with a componential view of ToM and
suggest that other mechanisms are necessary for mental attributions of
beliefs and intentions.

D8
DISSOCIATION BETWEEN LINGUISTIC AND VISUOSPATIAL
FMRI ACTIVATIONS DURING CONDITIONAL AND TRANSITIVE
REASONING Jérôme Prado1, Jean-Baptiste Van der Henst1, Ira Noveck1;
1Laboratoire sur le Langage, le Cerveau et la Cognition (L2C2), Université de
Lyon, France — A highly debated issue in the literature on deductive reasoning concerns the linguistic or visuospatial nature of the inferencemaking process. Several neuroimaging studies have attempted to address
this question but have found heterogenic results. One of the possible
explanations for these discrepancies could lay in the fact that different
types of logical arguments could involve different types of cognitive processes. To test this hypothesis, we used fMRI while the same participants
were asked to reason on both conditional arguments (e.g. there is a triangle; if there is a triangle then there is a circle) and transitive relations (e.g.
the square is to the left of the circle; the circle is to the left of the triangle).
We found that largely separate functional networks were activated for
each logical argument relative to its respective baseline, at the time of the
inference making process. While a bilateral superior parietal system was
specifically involved in the transitive reasoning task, the conditional task
yielded activation in a restricted network involving Broca’s area and the
left inferior parietal cortex. This functional dissociation suggests that reasoning on conditional arguments mostly rely on linguistic processes
while reasoning on transitive relations mostly relies on visuospatial
mechanisms. These results are consistent with the idea that there is not a
unified cognitive mechanism at the basis of deductive reasoning and suggest that different kinds of processes are involved depending on the type
of logical argument.

116

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

D9
AGING EFFECTS ON TEMPORAL CONSTRUAL Kanchna
Ramchandran1, Irwin Levin1, Antoine Bechara3, Daniel Tranel1, Natalie L.
Denburg1; 1University of Iowa, 2University of Southern California — According to temporal construal theory, people construe the near-term future at
concrete, subordinate levels (Ex: making a list=writing things down) and

Poster Session D

the long-term future at abstract, supra-ordinate levels (Ex: making a
list=getting organized). Healthy, community dwelling, older adults (5579 years) were measured on behavioral tasks of temporal construal.
While time perspective (the length of one's self-defined future) declines
with age, our results indicate that abstract thinking is significantly higher
in the old-old (72-79) vs. the young-old (55-71). These preliminary results
are discussed in the context of the anterior prefrontal cortex that is
hypothesized to mediate temporal construal and its supposed functional
decline with age. It is perhaps in this region (1) where collective experience is structured as abstract rules/prototypes of behavior and (2) where
decision-making declines as people age. Thus, older adults may ignore
the long-term consequences of their decisions as being too abstract, while
disproportionably focusing on immediate payoffs.
D10
THE EFFECT OF LEVODOPA INFUSION ON TASK RELATED
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN PARKINSON DISEASE Grega
Repovs1, Deanna Barch1, Meghan Campbell2, Tamara Hershey2; 1Washington
University in Saint Louis, 2Washington University School of Medicine,
Washington University in Saint Louis — Parkinson disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disease primarily characterized by a depletion of dopaminergic neurons in substantia nigra. Besides pronounced motor disfunction,
PD patients also exhibit impairment of a number of cognitive abilities
such as working memory (WM) and inhibition in cognitive control.
Given the important role of dopamine in modulating the information
flow both within frontal lobes as well as to and from other brain areas, we
were interested in exploring to what degree the depletion of dopaminergic neurons in PD affects task-related functional connectivity, as well as
assessing the effect of dopaminergic treatment on the same. 24 patients
with PD and 21 healthy controls took part in a levodopa challenge study.
Each participant performed two block-design fMRI runs of 2-back WM
and Go/No-Go tasks off and on levodopa infusion. Preliminary analysis
of functional connectivity between task related regions of interest conducted on 10 patients and 13 controls revealed significant task dependent
differences in functional connectivity between the two groups. The differences were present both in baseline off-levodopa condition as well as in
the effect of levodopa on functional connectivity. For patients performing
WM task levodopa infusion enhanced connectivity within dorsolateral
prefrontal - posterior parietal network, regarded as crucial for WM executive processes. In Go/No-Go task levodopa infusion enhanced connectivity of cortical and subcortical regions to right inferior frontal cortex, a
region strongly implicated in response inhibition. The results reveal significant contribution of dopamine to task related integration of brain
function and its impairment in PD.
D11
REINTERPRETING COGNITIVE CONTROL AS BAYESIAN
INFERENCE Jeremy Reynolds1, Michael Mozer1; 1University of
Colorado — Cognitive control refers to the flexible deployment of memory
and attention in response to task demands and current goals. Modern
theories of cognitive control are often framed in terms of optimization:
control operations are performed so as to maximize reward, produce few
errors, achieve goals in minimal time, etc. We present a novel perspective
on cognitive control which posits that control operations determined by
Bayesian inference. We model tasks in which participants are shown
sequences of stimuli, some demanding a response, and others modulating the nature of the responses (e.g., Koechlin, Ody, & Kouneiher, 2003).
In these tasks, participants must use working memory to maintain the
current control set. Our modeling framework is based on a dynamic
Bayes network that is initialized with the information contained in the
task instructions. The network includes an internal memory whose control operations (storage, retrieval, and reset) are deduced via probabilistic
inference. We show that our model provides a parsimonious account of
behavioral and neuroimaging data, and offers a novel view of dynamic
control hierarchies operating at different time scales that emerge as a
response to task demands. Moreover, our framework provides insight

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

into how task instructions can be directly translated into appropriate
behavior and then efficiently refined with subsequent task experience.
D12
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY OF SUSTAINED ATTENTION
FOLLOWING TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Nadine
Richard1,
Charlene O'Connor1, Marina Mandic2, Adriana Restagno2, Brian Levine1,2;
1
University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research Institute — Sustained
attention
(SA) refers to the endogenous (“top-down”) control of attentional
resources to maintain goal-directed behavior. In neurologically healthy
individuals, SA involves a right-lateralized fronto-thalamic-parietal network, with dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) as the primary substrate for executive control. Frontal lobe functioning is particularly
vulnerable to the effects of traumatic brain injury (TBI), often resulting in
enduring SA deficit. Neuroplastic mechanisms and/or the engagement
of alternate processes offer possible routes for the recovery of endogenous control, with the additional possibility of attentional re-engagement
though exogenous (“bottom-up”) stimulation (e.g. via alerting tones).
This fMRI study measured activation in seven chronic (minimum one
year post-injury) moderate-to-severe TBI patients, whose performance on
the Sustained Attention to Response Task (SART; Robertson et al., 1997)
was comparable to that of ten neurologically healthy controls. Participants performed the SART and a visuomotor control task, each with and
without exogenous alerting tones, yielding four experimental conditions
in a blocked fMRI design. Rather than the focal right DLPFC activity
observed in controls, TBI patients showed activations across several prefrontal regions during SART performance. By contrast, activations in thalamic and right parietal regions were similar across the patient and
control groups, suggesting that functioning in these regions is less
directly affected by TBI. Exogenous alerting tones had similar performance but different neurophysiological effects in the two groups. These
findings suggest that patients who have sustained and functionally
recovered from moderate-to-severe TBI recruit an altered network to support sustained attention.
D13
ACTION AND DESIRE: AN FMRI/EYETRACKER STUDY OF
REWARD-ORIENTED ACTION PREPARATION K.
Richard
Ridderinkhof1, Helga Harsay1, Anna van Duijvenvoorde2, Nick Oosterhof3,
Birte Forstmann1, Jasper Wijnen1, Rogier Mars1; 1Acacia, University of
Amsterdam, 2University of Amsterdam, 3Princeton University, 4University of
Oxford — In the interface between motivation and action, expectancy of
reward plays a critical role. Potential reward can enhance action readiness in systems concerned with action preparation. Nonhuman primate
research suggests that the enhancement of action readiness is achieved by
a gating mechanism within subcortical areas that upregulates the
throughput of cortical information to executive structures in the presence
of potential reward. In a combined eyetracker-fMRI-setup, human subjects engaged in an antisaccade task. Reflexive responses had to be suppressed and voluntary responses had to be generated. Information on
reward and spatial preparation was precued. Antisaccadic onset-latency
served as a behavioural measure for the level of action preparation. In
anticipation of reward the striatum was strongly activated and antisaccadic onset latency was reduced. Specific preparatory information on an
upcoming action activated cortical and subcortical structures within the
oculomotor circuit and reduced antisaccadic onset latency. Furthermore
with both reward- and preparatory information available in the preparatory phase the striatum seemed to serve as an integrative structure to
improve cross-talk among reward- and oculomotor circuits by “pushing”
the superior colliculus to an “up” state to facilitate afferent cortical input.
Thus action preparation and efficiency was successfully maximized in
the expectation of an upcoming reward.
D14
DOES COMPENSATORY NEURAL ACTIVITY SURVIVE OLD-OLD
AGE? Jenna L. Riis1,2, Scott M. McGinnis1,2, Hyemi Chong3, David A.
Wolk4, Dorene M. Rentz1,2, Phillip J. Holcomb5, Kirk R. Daffner1,2; 1Harvard

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

117

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

Medical School, 2Brigham and Women's Hospital, 3University of Texas
Southwestern Medical School, 4University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
5Tufts University — It has been postulated that one compensatory mechanism employed by high-performing older adults to offset age-related
declines in neurophysiological functioning is the appropriation of more
processing resources. Consistent with this idea, we have found that cognitively high-performing younger-old adults (60-79 years old) respond
behaviorally to novel stimuli comparably to their younger counterparts
by allocating additional resources, as measured by the P3 event-related
potential. We hypothesized that age-associated reductions in processing
capacity would cause this mechanism to break down in old-old adults
(&#8805;80 years old). Here, we compared old-old to young-old, middleaged, and young adults who participated in a subject-controlled variant
of the novelty oddball paradigm. Preliminary results revealed: 1) Cognitively high-performing old-old adults continued to be engaged by novelty, spending much more time viewing novel than standard stimuli. 2)
Distinctions between cognitively high and average-performers in novelty
processing persisted in old-old age, with cognitively high-performers
continuing to allocate more attentional resources to novel stimuli (as
measured by P3 amplitude and viewing duration) than cognitively average-performers. 3) As predicted, across cognitively high-performers,
there was a reduction in P3 amplitude to novel stimuli in old-old compared to young-old adults, suggesting that information processing
resources may decline in cognitively high-performing old-old adults,
undermining their capacity to compensate by appropriating additional
resources. 4) Among cognitively high-performing old-old, the P3
response to novel and standard stimuli became less distinct, consistent
with the notion that even in successful cognitive aging there may be an
age-related reduction in processors specialized to handle specific stimulus types.
D15
DIFFUSION TENSOR IMAGING CORRELATES OF COGNITIVE
CONTROL R. E. Roberts1,2, P. Nachev1, M. Husain2,1; 1Imperial College
London, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience & Institute of Neurology, UCL — Cognitive control is used to describe the management and allocation of
resources in response to situations of increased difficulty, interference or
competition. The aim of our study was to investigate whether differences
in performance, across healthy individuals, on cognitive control tasks can
be related to the structure of white matter within their brains using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). Our subjects were tested on two different
tasks, the Eriksen Flanker and Change of Plan paradigms, which examine
performance on two different aspects of cognitive control: interference
suppression and rapidly switching response plans respectively. In addition to medial and lateral prefrontal fMRI activations, previous Flanker
and Change of Plan studies have demonstrated task-relevant activity in
parietal cortex. We used the coordinates of these areas to guide the location of our regions of interest (ROIs) in our DTI analysis. In the Flanker
ROI, we found a positive correlation between incongruence cost and
Fractional Anisotropy (FA) in the white matter adjacent to the intraparietal sulcus (IPS), most prominently in the left hemisphere. In the Change
of Plan ROI, there was a positive correlation between performance and
FA in the white matter adjacent to IPS, this time most prominently in the
right hemisphere. Our initial findings suggest that the microstructure of
white matter adjacent to IPS may be related to behavioural performance
on two tests of cognitive control. In conjunction with medial frontal
regions, IPS may perform a more prominent role in response selection
and interference suppression than previously thought.
D16
UNEXPECTED REWARD AND EXPECTED PUNISHMENT ELICIT
NEURAL ACTIVITY IN THE STRIATUM AND DORSAL RAPHÉ
NUCLEUS RESPECTIVELY. Oliver J. Robinson1, Barbara J. Sahakian1,
Roshan Cools1; 1University of Cambridge, Behavioural and Clinical
Neuroscience Institute — Adequate adaptation to our constantly changing
environment requires the anticipation of biologically relevant events by

118

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

learning signals of their occurrence, i.e. reward and punishment prediction. A putative neuronal mechanism of reward prediction is the fast phasic firing of dopamine cells that project to the striatum and the prefrontal
cortex. Conversely, the prediction of future punishment may be subserved by serotonin, released by the dorsal raphé nucleus, thus acting as
a motivational opponent to dopamine in prediction learning (Daw et al.,
2002). Here we demonstrate, using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging during observational reversal learning, that the ventral
striatum and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex are more active when
subjects switch responding following unexpected reward than when they
switch responding following unexpected punishment. This difference
may underlie previously observed contrasting effects of dopamine on
behavioural switching following unexpected reward versus punishment
(Cools et al., 2006). By contrast, activation centred on the dorsal raphé
nucleus was greater for predicted (and unavoidable) punishment than for
predicted reward. These data concur with distinct dopaminergic and
serotoninergic mechanisms of outcome-based switching and punishment-prediction respectively (Cools et al., 2006; 2007).
D17
DISSOCIABLE NEURAL NETWORKS FOR ATTENTION AND
INTENTION DURING PREPARATION IN TASK SWITCHING
Hannes Ruge1, Todd Braver2; 1University of Technology Dresden, 2Washington
University in St. Louis — The picture emerging from previous behavioral
and brain imaging studies suggests that preparation for frequently
changing future task demands seems to be accomplished by attentional
means. Specifically, the term "attentional" is used to emphasize that
rather general processing routines required for accomplishing a certain
task (e.g. letter judgment or digit judgment) are biased in favor of the currently relevant task. This mechanism ensures that upcoming task-ambiguous stimuli (e.g., a letter and a digit) will be preferentially processed
within the previously biased channel. Among the most consistently
reported brain areas associated with such attentional preparation processes are the posterior parietal cortex and the posterior lateral prefrontal
cortex. The present study demonstrates that task preparation can also
include intentional (action-oriented), rather than attentional (input-oriented) processes. We show that such a shift of strategy can be induced,
when the effects that are entailed by actions in a given task are made
explicit. Under such conditions, preparatory BOLD activation was
observed in more anterior regions within lateral prefrontal cortex and the
anterior intra-parietal sulcus.
D18
MOTIVATIONALLY-BASED MODULATION OF COGNITIVE
CONTROL DURING TASK-SWITCHING Adam
Savine1,
Todd
Braver1; 1Washington University in St. Louis — It is becoming increasingly
appreciated that the mechanisms by which humans exert control over
thoughts and actions will need to be understood in terms of motivational
as well as cognitive processes. Motivation may facilitate adaptive mobilization of cognitive control, such that in tasks with higher motivational
priority cognitive resources will be more effectively deployed to regulate
behavioral performance. The current study tested this hypothesis within
the domain of cued task-switching. Participants performed face and
word classification tasks in either single-task or mixed-task blocks. In half
of the trials (randomly intermixed) in each block an advance incentive
cue signaled the potential for a monetary bonus for good performance
(with performance criteria set individually from a baseline task block).
On non-incentive trials the classic task-switching behavioral performance
signatures of switch cost and mixing cost were observed. However, on
trials with incentive cues, these costs were significantly attenuated, demonstrating that motivational priority information conveyed by incentive
cues is of greater strength or of a different type than the priority information provided by neutral task cues. Neuroimaging data of this paradigm
provide additional information regarding the neural correlates of incentive effects on cognitive control. Results are presented regarding incentive cue effects on preparatory lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) activation,

Poster Session D

and on PFC and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) responses in trials subsequent to ones in which reward was not obtained.
D19
THE NEURAL BASIS OF RAPID INSTRUCTED TASK LEARNING
Walter Schneider1,2,3, Michael W. Cole1,2,3, Bruna Martins1; 1University of
Pittsburgh, 2Center for Neuroscience, University of Pittsburgh, 3Center for the
Neural Basis of Cognition, University of Pittsburgh — Interpreting symbols
for rapid instructed task learning (RITL) is one of the most powerful yet
poorly understood human behaviors. Accurately learning cognitive tasks
usually requires only several trials for humans, which is in sharp contrast
to the many trials typically necessary for our primate relatives (e.g., thousands of trials over 3-6 months for macaques to learn a simple match-tosample task for Fuster and Jervey, 1982). This poorly understood yet
extremely important cognitive ability relies on explicit task instruction
and allows for rapid sharing of behaviors among individuals, increasing
cooperation, survivability, and productivity in everyday life. Functional
MRI (fMRI) was used here to investigate RITL, comparing loading of
novel task instructions to loading of familiar task instructions. We found
that an anterior portion of lateral prefrontal cortex (aPFC) is more active
during RITL. We suggest that aPFC is important for rapidly converting
task instructions into task sets for subsequent task performance. Sustained activity within dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) suggests
these task sets are maintained during task performance within this
region. DLPFC and other cognitive control network (Cole & Schneider,
2007) regions likely interact to implement each task set constructed by
aPFC.
D20
THE INFLUENCE OF SOCIAL EVALUATION ON PERFORMANCE
MONITORING: EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS
AND SKIN CONDUCTANCE RESPONSES Beate
Schuermann1,
Norbert Kathmann1, Tanja Endrass1; 1Humboldt-University, Berlin — The
affective and motivational state plays a decisive role in behavioural selfregulation, providing insight into stress-related consequences of cognitive functioning. In situations, where errors become highly significant to
oneself, e.g. during social evaluation, activity of the self-monitoring system increases in order to prevent errors. Performance monitoring, as an
essential prerequisite for altering behaviour, can be investigated using a
response-locked brain potential, the error-negativity (ERN), observed at
fronto-central electrodes after the execution of errors. Several studies
have already examined the influence of financial incentives on the ERN.
These studies lead to an increased interest in investigating motivational
influences on the ERN in general. However, little is known about the
modulating effects of social motivation on performance monitoring. The
present study measured the ERN during a modified Stroop task with two
motivational conditions in 20 undergraduates. During an evaluation condition the aim was to induce stress, therefore participants were told that
performance was directly assessed by a research assistant. In contrast,
during a control condition subjects were told that no evaluation would
take place. Skin conductance response was measured during both experimental conditions to validate the stress induction. The results suggest a
reliably larger ERN and stronger electrodermal activity during the evaluation condition in comparison to the control condition. No behavioural
differences could be observed between conditions. ERN modulations are
interpreted as consequences of different error perception and error significance under social evaluation. These results emphasize an evaluative
function of the ERN, and support its sensitivity to affective and motivational contexts.
D21
EFFECTS OF STIMULUS-RESPONSE CONGRUENCY ON
TEMPORAL FLANKER TASK PERFORMANCE: EVIDENCE FOR
MODALITY-SPECIFIC CONTROL MECHANISMS Hillary Schwarb1,
Eliot Hazeltine2, Eric H. Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology,
2University of Iowa — Theorists differ regarding the cognitive architecture
of executive control; some propose that a unitary central executive mech-

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

anism (e.g., Baddeley, 1986; 1996) while others suggest a collection of
independent control mechanisms (e.g., Miller & Cohen, 2001) accomplishes this control. In the present experiments, we look for evidence for
independent control mechanisms by examining conflict adaptation
within and between stimulus modalities. If multiple control mechanisms
mediate human performance, then the modality of the task stimulus may
be an important factor for determining how cognitive control is allocated.
To test whether control transfers across stimulus modalities, we modified
the flanker task (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974) so that the stimuli were differentiated in time rather than space, making it amenable to both visual and
auditory stimuli. A four choice version of the task was used to eliminate
the contributions of stimulus feature repetitions. As in the standard
flanker task, the congruency effect was larger after compatible trials than
after incompatible trials – the hallmark behavioral finding of adaptive
control processes. However, this sequential effect was only observed
when the consecutive trials used the same stimulus modality. When the
stimulus modality switched, no adaptive control was observed – this
result was obtained even when the two stimulus modalities used highly
related SR mappings. These data suggest that sequential effects are
restricted to the relevant input modality; that conflict resolution is modality-specific; and that modalities rather than SR mappings determine the
boundaries for conflict resolution. The neural implications of separate
modality-specific conflict resolution mechanisms were investigated using
fMRI.
D22
PREDICTORS
OF
COGNITIVE
CONTROL PROCESSING
INCREMENTS IN PRESCHOOLERS FROM POOR HOMES AFTER
COGNITIVE TRAINING INTERVENTIONS Soledad
Segretin1,2,
1,2
1
1 1
Sebastian Lipina , Sol Benaros , Julia Hermida ; Unidad de Neurobiología
Aplicada (UNA), CEMIC-CONICET, 2Escuela de Humanidades, Universidad
Nacional de San Martin (UNSAM) — Previous studies showed negative
impact of poverty on executive performance in healthy preschoolers.
Two cognitive training interventions [T1: N= 237; T2 N=382) were
applied in two new cohorts (3-5 years). Intervention Groups received
individual (T1, T2) or group (T2) weekly sessions of training in tasks
demanding inhibitory control, working memory, planning, and flexibility
processing. Three schemes were applied: 16, 25 or 32 sessions. Control
Groups were involved in tasks with non-executive demands (same
schemes). Both groups received iron and acid folic supplementation.
Teachers and parents received training and/or counselling, respectively.
Ethical international and national procedures were applied. Intervention
Groups significantly enhanced performance on trained and new tasks
(Colombo and Lipina, 2005; Martelli et al., 2007; Segretin et al., 2007). In
order to identify the role of independent variables on performance increments, Multinomial Regression Analyses were applied. Higher baseline
ages predicted performance increments in verbal working memory (T1:
rr=2.36, p=0.01, IC95%=1.19/4.66); spatial working memory (T2: rr=2.88,
p<0.001, IC95%=1.63/5.11); and flexibility (T2: rr=2.29, p=0.02,
IC95%=1.14/4.60). Lower baseline scores predicted performance increments in attention (T2: rr=0.87, p<0.001, IC95%=0.83/0.92), spatial working memory (T1: rr=0.71, p=0.005, IC95%=0.56/0.90); and flexibility (T1:
rr=0.59, p<0.001, IC95%=0.45/0.77; T2: rr=0.53, p<0.001, IC95%=0.41/
0.70). Higher parental education and occupation predicted increments in
spatial working memory (T1: rr=1.47, p=0.03, IC95%=1.04/2.08) and flexibility (T2: rr=1.25, p=0.02, IC95%=1.03/1.50). Results suggest that a profile consisting in higher baseline ages, lower baseline performances, and
higher parental education/occupation backgrounds, were the best predictors of cognitive control performance increments in healthy preschoolers from poor-homes.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

119

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

D23
DOPAMINE
REPLACEMENT
THERAPY
MODULATES
ATTENTION SHIFTING BUT NOT REVERSAL LEARNING IN
MILD-MODERATE PARKINSON’S DISEASE Alison C. Simioni1,
Lesley K. Fellows1; 1McGill University — Dopamine plays a modulatory
role in human cognition, but the mechanisms underlying this modulation
remain unclear. Untreated patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD) can
have variable cognitive deficits, often in the domain of frontal-executive
function. Some work suggests that dopamine replacement therapy (DRT)
also affects cognition, either improving or worsening specific executive
functions. It has been proposed that this relates to regional differences in
dopamine denervation within frontal-striatal systems. Existing evidence
for this regionally-specific hypothesis is largely derived from between
group comparisons in relatively small samples- a concern in this heterogeneous disease. We tested the effects of DRT on dorsolateral and ventromedial prefrontal-striatal function in a cohort of 19 patients with mildmoderate PD, in a within-subjects design. Task shifting was used as a
probe of dorsolateral frontal function, reversal learning a test of ventromedial frontal function. Basic motor abilities were measured with the
Purdue Pegboard test. DRT had the expected beneficial effect on motor
ability, significantly improving pegboard scores. In contrast to prior
reports, no significant effect of DRT was detected on standard measures
of reversal learning. Treatment did affect task shifting performance.
Patients tended to be slower off medication on both switch and nonswitch trials, but switch cost was significantly smaller off compared to on
medication, again in contrast to previous work. These findings highlight
the complex role of dopamine in prefrontal function, and argue against a
regional frontostriatal dopamine deficiency-overdose account of executive dysfunction in PD.
D24
BRAIN RESOURCE ALLOCATION IN THE ATTENTIONAL
BLINK Heleen A. Slagter1, Tom Johnstone1, Iseult A.M. Beets2, Bridget
Kelly1, Richard J. Davidson1; 1University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, 2PhilipsUniversity, Marburg, Germany — The brain has difficulty processing two
temporally close targets, as is evidenced by the “attentional blink” (AB)
deficit: If two targets are presented within 500 ms in a rapid sequence of
distracters, correct identification of the first target (T1) hinders identification of the second (T2). This deficit is thought to result from competition
between the two targets for limited attentional resources. To gain a better
understanding of the neural mechanisms underlying the AB, while in an
MRI scanner, participants performed an AB task in which T1 and T2 were
visual stimuli (a body and a scene respectively) which both activate dissociable areas of occipitotemporal cortex: the extrastriate body area (EBA)
and the parahippocampal place area (PPA). This allowed us to examine
attentional resource distribution between the two targets. Greater PPA
activity was observed in T2seen compared to T2unseen trials, reflecting
conscious T2 perception. No overall difference in EBA activation was
observed between T2seen and T2unseen trials, confirming the idea that
the AB bottleneck occurs at a later locus of processing. However, poor
performance was generally associated with greater EBA activity in
T2unseen vs. T2seen trials, indicating that individuals with a relatively
big AB spent more processing resources to represent T1 in T2unseen trials. This finding supports the idea that the AB results from an over-allocation of resources to T1. Results from additional analyses on
simultaneously collected skin conductance, pupil diameter, and heart
rate data provide further insight into the role of arousal and cognitive
effort in AB task performance.
D25
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF SOCIAL AND NON-SOCIAL
REWARD PROCESSING David V. Smith1,2,3, Benjamin Y. Hayden3,4,
Justin R. Meyer2, Jason A. Chen2, Truong-Kha Trong2, Allen Song2, Micheal L.
Platt1,3,4, Scott A. Huettel1,2,3; 1Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke

120

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

University, 2Brain Imaging and Analysis Center, Duke University, 3Center for
Neuroeconomic Studies, Duke University, 4Duke University — Viewing
an
attractive face and obtaining money are both rewarding. Monetary
rewards, however, are secondary reinforcers (i.e., they cannot be immediately consumed), while social rewards like viewing an attractive face can
be immediately experienced by their recipients. We examined whether
the receipt of social (attractive faces) and non-social (money) rewards
similarly modulate neural systems implicated in learning and valuation
of outcomes. We used event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine the brain responses of heterosexual men to female
faces. Attractiveness of the face stimuli was calibrated based on normative data from an independent behavioral study. Subjects passively
viewed a succession of faces and financial gains and losses (non-hypothetical) while they performed a simple, unrelated task. Monetary gains,
compared to losses, evoked activation in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex that scaled with the value of monetary but not social rewards. Activation in the ventral striatum, in contrast, increased with increasing
magnitude of both social and non-social rewards. These results suggest
that social rewards might be particularly valuable for studying experienced utility since they are consumed immediately unlike money which
can only be utilized after the experiment. Ongoing research extends this
paradigm to an active choice task in which subjects trade money for the
opportunity to view a more attractive face (cf. Hayden et al. 2007). Preliminary data from this latter paradigm suggest that activation in cognitive control regions is modulated by individual differences in subjects’
value functions for social rewards.
D26
USING REAL-TIME FMRI TO ACHIEVE ENHANCED CONTROL
OVER MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX Rachelle Smith1, Graeme
McCaig1, Kamyar Keramatian2, Burkard Maedler3, Kalina Christoff1;
1University of British Columbia, 2University of British Columbia/Neuroscience
Program, 3University of British Columbia — Real-time
fMRI
(rt-fMRI)
allows for improved hypothesis testing of proposed functions of higher
order brain regions and for presentation of real-time feedback of activation in target areas. While rt-fMRI has been applied in studies of the anterior cingulate, somatomotor cortex, supplementary motor area,
parahippocampal place area, amygdala, primary and secondary auditory
areas and most recently, the anterior insula, its application to higher
order brain regions such as the anterior prefrontal cortex remains relatively unexplored. The present study aimed to test the hypothesis that
subjects can learn improved modulation of activation in the anterior
medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) based on rt-fMRI feedback of the average activation in this region. Previous studies have implicated the anterior MPFC in emotional awareness (e.g. Lane et al., 1997) and selfreferential processing (e.g. Fossati et al., 2003). Based on these findings,
we employed an up-regulation strategy that aimed at focusing attention
upon an emotionally significant personal memory (chosen prior to scanning by the subject), while experiencing in fullness and reflecting upon
the associated emotion. The down-regulation strategy, on the other hand,
aimed at detaching oneself from the associated emotion, while viewing
the same personal memory from a more cognitive perspective. Results
demonstrate the suitability of this paradigm for modulation of the anterior MPFC. These findings and the developed paradigm bear implications for the development of alternative treatments for clinical disorders
such as depression that are often characterized by a ruminative response
style (e.g. Nolen-Hoeksema and Morrow, 1991).
D27
THE ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX AND THE PREFRONTAL
CORTEX IN PROACTIVE AND CONCURRENT INTERFERENCES SWITCHING Myeong-Ho Sohn1, Byeong-Taek Lee2, E. Zita Patai1, Becky
Weldon1; 1George Washington University, 2Seoul National University — Cognitive control is required to minimize the interference effect on the performance of the goal-relevant task. In this fMRI study, we examined the
effects of proactive and concurrent interferences. The proactive interfer-

Poster Session D

ence occurs when the current task is different from the most recent task.
The concurrent interference occurs when the current target is accompanied with a distractor. Participants performed two perceptual classification tasks and two semantic classification tasks in a task-switching
paradigm. In general, participants were more fluent with perceptual than
semantic tasks. The performance of a semantic task was interfered more
by a concurrent distractor associated with another semantic task than by
a concurrent distractor associated with a perceptual task. In contrast, the
perceptual task performance did not differ by the type of concurrent distractor. In addition, the switch cost of a semantic task was greater when
preceded by a perceptual task than by another semantic task, which the
switch cost of a perceptual task did not differ by the type of the preceding
task. Although the behavioral data seemingly portray a contradicting
case (i.e., the greater concurrent interference with a semantic task and the
greater proactive interference with a perceptual task), the imaging results
revealed greater activations in the anterior cingulate and the prefrontal
cortex in relation to the semantic task performance. We interpret these
results that the semantic task suffers more from the task-level conflict,
which is detected by the anterior cingulate cortex and modulated by the
prefrontal cortex.
D28
RESPONSE INHIBITION AND ATTENTIONAL PROCESSING IN 57 YEAR-OLD CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT ADHD
SYMPTOMS; AN ERP STUDY. Marjolein Spronk1, Lisa M. Jonkman1,
Chantal Kemner1,2; 1Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands,
2University Medical Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands — Attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children below age 7 is still a relatively
neglected area in Event-Related-brain Potential (ERP) research. The aim
of the present study was to investigate differences in response inhibition
and attentional processing in 5-7 year-old children with and without
ADHD symptoms, both derived from a community sample. Thirteen
ADHD children and 16 control children performed a CPT-AX task.
Behavioral measures (hits, false alarms, inattention and impulsivity
scores) and ERP measures of conflict monitoring and inhibition (NogoN2 and Nogo-P3), cue-orientation and prestimulus target expectation
(Cue-N2 and P3) and response preparation (Contingent Negative Variation (CNV)) were collected. Although no behavioral differences were
found between the two groups, ERPs showed a significant Cue-P3 at Cz
in the control group, which was absent in the ADHD group. Furthermore, CNV was found to be similar at fronto-central leads but larger in
the ADHD group at parietal-occipital leads. No group differences for
Nogo-N2 were found and Nogo-P3 appeared absent in both groups. The
attenuated Cue-P3 effect in the ADHD group is interpreted as a reduced
Go-expectation compared to controls. The functional significance of the
enlarged parietal-occipital CNV in ADHD children is still unclear.
Whereas intact Nogo-N2’s in both groups indicate comparable levels of
conflict, the absence of the Nogo-P3 in both groups indicates that inhibition processes are still immature at this age. In conclusion, community
sample ADHD children perform similar to healthy children at the CPTtask at age 5-7, ERPs, however, show that attention-related brain activity
is already deficient at this age.
D29
NEUROPLASTICITY-BASED COGNITIVE TRAINING IMPROVES
WORKING MEMORY AND COGNITIVE CONTROL PROCESSES
IN SCHIZOPHRENIA PATIENTS: BEHAVIORAL AND FMRI
ASSESSMENTS Karuna Subramaniam1,2, Tracy Luks1, Stephanie Aldebot1,
Paul Hennig1, Adelaide Hearst1, Melissa Fisher1, Dawood Subhani1, Gregory
V. Simpson1, Sophia Vinogradov1; 1University of California San Francisco,
2
Northwestern University — Previous research has demonstrated that
schizophrenia patients show impairments in attention, working memory
(WM) and cognitive control functions, which are associated with relative
decreases in DLPFC activity compared to healthy controls (HCs). In the
current study, we investigated whether neuroplasticity-based cognitive
training would improve these impairments. We used fMRI to measure

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

brain activity in 16 patients and 8 HCs while they performed three NBack tasks, of increasing levels of WM load (0, 1, and 2-Back tasks), and
an AX-CPT task that assessed cognitive control. Eight patients were then
randomly assigned to 80 hours of computerized targeted cognitive training exercises (TCTs) that trained auditory and visual processing (PositScience), and 8 to the control-condition involving 80 hours of graphicbased computer games (CGs). All subjects repeated the fMRI tasks after
this 16-week intervention. BOLD fMRI activity was measured on a 3 T GE
scanner (EPI; 14 slices every 1sec for the N-Back task; 24 slices every 2sec
for the AX-CPT task) before and after intervention. Preliminary results on
the 2-Back task regarding the changes in performance relative to baseline
indicate that after training, TCTs made 42% more correct rejections and
84% fewer false positives compared to CGs. On the AX-CPT task, the
change scores relative to baseline indicate that after training TCTs made
49% more correct target responses (AX); 40% fewer incorrect non-target
responses (AY); and 50% fewer misses compared to CGs. Taken together,
these findings suggest that neuroplasticity-based cognitive training
improves patients’ WM and cognitive control operations.
D30
A HIGH DENSITY EEG STUDY OF THE RIGHT INFERIOR
FRONTAL CORTEX DURING STOP SIGNAL RESPONSE
INHIBITION Nicole Swann1, Julie Onton2, Scott Makeig2, Adam Aron1;
1UC San Diego, 2Institute for Neural Computation, UC San Diego — Prior
research has shown that the inferior frontal cortex of the right hemisphere (rIFC) is critical for voluntarily stopping of an initiated response
tendency. We used 256 channel EEG to monitor 8 volunteers during a
stop-signal task. For each trial, subjects were prompted to initiate a right
hand motor response. However, for a minority of trials, an auditory stop
signal instructed the subject to inhibit their already-initiated response.
Each stop signal was delivered at a variable time relative to the initiation
prompt to produce a roughly equal number of successful and failed ‘stop’
trials. Using independent component analysis (ICA), we extracted a putative rIFC-localized EEG component in all of the 8 subjects analyzed so far.
In these components, preliminary observations suggest a stronger
increase in theta power during ‘stop’ trials relative to ‘go’ trials. This
theta response was similar for the early portions of all ‘stop’ trials regardless of whether or not stopping was successful – consistent with the
notion that the stop process is triggered on all trials regardless of outcome (and what determines success or failure is the speed of going). The
increase in theta power occurred roughly 200 ms after the stop signal,
consistent with prior reports of an event-related potential near 200ms following stop signal presentation (N200). Future analysis will explore possible phase coherence of the rIFC signal with other putatively connected
cortical regions.
D31
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR A DIFFERENTIAL
ACTIVATION OF THE BRAIN NETWORK ASSOCIATED WITH
TEMPORAL DISCRIMINATION PROCESSING. Vincenza Tarantino1,
Christina G. Baehne2, Ann-Christine Ehlis2, Michael M. Plichta2, Christian P.
Jacob2, Patrizia S. Bisiacchi1, Andreas J. Fallgatter2; 1University of Padua, Italy,
2University of Wuerzburg, Germany — The ability to discriminate time
durations of stimuli is essential in order to optimally shape behaviour.
However the question of how temporal information is processed by the
brain is still a matter of debate. In the present study we examined behavioural and brain electrical activity related to a visual time discrimination
task. Forty-four subjects were required to compare two sequentially presented time intervals: a fixed standard interval (1000 ms), and an equal to
standard, longer (1200 ms), or shorter (800 ms) one. Longer intervals
were more accurately and faster identified than shorter intervals. ERP
data showed a CNV component at centro-frontal sites, which develops
during the encoding of the comparison interval and, only for longer intervals, terminates at the end of a memorized standard duration (negativeto-positive shift). In line with previous studies, the shift of CNV might be
assumed to reflect the end of a process in which pulses are accumulated.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

121

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

Interestingly, the analysis of amplitude and scalp distribution of ERP
components after the offset of the comparison intervals differentiated the
time processing associated with the three time durations. Specifically, the
amplitude of a P150 peak linearly increased with the interval length at
central and parietal sites. A P500 component was found to be pronounced
and earlier in latency in more parietal scalp locations, for longer than for
shorter intervals. Results are discussed in the light of memory processes
required by the task, and linked to the timing of activation of specific
brain areas of a fronto-parietal circuit.
D32
DIFFERENCES IN ACTIVATION BETWEEN CURRENT AND
FORMER COCAINE USERS USING A MONETARY INCENTIVE
DELAY TASK Andre Thomas1, Jennifer Hylton1, Shashwath Meda1, Melissa
Andrews1, Michael Stevens1,2, Godfrey Pearlson1,2; 11Olin Neuropsychiatry
Research Center, Institute of Living at Hartford Hospital, 2Yale University
School of Medicine — We assessed fMRI activation differences between
current and former cocaine users while anticipating rewards using a
monetary incentive delay (MID) task. Subjects/Methods. We studied 10
current cocaine dependent subjects (8 male), 13 former cocaine dependent subjects (11 male), and 33 non-drug using healthy subjects (HC; 12
male) with fMRI at 3T. We compared all 3 groups using one-way
ANOVA in SPM2, for MID phases (Prospective reward, anticipation of
reward, outcome to wins and losses) and small volume correction in predefined ROI’s in a "motivational circuit", comprising nucleus accumbens
(NAcc), amygdala, ventral tegmental area (VTA), ventromedial PFC, caudate, putamen, hippocampus, anterior cingulate, insula and OFC. Findings. The cocaine groups activated less in NAcc during anticipation
periods than HC (0.055 FWE corrected). Current users activated VTA
(0.051 FWE corrected) markedly more than former users; both activated >
HC. Also, current users deactivated more in left NAcc and right caudate
vs former users, contrasted with HC. Conversely, former users activated
more in ventromedial PFC in the anticipation phases (0.004 uncorrected
and 0.009 uncorrected). Both groups activated more in both the mesial
PFC than controls. Failure to activate NAcc during the reward anticipation phase characterized current & past cocaine abusers. Differences in
VTA, mesial PFC, and NAcc activation in anticipation phases distinguished the drug groups from controls. Discussion. Data are consistent
with a general deficit in dopaminergic reward circuitry, perhaps both
predisposing to and exacerbated by cocaine abuse.
D33
INVESTIGATING THE DISTINCTIONS BETWEEN SWITCHING
TASKS AND RESUMING FROM INTERRUPTIONS. Yi-Fang
D.
Tsai1, Matthew S. Peterson1; 1George Mason University — Differences
in
switch and interruption costs have not been addressed in task-switching
and interruptions literature. Task-switching is commonly presented as
switching from one task to another when given an external signal. Switch
costs may be due to failure of a preparatory process or may reflect carryover effects of competing stimulus-response associations. In contrast, an
interruption occurs when a secondary task temporarily interrupts the
completion of a primary task. Compared to a simple task switch, an additional retrieval step is necessary to reactivate the appropriate representations when resuming the primary task. If resumptions require additional
memory retrieval, then they should be sensitive to potential interference
effects during the interruption interval. Subjects were trained on three
discrimination tasks: even-odd, low-high, and consonant-vowel. Subjects
performed one of the three discrimination tasks until they were either
cued to switch to another task or instructed to remember the last task
they performed when given a state change cue (interruption). The length
of the interruptions was held constant and one or three task switches
occurred during the interruption interval. After the interruption interval,
subjects resumed the task that occurred before the interruption. Reaction
times were faster for no switch trials compared to switch trials. There was
no significant reaction time difference between switch and resumption
trials. However, resumption times were faster when the interruption
interval contained one task switch compared to when it contained three.

122

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

These results suggest that resumptions from an interrupting task may
suffer interference effects due to the nature of the interrupting task.
D34
MULTIPLE ROUTES TO COGNITIVE CONTROL? BEHAVIOURAL
ADJUSTMENT TRIGGERED BY CHANGES IN RESPONSE
CONFLICT DOES NOT DEPEND ON INTACT PREFRONTAL
CORTEX Ami Tsuchida1,2, Lesley Fellows1,2; 1Montreal Neurological
Institution, 2McGill University — Functional imaging studies have repeatedly implicated two regions of prefrontal cortex in cognitive control: Both
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) are commonly activated when adjustment of behavior is
needed in the face of response conflict. Recent theories relate these activations to evaluative and strategic functions of these regions, with dACC
said to detect conflict, in turn leading to adjustment of cognitive control
implemented by DLPFC. Converging support for this view has been
more variable. For example, patients with dACC damage do not necessarily show deficits in adjusting performance in response to changing
levels of conflict. Here we asked whether any region of human prefrontal
cortex is necessary for such performance adjustment. We administered a
computerized Stroop color-naming task to 33 subjects with focal frontal
lobe damage, and 29 demographically-matched controls. As in prior
imaging and lesion work, the proportion of incongruent trials was
manipulated to examine how cognitive control was affected by changes
in the degree of response conflict. Subjects were assigned to 4 groups,
based on the site of damage: right lateral (N=9), left lateral (N=5), dorsomedial (N=10), and ventromedial (N=9). Although damage to left lateral
PFC was associated with an exaggerated Stroop effect compared to controls, all 4 lesion groups showed intact adjustment of the Stroop effect in
response to changing conflict level. These results argue against a critical
prefrontal contribution to such adjustments, and lead us to question the
underlying basis of this putative ‘top-down’ phenomenon.
D35
LEARNING TO IGNORE THE IRRELEVANT: BEHAVIOURAL AND
NEURAL CORRELATES OF TARGETED PRACTICE ON A NOVEL
SELECTIVE ATTENTION TASK. Gary Turner1, Anthony Chen1,2,
Shawn Song2, Terrence Nycum1, Mark D'Esposito1,3; 1Helen Wills
Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 2University of
California, San Francisco, 3University of California, Berkeley — Poor
goal
direction is consistently identified as a rehabilitation target, yet neural
mechanisms underlying improvements in goal-directed behaviour are
not well understood. The capacity to parse information as goal-relevant
or -irrelevant, is an essential component of goal-direction. Here we investigated neural mechanisms associated with changes in this capacity
through targeted practice. We challenged healthy participants to selectively process goal-relevant information while ignoring interleaved, goalirrelevant stimuli using a modified N-back task design. Participants were
presented with a pseudo-random sequence of face and scene stimuli and
asked to selectively maintain face stimuli while learning to ignore goalirrelevant scene stimuli over a single fMRI session during which category
relevance remained constant. The task design allowed us to model brain
responses to each stimulus category independently. We were interested
in whether top-down, selective attention practice would result in changes
in neural selectivity (i.e., relative contribution of face and scene-associated brain activity) in the fusiform face area (FFA) and parahippocampal
place area (PPA). In PPA, increased neural selectivity with practice was
observed for all participants. Selectivity changes were more variable in
FFA regions. Both increases in PPA selectivity and greater face-related
activity in FFA were associated with faster responses to goal-relevant face
stimuli across the scan session. No similar brain-behaviour patterns were
observed for the ignored scene stimuli. These data provide preliminary
evidence for rapid, practice-related changes in neural selectivity within
visual association cortex that are behaviourally relevant. Such neural
changes may serve as biomarkers of enhanced goal-directed selection following rehabilitation.

Poster Session D

D36
SEX DIFFERENCES IN THE FUNCTIONAL NEUROANATOMY OF
WORKING MEMORY IN ADULTS WITH ATTENTION-DEFICIT/
HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER Eve Valera1,2,3, Ariel Brown4, Joseph
Biederman1,2, Stephen Faraone5, Nikos Makris3,6, Michael Monuteaux1,2,
Michael Vitulano1, Michael Schiller6, Larry Seidman1,2,7; 1Clinical and
Research Program in Pediatric Psychopharmacology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, 2Harvard Medical School, 3Athinoula A. Martinos Center,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, 4Boston University School of Medicine, 5SUNY
Genetics Research Program, SUNY Upstate Medical Center, 6Center for
Morphometric Analysis, Massachusetts General Hospital, 7Massachusetts
Mental Health Center Public Psychiatry Division, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School — Attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) in adults is associated with significant morbidity and
dysfunction. The majority of ADHD neuroimaging research, often showing functional abnormalities in ADHD, has been conducted with males,
so it is unknown whether these findings also apply to females. Thus, we
examined sex differences in neural functioning of ADHD adults during
performance on a verbal working memory (WM) task. Forty-four adults
with ADHD (21 female) and 49 controls (23 female) were group-matched
on age, sex, and estimated IQ. Correct responses and reaction time on an
n-back task were measures of behavioral WM performance. The BOLD
fMRI response was used as a measure of neural activity during WM performance. Behavioral WM performance on the n-back task did not differ
significantly between ADHD adults and controls. Using Statistical Parametric Mapping, a comparison of neural activity for all ADHD adults vs.
all controls showed decreased activity in a prefrontal region for the
ADHD adults. However, separated by sex, analyses revealed that male
ADHD adults showed significantly decreased activity relative to male
controls in several brain regions, whereas female ADHD adults showed
no differences from female controls. Also, correlational analyses revealed
negative associations between WM related neural activity and number of
hyperactive symptoms for males and number of inattentive symptoms
for females. In sum, male but not female adults with ADHD showed
altered patterns of neural activity during performance on a verbal WM
task. These findings highlight the importance of obtaining large samples
and examining groups separately by sex.
D37
PREFRONTAL NETWORK UNDERLYING INHIBITION OF A
PREPOTENT RESPONSE: FMRI EVIDENCE Antonino
Vallesi1,
Anthony R. McIntosh1,2, Donald T. Stuss1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute Baycrest Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada — Inhibition is an important cognitive function which
may be decomposed into different sub-functions. The neural networks
underlying inhibition are, however, not yet well-characterized. We
addressed this issue by using fMRI on 12 healthy participants performing
a Stroop-like go/nogo task. In that task, a prepotent response should be
prevented in the presence of a nogo stimulus (“distractor”) which shares
features with the go stimulus (“target”). Conflict was controlled by
matching the distractor with an equally conflicting target. The absence of
a response was controlled by matching the distractor with another nogo
stimulus category associated with a weaker tendency to respond
(“other”). Focusing on frontal regions, multivariate Partial Least Squares
(PLS) analysis identified a network of areas mainly activated in the presence of distractors, including bilateral ventrolateral prefrontal cortex
(VLPFC), dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), and anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC). Functional connectivity among these areas was assessed by
selecting a seed voxel in the right VLPFC, and running a subsequent
Multiblock PLS analysis that identifies how distributed patterns of brain
activity covary together in relation to the task conditions. This analysis
confirmed that these areas were functionally connected with each other
especially when inhibition was required. Based on previous neuropsychological work, these findings suggest that different prefrontal areas

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

support inhibitory function in complementary and yet interacting ways,
such as retrieving the task-rules (left VLPFC), setting up the schemata
necessary to prevent a prepotent but inappropriate response (left
DLPFC), energising these schemata (ACC), inhibiting the response (right
VLPFC) and monitoring the results (right DLPFC).
D38
DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF DEEP-BRAIN STIMULATION IN
THE SUBTHALAMIC NUCLEUS ON SELECTIVE RESPONSE
INHIBITION Wery P. M. van den Wildenberg1, Scott A. Wylie2, Nelleke C.
van Wouwe2,3, K. Richard Ridderinkhof1,3; 1University of Amsterdam, the
Netherlands, 2University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 3Leiden University, the
Netherlands — Recent patient studies and fMRI work have shown that the
basal ganglia play a key role in a distributed brain network that controls
the non-specific abortion of motor responses. The aim of the present
study was to specify the involvement of the basal ganglia in the selective
inhibition of responses as a more fine-grained form of cognitive control.
We employed two well-established paradigms to tap two specific manifestations of selective response inhibition. First, we administered the
Simon conflict task (based on the so-called activation-suppression model)
to study response capture and selective inhibition of response activation
that is triggered by irrelevant information. Second, we employed the
stop-change task (based on a horse-race model) to investigate the ability
to interrupt and change an ongoing overt action. Our sample consisted of
12 patients diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease (PD) who received deepbrain stimulation (DBS) in the subthalamic nucleus (STN). All patients
performed the tasks on and off stimulation to address the question
whether stimulation is effective in improving the suppression of taskirrelevant response activation (Simon task) and the stop-signal RT (stopchange task). The results show that DBS of the STN impaired interference
control and was associated with significantly enhanced selective stopping, as indicated by shorter stop-signal RTs to the change signal. An
additional finding is that DBS of the STN did not lead to significantly
shorter response latencies to the change signal, pointing towards the
functional independence of the effects of DBS on responding and
response inhibition.
D39
FUNCTIONAL LOCALIZATION IN NEUROIMAGING: A MULTIDOMAIN META-ANALYTIC APPROACH Jared X. Van Snellenberg1,
Jason Buhle1, Tor D. Wager1; 1Columbia University — Meta-analysis is an
important approach to understanding which brain regions subserve the
cognitive and affective functions studied with neuroimaging. The results
of meta-analyses within a given domain (e.g. working memory) can identify the location and extent of brain areas that are activated consistently
across studies and laboratories. Comparing activations across different
meta-analyses can additionally reveal brain regions involved in domaingeneral processes and demonstrate the specificity and predictive value of
findings across a range of task conditions. In the present study, we compared activations from published meta-analyses of working memory
(WM, 60 studies), inhibition (47 studies), task switching (31 studies), and
emotion (163 studies), and an unpublished meta-analysis of long-term
memory (LTM, 165 studies). These comparisons reveal a number of commonalities across domains. Each of the four cognitive domains showed
consistent bilateral activation of the inferior frontal junction (lateral BA 9,
superior BA 44 and 46) and a dorsal medial junction region at the interface of medial BA 6 and 8 and dorsal BA 32, often referred to as anterior
cingulate cortex in the literature. LTM, WM storage, and task switching
additionally all activated bilateral anterior insula, as did studies eliciting
emotional experience. Finally, LTM, executive WM, and task switching
all activated superior parietal cortex (BA 7). Although activations in these
regions are often ascribed to different specific functions in individual
studies, they are likely to play more fundamental roles in the organization of motivated behavior across many types of tasks.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

123

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

D40
BOLD SUPPORT FOR BOTH GOAL-DRIVEN AND STIMULUSDRIVEN BIAS IN THE CONTINUOUS PERFORMANCE TASK
Nelleke van Wouwe1,3, Richard Ridderinkhof2, Guido Band1,3, Merel
Pannebakker1,3, Leon de Bruin1,3, Serge Rombouts1,3, Bernhard Hommel1,3;
1
Leiden University, 2University of Amsterdam, 3Leiden Institute for Brain and
Cognition — Working memory maintenance of the current task context,
like rules and intentions, is crucial in acting adaptively. When these rules
are insufficiently maintained, current decisions are increasingly biased by
recent experiences such as learned associations between features of an
event. By means of an event-related fMRI we aimed to distinguish the
contribution of rule based control processes and automatically learned
cue-probe associations in an adapted AX-continuous performance task,
using words (cues) and pictures of faces and houses (probes). The subjects’ task was to respond on a target probe given that it was preceded by
a specific cue. Behavioral results indicate that top down control and cueprobe associations both explain part of the variance in performance during decision making. If a specific cue stimulus was followed by a face on
previous occasions, subsequent presentation of that cue stimulus reactivated the 'face' area in the brain (Fusiform Face Area), regardless of
whether it was now followed by a face. We found similar results for cue
stimuli followed by houses, which reactivated the ‘house’ area (Parahippocampal Place Area). On events that violated these cue-probe associations, Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex was activated suggesting that this
area contributes to reorganizing or retrieving of information in working
memory. Moreover, activation in medial frontal areas suggests that
increased control was applied in trials when incompatible response tendencies (induced by both rule based expectations as by learned cue-probe
associations) had to be corrected. This study shows that top down and
bottom up processing interact during decision making.
D41
TO SATISFICE OR MAXIMIZE? NEURAL PREDICTORS OF
HEURISTIC USE IN RISKY DECISION MAKING Vinod
Venkatraman1,2, Kelsey Merison1, John W. Payne2,3, James R. Bettman2,3,
Mary Frances Luce2,3, Scott A. Huettel1,2; 1Brain Imaging and Analysis Center,
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, 2Center for Neuroeconomic
Studies, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, 3Fuqua School of
Business, Duke University, Durham, NC — Human decision making is frequently characterized as a competition between a rational, cognitive system and an irrational, emotional system. Using a novel incentivecompatible task that sets heuristic and analytic choices into opposition,
we demonstrate systematic violations of this dual-systems perspective.
Young-adult subjects made decisions about improving five-outcome
mixed monetary gambles by adding money to either a reference outcome
that changed the overall probability of winning or losing (satisficing
choice), or alternative extreme outcome whose selection was consistent
with economic models (maximizing choice). Results from a behavioral
study (n=128) as well as a fMRI experiment (n=23) revealed that subjects
used the satisficing heuristic 70% of the time, with substantial intersubject variability. Greater activation in insular cortex and ventromedial prefrontal cortex, regions often associated with emotional function,
predicted economically rational, maximizing choices. Conversely, satisficing choices were predicted by activation of the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex and posterior parietal cortex, regions associated with cognitive
control. Most critically, the activation of dorsomedial prefrontal cortex
exhibited a decision-by-trait interaction: greater activation for maximizers during satisficing choices and greater activation for satisficers during
maximizing choices. Differences between satisficers and maximizers persisted through to evaluation of outcomes. The differential gain-loss activation in the ventral striatum was strongly correlated with the proportion
of satisficing choices, suggesting that satisficers are more sensitive to
reward consequences of their decisions. Our findings demonstrate that
irrationality does not necessarily reflect a failure of cognitive brain sys-

124

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

tems; instead, control systems may potentiate either rational or irrational
choices depending on traits and context.
D42
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
INVESTIGATIONS
OF
ENDOGENOUS AND EXOGENOUS CONTRIBUTIONS TO
LANGUAGE SWITCH COSTS IN OVERT PICTURE NAMING Kim
M. W. Verhoef1, Ardi Roelofs1,2, Dorothee J. Chwilla1,2; 1Radboud University
Nijmegen, 2F.C. Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging — Response
times (RT) are usually longer when individuals switch between tasks
(e.g., picture naming and word reading) than when tasks are repeated.
Waszak, Hommel and Allport (2003) reported larger switch costs for picture-word stimuli associated with two tasks (picture naming and word
reading) than for stimuli associated with one task only (e.g., reading).
Moreover, Koch and Allport (2006) demonstrated that the effect of stimulus-task associations can be counteracted by endogenous preparation. We
examined endogenous and exogenous contributions to the costs of a supposedly special form of task switching, namely switching between languages. Dutch-English bilingual speakers overtly named pictures in one
language or another while we measured event-related brain potentials
(ERP). In a first study, all pictures were named in both languages. Endogenous preparation was manipulated by cueing the target language at
short (750 ms) and long (1500 ms) preparation intervals. RTs showed
larger switch costs for long compared to short intervals. At frontocentral
electrode sites, stimulus-locked ERPs were more negative for long compared to short intervals in the N2 time-window. These findings suggest
that endogenous language preparation can counteract exogenous language influences. In a second study, picture-language associations were
manipulated to test for exogenous language-switch costs directly. Pictures were named in both languages or in one language only. Compared
to the single-language pictures, the pictures associated with both languages elicited larger switch costs and they should yield larger N2-type
negativities. The RT and ERP results will be discussed in the context of a
computational model of bilingual language control.
D43
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN DISSOCIABLE COMPONENTS
OF COGNITIVE CONTROL: AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
INVESTIGATION OF RULE-SWITCHING Matthew Waxer1, J. Bruce
Morton1; 1University of Western Ontario — Rule-switching is thought to
involve distinct preparatory and response-related processes. The current
study investigated developmental changes in these potentially dissociable aspects of cognitive control by mean of high-density event-related
potentials (ERP’s). Nine-year-old (n=20), 11-year-old (n=20), and adult
(n=20) participants performed a deductive rule-switching task with distinct preparatory and response-related trial periods. On any particular
trial, the sorting rule either changed (i.e., switch trials) or remained the
same (i.e., repeat trials), and the imperative stimulus either embodied
conflict (i.e., conflict trials) or did not (i.e., non-conflict trials). To investigate age-related changes in preparatory processes underlying ruleswitching, for each group we compared ERP’s in the preparatory period
of switch trials and repeat trials. To investigate age-related changes in
response-related processes underlying rule-switching, for each group we
compared ERP’s in the response period of conflict trials and non-conflict
trials. All groups were slower and more error-prone on switch trials and
conflict trials than on repeat trials and non-conflict trials. There was no
interaction between switching and conflict. Analysis of ERP’s timelocked to the preparatory period revealed a late negativity over frontal
sensors whose amplitude was greater on switch trials than repeat trials
and that was more sustained for adults than children. Analysis of ERP’s
time-locked to the response-period revealed a fronto-central N200 whose
amplitude was greater on conflict than on non-conflict trials for 11-yearolds and adults but not 9-year-olds. These findings provide initial insight
into age-related differences in dissociable processes involved in ruleswitching.

Poster Session D

D44
CHANGING THE RULES AT THE DROP OF A HAT: AN ERP
STUDY OF PRESCHOOLERS’ SET-SHIFTING ABILITY Sandra
Wiebe1, Daniel Carroll2, Megan Herrington1, Sari Raber1, Kimberly Espy1;
1University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 2University of Sheffield — The
preschool
years are marked by the emergence of the ability to flexibly shift between
response modes depending on contextual demands. High-density eventrelated potentials (ERPs) were used to study the neural bases of this
emerging skill in 5-year-old children. A sample of 19 children completed
a computerized version of the Shape School task (Espy et al., 2006) and
provided usable ERP data. Cartoon shape characters appeared individually on the screen, and children pressed different buttons corresponding
to each character’s shape (if the character was wearing a hat) or color (if
the character was hatless). The rule shifted unpredictably after 1 or 3 nonswitch trials, yielding 3 switching condition (Switch-1, Switch-3, or Nonswitch). Condition was related to both speed and accuracy (ps < .05):
response time was significantly slower only for Switch-1 trials, but children performed more poorly on Switch vs. Non-switch trials (91% vs.
94% correct). The Switch-3 condition was associated with a larger N2 at
anterior leads, with a corresponding positivity at right posterior leads,
relative to both the Non-switch and Switch-1 conditions. The Switch-1
condition elicited a large anterior P3, accompanied by a posterior negativity, relative to the Non-switch and Switch-3 conditions. Timing and
topography of neural activation associated with set-shifting varies
depending on trial-by-trial contingencies, with earlier neural engagement
and faster responses in the Switch-3 condition, and longer switch latencies corresponding to slower neural responses in the Switch-1 condition.
D45
ERP CORRELATES OF RESPONSE TIME DIFFERENCES IN THE
IMPLICIT ASSOCIATION TEST John Williams1, Rebecca Neil1, Ally
Stevens1; 1Biola University — In the past decade the Implicit Association
Test (IAT) has been widely used in social cognitive research to measure
underlying implicit attitudes related to a variety of constructs. Many
hypotheses have recently been proposed to explain the source of
response time differences typically found between congruent and incongruent conditions. In the present study, event-related potentials (ERPs)
were measured during an IAT task which collected responses to gay vs.
straight targets and pleasant vs. unpleasant words. As in previous studies, response times were faster in the congruent conditions than the
incongruent conditions. The ERP data revealed several differences
between the two conditions: First, N200 amplitudes were slightly larger
for the incongruent conditions than the congruent conditions, possibly
reflecting greater response inhibition during incongruent trials. Second,
N400 amplitudes were significantly larger for incongruent trials than
congruent trials, a result typically found in semantic matching tasks.
Finally, amplitudes of positive-going deflections occurring between 600800 ms after stimulus presentation were significantly greater during congruent than during incongruent trials, possibly representing a greater
familiarity effect in the congruent conditions. All differences were
broadly distributed in frontal and parietal areas. Results are discussed
with respect to the differing explanations for the source of IAT response
time effects.
D46
BENDING THE RULES: INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN HIGHERLEVEL CONDITIONAL MOTOR RESPONSES Uta Wolfensteller1, D.
Yves von Cramon1,2; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Neurological Research,
Cologne, Germany — In everyday life we constantly choose responses
based on certain rules or rule combinations. The objective of this fMRI
study was to investigate the cerebral correlates of higher-level conditional motor responses during congruent and incongruent rule combination. Participants were required to respond to visual stimuli by pressing
the appropriate button according to a currently valid rule. This rule
referred either to a single stimulus dimension, i.e. color OR shape, or to

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

the combination of both dimensions, i.e. color AND shape. Congruent
stimuli which required the same response in both single dimension rules
led to the same response in the combination rule (congruent rule combination). In contrast, incongruent stimuli which required different
responses in both single dimension rules led to a different response in the
combination rule (incongruent rule combination). Behavioral analyses
revealed two subgroups of participants; those showing a congruency
effect when implementing the combination rule and those showing nonsignificant or reverse congruency effects. In the subgroup with a congruency effect, activation related to congruent rule combination was
observed in the right intraparietal sulcus. In contrast, activation related to
incongruent rule combination was revealed for the left lateral BA 10, left
anterior insula, and right superior parietal lobule. Furthermore, the size
of the behavioral congruency effect was positively correlated with activation associated with incongruent rule combination in the anterior insula,
intraparietal sulcus, and orbitofrontal cortex. Together, the present findings provide novel evidence for interindividual differences associated
with higher-level conditional motor responses both on the behavioral and
cerebral level.
D47
ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX SIGNALS THE REQUIREMENT
TO BREAK INERTIA WHEN SWITCHING TASKS: Todd
Woodward1, Paul Metzak1, Clay Holroyd2; 1University of British Columbia,
Canada, 2University of Victoria, Canada — When switching tasks, if stimuli
are presented that cue two of the tasks in the task set (i.e., bivalent stimuli), performance slowing is observed on all tasks, including those not
cued by the bivalent stimulus. This slowing has been coined the bivalency effect, and may serve to optimize task switching performance by
promoting flexibility at the cost of time when ambiguous stimuli are
encountered. Recent work on the function of the dorsal anterior cingulate
(dACC) cortex has suggested that this neural region may be recruited
when breaking inertia is required to initiate a change in response, such as
when bivalent stimuli are encountered. In the current task switching
study, we used tightly matched experimental and control conditions in
order to isolate the bivalency effect. As predicted, dACC activation was
associated with the bivalency effect, supporting an account stating that
the role of the dACC is to signal a break in task inertia, for the purpose of
potentially changing the course of action. This result may extend the conflict monitoring account of dACC activation to situations where conflict
occurred on past trials (i.e., conflict is not elicited by the current stimulus), and/or may support a more generalized account of dACC function
involving monitoring internal states for breakdowns that may require
interrupting the inertia set into motion by carrying out a series of tasks.
D48
DEVELOPMENT OF TOP-DOWN ATTENTIONAL MODULATION:
AN FMRI INVESTIGATION Samantha B. Wright1, Carol L. Baym2,
Natalie Repin3, Adam Gazzaley4, Silvia A. Bunge1,5; 1University of California
at Berkeley, Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, 2University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, 3University of California at Davis, 4University of
California at San Francisco / NeuroImaging Center, 5University of California at
Berkeley — The top-down modulation of attention is a necessary component of goal-oriented behavior as it allows for the filtering out of irrelevant information. Previous studies (Gazzaley et al., 2005) have found that
young adults are able to suppress or enhance the maintenance of information in working memory, whereas elderly adults are less able to suppress irrelevant information. The present study focuses on top-down
control in children age 8-13, as well as in young adults (current N = 36).
The fMRI task consists of three counterbalanced blocks, in which participants view two face and two scene images in random order followed by a
probe image on each trial. One block requires participants to pay attention to faces, while ignoring scenes. In another block they are instructed
to pay attention to scenes and ignore faces. In a control block, participants
passively view all images. After fMRI scanning, participants are given a
surprise memory test. We predict that, relative to children, young adults

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

125

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

will exhibit stronger modulation of face-selective and scene-selective
brain regions as a function of attentional demands (enhance vs. passive
vs. suppress). Region-of-interest analyses will be used to test this hypothesis. We further predict that adults will exhibit stronger modulation of
subsequent memory performance as a function of attentional demands.
Preliminary behavioral analyses are consistent with this prediction, suggesting that there are developmental improvements in the ability to control attention to either faces or scenes in this working memory task.
D49
PARKINSON’S DISEASE REDUCES INHIBITORY CONTROL
DURING ACTION SELECTION Scott Wylie1, Wery van den
Wildenberg2, Nelleke van Wouwe1,3, Richard Ridderinkhof2,3, Kara Downs1;
1
University of Virginia, 2University of Amsterdam, 3Leiden University — The
ability to inhibit strongly activated, but situationally inappropriate
responses is an important aspect of executive cognitive control and is
postulated to involve frontal-basal ganglia circuitry. Basal ganglia dysfunction resulting from Parkinson’s disease (PD) is hypothesized to
reduce inhibitory control, thus producing measurable interference on
response time (RT) when an irrelevant response competes with the selection of a preferred response. Larger interference effects have been demonstrated in studies of PD, but a specific role for inhibition can only be
speculated. The activation-suppression hypothesis (Ridderinkhof, 2002)
offers a framework for understanding interference effects in PD that distinguishes between deficits in “response capture” by an irrelevant
response and “selective inhibition” engaged to suppress this response.
We administered two well-established measures of response interference,
the Eriksen flanker task and the Simon task, to separate samples of PD
subjects and healthy controls. Guided by the activation-suppression
hypothesis and the prediction that PD would reduce inhibitory control,
we focused on how PD affects response capture and response inhibition.
Results from both studies show normal patterns of response capture
among PD subjects, but diminished efficiency of inhibitory control compared to healthy subjects. These results support the postulation that a
fundamental effect of basal ganglia dysfunction produced by PD is a
reduced capacity to suppress conflicting responses.
D50
THE ROLE OF MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN RISK
DECISION MAKING Gui Xue1,2,3, Zhonglin Lu1,2,3, Irvin P Levin4,
Xiangrui Li1,2,3, Antoine Bechara1,2,3; 1University of Southern California,
2Dana and David Dornsife Cognitive Neuroscience Imaging Center, University
of Southern California, 3Brain and Creativity Institute, University of Southern
California, 4University of Iowa — Risky decision-making relies on evaluating both the value of a given outcome and the risk involved in receiving
the desired outcome. Although patients with medial prefrontal cortex
(MPFC) lesions are severely impaired on tasks involving risky decisions,
the neural processes that support the evaluation of risk versus the evaluation of the outcomes remain to be elucidated. Thirteen healthy young
adults were recruited to perform a task that simulates risky decisions
(i.e., the Cups task) in a 3T fMRI scanner. The Cups task includes a gain
domain and a loss domain. For both domains, each trial consists of a certain option of winning or losing $1 for sure, and a risky option with a
probability of winning more than $1 or not winning at all (for the gain
domain), or of losing more than $1 or not losing at all (for the loss
domain). The risk (risky vs. safe) by outcome valance (win vs. loss) factorial design enabled us to examine their differential effects and interactions. We found that the dorsal and ventral MPFC were parametrically
modulated by the experienced risk level versus the received gain/loss,
respectively. Individual’s risk preference was negatively correlated with
the risk-related activation in the dorsal MPFC region, whereas it was positively correlated with the reward-related activation in the ventral MPFC
region. These results suggest that the dorsal and ventral MPFC convey
different decision signals (i.e., risk vs. the value of an outcome, e.g.
reward), which can account for individual differences in decision under
risk.

126

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

D51
DISSOCIABLE INFLUENCES OF PROBABILITY, MAGNITUDE,
AND EXPECTED VALUE ON DECISION-MAKING Tal
Yarkoni1,
1
1
Todd Braver ; Washington University — Decision-making in the real
world is a highly complex enterprise. To gain traction on the neural
mechanisms underlying decision-making behavior, neuroimaging studies typically use relatively simple experimental designs that vary one or
two dimensions of interest (e.g., probability or magnitude) while holding
other key dimensions (e.g., expected value) constant. It is presently
unclear to what extent the results of such studies generalize to more complex situations in which multiple decision-relevant dimensions vary
independently and people's decisions may depend on a complex admixture of strategies. The present study used an experimental paradigm that
allowed differences in probability, magnitude, and expected value to
vary relatively independently across two choices on a trial-by-trial basis.
Behavioral experiments demonstrated that the unique influences of these
variables on choice behavior could be reliably estimated, and that most
participants' choices were influenced by more than one variable. Subsequently, the same paradigm was used in an fMRI experiment, and multiple regression analysis was used to identify brain regions independently
sensitive to differences in probability, magnitude, or expected value.
Results identified both common and distinct regions associated with
trial-by-trial differences in these parameters. Moreover, using different
regression models, we identified distinct networks associated with different decision-making strategies—e.g., responding based on explicit computation of expected value versus responding based on heuristic biases
such as risk aversion. Our results extend those of previous studies and
demonstrate the viability of using relatively complex parametric designs
to study the neural substrates of decision-making.
D52
SLEEP DEPRIVATION EFFECTS ON PERFORMANCE AND
NEURAL ACTIVATION DURING SIMPLE AND INTEGRATIVE
DECISION MAKING Dagmar Zeithamova1,2, Victoria Williams2, W Todd
Maddox1,2, David Schnyer1,2; 1Institute for Neuroscience, University of Texas
at Austin, 2University of Texas at Austin — As decision making becomes
increasingly complex, more anterior regions of prefrontal cortex are
engaged. In the current work we hypothesized that sleep-deprived individuals will have difficulty engaging the processes supported by anterior
prefrontal cortex, while other simpler decision making tasks will remain
less affected. Healthy young participants performed simple and integrative decision making tasks while fMRI was simultaneously recorded
using a 3T MRI. Stimuli were novel abstract shapes and subjects were
asked to do either a simple alternative choice perceptual matching task or
one that involves integration of two perceptual matching decisions. A
network of regions including lateral occipital, inferior temporal, inferior
parietal and lateral frontal cortices was recruited in both tasks when compared to a low level visual-motor control. Most importantly, polar and
orbital regions of the anterior frontal cortex were recruited to a greater
degree for the integrative decision making task. Participants were
brought back for the same tasks after 24 hours of sleeplessness. There was
a small drop of performance during perceptual matching, but a marked
drop in performance for the integrative decision making. The performance decline was accompanied by a substantial reduction of activation
in the prefrontal cortices. We concluded that anterior parts of the frontal
cortex are more vulnerable to sleeplessness, providing a neural correlate
of preferential break down of complex cognitive functions under mental
fatigue.

Poster Session D

Memory: Memory systems
D53
ERP INDICES OF ORTHOGRAPHIC AND NORMATIVE WORD
FREQUENCY IN RECOGNITION MEMORY Erika Nyhus1,2, Simon
Dennis2,3, Tim Curran1; 1University of Colorado at Boulder, 2University of
Adelaide, Australia, 3Ohio State University — Previous research has demonstrated that people are better at recognizing low frequency words than
high frequency words. Rugg, Cox, Doyle, and Wells (1995) tested the
effect of word frequency on ERPs. Their results showed greater old/new
differences over left posterior, superior channels between 400-800 ms for
low than high frequency words. These results are difficult to interpret as
word frequency is often confounded with orthographic frequency. Therefore, we crossed orthographic frequency, the frequency of letters within a
word, with normative word frequency and recorded ERPs during a recognition memory task. Subjects were better at recognizing words with
low than high orthographic and normative word frequency. An early
ERP effect (starting at 100 ms) recorded over posterior, inferior channels
differentiated low from high orthographic frequency. A parietal old/new
effect (500-800 ms) recorded over left posterior, superior channels, often
thought to reflect recollection processes, was greater for words with low
than high normative word frequency. These results suggest that orthographic frequency affects earlier item identification processes, whereas
word frequency affects later memory processes. These results will aid in
resolving the debate in the computational modeling literature between
memory models that postulate that the word frequency effect occurs
because of the frequency of the features within a word, such as orthographic frequency (e.g. REM model, Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997), and those
postulating that the word frequency effect occurs because of prior contexts in which the words have been experienced, such as normative word
frequency (e.g. BCDMEM model, Dennis & Humphreys, 2001).
D54
AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF SUCCESSFUL RETRIEVAL IN
TESTS OF CUED RECALL AND RECOGNITION Kayoko
Okada1,
1 1
Michael D. Rugg ; University of California, Irvine — The majority of eventrelated fMRI studies of episodic retrieval have employed tests of recognition, and none has directly compared the neural correlates of successful
retrieval as indexed by recognition versus recall. Thus the aim of the
present study was to contrast ‘retrieval success effects’ in recognition and
word-stem cued recall tests. Participants studied words and were then
scanned while performing either a yes/no recognition or a word-stem
cued recall test. In both cases, the requirement was to discriminate
between studied and unstudied test items. For recognition, responses
consisted of overt repetition of the test item followed by an old/new
judgment. For cued recall, the requirement was to complete the stem with
a study item if possible, or otherwise with any suitable word, and then
make an old/new judgment. The neural correlates of retrieval success
were operationalized as the difference in activity between items receiving
correct old and new judgments. Effects common to the two tasks were
found in bilateral lateral and medial parietal cortex. Importantly, a left
inferior parietal region previously argued to be selectively activated during recollection-based recognition was among the regions demonstrating
a common effect. In addition, several regions, including medial and lateral prefrontal cortex, demonstrated interactions with task. These findings indicate that regions previously associated with successful
recognition are also responsive during successful recall. They highlight
the potential benefits of memory tests other than recognition procedures
to investigate the neural correlates of successful retrieval.

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

D55
HANDS-ON LEARNING: VARIATIONS IN SENSORIMOTOR
EXPERIENCE ALTER THE CORTICAL RESPONSE TO NEWLY
LEARNED OBJECTS Robyn T. Oliver1,2, Molly A. Parsons1, Sharon L.
Thompson-Schill1,2; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2University of Pennsylvania,
Center for Cognitive Neuroscience — For hundreds of years, philosophers
and psychologists have considered the impact that direct sensorimotor
experience has on learning and expression of conceptual knowledge.
Here we report direct evidence that variations in sensorimotor experience
during learning alter the neural systems involved in memory retrieval.
We taught participants to recognize and name a set of 30 novel objects,
after either purely visual exposure or after a multimodal exposure combining vision, touch, and action. While the total duration of exposure to
each object remained constant across objects and subjects, the amount of
tactile and action processing performed with the objects varied across
objects and across individuals. After training, we collected fMRI data
while participants made judgements about the shape, color, and size of
these objects (in response to verbal prompts). Variations in sensorimotor
experiences affected the response of two regions of parietal cortex that
are thought to play multimodal roles in sensory perception. The results
illustrate the distributed nature of the cortical representation of long-term
knowledge about objects, and further, they demonstrate the casual effect
of the learning modality on the recruitment of sensorimotor cortex during conceptual retrieval.
D56
PERIRHINAL CORTEX ACTIVITY IS RELATED TO ACCURACY IN
RECOGNITION
MEMORY
AND
ON
PERCEPTUAL
DISCRIMINATIONS Edward O'Neil1, Anthony Cate2, Stefan Köhler1; 1The
University of Western Ontario, 2VA Research Service, Martinez, CA — The
prevailing view of the medial temporal lobe (MTL) holds that its structures are dedicated to long-term declarative memory. Recent evidence
challenges this position, suggesting that perirhinal cortex (PRc) in the
MTL may also play a role in online processing of objects when perceptual
discriminations of stimuli with highly overlapping visual features are
required. Relevant neuropsychological findings in humans have been
inconclusive, however, likely because studies have relied on patients
with large, variable MTL lesions, resulting in inconsistent findings across
studies. Also, perceptual and mnemonic tasks have not always been
matched for difficulty. Here, we conducted an event-related fMRI experiment in 18 healthy participants to directly compare the role of PRc in perceptual discriminations and in recognition memory. We used sets of faces
designed to have a large degree of feature overlap as stimuli. Prior to
scanning, subjects were familiarized with a subset of faces. During scanning, all trials employed displays with three faces. The perceptual task
required identification of an ‘oddball’, i.e. the face least similar to the
other display members. The memory task involved forced-choice recognition of the previously studied face. Task difficulty was manipulated
independently in the two conditions. When it was matched, there were
no significant differences in PRc activation for the memory and perception trials. Instead, a conjunction analysis revealed a common region in
right PRc whose activity was related to accuracy of both recognition
memory and perceptual discriminations. These findings show that the
functional role of PRc is not limited to long-term declarative memory.
D57
ENCODING ACTIVITY SUPPORTING ITEM-ITEM ASSOCIATIVE
VERSUS ITEM-SOURCE MEMORY Heekyeong Park1,1, Michael Rugg1;
1
Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, University of CaliforniaIrvine — Previous studies using the subsequent memory procedure have
suggested that the successful encoding of associations recruits brain
regions additional to those engaged during encoding of items. Here, we
investigated whether the regions engaged during successful encoding of
inter-item associations differ from those engaged during item-context
encoding. Subjects were scanned while they made relational semantic
judgments on a list of word pairs which were presented in one of four

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

127

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

different locations. In a subsequent unscanned test phase, subjects made
associative recognition judgments on studied and new pairs (same pair
vs. rearranged pair vs. new) and, for pairs judged same or rearranged, a
source judgment (location of the two words at study; for rearranged
pairs, both items had always been studied in the same location). In accordance with previous findings, study pairs that were correctly endorsed as
intact elicited greater activity in the left ventral inferior prefrontal gyrus
and the medial temporal lobe than did pairs that were incorrectly
endorsed as rearranged. Importantly these associative subsequent memory effects did not interact with the factor of source accuracy. These findings suggest that encoding of item-item and item-context associations
depend upon at least partially dissociable brain regions.
D58
ASSOCIATIONS EVOKED DURING MEMORY ENCODING
RECRUIT THE DEFAULT-NETWORK OF THE HUMAN BRAIN.
Jan Peters1, Irene Daum1, Elke Gizewski2, Michael Forsting2, Boris Suchan1;
1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany,
2University Hospital Essen, Germany — The brain regions activated during
resting states (the so-called “default network”) and those involved in the
processing of contextual associations have recently been reported to
show a remarkable overlap. At the same time, aging and dementia affect
similar regions of the brain. Here we explored a recent proposal of associative processing being an important function of this network. In a novel
episodic memory encoding task, participants were asked to indicate
whether they memorized a picture based on an association evoked by the
stimulus (association trials) or based on a distinctive feature of the stimulus (feature trials). Behaviorally, memory encoding with subjective associations enhanced memory formation relative to feature-based encoding,
and this effect was more pronounced for rapidly evoked associations.
Functional magentic resonance imaging revealed robust activity in all
regions of the default network, i.e. medial prefrontal cortex, lateral parietal cortex, retrosplenial cortex / precunues and posterior medial temporal lobe (hippocampus and parahippocampal cortex) for associative
relative to feature-based encoding. Importantly, this effect was similar for
high-contextual and low-contextual stimuli. In addition to a role in the
processing of internally generated information, such as during mind
wandering, our data suggest that the default network may support the
rapid linkage of external stimuli to stored long-term memory representations.
D59
TASK SWITCHING AFFECTS PREPARATION FOR EPISODIC
AND SEMANTIC RETRIEVAL. Jeffrey Phillips1,2,3, David Wolk5,4,1,
Mark Wheeler1,2,3,6; 1University of Pittsburgh, 2Center for the Neural Basis of
Cognition, University of Pittsburgh, 3Learning Research and Development
Center, University of Pittsburgh, 4University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
5
Alzheimer Disease Research Center, University of Pittsburgh, 6Center for
Neuroscience, University of Pittsburgh — Memory performance depends
partially on attentional factors, such as preparedness for memory search
and retrieval. We investigated episodic and semantic task preparation
with a task-cueing paradigm, in which subjects were cued randomly
before each trial to perform an OLD/NEW (episodic) or LIVING/NONLIVING (semantic) decision on previously studied and novel stimuli.
Behavioral data indicated less efficient processing on trials when the cued
task switched rather than repeated from the previous trial. We thus asked
whether it was possible to neurally dissociate processing on switch vs.
repeat trials. The use of a catch-trial fMRI design allowed independent
estimation of preparatory and retrieval-phase responses. Preparatory
responses in right thalamus were greater when the cued task switched
rather than repeated from the previous trial, regardless of cued task. In
contrast, preparatory activity in bilateral intraparietal sulcus and left fusiform gyrus was independent of task-switching requirements. We propose that thalamic preparatory effects reflect modulation by anticipated
attentional demands, like the need to reconfigure the current task set.
Additionally, task-dependent switch effects were found in bilateral fusi-

128

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

form, right parahippocampal, and medial superior frontal gyri. In these
regions, preparatory activity rose and peaked 1-2 trials after subjects
switched to episodic retrieval, then fell with repeated semantic task performance. This cyclical response suggests that the neural correlates of
episodic task sets emerge and decay gradually, with repeated task performance. The application of a task-switching analysis may be useful in distinguishing voluntary task set reconfiguration from more slowlyevolving attentional states, such as an episodic retrieval mode or orientation.
D60
CORTICOSTRIATAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE ACQUISITION
AND USE OF IMPLICIT CATEGORY KNOWLEDGE Amanda
Price1,1; 1Elizabethtown College — This study examined the role of feedback in implicit learning of a multidimensional category structure among
PD patients and age-matched controls. Participants completed two
implicit learning tasks; underlying category structure was identical on
the two tasks though surface details differed. On the feedback-based task,
participants received feedback after each categorization decision. In the
no-feedback task, participants learned the category structure incidentally
as they viewed each stimulus and made a judgment about its appearance;
no mention was made of categorization or learning during this exposure
phase. Following the feedback-based or incidental exposure phases for
the tasks, participants completed an implicit assessment of category
knowledge. Sixty trials were presented; half presented stimuli that had
been previously seen and half presented stimuli developed by generalizing from the categorization structure to relevant stimuli that had not previously seen. For each stimulus, participants guessed whether it belonged
to category A or B. Patients with PD exhibited normal levels of category
knowledge for previously seen stimuli in both the feedback-based and
no-feedback tasks. Performance on the two tasks did not differ, indicating that implicit category learning in PD is unaffected by the presence or
absence of feedback. In contrast, PD patients were impaired relative to
controls on novel stimuli generalized from the category structure. These
results suggest that corticostriatal dysfunction associated with PD does
not impair the implicit acquisition of category knowledge but disrupts
the ability to generalize this implicit knowledge to novel situations or
stimuli.
D61
WORD CATEGORY DEFICITS IN SEMANTIC DEMENTIA
Friedemann Pulvermuller1, Elisa Pye1, Clare Dine1, Olaf Hauk1, Karalyn
Patterson1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge — Does the
cortex process meaning in a single local cortical module or are meaning
representations spread out over different parts of the cortex? Evidence
from patients with severe semantic and conceptual deficits, such as
Semantic Dementia, SD, is pivotal in answering this question. Neuronal
degeneration primarily affects temporal poles in SD, with often some
additional involvement of orbito-frontal cortex. Using a lexical decision
task, we asked whether word-processing impairments in SD are equally
or differentially present for six different lexico-semantic categories. Stimulus matching ruled out possibly confounding factors, including length,
frequency, imageability and other psycholinguistic features. The stimulus
categories included written words related to actions usually performed,
respectively, using the FACE, ARM or LEG, visually-related words with
primary relation to COLOUR or FORM information, and ABSTRACT
words. Previously published neuroimaging results suggest that brain
regions near to the primary site of atrophy in SD may be especially
important for processing of FACE and COLOUR words. SD patients
(n=11) had significantly impaired lexical decision accuracy overall, compared to age-matched controls, but also showed reliably different rates of
success in contrasts of interest. Performance on FACE words was
reduced compared with ARM words (with LEG words in-between);
visual words from the COLOUR category were more affected than FORM
words; ABSTRACT words yielded the poorest performance. With the
exception of the latter effect, category differences were absent in a

Poster Session D

matched control group (N=10). The results are interpreted in terms of a
‘hybrid’ theoretical framework including both regionally-specific and
central components of semantic networks.
D62
DIFFERENCES IN VISUAL MEMORY: SCENE AND FACE
FAMILIARITY Dorian Pustina1,2, Jan Peters2, Irene Daum2; 1International
Graduate School of Neuroscience, Bochum, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
Ruhr-University Bochum — Memory research suggest the existence of two
distinct mechanisms in recognition memory: recollection and familiarity.
With respect to the Medial Temporal Lobe (MTL), recollection has been
found to activate the hippocampal complex, while familiarity activates
different areas in the parahippocampal region. On the other hand perceptual processes for different material types also activate a similar set of
structures in MTL raising a new important question. How does memory
for spatial (i.e. scenes) and non spatial stimuli (i.e. objects / faces) relate
to different grades of recollection and familiarity? Traditional experiments require subjects to rate their own feeling of confidence and permit
the creation of receiver operating characteristics (ROCs). Although it has
demonstrated its validity this paradigm reduce memory mechanisms to
the area of conscious awareness or decision making. In order to avoid
subjective responses we manipulated the stimuli graphically to induce
familiarity. 204 faces were paired and morphed using a commercial software. The 102 resulting faces gradually shift from one to another in 6
steps of 20% each (0% - 100%). Another 102 stimuli were created from
high resolution pictures of scenes and landscapes by moving a virtual
window in steps of 20%. We investigated the effect of objective stimulus
familiarity on fMRI responses in the medial temporal lobe. Preliminary
fMRI data suggest that objective familiarity of faces and scenes recruits
distinct medial temporal lobe subregions.
D63
PATTERN CLASSIFICATION OF RECOGNITION MEMORY
STATES IN FMRI Joel Quamme1, David Weiss1, Kenneth Norman1;
1Princeton University — Pattern classification algorithms have been used
in fMRI to examine distributed activity patterns in the brain associated
with different cognitive states. In this study, we used pattern classification to examine the brain activity associated with strategic recollection
and familiarity retrieval modes in a recognition task. Subjects studied singular and plural words, and performed recognition memory tasks in the
scanner. We trained a logistic regression classifier to distinguish between
subjects’ fMRI brain patterns when instructed to recollect details about a
previously studied item, and when instructed to pay attention only to
general feelings of item familiarity. Then, in a second phase, subjects
made old-new judgments to studied, non-studied, and switched-plural
versions of studied words (e.g., study FLEAS, test FLEA). After training
the classifier on the first phase, we tested it on brain activity from the second phase to obtain the classifier’s “best-guess” concerning the subject's
cognitive state before, during, and after old, new, and switched-plural trials. We found a network of parietal regions, including intraparietal sulcus and precuneus, that predict more switched-plural correct rejections
when the classifier identified a recollection state prior to the stimulus. We
discuss implications of the current results for theories of parietal contributions to memory.
D64
CO-OCCURRING PLASTICITY IN DISTRIBUTED NEURAL
NETWORKS
REVEALS
THE
COMPONENT
PROCESSES
CONTRIBUTING TO REPETITION PRIMING Elizabeth Race1, Shanti
Shanker2, Anthony Wagner1,2; 1Neurosciences Program, Stanford University,
2
Stanford University — Repeated conceptual processing of a stimulus
results in behavioral facilitation (priming) and functional activation
reductions in left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) and posterior
neocortical regions. While initially posited to reflect neocortical tuning,
repetition-induced activation reductions have been recently associated
with stimulus-response learning. To investigate whether cortical tuning
and response learning co-occur and to determine the representational

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

level at which response learning impacts cortical activation, event-related
fMRI was used to examine repetition effects at three levels: (a) conceptual
repetition, (b) stimulus-decision repetition, and (c) stimulus-response
repetition. During study, participants performed one of two semantic
classification tasks on words. Subsequently, studied words were represented (conceptual repetition) along with a set of novel words (no repetition). Half of the old words were classified under the same decision as at
study (within-task repetition), and half were classified according to the
other decision (across-task repetition). Of the across-task trials, half
required the same response as at study (response repetition) and half a
different response (response switch). Behavioral facilitation was
observed for within-task compared to novel and across-task items, providing evidence for stimulus-decision learning. Facilitation was also
observed for across-task response-repeat compared to across-task
response-switch and novel items, providing evidence for stimulusresponse learning. fMRI revealed three distinct patterns of neocortical
plasticity: (a) conceptual repetition in left anterior VLPFC, middle temporal, and fusiform cortices, (b) stimulus-decision learning in left posterior/
mid-VLPFC, and (c) stimulus-response learning in pre-SMA/anterior
cingulate and right mid-VLPFC. Priming is associated with co-occurring
neocortical plasticity that facilitates conceptual processing, stimulus-decision mapping, and stimulus-response mapping.
D65
SELECTIVE
RECOLLECTION
OF
TASK
RELEVANT
INFORMATION: AN ERP STUDY Elward Rachael1, Wilding Edward1;
1Cardiff University — Event-related potential (ERP) old/new effects are
differences between the ERPs associated with correct judgments to old
(studied) and new test items. One effect - the left-parietal ERP old/new
effect - is a correlate of recollection, and changes in the size of this effect
have been employed in order to infer the degree to which recollection has
been engaged. This logic has been employed in ERP exclusion task studies, where the test requirement is to respond on one key to items from
one study context (targets), and on another key to unstudied items, along
with items from a second study context (non-targets). In ERP exclusion
studies where the likelihood of a correct target judgment is high, the leftparietal old/new effect for non-targets has been markedly smaller than
that for targets. This has been interpreted as reflecting strategic retrieval
processing, whereby target/non-target judgments are made by relying
primarily on the success or failure of attempts to recollect information
about targets. This is only an effective strategy when recovery of information about targets is highly likely, and this account explains the majority
of published data points. Here, however, we report a marked attenuation
of the non-target left-parietal old/new effect despite relatively low levels
of target accuracy, contrasting directly with other findings in very similar
paradigms. These findings challenge the account described above, and
indicate that factors other than the likelihood of recovering information
about targets also exert influence over when selective retrieval strategies
will be employed.
D66
NEURAL CORRELATES OF IMPLICIT RELATIONAL MEMORY IN
AGING Kelly S. Giovanello1, Wei-Chun Wang1; 1The University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill — Relational memory – the form of memory which
represents the relationships among items or informational elements – can
be tested using explicit tasks (e.g., associative recognition) or implicit
tasks (e.g., perceptual relational priming). Older adults, relative to young
adults, typically show impaired associative recognition performance, yet
intact perceptual relational priming. Previous findings from our laboratory indicate that such age-related deficits in associative recognition
reflect reductions in hippocampal specificity with aging. In the current
study we tested the hypothesis that older adults, relative to young adults,
would show equivalent hippocampal specificity under conditions in
which intact perceptual relational priming was observed. Thirty-two
individuals participated in the study. Each individual was scanned in
four consecutive event-related functional MRI runs. The first two runs

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

129

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

Poster Session D

comprised the perceptual relational priming task and the second two
runs consisted of the associative recognition task. Perceptual relational
priming was assessed using a sentence reading task, while associative
recognition was measured using a sentence recognition task. Behavioral
results showed significant perceptual relational priming for both young
and older adults. However, older adults, compared to young adults,
demonstrated impaired associative recognition performance. Analysis of
the neuroimaging data revealed that young adults activated left hippocampus for associative recognition, as well as during implicit perceptual
relational priming as measured by the sentence reading task. Older
adults demonstrated right hippocampal activity during associative recognition and bilateral hippocampal activity during perceptual relational
priming. These results suggest that older adults’ performance on explicit
and implicit tasks of relational memory may arise from differences in hippocampal processing.

neutral, and monetary reward value of stimuli; high-reward or lowreward for subsequent successful recognition). In the recognition phase
approximately 24 hours after the encoding phase, subjects were randomly presented with old and new pictures and were required to judge
whether or not they had memorized it. Two-way repeated measures
analysis of variance (ANOVA) with emotion and reward as factors was
used to analyze the recognition memory performance, and yielded significant main effects of emotion (negative > neutral) and reward (high-value
> low-value), without an interaction between two factors. Functional
imaging data revealed that the left amygdala was activated during the
encoding of negative pictures relative to neutral pictures, and the left orbitofrontal cortex was activated during the encoding of pictures with highreward relative to those with low-reward. The present findings support
the view that emotion and reward anticipation recruit limbic activations
and enhance long-term memory formation.

D67
DORSAL AND VENTRAL POSTERIOR CORTEX SUPPORT VIEWDEPENDENT OBJECT CATEGORIZATION AND RECOGNITION:
EVIDENCE FROM REPETITION SUPPRESSION EFFECTS Haline
Schendan1,2,3, Chantal Stern2,3,4; 1Tufts University, Medford, MA,
2Massachusetts General Hospital, Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical
Imaging, Charlestown, MA, 3Boston University, Boston, MA, 4Center for
Memory and Brain, Boston University, Boston, MA — People are fast and
accurate at categorizing and recognizing objects under various viewing
conditions (object constancy), but perform worse when viewing objects
from unusual angles. Functional magnetic resonance imaging tested the
‘multiple-views-plus-transformation’ account: While multiple view representations in the ventral pathway are sufficient for canonical views,
mental rotation processes, implemented in parietal cortex, are required
for unusual views. Participants categorized objects in canonical or
unusual views during study and a later indirect memory test. Finally,
they recognized each object as old or new. On both an indirect memory
test and a recognition test, objects were repeated in the same or different
view than studied, or were new. Transfer appropriate processing predicts
the largest repetition suppression effects for same unusual views in ventral posterior object processing areas and parietal cortex for mental rotation. The pattern of repetition effects in independently-defined, objectsensitive and mental rotation (and not saccade) areas on both memory
tests confirmed this prediction. A visual object knowledge network was
revealed that includes a ventral hierarchy for perceptual and conceptual
representations of objects. Clear evidence was also found that this network includes a dorsal hierarchy for spatial transformation of objects that
is involved in mental rotation. Both the ventral and the dorsal pathways
have key roles in visual object cognition, knowledge representation, and
implicit and explicit memory. These findings support a two-state interactive framework of object knowledge that integrates vision and memory
frameworks to characterize the cortical dynamics supporting meaningful
interactions with objects in diverse situations.

D69
THE NEURAL BASIS OF THE COGNITIVE MAP: PATH
INTEGRATION DOES NOT REQUIRE HIPPOCAMPUS OR
ENTORHINAL CORTEX Yael Shrager1, C. Brock Kirwan1, Larry R.
Squire1,2; 1University of California, San Diego, 2Veterans Affairs Medical
Center — The hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and related medial temporal lobe structures have been linked to both memory functions and to
spatial cognition, but it has been unclear how these ideas relate to each
other. An important part of spatial cognition is path integration (the ability to use self-motion cues to keep track of a reference location), and it has
been suggested that the path integrator is located in the hippocampus or
entorhinal cortex. Patients with bilateral hippocampal lesions or larger
lesions that also included entorhinal cortex were led on a path while
blindfolded and were then asked to point to their start location. Patients
pointed as accurately as controls when they were encouraged to actively
maintain the path in mind. They also accurately estimated the distance
between the start and end locations. A separate rotation condition confirmed that performance was based on path integration. When demands
on long-term memory were increased, the patients were impaired. Thus,
in humans the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex are not essential sites
where computations needed for path integration are carried out. One
possibility is that these computations occur upstream in neocortex, perhaps in the parietal lobe. The hippocampus and entorhinal cortex could
then operate on this information, as well as on other inputs, to transform
perception into long-term memory.

D68
EFFECTS OF EMOTION AND REWARD MOTIVATION ON
NEURAL ACTIVITY ASSOCIATED WITH EPISODIC MEMORY
ENCODING: A PET STUDY Yayoi Shigemune1, Nobuhito Abe1, Maki
Suzuki2, Aya Ueno1, Etsuro Mori1, Manabu Tashiro2, Masatoshi Itoh2,
Toshikatsu Fujii1; 1Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai,
Japan, 2Division of Cyclotron Nuclear Medicine, Cyclotron and Radioisotope
Center, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan — It has been known that emotion
and reward motivation promote long-term memory formation via limbic
activations. However, the effects of emotion and reward motivation on
memory processing have so far been studied separately; therefore,
whether memory enhancement occurs in the context of combination of
two factors is still unclear. In the present H215O positron emission
tomography (PET) study, the subjects were scanned under four different
intentional encoding conditions. These four conditions were made by the
combination of two factors (i.e., emotional value of stimuli; negative or

130

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

D70
NEURAL BASIS OF IMPLICIT SEQUENCE LEARNING IN A
PROBABILISTIC TRIPLETS LEARNING TASK Jessica R. Simon1,
Kelly A. Barnes1, Chandan J. Vaidya1,2, James H. Howard Jr.1,3, Darlene V.
Howard1; 1Georgetown University, 2Children’s Research Institute, Children’s
National Medical Center, 3Catholic University of America — Implicit learning is the acquisition of knowledge about environmental regularities (e.g.
where or when something is likely to occur) without explicit awareness.
We used functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to identify brain
activation associated with performance on a new implicit probabilistic
sequence learning task involving triplets of trials, called the Triplets
Learning Task (Howard et al, under revision). During three event-related
fMRI runs, 11 college-aged adults responded to only the third (target)
stimulus in sequences of three stimuli by pressing a corresponding button. Unbeknownst to participants, the location of the first stimulus predicted one target location for 80% of the trials (High Probability) and
another location for 20% of the trials (Low Probability). Participants demonstrated learning, defined as faster performance on High than Low
Probability trials. The neural basis of learning was examined by contrasting regions more active on High relative to Low Probability trials and
vice versa. Across both contrasts, activated regions included premotor
(BA 6), prefrontal (BA 9/10/11), parietal (BA 7/39/40), cerebellar and
Medial Temporal Lobe (MTL) structures. Subsequent correlations with
learning scores revealed changes in the neural substrates as training pro-

Poster Session D

gressed. Learning correlated with MTL activation only in the first run,
possibly reflecting binding of the three stimuli within the trials, and correlated with other brain regions later in training (e.g. caudate), reflecting
probabilistic learning of triplets that occur more frequently. These results
replicate findings of early MTL and late caudate involvement in probabilistic learning and extend them to a probabilistic sequence learning task.
D71
SEPARATING JUDGMENTS OF LEARNING FROM MEMORY
ENCODING: AN EVENT RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY IdaMaria Skavhaug1, Edward L. Wilding2, David I. Donaldson1; 1University of
Stirling, 2University of Cardiff — We investigated the correspondence
between objective and subjective event-related potential (ERP) measures
of subsequent memory performance, in order to understand how people
make Judgments Of Learning (JOLs). Participants studied a series of
word pairs, and for each word pair made a JOL, which was an indication
of how confident they were that they would remember or forget the word
pair if it was re-presented at a later point in time. Memory for the pairs
was assessed on a subsequent recognition memory task and JOLs were a
reasonable predictor of the accuracy of memory judgments. ERPs were
also recorded at study, and we compared the patterns of activity elicited
by (i) items remembered or forgotten at test (the objective measure), and
(ii) items rated likely or unlikely to be remembered later (the subjective
measure). ERPs revealed two distinct patterns of neural activity; one ERP
effect that was shared by the two contrasts, and a second ERP effect that
was specific to the JOLs. The findings strongly suggest that while some
processes are common to subjective and objective measures of memory
accuracy, there are also processes that distinguish between them. Evidence from ERP data reveals that JOLs cannot simply be reduced to the
processes that predict the accuracy of memory judgments.
D72
IMPLICATIONS OF THE MEDIODORSAL THALAMIC NUCLEI IN
RELATIONAL AND NON-RELATIONAL MEMORY Eleonore XianChay Soei1,2,3, Benno Koch4, Michael Schwartz4, Irene Daum1,2,3; 1RuhrUniversity-Bochum, Universitaetsstr 150, Bochum, Germany, 2Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, Ruhr-University-Bochum, Universitaetsstr Bochum,
Germany, 3Research School, Ruhr-University-Bochum, Universitaetsstr,
Bochum, Germany, 4Municipal Hospital Dortmund, Germany — The
mediodorsal thalamic nuclei (MD) have been shown to contribute to
human recognition memory, which can be conceptually divided into relational and non-relational memory. To investigate the role of the MD in
these processes, we assessed ten patients with focal ischemic lesions in
the MD and ventrolateral thalamic regions (VL) on spatial and non-spatial relational and non-relational memory. Each patient was compared to
an individual control group of fifteen age-, sex- and IQ-matched healthy
participants, since parameters of relational and non-relational memory
are significantly affected by age. Of the six MD patients, only one patient
preformed similarly to the controls in spatial relational memory, and
three patients performed in the normal range in non-spatial relational
memory. Two of the four VL patients were impaired in both relational
tasks. Neither MD nor VL lesions led to deficits in non-relational memory. This pattern suggests an involvement of the MD in relational memory and is consistent with an interpretation in terms of failure to
accurately remember contextual information or retrieval deficits due to
MD-prefrontal cortex disconnection. The relational memory deficits following VL lesions are discussed in relation to fronto-striatal circuit disturbances.
D73
PRIMING THE PAST: SALIENT TARGET STIMULI DISTINCTLY
AFFECT PRECEDING-PRIME TRACES ACQUIRED WITH AND
WITHOUT AWARENESS Alexander N Sokolov1, Pietro Guardini2,
Marina A Pavlova3,4; 1Ulm University Medical School, Ulm, Germany,
2
University of Padua, Italy, 3Children’s Hospital, University of Tuebingen
Medical School, Tuebingen, Germany, 4Institute of Med Psychology & Behav.

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

Neurobiology, MEG Ctr, Univ. of Tuebingen Medical School, Tuebingen,
Germany — Perceptual priming is commonly viewed as altered subsequent target processing by preceding prime stimuli. Here, we ask how, if
at all, subsequent salient targets modulate memory-trace processing of
preceding primes (i.e., backward priming) accomplished with and without awareness of prime identity. On a trial, participants saw a prime, a
mask, and a target in succession, pressing a respective key to report
prime identity (a square with or without gaps in its outline that was
either congruent or incongruent with the target). In experiments 1 and 2,
prime identification was either above or at chance level, respectively.
With prime awareness (experiment 1), target-prime congruency yielded
reduced response times, while without prime awareness (experiment 2),
reduced error rates occurred for the congruent primes. The results show
the existence of backward, retroactive priming of prime traces by subsequent salient target stimuli. Moreover, the findings suggest an awareness-dependent dissociation of backward priming: backward priming
engages either response processing or solely sensory representations
with discriminable and indiscriminable prime identity, respectively. The
outcome has implications for methods commonly used with ordinary
(feedforward) priming to assess detectability and discriminability of
primes. Future studies are required that combine functional brain imaging with psychophysics to determine the precise neural mechanisms of
backward priming.
D74
ENCODING-RELATED NEURAL ACTIVITY OF PERCEPTUAL
PRIMING IN HEALTHY YOUNG AND OLDER SUBJECTS Anja
Soldan1, Elaine Gazes1, John Hilton1, Yaakov Stern1; 1Columbia University,
Taub Institute, Cognitive Neuroscience Division — In this event-related
fMRI study we examined how neural activity during encoding of unfamiliar line drawings with or without a coherent 3-dimensional structure
is related to behavioral priming on a structural possibility task. Healthy
young (N=17; age=18-30 years) and elderly (N=16; age=65-80 years) subjects were tested. The decisions subjects made during the encoding task
were unrelated to the structural coherence of these objects. Neural repetition effects occurring during the encoding phase and their relationship to
subsequent priming were examined. We found that differential encoding-related neural activity for coherent 3D objects and structurally impossible figures predicted later priming on the structural possibility task.
These findings provide evidence for differential neural plasticity as a
function of a figures global structural coherence. They also indicate that
neural changes occurring in one context during encoding can be associated with later priming in another context.
D75
AGE-RELATED
CHANGES
IN
SLEEP-DEPENDENT
CONSOLIDATION OF MOTOR BUT NOT COGNITIVE
LEARNING TASKS Rebecca Spencer1,2, Jessica Wilson1, Rich Ivry1;
1
University of California, Berkeley, 2University of Massachusetts, Amherst — Performance changes are greater on a range of motor and non-motor learning tasks following an interval spent asleep relative to an equivalent
interval spent awake. Recently we reported an age-related decline in
sleep-dependent consolidation on an explicit motor sequence learning
task. Sleep-dependent improvements on this task have been associated
with NREM-2 sleep. Sleep-dependent improvements on non-motor,
declarative memory tasks have generally been associated with time spent
in SWS. Given this distinction, we compared sleep-dependent changes in
performance on an explicit sequence learning task and a paired associates
task. There were twelve participants in each of the following age ranges:
21-30, 31-40, 41-50, 51-60, and 61-70 years. Consistent with our previous
report, in older adults (> 40 yrs) performance improvements on the
sequence learning task did not differ for the 12-hr interval awake and the
12 hr interval asleep. However, in both younger and older adults, performance improvements on the paired associates task were greater across
the 12 hr interval spent asleep than the 12 hr interval spent awake. Preserved sleep-dependent consolidation of the paired-associates task but

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

131

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

not the sequence learning task in older adults may reflect changes in the
quantity of NREM-2 sleep in older adults. However, time spent in this
sleep stage has been shown to be preserved or even increase with age.
Thus, the dissociation between SDC for motor sequence learning and
paired associate learning may be related to differential aging effects in
neural regions involved in consolidation processes for these two forms of
explicit learning.
D76
FUNCTIONAL DYNAMICS OF SUCCESSFUL ENCODING AND
RETRIEVAL IN THE HUMAN MTL REVEALED USING
INTRACRANIAL EEG RECORDINGS Bernhard Staresina1, Thomas
Thesen3, Chad Carlson3, Orrin Devinsky3, Lila Davachi1,2; 1New York
University, 2New York University/Center for Neural Science, 3New York
University Medical Center — How are episodic memories encoded and
retrieved in the medial temporal lobe (MTL)? What is the division of
labor between anatomically and functionally distinct MTL subregions? In
recent fMRI studies, it has been shown that perirhinal cortex (PrC) supports item-level encoding, whereas the hippocampus supports associative encoding. Interestingly, however, we find that if associative
information is directly related to an item (i.e., item-feature association),
both PrC and the hippocampus show enhanced activation during successful binding. What is the nature of these shared encoding mechanisms? In order to address the spatiotemporal dynamics between PrC
and the hippocampus, we recorded intracranial EEG (iEEG) from epilepsy patients with depth electrodes presurgically placed within the
MTL. During encoding, participants were presented with concrete nouns
superimposed on a colored background. Their task was to imagine the
referent of each noun in the presented color and to indicate whether the
imagined word/color combination was plausible. During the subsequent
retrieval test session, participants were presented with previously seen
and novel words. First, participants were asked to indicate whether a
given word was ‘old’ or ‘new’ (item memory). Further, when they
responded ‘old’, memory for the associated color was queried (item-feature memory). Preliminary data from two subjects point to differential
activation within the MTL during encoding and retrieval, and memoryspecific analyses will focus on event-related potentials as well as time-frequency representations for successful versus unsuccessful item-feature
binding and retrieval across different MTL subregions.
D77
REALITY AND THE SELF WITHIN THE EPISODIC MEMORY
NETWORK Jennifer J Summerfield1, Demis Hassabis1, Eleanor A Maguire1;
1Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, Institute of Neurology, University
College London, London, UK — Episodic memory is supported by a distributed network of brain regions. Several areas within posterior medial parietal cortex (posterior cingulate, precuneus, retrosplenial cortex) and
medial prefrontal cortex (ventral, dorsal) are consistently and strongly
implicated. However, the exact contributions of these areas, and the subregions within them, remain unclear. A recent functional MRI (fMRI)
study contrasted the recall of episodic memories with recall of closely
matched but imagined fictitious experiences (Hassabis, Kumaran, Maguire, submitted). This revealed increased activation in these medial posterior and anterior regions for real personally-experienced events. In the
current study we sought to define more precisely how these areas are
modulated by the ‘realness’ of an experience and also the extent to which
an experience is self-relevant. Three experimental sessions were conducted over three consecutive weeks. In the first two sessions naturalistic
episodic events were elicited, viewed or created. These included real and
imagined personal episodic events, and non-personal events from a fictitious film, events from real news clips, imagined film events and imagined news events. Events were matched for age, emotional content and
spatial-temporal characteristics. In addition, control tasks required participants to view or imagine single acontextual objects. In the final session
events and objects were recalled during fMRI. Several spatially distinct
regions were identified within medial posterior parietal cortex and

132

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

medial prefrontal cortex that were differentially responsive to the manipulations of ‘realness’ and self-relevance. These findings therefore identify
specific functional roles of key regions within the episodic memory
retrieval network.
D78
NEURAL MECHANISMS FOR THE RETRIEVAL OF TIME
DURATION OF PAST EVENTS Maki Suzuki1, Nobuhito Abe2, Syunji
Mugikura2, Aya Ueno2, Shigemune Yayoi2, Syoki Takahashi2, Toshikatsu
Fujii2; 1Cyclotron and Radioisotope Center, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan,
2
Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan — It is still
not well understood the neural mechanisms for the retrieval of time
information attached with experienced events. In the present study, we
investigated brain activation associated with the successful retrieval of
‘time duration’ of past events using event-related functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). During an encoding phase, subjects were presented with black-and-white face photographs one by one either for long
duration (8.5 seconds; LONG) or for short duration (2.5 seconds;
SHORT), and were asked to memorize each face with its time duration.
This encoding phase was followed by a visual distraction task. During a
retrieval phase, the old or new face photographs were presented one by
one for 2 seconds in a random order. The subjects were asked to judge
whether or not they had seen each presented face, and if they judged it as
old, to indicate the presented time (LONG or SHORT) at encoding phase.
fMRI scanning was performed both in the encoding and retrieval phases.
The results of only the retrieval phase were reported here. Compared
with the successful time duration judgment of old SHORT faces, the successful time duration judgment of old LONG faces was associated with
the activation in the right inferior occipital / fusiform gyri, dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex, and the basal forebrain. The reverse comparison
showed the activation in the left superior temporal gyrus. Our data indicate that information of time duration of past events is stored in brain
regions engaged in the processing of those events at encoding.
D79
NEURAL SUBSTRATES FOR SOCIAL TRANSITIVE INFERENCE
Shannon M Tubridy1, Sonja Schmer-Galunder3, Wendy A Suzuki2, Lila
Davachi1,2; 1New York University, 2Center for Neural Science, New York
University, 3Columbia University — While it is known that the hippocampus is critical for relational processing and memory (Cohen and Eichenbaum, 1993; Davachi 2006), little is known about the neural processes
supporting memory for social relationships. A recent fMRI study reports
no hippocampal activation during processing of social relations (Kumaran and Maguire, 2005). However, social judgments in that study were
for relations in over-learned social networks, perhaps enabling use of
semantic memory. Work in rats and monkeys (Dusek and Eichenbaum,
1997; Buckmaster et al., 2004) suggests that the hippocampal system is
critical for expression of transitive inference (TI) – inferring relationships
of nonadjacent items in a hierarchy of overlapping premise pairs – and
recent fMRI studies in humans show hippocampal activation during
transitive processing of arbitrary stimulus relations (Heckers, et al., 2004;
Preston et al., 2004). To test whether the hippocampus plays a role in
social relational processing in humans, we adapted a TI task known to
rely on hippocampal mechanisms. Participants learned the relationships
between pairs of individuals interacting in an office setting such that a
dominance hierarchy across all individuals could be inferred from interactions between pairs of individuals. Participants were scanned during TI
judgments of social dominance to examine the role of the hippocampus
and medial prefrontal regions in the inferential processing of social relations. Preliminary data indicate that subjects were, indeed, able to learn
the dominance hierarchy, achieving 90%, 76%, and 80% accuracy on
anchor, premise, and transitive test pairs. The relationship of imaging
results to behavioral performance is discussed.

Poster Session D

D80
REACTIVATION OF MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE AND AREA MT/
V5 DURING THE RETRIEVAL OF MOTION INFORMATION: A PET
STUDY Aya Ueno1, Nobuhito Abe1, Maki Suzuki2, Yayoi Shigemune1,
Kazumi Hirayama1, Etsuro Mori1, Manabu Tashiro2, Masatoshi Itoh2,
Toshikatsu Fujii1; 1Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai,
Japan, 2Division of Cyclotron Nuclear Medicine, Cyclotron and Radioisotope
Center, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan — Recent neuroimaging evidence
suggests that the retrieval of a prior episode reactivates brain regions that
were active when the episode was encoded. However, with regard to the
reactivation of medial temporal lobe (MTL), the previous results remain
controversial. In the present study, we used positron emission tomography (PET) to assess whether overlapping activity was found in both the
MTL and motion-related cortical regions during the encoding and
retrieval of motion information attached with meaningless shapes. PET
measurements were carried out during four conditions: two encoding
conditions (EM; encoding of moving shapes and ES; encoding of static
shapes) and two retrieval conditions (RM; retrieval of moving shapes and
RS; retrieval of static shapes). During the study, subjects were asked to
encode moving (turning around to the right or the left) and static shapes.
At subsequent testing, subjects were presented with only the static
shapes that had been presented with or without motion during encoding,
and were engaged in the retrieval tasks of shapes and motion. To determine whether brain regions activated during encoding were reactivated
at retrieval, we used a conjunction analysis of EM vs. ES and RM vs. RS.
Overlapping activity was found in the area MT/V5 in the right hemisphere and the left MTL during the encoding and retrieval of meaningless shapes with motion information compared with those without
motion information. These results suggest that the retrieval of specific
event information is associated with reactivation of both the MTL and the
regions involved during encoding of the information.
D81
FMRI CORRELATES OF PERCEPTUAL SPECIFICITY IN IMPLICIT
AND EXPLICIT MEMORY Katja Umla-Runge1, Hubert D. Zimmer1,
Christian Groh-Bordin2, Christoph Krick3, Wolfgang Reith3; 1Brain & Cognition
Unit, Saarland University, Germany, 2Clinical Neuropsychology, Saarland
University, Germany, 3Saarland University Hospital, Germany — The
purpose of this fMRI study was to find out if there are overlapping brain
regions responding to a perceptual specificity manipulation in explicit
and implicit object memory. Earlier studies demonstrated the involvement of the fusiform gyrus in object priming. Furthermore, a hemispheric
specialization was brought forward: right fusiform structures are hypothesized to represent specific properties, left fusiform regions more abstract
features of visual stimuli. In the implicit memory task, participants made
living/non-living judgments about objects depicted in photographs.
Objects were either repeated identically or as different exemplars of the
same concepts. A concomitant feature of the implicit task was that it
served as an incidental learning phase for a subsequently conducted
explicit memory test. Same and different exemplars were randomly intermixed with new objects. Participants were instructed to perform an inclusion task. In the implicit task, we obtained a significant repetition
suppression effect in bilateral fusiform gyri only for identically repeated
objects. Although fusiform regions were activated in the explicit test relative to a control condition, differential involvement modulated by perceptual specificity and/or memory status could not be observed.
Repetition enhancement in explicit memory is supported by other brain
structures which are also modulated by perceptual specificity (enhanced
involvement of inferior parietal regions for different as compared to identical exemplars and of posterior cingulate cortex for the reverse contrast).
Our results suggest that implicit and explicit memory for visual objects
share perceptual processes but, apart from that, are supported by very
different neural structures responding to perceptual specificity manipulations.

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

D82
MODULATION OF A NEURAL CORRELATE OF RECOLLECTION
BY AMOUNT OF RETRIEVED INFORMATION Kaia L. Vilberg1,
Michael D. Rugg1; 1UCI — In a prior experiment (Vilberg & Rugg, 2007),
we reported that activity in the left inferior parietal cortex covaried with
the amount of information recollected when the demands of the retrieval
test required online evaluation of recollected content. The present experiment addressed the question whether activity in this region is modulated
by amount recollected when no such online demands are present. At
study, participants relationally encoded pictures of objects that were presented as pairs. Half of the pairs were studied for 1 second, whereas the
remainder were studied for 6 seconds. Test items were single pictures.
The test task was a standard remember/know procedure. A 'surprise'
post-test, administered after fMRI data had been acquired, was used to
evaluate the amount of information recollected at test for items given
Remember responses. Participants correctly recollected more study
details for those items presented for a duration of 6 seconds than those
presented for 1 second. Recollection was associated with enhanced activity in posterior cortex, most notably left angular gyrus and medial parietal cortex (precuneus). Effects of amount of information recollected, as
operationalized by the contrast between remembered items studied for 6
seconds vs. those studied for 1 second, were found in the left inferior
parietal cortex, mirroring the results of our prior study. These findings
provide further support for the proposal that retrieval-related activity in
left inferior parietal cortex reflects processes supporting the representation of retrieved episodic information, irrespective of the evaluative
demands at test.
D83
A SYSTEMATIC EXAMINATION OF TRANSITIVE INFERENCE IN
OLDER AND YOUNGER ADULTS Christina Villate1, Sandra Moses1,
Jennifer Ryan1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute, 2University of Toronto — Previous studies suggest that older adults have a deficit in binding multiple
objects and their respective relations. We assessed relational memory
binding in twenty younger and twenty older adults using the transitive
inference task in which subjects learned a series of premise pairs (A>B,
B>C, C>D, D>E, E>F) and were asked to make inference judgments (B?D,
B?E, C?E). In addition, we administered a medial temporal lobe and a
frontal lobe neuropsychological test battery to our older participants to
examine whether success was dependent upon the integrity of other cognitive abilities. The transitive inference task revealed that older adults
were impaired relative to their younger counterparts in learning the
premise pairs and in making later inference judgments. Older adults
were also less likely to be explicitly aware that a relational hierarchy
existed among the stimuli (A>B>C>D>E>F). The results of the neuropsychological test batteries revealed that older participants who showed
superior verbal associative memory showed superior transitive inference
accuracy. Conversely, participants who showed superior memory for single items and iconic/pictorial tasks showed inferior transitive inference
accuracy. Altogether these results suggest that successful transitive inference performance and conscious awareness for the hierarchical relationship rely on the relational organization of the premise pairs in memory,
and such relational memory binding is impaired in normal aging. We
speculate that transitive inference performance is mediated by interactions among multiple cognitive systems that support different aspects of
processing and the degree of contribution varies depending on underlying cognitive/neural integrity.
D84
BEHAVIORAL AND ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR
A NOVEL MECHANISM BY WHICH IMPLICIT MEMORY CAN
DRIVE ACCURATE RECOGNITION Joel Voss1, Carol Baym2, Ken
Paller1; 1Northwestern University Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program,
2University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign — Awareness
of
memory
retrieval commonly accompanies behavioral indications of explicit memory, such as accurate responding in a recognition test. Implicit memory

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

133

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

does not entail conscious memory retrieval and is generally preserved in
amnesia, even when explicit memory is severely impaired. Whether recognition can instead be accomplished via implicit memory is highly controversial. We sought to unmask implicit memory contributions to
recognition in healthy subjects by drastically reducing explicit memory.
Forced-choice recognition accuracy for kaleidoscopes improved when
explicit memory was degraded. Furthermore, recognition was most accurate when explicit memory was introspectively absent. Event-related
EEG responses dissociated implicit and explicit recognition, as earlyonset negative potentials indexed the former whereas later-onset positive
potentials accompanied the latter. This evidence indicates that implicit
memory was operative when explicit memory was unavailable to guide
performance, such that objects could be correctly selected in a recognition
test in the absence of the awareness of retrieval.
D85
EFFECTS OF ADVANCED AGING ON THE NEURAL
CORRELATES OF RECOGNITION MEMORY T.H. Wang1,2, M.D.
Grilli1,2, M.D. Rugg1,2; 1Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory,
UC Irvine, 2UC Irvine — Functional neuroimaging studies investigating
the neural correlates of age-related differences in recognition memory
have reported that retrieval-related activity (‘old/new’ effects) are larger
and more widespread in older adults (a pattern of ‘over-recruitment’). In
the present study we investigated whether this pattern becomes more
exaggerated with advancing age. We used functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) to contrast retrieval-related activity in two groups of
older adults: aged between 84 -96 yrs (‘old-old’) and 64-77 yrs (‘youngold’) respectively. At study, participants performed animacy judgments
on a series of pictures of objects. In order to behaviorally match later recognition performance, half of the pictures were presented once and the
other half twice. The test phase comprised the presentation of all studied
items intermixed with new pictures. Subjects were required to indicate
whether each test item was previously studied (‘old’), new, or whether
they were unsure of its study status (‘guess’). Recognition performance of
the old-old subjects for twice-studied objects was approximately equivalent to that of the young-old subjects for once-studied items. Consistent
with previous findings, analyses of event-related BOLD activity revealed
an extensive network of ‘old/new’ effects in the ‘young-old’ subjects,
including medial and lateral regions of both parietal and prefrontal cortex. By contrast, old/new effects in the old-old participants were markedly more restricted, and were most prominent in bilateral superior
frontal cortex. Thus, the pattern of cortical over-recruitment that is
observed when comparing old/new effects in young-old individuals relative to individuals in their early 20’s does not continue its development
with advancing age.
D86
EFFECTS OF MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE LESIONS ON
PERFORMANCE OF A COMPLEX VISUAL SEARCH TASK David
Warren1, Melissa Duff2, Daniel Tranel2, Neal Cohen1; 1Beckman Institute,
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2University of Iowa Carver College of
Medicine — Long-term declarative memory is widely acknowledged as
the chief function of the medial temporal lobe (MTL) region, but recent
evidence suggests that these structures may additionally contribute to
performance in tasks with short or even no delays under certain circumstances. We tested this emerging view of MTL function in neurological
patients with damage limited to the hippocampus or with more extensive
MTL damage, as contrasted with normal comparison participants, on a
novel visual search task. Successful performance required determining
whether a target stimulus was present in a dense field of lure stimuli
which varied systematically in their similarity to the target. A sample of
the sought target was always available in the center of the screen. Both
overt behavioral responses and eye movements were monitored throughout the experiment. Irrespective of the extent of their MTL lesions, all
patients with hippocampal damage were able to perform the task,
although patient performance was decremented relative to comparison

134

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

subjects. Eye movement measures revealed that all participants made
longer initial fixations to stimuli that more closely resembled the target
stimulus. However, eye movement measures also revealed that normal
comparison subjects changed their pattern of eye movements across trials, apparently reflecting more efficient search, but none of the patients
with hippocampal damage exhibited any reliable changes on the same
measures. These data suggest that the hippocampus may contribute to
performance when comparisons must be made among stimuli that are
sufficiently complex or sufficiently similar even under conditions in
which no delays are imposed.
D87
EVIDENCE FOR DISTINCT NETWORKS RELATED TO
PERCEPTUAL AND SEMANTIC PROCESSING REVEALED BY
SPONTANEOUS FMRI CORRELATION PATTERNS Gagan Wig1,3,
Daniel Schacter1,3, Randy Buckner2,3; 1Harvard University, 2Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Harvard University, 3Athinoula A. Martinos Center for
Biomedical Imaging, MGH/MIT/HMS — We recently described two dissociable patterns of activity related to semantic classification of visual
objects within the context of a repetition-priming paradigm (Wig et al.,
Society for Neuroscience Abstracts, 2007). The first pattern was related to
perceptual characteristics of the classified stimuli, while the second pattern highlighted regions demonstrating sensitivity to semantic (conceptual) processing. Amongst other regions, a region at the confluence of the
left inferior temporal gyrus and fusiform gyrus (ITG-FG; BA 37) demonstrated perceptual specificity, while an adjacent region within the left
middle temporal gyrus (MTG; BA 21/37) demonstrated conceptual specificity that also tracked frontal cortex. Based on these observations, we
hypothesized that each region would demonstrate distinct patterns of
spontaneous BOLD functional correlations with the rest of the brain. Participants were scanned at 3 Tesla during passive fixation. The ITG-FG
correlated with bilateral regions in the superior, middle and inferior
occipital gyri and the precuneus. By contrast, the MTG correlated with
bilateral regions of the inferior frontal gyrus and the superior and inferior
parietal lobules. Together, these results provide evidence for a functional
sub-division between regions of the temporal lobe based on their correlated networks, and extend the application of spontaneous correlation
analyses to defining and dissociating semantic and perceptual networks.
D88
MODULATION OF THE EARLY CONTEXT EFFECT IN
ABSTRACT AND CONCRETE WORDS REFLECTS ACTIVITY IN
THE SEMANTIC SYSTEM – EVIDENCE FROM ELECTRICAL
NEUROIMAGING Miranka Wirth1, Helge Horn1, Andrea Federspiel1,
Thomas Koenig1, Annick Razafimandimby3, Beat Meier2, Thomas Dierks1,
Werner Strik1; 1University Hospital of Psychiatry, Bern, Switzerland,
2University of Bern, Institute of Psychology, Bern, Switzerland, 3Groupe
d’Imagerie Neurofonctionnelle, UMR 6194, CNRS, CEA, Universities of Caen
and Paris 5, Caen, France — Spatial and temporal characteristics of lexicosemantic retrieval are frequently examined with semantic context (i.e.
priming) paradigms. These paradigms measure context (i.e. priming)
effects in word processing evoked by semantically related context.
Besides the well-known attention-dependent N400 context effect (>
250ms), recent Event-related Potential studies demonstrate early automatic context effects in the P1-N1 time period (< 200ms). However, in
visual words the semantic origin of the early effects remains debated.
This study examined spatio-temporal activation dynamics of the early
context effect as well as the modulation of the effect by differences in
structure and accessibility of verbal semantics existent in abstract and
concrete words. The early context effect was measured in visually-displayed words that followed semantically related single word context.
Spatial and temporal characteristics of the effect were analyzed with electrical neuroimaging. In abstract words the early context effect was
enhanced compared to concrete words indicated by a topographic dissimilarity in the P1-N1 transition period (116 – 140ms). The concretenessdependent modulation demonstrates the sensitivity of the early context

Poster Session D

effect to structural differences in verbal semantics. Moreover, the early
context effect in abstract words was explained by enhanced activation in
the left (inferior)prefrontal cortex for related compared to unrelated
words in addition to temporo-parietal generators recruited in both conditions. Taken together our findings show that the early context effect
reflects activation processes in verbal semantic memory.
D89
THE EFFECTS OF SLEEP DEPRIVATION ON CATEGORY
LEARNING AND RETENTION Sasha
M
Wolosin1,
Dagmar
Zeithamova1,2, David M Schnyer1,2, W Todd Maddox1,2; 1The University of
Texas at Austin, 2Institute for Neuroscience, The University of Texas at
Austin — We examined the effects of sleep deprivation on category learning and retention. Subjects completed an information-integration and
two prototype category learning tasks over two consecutive days (24
hours apart), with sleep (control) or without sleep (sleepless). Information-integration requires integration of information from two or more
stimulus dimensions, and is assumed to be mediated by the basal ganglia
(Ashby et al., 1998). Prototype learning has been shown to involve different neural systems depending on whether stimuli are compared to a single prototype or are assumed to belong to one of two different prototypes
(Zeithamova et al., 2007). By choosing tasks for which the underlying
neurobiology is understood, we hope to elucidate how sleep deprivation
affects different neural networks involved in categorization. In the information-integration task, subjects categorized stimuli during session 1,
and continued to perform the same task 24 hours later. Pre-learned category structures were retained, as shown by initial performance on day 2
compared to final performance on day 1, in both the control and sleepless
groups. In the prototype learning tasks, subjects were required to learn
either one or two prototypes on each day and categorize stimuli based on
those prototypes. In these tasks, subjects in the sleepless group showed a
significant drop in performance on day 2, while controls did not. The
results suggest that sleep deprivation impairs prototype learning, but
does not affect retention of information-integration category structures.
D90
HYPERMNESIA FOR AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL EVENTS AFTER A
ONE YEAR DELAY Cindy Woolverton1, Jenna Campbell1, Lynn Nadel1,
Lee Ryan1; 1University of Arizona — In a recent study, we investigated the
retrieval of remote autobiographical memories as a function of repeated
retrievals and the passage of time (Nadel, Campbell, & Ryan, 2007).
Results suggested that repeated retrievals throughout the course of one
month led to an overall increase in detail, an effect known as hypermnesia, increased consistency, and a decrease in reported uncertainty. We
were then interested to see if the increased detail and consistency was
maintained over a long delay, over one year, or if the memories had
returned to their original state. Eight of the original twelve participants
came back into the laboratory for a single retrieval session of the same 36
memories that had been discussed in the initial study. We found that the
level of internal details remained stable, while the external details
increased significantly, approximately 50% above the previous retrieval
session from the original study. As a result, there were further hypermnestic effects beyond the heightened level of detail obtained in the original study at this long delay. The highly consistent script that developed
throughout the original study was changed with the addition of more
detail. Participants recalled details from the initial retrieval sessions that
had fallen out of the script in addition to new details that had not been
mentioned in any previous session. These findings have implications for
long-term consolidation processes and the longevity of short-term repetition effects.
D91
PRACTICE
STRUCTURE
LEADS
TO
THE
SELECTIVE
CONSOLIDATION OF MOTOR SEQUENCES Nicholas
Wymbs1,
1 1
Scott Grafton ; University of California, Santa Barbara — Learning a set of
skills is easier when trials are distributed into blocks of a similar type
compared to trials that are randomly distributed. However, consolidation

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

is better for trials following random practice, an effect known as contextual interference (CI). Using CI and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), the neural mechanisms supporting consolidation were
identified. Individuals learned a set of 4-element sequences with their left
hand in a within-subjects design. fMRI was acquired during learning of
three sequences acquired according to a block and three to a random
practice schedule. Skill retention and fMRI was tested the following day.
Behavioral results confirmed the consolidation benefit of random practice. A go-nogo design separated movement preparation from movement
execution. To identify CI effects during skill acquisition, an interaction of
practice structure and time was calculated. With increasing practice,
fMRI activity in planning (nogo trials) and execution (go trials) of
sequences from a random schedule were greater in sensorimotor and premotor regions, despite similar performance in the two groups. During
retest, trials learned under block and random schedules were presented
together. Effects of consolidation were measured by contrasting block
and random practiced trials. This revealed greater activation in left sensorimotor and premotor regions for sequence retrieval (go trials) learned
with a random practice schedule. These results demonstrate that motor
and premotor systems support consolidation for novel motor skills.
Manipulation of practice structure is a novel approach for studying consolidation.
D92
AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY OF RECOGNITION
MEMORY FOR WORDS AND FACES. Yick Yee Ying1, Wilding
Edward1; 1Cardiff University/School of Psychology — This experiment was
designed in order to determine the task-specificity of event-related potential (ERP) old/new effects. These effects are differences between ERPs
associated with old and new items attracting correct old/new recognition
judgments. They are assumed to index retrieval processes. ERP old/new
effects for faces and words were contrasted, and these stimuli were
selected because of indications that faces and words are associated with
different old/new effects. Participants completed face and word studytest blocks. In all study phases, participants indicated the screen location
where words/faces were presented (left, right, central). In all test phases,
participants made recognition memory judgments. Discrimination was
superior and reaction times were faster for words than for faces. Moreover, ERPs associated with correctly judged old items were more positive-going than those associated with correctly judged new items. These
old/new effects were largest anteriorly from 300 to 500ms, and posteriorly from 500 to 800ms. Critically, there were reliable differences between
the ERP old/new effects for faces and words from 500 to 800ms, where
they extended anteriorly for faces to a greater extent than for words. This
task-specific effect could not be explained by the different discrimination
rates for the two stimulus types, and the findings indicate that there are
retrieval processes common to faces and words, in addition to processes
that are engaged selectively for faces. These stimulus types vary on multiple dimensions, and it will be important to vary these systematically in
order to delineate the principal determinants of the task-specific old/new
effects reported here.
D93
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF LONG-TERM AND
SHORT TERM MEMORY FOR FACES: MODULATIONS IN THETA,
ALPHA AND GAMMA ACTIVITY Elana Zion-Golumbic1, Marta Kutas2,
Shlomo Bentin1,3; 1The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel,
2
University of California, San Diego, 3The Interdisciplinary Center for Neural
Computation, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel — Social
interaction depends on our ability to create, store and retrieve memories
for human faces. This human ability involves multiple levels of representation which presumably must interact for successful memory retrieval.
We investigated the neural mechanisms involved in creating and retrieving memories for new faces, with which subjects have no prior experience. These were compared to famous faces, for which participants have
elaborate perceptual and semantic neural representations. Participants

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

135

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

studied a series of faces which they later were asked to recognize when
interspersed in a series of new faces. Famous and non-famous faces were
presented in separate blocks. EEG was recorded throughout and analyzed in different frequency bands. Theta (4-7Hz) and Alpha (8-12Hz)
amplitudes were modulated by memory, distinguishing between correctly remembered old faces (hits) and correctly categorized new faces
(CR), regardless of pre-experimental face familiarity. In addition, hits
exhibited increased theta phase-locking across many long-distance electrodes, relative to CRs. In contrast, induced Gamma activity (30-80Hz)
was modulated by familiarity, being greater for famous than unfamiliar
faces, similarly for both hits and CRs. This pattern suggests that Theta
and Alpha rhythms are systematically related to short-term mnemonic
processes, whereas induced Gamma activity is more related to the accessing of long-term memory representations.

Memory: False memory
D94
RECOLLECTION FAILURE INCREASES FALSE RECOGNITION IN
PATIENTS WITH ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Nobuhito Abe1, Toshikatsu
Fujii1, Yoshiyuki Nishio1, Osamu Iizuka1, Shigenori Kanno1, Hirokazu
Kikuchi1, Masahito Takagi1, Kotaro Hiraoka1, Hiroshi Yamasaki1, Kazumi
Hirayama1, Hyunjoo Choi1, Etsuro Mori1; 1Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine, Sendai, Japan — Recent neuropsychological evidence suggests
that patients with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) are impaired in recollectionbased monitoring processes and therefore exhibit increased rate of false
recognition. To obtain further evidence for this notion, we compared
patients with mild AD with age-matched control subjects using a recognition memory task. Subjects studied animate or inanimate items. These
items were presented either once or three times. Subjects were later asked
to make a old/new recognition judgment in response to (1) same – items
identical to those seen at encoding, (2) similar – items similar but not
identical to items seen at encoding, and (3) new – non-studied, unrelated
items. To the same items, repeated presentation of stimuli increased the
proportion of ‘old’ response in both groups. To the similar items,
repeated presentation of stimuli increased the rate of ‘old’ response in
AD patients, whereas the ‘old’ response rate in control subjects did not
differ between the single and repeated presentations of stimuli. The
results indicate that repeated presentation of stimuli at encoding
increased a feeling of familiarity for the studied items in both groups. In
response to the similar items, the control subjects might be capable of
counteracting this feeling of familiarity by recollecting the original items,
but AD patients might not. Consistent with the results of previous studies, our results seem to further support the view that patients with AD
are impaired in their ability to use recollection to reduce familiarity-based
false recognition.
D95
FALSE MEMORIES: ENCODING PROCESSES AND THE WORD
FREQUENCY MIRROR EFFECT. Eve Attali1,2, Francesca De Anna1,2,3,
Bruno Dubois1,2,3, Gianfranco Dalla Barba1; 1INSERM U610, Paris, 2UPMC
Paris, 3Hopital Pitie Salpetriere Paris — One of the most replicable empirical results in the recognition memory literature is the word frequency
mirror effect (WFME). This effect refers to a phenomenon where the false
recognition (FR) rate is higher for high frequency (HF) words, which are
assumed to have a strong representation in semantic memory, while the
hit rate is higher for low frequency (LF) words which are assumed to be
also represented in episodic memory. This WFME in the recall tasks is
still debated. Moreover, little is known about the role of encoding processes on the WFME. Sixty subjects were asked to study 3 lists of HF and
LF words under 3 different encoding conditions: semantic, phonological
and non-specific. After studying each list, subjects were asked to recall as
many words as possible or to recognize studied words from a pool of 24
targets, 24 related foils and 24 unrelated foils. The WFME was confirmed

136

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

in the recognition task but not in the recall task. Semantic encoding
induced better recall and recognition than the two other encoding conditions. In contrast, phonological encoding induced more intrusions and FR
than the two other encoding conditions. These results suggest that
strongly represented semantic information plays a different role in recall
and recognition, affecting differentially true and false memories. The
results also show that encoding processes play a crucial role in the production of false memories and suggest that encoding that relies on
semantic memory improves accuracy in a subsequent memory test,
increasing correct responses and reducing false memories.
D96
REMEMBERING THE GENDER BUT NOT THE IDENTITY OF THE
SPEAKER: AN MEG STUDY OF PARTIAL SOURCE MEMORY
Shih-kuen Cheng1, Yuhan Chen1, Daisy L. Hung1,2, Ovid J.-L. Tzeng1,2,3;
1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central University, Taiwan,
2
Institute of Neuroscience, Naiontal Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, 3Institute
of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, Taiwan — This study examined whether
imprecise source information derived from gist memory supports source
judgments in the form of recollection or familiarity. Participants listened
to two lists of semantically related words spoken by two male voices and
two female voices respectively. At test, participants made source judgments to visually presented items while MEG was recorded. MEFs were
categorized into source correct hits (the identity of the speaker was correctly identified), within-gender source errors (the incorrectly identified
speaker was of the same gender with the correct speaker), between-gender source errors (the incorrectly identified speaker was of different genders with the correct speaker), and correct rejections. During 400 to 700
ms after stimulus onset, the MEFs recorded over left temporal-parietal
scalps were more positive-going for HIT/Source Correct trials than for
Hit/Withing-Gender Source errors, which was of no difference from correct rejections. This MEG old/new effect resemble the left parietal ERP
old/new effect, which has been linked to recollection based recognition.
During 400 to 700 ms after stimulus onset, the MEFs recorded over the
left occipital scalp regions was of similar amplitude for HIT/Source Correct and HIT/ Within Gender Source Errors, and were larger for these
two response categories than correct rejections. This effect might reflect
the magnetic-physiological correlates of retrieving partial, imprecise
source information. The distributions of these two MEG old/new effects
were not identical, suggesting different, non-overlapping neural substrates involved in the retrieval of specific and partial source information.
D97
MEMORY, CONSCIOUSNESS AND TEMPORALITY: TOWARD A
TAXONOMY OF CONFABULATION Gianfranco Dalla Barba1,2,
Marie-Françoise Boissé2, Stéphanie Carrus2, Bruno Dubois1,3; 1INSERM U.
610, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, 3Hôpital de la
Salpêtrière, Paris, France — In the last two decades the literature on confabulation has been largely influenced by the distinction between spontaneous and provoked confabulation. However, this distinction has been
challenged by several theoretical and experimental observations. In this
study we administered to 10 patients with an amnesic confabulatory syndrome a new version of the “Confabulation Battery”, which includes 15
questions for each of the following domains: Personal Semantic Memory,
Episodic Memory, Orientation in time and place, Linguistic Semantic
Memory, Recent General Semantic Memory, Contemporary General
Semantic Memory, Historical General Semantic Memory, Semantic
Projects, Episodic Projects, “I don’t know” semantic questions (e.g.,
"What did Marilyn Monroe's father do?"), and “I don’t know” episodic
questions (e.g. "Do you remember what you did on March 13, 1985?").
Spontaneous Confabulations were also collected during informal conversation. A total of 412 provoked and 60 spontaneous confabulations were
analyzed according to the type of their content and, for provoked confabulations, also according to the type of question that elicited them. Regardless their modality of appearance (spontaneous vs provoked), 75% of
confabulations was classified as either misplacement of true memories in

Poster Session D

wrong time and place, or report of premorbid routine activities. Only 7%
of provoked and 1% of spontaneous confabulations showed the ‘fantastic’ content described in the literature. Provoked confabulations were
mainly restricted to Episodic Memory, Orientation in time and place and
Episodic Projects. Following these results, we propose a new taxonomy
of confabulation based on the Memory, Consciousness and Temporality
Theory (Dalla Barba, 2002).
D98
CEREBRAL CORRELATES OF FALSE MEMORIES AFTER SLEEP
AND SLEEP DEPRIVATION Annabelle Darsaud1, Hedwige Dehon2,
Virginie Sterpenich1, Thanh Dang-Vu1, Martin Desseilles1, Steffen Gais1, Luca
Matarazzo1, Manuel Schabus1, Gilles Vandewalle1, André Luxen1, Fabienne
Collette2, Pierre Maquet1; 1Cyclotron Research Centre, University of Liège, Belgium,
2Cognitive sciences Department, University of Liège, Belgium — Memory
is
often accurate but errors and distortions also occur. Although sleep has
been shown to facilitate accurate memory consolidation, little is known
as to its effects on memory distortions. Hence, we investigated the effects
of sleep on the production of DRM false memories (FMs) and their neural
correlates in an fMRI protocol. Subjects listened to a set of 32 thematic
lists, each of which consisted in 15 semantic associates (target items) converging to a critical non presented theme word (lure). Subjects were
divided in two groups that either slept (S, n=18) or were sleep-deprived
(SD, n=18) on the first post-session night. Recognition was assessed after
2 recovery nights and consisted in a remember/know/new judgement
on the targets items, lures and new words. Functional MRI data were
acquired using a 3T Allegra MR scanner and analysed using SPM5.
Behavioural results showed a significant main effect of sleep on true and
false recognition with S group remembering significantly more studied
words (p<0.001) and lures (p=0.056) than SD group. Patterns of brain
responses significantly differed between groups suggesting that the two
groups engaged different networks to retrieve true and false memories.
That is, the production of “remember” responses for the target information was associated to parietal and cortical areas in the SD group, while a
“remember” response to a lure was associated to activity in the hippocampus in the S group. This hippocampal activation may be understood as
an offline processing of memories during sleep.
D99
TEMPORAL CONSCIOUSNESS AND CONFABULATION IN
KORSAKOFF ’S SYNDROME Caroline
Decaix1,
Richard
Lévy1,2,
Gianfranco Dalla Barba2,3; 1Hôpital Saint Antoine, Paris, France, 2INSERM U.
610, Paris, France, 3Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France — Temporal Consciousness [TC, (Dalla Barba, 2002)] allows individuals to be aware of
something as part of their personal past, present or future. TC is opposed
to Knowing Consciousness (KC), which allows individuals to be aware of
something as a meaning or as an element of impersonal knowledge or
information. Patients who confabulate in episodic memory often confabulate also in tasks of orientation in time and place and in tasks tapping
their ability to plan their personal future. Accordingly, it has been suggested that in these cases confabulation affects Temporal Consciousness
rather than merely episodic memory. Patient PL is a 43 years-old man
with Korsakoff’s syndrome. His intellectual and memory functions
where only mildly affected. We administered to PL a new version of the
“Confabulation Battery”, which includes 15 questions for each of the following domains: Personal Semantic Memory, Episodic Memory, Orientation in time and place, Linguistic Semantic Memory, Recent General
Semantic Memory, Contemporary General Semantic Memory, Historical
General Semantic Memory, Semantic Projects, Episodic Projects, “I don’t
know” semantic questions (e.g., "What did Marilyn Monroe's father
do?"), and “I don’t know” episodic questions (e.g. "Do you remember
what you did on March 13, 1985?"). PL’s confabulations were mainly
restricted to Episodic Memory (73%), Orientation in time and place (33%)
and Episodic Projects (53%). Results from PL’s case provide further support to the hypothesis that confabulation affects TC and that it is reductive to consider confabulation a pure memory disorder. Dalla Barba, G.

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

(2002). Memory, consciousness and temporality. Boston: Kluver Academic Publishers.
D100
FALSE MEMORIES: SHORT-TERM AND LONG-TERM EFFECTS
COMPARED Kristin E. Flegal1, Alexandra S. Atkins1, Patricia A. ReuterLorenz1; 1University of Michigan — We have previously documented false
recognition and false recall in a modified Deese-Roediger-McDermott
(DRM) task in which 4 semantically related words are retained for a mere
3-4 second delay. Here we investigate whether the processes associated
with short-term memory distortions are dissociable from those that
underlie false memories in the long term. We report the results from a
novel task that allows us to examine distortions in short-term memory
and long-term memory conjointly, following the same study phase. Agerelated differences in younger and older adults are investigated as one
variable along which memory processes might dissociate. Within both
age groups, we replicate findings of rapid semantic distortions at short
delays, as critical lures are falsely recognized more often than unstudied
and semantically unrelated negative probes, although accompanied by
lower confidence ratings than those following correct responses. At
longer delays, false alarms to critical lures come to be made as quickly
and nearly as frequently as accurate recognition responses, consistent
with a decline in discriminability between lures and studied items as time
elapses. A significant crossover interaction is seen in confidence ratings
for these “yes” responses to critical lures at shorter and longer delays for
younger adults, but interestingly, older adults remain (rightly) less confident in falsely recognizing lures even in long-term memory. Regardless
of age, gist-based memory remains stable over time in the face of significant decreases in veridical remembering. The implications of these results
for time-invariant versus dissociable memory mechanisms are discussed.
D101
PREFRONTAL REGIONS DIFFERENTIALLY CONTRIBUTE TO
SOURCE MEMORY RETRIEVAL PROCESSES David
Gallo1,
Ian
McDonough1, Jason Scimeca1; 1University of Chicago — Prefrontal cortex is
involved during memory retrieval, with potential processing differences
between dorsolateral and ventrolateral regions. We investigated the function of these regions using event-related fMRI. Subjects studied two types
of stimuli (red words and pictures) and subsequently were scanned while
taking different source memory tests (always using black words as
retrieval cues). On the red word test they accepted items that were studied in red font (irrespective of whether the item also was studied as a picture), on the picture test they accepted items that were studied as pictures
(irrespective of whether the item also was studied in red font), and on the
exclusion test they accepted items studied in red font but rejected items
studied as pictures (i.e., unlike the other two tests, both sources were relevant on this test). Behavioral results confirmed that subjects had
searched memory for the appropriate information on each test. Replicating prior work, right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex was more active on
the red word test than on the picture test, owing to greater retrieval effort
when recollecting font color. Further, this effect was greater for studied
than for nonstudied items, implicating postretrieval monitoring processes. In contrast, more ventral prefrontal regions were recruited on the
exclusion task, and this pattern was found for both studied and nonstudied items. This pattern implicates general retrieval orientation processes,
such as the active maintenance of an exclusion rule. Although both
regions were involved at retrieval, they differentially contributed to
retrieval orientation and monitoring processes.
D102
WHEN RECOLLECTION HELPS YOU TO REALIZE SOMETHING
DIDN'T HAPPEN: AN ERP STUDY OF FEEDBACK IN
DISQUALIFYING FALSE MEMORIES Taylor
Joerger1,
Brian
Maniscalco1, Jennifer Mangels1,2; 1Columbia University, 2Baruch College, City
University of New York — Past studies suggest that recollection of a disqualifying event can reduce familiarity-based false alarms (FAs) produced in the Deese-Roediger-McDermott (DRM) paradigm. By

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

137

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

examining the FN400 and late posterior component (LPC), which have
been used as indexes of familiarity and recollection, respectively, we
investigated how the recollection of feedback helps subjects overcome the
familiarity associated with false alarms. Twenty-five subjects studied 28
DRM lists and then 24-hours later took a recognition test (first test) in
which they made old/new decisions (with confidence ratings) to targets
and distractors, including highly-related lures. Subjects received immediate feedback awarding points for accuracy and confidence, then took a
surprise retest that included first-test targets and distractors along with
additional distractors. Subjects indicated old/new, confidence and presence or absence of recollection of first-test feedback. ERPs measured at
retest retrieval revealed that first-test old and new words were equally
familiar and only the retest-unique words elicited a weaker FN400.
Although the centroparietal LPC did not appear to differentiate first-test
old and new items overall, it differentiated recollection of feedback at
first test (feedback > no feedback). We then conditionalized ERPs to high
confidence correct rejection (CR) of distractors depending on whether
they represented a corrective switch from an earlier FA, or simply repetition of correct response made at first-test. The LPC associated with feedback retrieval was enhanced for CRs where the feedback served to
disqualify the earlier error. Therefore, feedback recollection enables subjects to disqualify the familiarity of new words, especially when correcting FAs.
D103
UNVEILING ERP DIFFERENCES BETWEEN FALSE AND TRUE
MEMORIES IN A FILM-WATCHING PARADIGM Sascha
Tamm1,
2
1
1
1
Anett Galow , Michael Niedeggen , Rainer Bösel ; Freie Universitaet Berlin,
2Charité - Universitaetsmedizin Berlin — The present study examined the
processes underlying false memories as compared to true memories in an
EEG setting that resembled typical credibility assessment settings as close
as possible. 27 participants saw a short film about a robbery and had to
answer 35 yes-no-questions regarding its content about half an hour later.
In order to distort participants' memories of the scenes, 25 of these questions contained misleading information according to a common schema
of a robbery. Afterwards, participants were told to imagine the film
scenes during the seven day interval between the first and a second session. During this second session, EEG was recorded while participants
were asked the same 35 yes-no-questions. Behavioral data revealed an
increase of the mean number of false alarms ("yes" to questions with misleading information) compared to the first session(6.6 to 9.1), whereas the
hits ("yes" to questions without misleading information) did not change
(8.7 to 8.8). Event-related potentials (ERPs) for false alarms are characterized by a negative going wave between 400 and 500 ms (N400) followed
by a late positive deflection (P600), both focused predominantly at parietal sites. Whereas the first process is related to the processing of semantic incongruency, the latter is assumed to reflect memory retrieval. ERPs
for hits and false alarms only differ with respect to the N400 component.

Memory: Memory disorders
D104
IMPLICIT SEQUENCE LEARNING CHANGES IN NORMAL AGING
AND PARKINSON’S DISEASE Kim Celone1,3, Haline Schendan2,3, Sule
Tinaz1,3, Stephen Maher2,3, Chantal Stern1,3; 1Boston University, Center for
Memory and Brain, 2Tufts University, 3Athinoula A. Martinos Center for
Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital — Recent findings suggest that in addition to the striatal memory system, the medial temporal
lobe (MTL) system is necessary for implicit learning of complex multievent contingencies. Schendan et al. (2003) found consistent learningrelated activation of the MTL, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC),
and striatum during the early acquisition phase of a serial reaction time
(SRT) task in healthy young subjects. The present study contrasted fMRI
activation patterns of 12 Parkinson’s disease (PD; 56.8 ± 2.2yrs) patients,

138

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

12 age and education-matched controls (MC; 58 ± 2.0yrs), as well as 14
young controls reported in Schendan et al (2003). Group comparisons
examined fMRI activity in MTL, striatal, and prefrontal regions to assess
how changes in MTL function observed in normal aging, as well as compromised striatal function characteristic of PD patients, impacts the formation of multi-event associations. Both the MCs and PDs demonstrated
significant higher-order learning of the repeated second-order conditional sequence; however the extent of this learning was reduced compared to the young controls. Direct comparison of sequence and random
neuroimaging data demonstrated a similar, yet reduced, pattern of activation in the MTL, striatum and DLPFC regions across the three groups.
Interestingly, this difference appeared to be driven by increased activation of these regions during random conditions in the MC and PD groups
compared with the young subject data. These findings suggest an inability to regulate the activation in these regions as a result of aging and disease processes, which may adversely affect implicit sequence learning.
D105
IS RECOLLECTION NEEDED FOR RETRIEVAL OF SEMANTIC
INFORMATION? RECOGNITION MEMORY FOR REMOTE
MEMORIES IN HIPPOCAMPAL RETROGRADE AMNESIA Asaf
Gilboa1,2, Shani Waidergoren1; 1Haifa University, Israel, 2Cognitive Neurology,
Rambam Hospital, Haifa, Israel — Background: Dual-process theories suggest the hippocampus and surrounding medial temporal cortex critically
and independently support recollection and familiarity aspects of recognition memory, respectively. Others argue that both structures are critical
for both processes, though their contributions may differ. A seemingly
unrelated dispute surrounds the long-term fate of hippocampal contribution to memory: Multiple Trace Theory argues that semantic memories
consolidate and becomes hippocampal-independent whereas episodic
memories always depend on the hippocampus. Consolidation theories
posit that all declarative memories become hippocampal-independent
through consolidation as they age. Here we propose that the enduring
role of the hippocampus in remote memory is better captured by a process distinction (recollection-familiarity) than a content/form distinction
(episodic-semantic). Methods: we tested remote memory in patients with
specific hippocampal lesions using a range of recognition memory tests,
including: (i) Process Dissociation Procedures in which recollection is
used to override familiarity, rather than jointly contribute to recognition
performance. (ii) Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves which
can reflect two processes contributing to recognition. (iii) Remember/
Know judgments of subjective recollective experiences. (iv) Source memory which indexes recollection. Importantly, the content of the stimuli in
some tasks was episodic and in others, semantic. Results: compared with
normal controls, hippocampal patients showed specific deficits in recollection estimates and preserved familiarity estimates, regardless of
whether the content was episodic or semantic. Conclusion: The hippocampus is critical for recollection regardless of memory age or content/
form. Familiarity may support more complex forms of remote memory
(e.g. generic) than it does in recent (anterograde) memory experiments.
D106
MEMORY AND METAMEMORY IN PATIENTS WITH TEMPORAL
LOBE EPILEPSY Charlotte E. Howard1, Pilar Andrés1, Giuliana Mazzoni2,
Paul Broks1, Rupert Noad3; 1University of Plymouth, UK, 2University of Hull,
UK, 3Derriford Hospital, Plymouth Hospitals NHS Trust, UK — Research
has shown that the relationship between subjective complaints and actual
memory deficits is weak in patients with epilepsy (Blake et al., 2000;
Gleissner et al., 1998). The current study aims to investigate whether measures of metacognitive knowledge and cognitive performance were differentially disrupted in patients with temporal-lobe epilepsy. Fifteen
patients with temporal-lobe epilepsy and 15 healthy controls participated
in a paired-associates learning task. A combined Judgement-of-Learning
and Feeling-of-Knowing task was introduced to investigate metamemory
performance. Memory recall was measured after a 30-minute retention
delay and at four weeks. The results revealed a lower recall performance

Poster Session D

in patients with temporal-lobe epilepsy compared with controls. The
results also showed patients with temporal-lobe epilepsy were able to
monitor their memory successfully at the item-by-item level, but tended
to overestimate their memory when making global judgements-of-learning, whereas controls tended to underestimate their memory. These findings have an important implication for memory rehabilitation strategies
with patients with epilepsy. The results are discussed in terms of their
association with executive functioning and memory deficits in temporal
lobe epilepsy.
D107
CONTRIBUTION OF PRIOR SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE TO NEW
EPISODIC LEARNING IN AMNESIA Irene P. Kan1,2, Michael P.
Alexander3,4, Mieke Verfaellie1; 1Memory Disorders Research Center, Boston
VA Healthcare System and Boston University School of Medicine, 2Villanova
University, 3Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 4Harvard Medical
School — We evaluated whether prior semantic knowledge would
enhance episodic learning in amnesia. Subjects studied prices that are
either congruent (i.e., market value) or incongruent (i.e., four times
higher) with prior price knowledge for household and grocery items and
then performed a forced choice recognition test for the studied prices.
Consistent with a previous report, healthy controls’ performance was
enhanced by price knowledge congruency; however, only a subset of
amnesic patients experienced the same benefit. Patients with relatively
intact semantic systems (i.e., damage restricted to the medial temporal
lobes) experienced a significant congruency benefit, whereas patients
with compromised semantic systems (i.e., damage also including the
anterior and lateral temporal lobes) did not experience a congruency benefit. We also found that the extent to which patients experienced a congruency benefit was positively correlated with their prior price
knowledge. Our findings suggest that when prior knowledge structures
are intact, they can support acquisition of new episodic information by
providing frameworks into which such information can be incorporated.
D108
HIPPOCAMPAL-DEPENDENT
LEARNING
AND
GENERALIZATION IN THE HEALTHY ELDERLY AND
INDIVIDUALS WITH MCI Winifred M. Limmer1, Catherine E. Myers2,
James Golomb3, Alan Kluger3,4, Steven Ferris3, Mark A. Gluck1; 1Center for
Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers University-Newark, 2Rutgers
University-Newark, 3New York University Medical Center, 4Lehman College/
CUNY — Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) is associated with atrophy of
the hippocampus, and it may be a prodrome of Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
In a previous study, cognitively healthy individuals and individuals with
MCI learned to make a series of object discriminations. This phase was
followed by a generalization phase, in which the irrelevant – but not the
relevant – stimulus dimension changed. Individuals with hippocampal
atrophy (HA) learned the initial discriminations as quickly as individuals
without HA; however, individuals with HA exhibited impaired ability to
generalize (Myers et al., 2002). Impaired ability to generalize has been
associated with increased risk of decline to AD within two years (Myers
et al., in press). Thus, the object discrimination task may be able to predict
short-term risk of cognitive decline. For the reason that 10-15% of individuals were unable to complete the task, a “shaping” version, in which
object discriminations are learned cumulatively, was developed. Nondemented elderly individuals with scores on the Global Deterioration
Scale (GDS; Reisberg et al., 1982) of 2 (very mild cognitive impairment) or
3 (MCI) made fewer errors – during both the learning and generalization
phases – on the shaping versus the concurrent version. Results indicate
that better performance results if object discriminations are learned by
means of a shaping rather than a concurrent method. The shaping version of the task may yield a reduced rate of failure; thus, it may be a more
appropriate and efficacious instrument with which to evaluate hippocampal-dependent generalization in the healthy elderly and individuals
with MCI.

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

D109
USING COMPUTERS TO TRAIN FACE-NAME ASSOCIATIONS IN
PERSONS WITH DEMENTIA Nidhi Mahendra1,2; 1Department of
Communicative Sciences & Disorders, California State University, 2California
State University - East Bay — This study was designed to study the efficacy of computer-assisted cognitive interventions (CACIs) for training
familiar and unfamiliar face-name associations in persons with Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Given the low cost and widespread use of computers combined with increasing levels of computer literacy among seniors,
it is very timely to document the feasibility and applicability of CACIs for
individuals with dementia. Further, with the rapid aging of the United
States population and the rising incidence of dementia, it is imperative
that innovative non-pharmacological interventions be developed. Ten
individuals (4 men, 6 women) with mild to moderate dementia were
enrolled. They were administered a laptop-assisted cognitive intervention that employed errorless learning principles and spaced retrieval of
novel and previously familiar face-name associations. Participants were
screened for sensory impairments (hearing and vision), vascular etiology,
cognitive status, and depression. Participants were administered the
Dementia Rating Scale to quantify dementia severity and the Rivermead
Behavioral Memory Test to quantify memory impairments. Preliminary
results based on these ten individuals’ performance reveal that CACIs
were efficacious in helping persons with AD to learn novel and familiar
(previously known but forgotten) face-name associations. Overall, participants learned familiar face-name associations in fewer sessions than
novel ones. Eight out of ten participants retained these face-name associations for over six weeks after interventions ceased. These initial findings
reveal the promise of CACIs for training recall of factual information in
individuals with AD. Other directions being pursued include documenting the efficacy of CACIs for teaching novel and previously familiar procedures (motor acts).
D110
COGNITIVE AND NEURAL BASES OF SEMANTIC FLUENCY
DEFICIT IN TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURED ADULTS Catherine
Ngo1,2, Vanessa Raymont2,3, Jeffrey Solomon4, Stephen Dopkins5, Bobby
Cheon2, Amanda Greathouse2, Jordan Grafman6; 1Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, 2Henry M. Jackson Foundation, Vietnam Head Injury Study Phase III, National Naval Medical Center, Bethesda, MD, 3Mount Sinai School
of Medicine, New York, New York, 4Medical Numerics, Inc., Germantown, MD,
5
The George Washington University, Washington, DC, 6Cognitive
Neuroscience Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
Bethesda, MD — This investigation sought to understand the cognitive
and neural bases for semantic fluency deficit in traumatic brain injured
older adults. Studies 1 and 2 demonstrated that right frontal-temporal
lesion patients performed poorly on a verbally mediated semantic task
(repeated trials category fluency) and a non-verbally mediated semantic
task (vocabulary and object-function matching), but performed comparably with controls on a phonemic fluency task (letter fluency). These
results suggest that the semantic fluency deficit is not due to a difficulty
with word retrieval, but is rather due to a fundamental breakdown in
semantic knowledge stores. Consistent with this interpretation, the
results of Study 3 using the Analysis of Brain Lesions (ABLe) Behavior
Analysis program (Makale et al., 2002; Solomon et al., 2007) suggest the
brain basis of the observed deficit in the anterior temporal region.
D111
INTERNAL-EXTERNAL
SOURCE
MONITORING
IN
KORSAKOFF ’S AMNESIA. Marie Rowland1, Robert Rafal1, Paloma MariBeffa1; 1University of Wales, Bangor — Source monitoring theory describes
the discrimination of memories derived from different external sources as
well as between internal and external sources (i.e. imagination and a perceived event). Past research indicates that amnesic patients are distinctly
disrupted in source memory. The present study examined the performance of 11 Korsakoff amnesia patients to determine if there was a specific source monitoring deficit. Action tasks were performed by the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

139

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

participants, imagined by the participants, or performed by two research
assistants. Following the completion of the actions tasks, participants
completed a source monitoring task in which they were asked to indicate
which actions were performed by self, others, imagined or new. When
compared to a healthy control group, Korsakoff patients showed a bias
towards believing an action was new when the action was actually imagined. These results suggest that Korsakoff patients have a specific deficit
in internal-external monitoring rather than external source monitoring.
D112
DETAIL RETRIEVAL FOR REMOTE EPISODIC MEMORIES CAN BE
IMPEDED
BY
IMPROPER
RETRIEVAL
ORIENTATION:
IMPLICATIONS FOR CONSOLIDATION THEORIES John
D.
Rudoy1, Courtney M. Clark2, M. -Marsel Mesulam1,3, Sandra Weintraub1,3,
Ken A. Paller1,2; 1Northwestern University/ Interdepartmental Neuroscience
Program, 2Northwestern University, 3Northwestern University/ Cognitive
Neurology and Alzheimer's Disease Center — Retrograde amnesia after hippocampal damage generally involves deficits in retrieving memories for
recent events but not for events from decades ago. Consolidation theories
often explain this pattern by postulating that the hippocampus plays a
time-limited role in memory storage; remote memories can be retrieved
because hippocampal mediation is no longer required. This view has
been challenged by findings that amnesic patients produced fewer
remote episodic details than did controls (e.g., Moscovitch et al., 2006).
Could such findings arise if patients developed a habit of relying on gistbased retrieval, such that they tended to refrain from retrieving and
rehearsing remote episodic details? This novel idea was tested in subjects
aged 60-75 years who were cognitively intact or diagnosed with amnesic
Mild Cognitive Impairment. In each of two sessions in counterbalanced
order, subjects recalled two early-adulthood events from a list they provided in advance. Session-A included a detail-oriented manipulation
after the first recall test: subjects verbally described two photographs in
detail. Session-B included a gist-oriented manipulation after the first
recall test: subjects described nine photographs in 1-2 words each. In both
subject groups, for the memory recalled after the manipulation, the number of episodic details systematically increased or decreased with the
detail- or gist-oriented manipulation, respectively. Reduced episodic
recall can thus be produced by adopting a gist-based orientation. Further
research is needed to ascertain the extent to which an amnesic patient’s
apparent deficits in remote episodic remembering might result from
habitual gist-based retrieval following prolonged amnesia.

Perceptual processes: Multisensory
processing
D113
THE FEELING OF A PINCER BETWEEN ONE THUMB AND THE
OTHER INDEX FINGER: A NOVEL MOVEMENT EFFECT
PRODUCED USING A HALF-SILVERED MIRROR Eric Altschuler1,2,
VS Ramachandran2; 1University of Medicine & Dentistry of New Jersey, 2Brain
and Perception Laboratory, UCSD — Previously we have noted that a
strange feeling is produced if one places one hand on either side of a
plane reflecting mirror and opens and closes both hands at slightly different speeds or with a small phase offset while watching the reflection of
one hand. The unusual sensation is the brain trying to resolve the discrepancy between the inputs of the proprioception of one hand and the
vision of the reflection of the other hand (which looks like the first hand)
moving discordantly. Ourselves and subsequently others have found that
this mirror effect may be beneficial for patients with diseases associated
with poor mobility such as immobile phantom limbs and hemiparesis following stroke, whereby a patient watches the reflection of the good limb
while trying to move both limbs simultaneously. We report a possibly
related, but novel effect: If one places one hand on either side of a half-silvered mirror and looks at the mirror one can position the hands to create

140

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

what appears to be a pincer grip between the thumb of one hand and the
index finger of the other hand, as if they were from the same hand. Ourselves and a number of colleagues have found there is an odd sensation
accompanying this “pincer” movement, though, interestingly, not the full
proprioceptive capture as with the reflecting mirror. There is another odd
sensation as the thumb and finger appear to be about to touch. We delineate this novel effect and discuss potential applications to patient groups.
D114
LIPREADING AND AUDIOVISUAL SPEECH INTEGRATION IN
THE
AUDITORY
CORTEX
REVEALED
BY
HUMAN
INTRACRANIAL ERPS Julien Besle1,2, Olivier Bertrand3,4, Catherine
Fischer3,5, Marie-Hélène Giard3,4; 1Neurological Institute, Columbia
University, 2Cognitive Neuroscience and Schizophrenia Program, Nathan Kline
Intitute, 3INSERM U821, Brain Dynamics and Cognition, 4Université Lyon 1,
5Hopital Neurologique de Lyon — It is well known that visual lip movements influence auditory speech perception. Several fMRI studies have
shown that the auditory cortex plays a role in the integration of auditory
and visual speech cues, but provide no information about the processing
stage at which this happens. On the other hand, EEG/MEG have shown
that the auditory N1 component, elicited by speech syllable after 100 ms,
can be modulated by visual lip movements, but the spatial origin of this
effect remain unclear. In the present study, we recorded intracranial
event-related potentials to auditory, visual and audiovisual speech syllables with depth electrodes implanted at 900 sites in the temporal lobe of
10 epileptic patients, which gives us both good spatial and temporal resolutions. We show that visual lip movements activate the secondary, but
not the primary, auditory cortex just after movement-specific visual area
MT/V5. This feedforward crossmodal activation is followed by two
types of audiovisual interactions in the secondary auditory cortex: one
corresponding to the suppression of the unimodal visual activation by
auditory syllables and the other to the decrease of early (from 50 ms)
transient unimodal auditory responses by lip movements. These results
show that speech processing does not respect the classical hierarchical
model of sensory-specific and associative cortical areas.
D115
BRIDGING THE GAP BETWEEN SPEECH PERCEPTION AND
READING: EVIDENCE FROM PEDIATRIC NEUROIMAGING Vera
Blau1,2, Nienke van Atteveldt1,2, Jochen Seitz1,2, Rainer Goebel1,2, Leo
Blomert1,2; 1Maastricht University, The Netherlands, 2Maastricht Brain
Imaging Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands — Learning to associate letters
and speech sounds is an important milestone in literacy acquisition [1].
Whereas the associations between letters and sounds are highly automatized in literate adults, they might be disrupted in dyslexia [2]. We used
pediatric neuroimaging (fMRI) to investigate letter-speech sound integration in 8-12 year old children with and without reading impairment. Dyslexic (N=10) and control children (N=10) were scanned at 3T while
viewing and/or listening to letters and speech sounds and performing a
simple attention control task. Speech sounds and letters were presented
in isolation or combined in congruent or incongruent combinations. Dyslexic readers activated early auditory cortex (Heschl Sulcus/Planum
Temporale) less than fluent readers in response to congruent versus
incongruent letter-speech sound pairs. Moreover, dyslexic readers show
less pronounced activation for speech sounds in isolation. Finally, dyslexic readers but not fluent readers activate left-hemispheric pre-central
motor regions in response to visual and bimodal stimuli. These findings
suggest that during reading acquisition fluent readers but not dyslexic
readers sufficiently automatize letter-speech sound associations. Moreover, the data suggest that the cause of this insufficient letter-speech
sound binding reside in the phonological domain. On the basis of the
present findings, we propose that the impaired neural binding of letters
and speech sounds might act as agent between phonological processing
deficits and reading problems in developmental dyslexia.

Poster Session D

D116
THE
NEUROPHYSIOLOGY
OF
AUDITORY-VISUAL
MULTISENSORY INTEGRATION IN CHILDREN WITH AUTISM.
Alice Brandwein1, John Foxe1,2,3, Ted Altschuler2, Dave Saint-Amour4, Hilary
Gomes1,2, Sophie Molholm2,3; 1Neuropsychology, City University of New York
Graduate Center and Queens College, 2Cognitive Neuroscience, City University
of New York Graduate Center and City College, 3Program in Cognitive
Neuroscience and Schizophrenia, Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric
Research, 4Université de Montréal — The integration of multisensory information is a fundamental component of typical learning and development
in children. For most, this appears to occur effortlessly and often serves to
enhance perception. But some children reportedly find the sensory environment overwhelming and it has been hypothesized that this is due to a
failure to integrate the sensory inputs into meaningful and manageable
units. Clinical and parent based observations have led to the theory that
aberrant sensory integration is a major component of autism and related
neurodevelopmental disorders. However, this has not been rigorously
tested and is lacking direct neurophysiological evidence. Using high-density electrical mapping, we investigated basic auditory-visual integration
in children with autism (ASD) and children with typical development
(TD) who were matched for age and intellectual functioning. Children
were presented with auditory (simple tones) and visual (red circles) stimuli together or alone and performed a simple reaction-time task while
recordings of electrical brain activity were made. Our preliminary findings suggest that the time course and scalp topography of multisensory
integration processes are different in the ASD compared to the TD children. In general the children with autism exhibited smaller multisensory
interactions, and comparison of the topographies suggested that different
cortical regions were involved in integrating sensory information for
ASD and TD children. Data from the ASD group are considered in the
context of observed multisensory interactions in children of various ages
and stages of brain development.
D117
SYNESTHESIA AND LEARNED CONTEXTUAL PRIMING - AN
EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIAL STUDY David
Brang1,
Vilayanur S. Ramachandran2, Stanley Kanai3, Seana Coulson3; 1University of
California, San Diego, 2University of California, San Diego, Center for Brain
and Cognition, 3University of California, San Diego, Cognitive Science — In
grapheme-color synesthesia, individuals experience a specific and consistent color when viewing numbers or letters. We previously tested the
brain activity generated by synesthetes and normal controls in a modified
sentence-priming paradigm using event-related potentials (ERPs). In that
study the brain waves of synesthetes, but not controls, revealed both N1
and P2 perceptual components and the N400 contextual effect in
response to sentences such as "The grass is 7" compared to "The grass is
2," in which 7 is green and 2 is blue for one particular synesthete. Subjects
were presented with sentences such as "The grass is," ending in either a
color word ("green"), rectangular color patch such as a green box, or with
a grapheme matched to each synesthetes' perceived color (e.g. "The grass
is 7"). Half of the sentences in each block were congruous, half incongruous. To test whether the N1, P2, and N400 ERP components could be elicited in non-synesthetes, ERPs were recorded from two additional groups
of control subjects. Three control subjects were trained to associate letters/numbers with colors and nine control subjects were shown sentence-ending graphemes in the physical color of the associated letter/
number (a physically green 7). ERPs from both groups of non-synesthetes
showed contextual N400 effects in response to sentences ending in color
words, color patches, and, crucially graphemes. However, neither control
group elicited either the N1 or P2 components that reflect the early perceptual effects seen in synesthetes, further demonstrating the non-associative, perceptual nature of synesthesia.

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

D118
A SUBJECTIVE-METRIC BASED MEASURE OF AUDIOVISUAL
INTEGRATION EFFICIENCY Hans Colonius1, Adele Diederich2, Stefan
Rach1,2; 1University of Oldenburg, 2Jacobs University Bremen — Audiovisual integration efficiency (IE) is a presumed skill employed by subjects
independently from their ability to extract information from auditory and
visual speech inputs (Grant 2002, JASA). However, currently there are no
established methods for determining a subject’s IE. One approach is
based on employing models of auditory-visual integration to predict
optimal AV performance. Differences between model predictions and
obtained scores are then used to estimate IE. However, the validity of
these derived estimates of IE should not be based solely on the accuracy
of model fits. Here we present a novel measurement technique to address
this issue without requiring explicit assumptions about the underlying
audiovisual processing. It is based on a version of the theory of Fechnerian Scaling (FSDOS) developed by Dzhafarov and Colonius (2006, Psychometrika) that permits the reconstruction of subjective distances
among stimuli of arbitrary complexity from their pairwise discriminability. After computing the unimodal (visual and auditory) and the bimodal
subjective metric on the corresponding stimulus sets, the bimodal distance is compared to the sum of the unimodal distances, for each stimulus pair. The proposed index of audiovisual IE is based on the average
result of this comparison across the stimulus set. The approach is demonstrated on data from an experiment on audiovisual integration of letters
and speech. Among other desirable properties, it is shown that the new
index can better account for effects of redundancy in visual and auditory
information than previous approaches.
D119
WHAT IS THE POSITION OF AN ARM RELATIVE TO THE BODY?
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EGOCENTRIC AND ALLOCENTRIC
BODY REFERENCE FRAMES Corrado Corradi-Dell'Acqua1, Barbara
Tomasino1, Gereon R. Fink1,2; 1Institute of Neuroscience and Biophysics,
Research Center Jülich, Germany., 2University Hospital Cologne, Cologne
University, Cologne, Germany — Neuropsychological studies suggest that
the human brain is endowed with two body representations: the Body
Schema (BS), coding the orientation of one’s own body parts in space,
and the Body Structural Description (BSD), coding the location of body
parts relative to a standard body. We used fMRI to identify the neural
mechanisms underlying these putative body maps. Participants carried
out a handedness task, in which they assessed whether an arm or a handle of an object was right or left (STIMULUS: Arm vs. Handle). If the
stimulus was an arm, subjects imagined (i) rotating their own arm until it
matched the orientation of the stimulus (thus comparing the seen arm to
their own), or (ii) seeing the stimulus moving towards its appropriate
position in a simultaneously-presented human body (thus comparing the
arm to the one of a standard body – STRATEGY: Motor vs. Visual imagery). If the stimulus was a handle of an object, subjects imagined (i)
grasping the handle and placing it on its appropriate position on the
simultaneously-presented object, or (ii) seeing it moving towards its position on the object. The analysis of the interaction STIMULUS*STRATEGY
revealed activation (p < 0.05 corrected) of the left secondary somatosensory cortex, specifically when comparing the stimulus arm to one’s own,
and of the left posterior intraparietal sulcus when comparing the stimulus arm to the one of the standard body. The results associate BS and BSD
with different neural substrates, thereby suggesting that these are independent and dissociable body representations.
D120
TIME-WINDOW-OF-INTEGRATION
(TWIN)
MODEL
FOR
MULTISENSORY INTEGRATION IN SACCADIC REACTION
TIME Adele Diederich1, Hans Colonius2; 1School of Humanities and Social
Sciences/Jacobs University Bremen, 2University of Oldenburg — Saccadic
reaction time (SRT) to visual targets tends to be faster when auditory or
tactile stimuli occur in close temporal or spatial proximity even if subjects
are instructed to ignore the accessory input (focused attention task). The

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

141

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

TWIN model proposed in Colonius & Diederich (J. Cog. Neurosci. 2004)
distinguishes an early, afferent stage of parallel peripheral processing in
the sensory pathways (first stage) followed by a second stage comprising
neural integration of the input and preparation of an oculomotor
response. Crossmodal interaction (facilitation or inhibition of SRT) only
occurs if (1) the peripheral processing of the non-target wins the race and
(2) the peripheral processing of the target stimulus terminates within a
given temporal window of integration. TWIN distinguishes effects on
SRT based on unimodal stimulus properties (e.g., intensity) from those
based on crossmodal properties (e.g., distance between target and nontarget). It also allows a separation of an unspecific warning effect from
true multisensory integration. It can be tested with and without specifying probability distributions for the subprocess durations. Several experimental studies varying the spatial and temporal stimulus configurations
and using different modality combinations (audio-visual, tactile-visual)
have lent support for the model framework (e.g., Diederich & Colonius,
2007, Exp. Brain Res.). TWIN has recently shown to account for agerelated multisensory effects in the elderly as well.
D121
SOCIAL MODULATION OF TOUCH REPRESENTATION Valeria
Gazzola1, Fulvia Castelli2, Michael Spezio2, Christian Keysers1,2, Ralph
Adolphs2; 1BCN-NeuroImaging Center, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, 2Division of Humanities and Social Sciences, Caltech,
Pasadena — When a heterosexual man fancies a woman, her caress can
feel divine; but an identical caress given by another man may feel repulsive. To what extent does this perceptual difference arise from reappraisal by high-level areas in prefrontal cortex, differential sensory
coding at the level of somatosensory cortex, or both? We used BOLDfMRI in 18 Caucasian heterosexual men while they viewed videos of (a) a
woman they rated as attractive, (b) a man they rated as unattractive, or (c)
a grey screen. Synchronized with the video, subjects were caressed on
their legs by an experimenter who was blind to the three conditions. Condition (c), the caress only, activated somatosensory (SI, SII) and insular
(posterior and anterior) cortices. Using this activation as a region-of-interest further revealed that the activation was modulated by the gender of
the person in the video under the other two conditions (a and b). Specifically, associating a man with the caress led to a stronger anticipatory signal in somatosensory areas, while associating a woman with the caress
led to a stronger potentiation of the caress response in the same areas,
both compared to the grey screen condition. We also found that just seeing the toucher, without caress, evoked gender-related differential activation in fusiform gyrus and orbitofrontal areas. The latter regions may be a
source of top-down influence on somatosensory areas. Thus, sensory
regions that represent touch are tuned to the social valence that accompanies a gentle caress.
D122
DEPLOYMENT OF VISUAL ATTENTION TOWARDS RELEVANT
AND NON-RELEVANT MULTISENSORY SPEECH SIGNALS
UNDER NOISY ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS Hanna Krause1,
Daniel Senkowski1, Till R. Schneider1, Andreas K. Engel1; 1University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf — Recent studies have shown that visual
attention towards irrelevant signals reduces multisensory speech recognition performance. To further investigate the role of visual attention on
speech processing, we examined the interfering effects of natural acoustic
speech inputs and fully degraded acoustic speech signals on audiovisual
speech recognition. Subjects performed a multisensory speech recognition task in which they were instructed to detect a target syllable among
similar syllables from an attended center speaker while ignoring two surrounding distracter speakers. Sustained brain activity was monitored
using steady-state visual evoked potentials (SSVEPs) as a real-time index
of visual attention deployment. The visual inputs from a center speaker
were presented at a flicker rate of 25 Hz, whereas the inputs from two
distracter speakers were presented at 19 Hz. SSVEPs were monitored in a
speech interference condition (syllables from all three speakers) and a

142

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

non-speech interference condition, in which the interfering acoustic signals were directly derived from the original speech signals (center
speaker produces speech syllables, distracter speakers produce fully
degraded signals). Behavioral performance was reduced in both conditions compared to a no-interference control condition. The interference
effect was stronger in the speech compared to the non-speech condition.
Paralleling these findings, the degree of visual attention deployment in
SSVEP towards non-relevant speakers was larger in the speech compared
to the non-speech condition. We conclude that multisensory speech recognition under noisy environmental conditions is particularly affected by
similar acoustic speech signals and that visual attention deployment
towards non-relevant speakers has a negative impact on speech recognition.
D123
INVOLVEMENT OF VISUAL IMAGERY IN HAPTIC PERCEPTION
OF FAMILIAR, BUT NOT UNFAMILIAR, OBJECTS Simon
Lacey1,
1
1
1
1,2
1
Peter Flueckiger , Randall Stilla , Michael Lava , K. Sathian ; Emory
University, GA, 2Rehabilitation R&D Center of Excellence, Atlanta VAMC,
Decatur, GA — It is now accepted that visual cortical areas are routinely
active during touch in normally sighted individuals. However, there is
debate about whether this is due to visual imagery or engagement of
multisensory representations. Here we performed functional magnetic
resonance imaging while participants haptically discriminated object
shape (HS task); HS-specific processing was isolated by a contrast against
a control haptic texture discrimination task. In separate sessions, the
same participants made shape judgments on visual images of objects represented by words they heard (VI task); this was contrasted against a control condition requiring word/non-word judgments on auditorily
presented stimuli. We hypothesized that, if visual imagery is involved in
haptic shape perception, then activations in the VI and HS tasks would
overlap and moreover, inter-individual variations in activation magnitudes during VI would predict those in the HS condition. The HS condition employed a set of unfamiliar, meaningless shapes in one experiment
and a set of familiar objects in a second experiment. VI- and HS-related
activations overlapped in the lateral occipital complex bilaterally, left
ventral premotor cortex and left posterior thalamus, whether the HS task
involved familiar or unfamiliar objects. In the case of familiar objects, this
overlap was more extensive and there were additional regions of overlap
in left prefrontal cortex. In these overlap zones, activation magnitudes
were positively correlated across subjects between the VI and HS conditions for familiar, but not unfamiliar objects. We conclude that the role of
visual imagery in haptically-evoked activations is modulated by object
familiarity.
D124
AN ERP STUDY OF CROSS-MODAL INTEGRATION OF SPEECH:
WHEN THE WHOLE IS 'GREATER' THAN THE SUM OF ITS
PARTS Odette Megnin1, Tony Charman1, Torsten Baldeweg1, Michelle de
Haan1, Atlanta Flitton1; 1UCL Institute of Child Health — Event-related
potentials (ERPs) were recorded from 16 adult subjects during video presentation of monosyllabic words in one of four conditions: auditory-only
(A), visual-only (V), audio-visual with face (AVF), and audio-visual with
scrambled face (AVS). Multisensory interactions are regarded as significant when [AVF – (A+V)]>0 at a single electrode for a minimum of 24ms
duration (Guthrie & Buchard, 1991). Positive interactions were seen at
most fronto-central electrodes starting as early as 32ms and extending to
200ms post-auditory onset. AVF stimuli produced an attenuation of negativity at 121ms (N1) at Cz (with a reversal of polarity at mastoids) suggesting sensory-specific cortices may be attenuated by bimodal stimuli.
In addition, increased negativity was observed at FP2 which precedes the
auditory N1 response at the vertex. Importantly this pattern of results is
not observed in the other audio-visual condition (auditory + scrambled
face). In the AVF condition the initial lip movements precede the auditory onset by a mean of 332ms. The frontal enhancement and temporal
suppression may reflect top-down modulation with lip movements being

Poster Session D

used to constrain predictions about the word that is to be produced, leading to attenuation of the auditory N1 (van Wassenhove et al, 2005). This
hypothesized facilitation of processing through audio-visual interaction
is supported by reaction time facilitation in the AVF condition, and a significant correlation between N1 attenuation and FP2 enhancement suggests that these responses are linked. This study is currently being
applied to an adolescent sample with autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
and an IQ-matched control group.
D125
VISUO-MOTOR MIRROR RESPONSES IN HUMAN MEDIAL
TEMPORAL LOBE Roy Mukamel1,2, Marco Iacoboni1,2,3, Itzhak Fried3,4,5;
1UCLA Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 2UCLA, Semel Institute
for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 3Brain Research Institute, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 4Division
of Neurosurgery, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los
Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA, 5Functional Neurosurgery Unit, Tel Aviv
Medical Center and Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv,
Israel — Mirror neurons are multi-modal brain cells that respond both
when one performs a goal directed action and when one simply observes
a goal directed action performed by someone else. Such cells have been
directly recorded in the parietal (area PF) and frontal (area F5) cortices of
the monkey brain. In humans, there is indirect evidence for the existence
of such neurons in the anatomically corresponding motor regions (rostral
inferior parietal lobule, and posterior inferior frontal gyrus – pIFG,
respectively) on the lateral convexity of the brain. In addition we have
recently described mirror neurons in the human medial frontal lobe. In
the current study we recorded directly the activity of 601 neurons in the
medial temporal lobe (Amygdala, Entorhinal cortex, Hippocampus, and
parahippocampal gyrus) from neurosurgical patients while they were
executing or observing hand movements or facial gestures. We found
that 14% of the recorded neurons displayed visuo-motor mirror properties. Out of these 89 mirror neurons, 38% had excitatory responses for
both components of the mirror task (observation/execution), and 27%
had inhibitory responses. Another 33% of the neurons responded with
excitation during one component of the task and inhibition for the other.
While responses to action-observation may reflect perception, responses
to action-execution could arise from proprioceptive feedback or represent
efferent copies from motor cortex, or abstract representation of the movement. Our results suggest that the mirror neurons system may have
wider distribution than previously suspected.
D126
ARE MEMORIES FOR DURATION MODALITY SPECIFIC? Ruth
Ogden1, John Wearden2, Luke Jones1; 1The University of Manchester, UK,
2
Keele University, UK — Ogden, Wearden and Jones (in press) reported
that temporal reference memory is incapable of accurately storing multiple auditory standards of different durations. In a modified temporal
generalization task participants were presented with and tested on a first
standard (A), and then presented and tested on a second standard (B).
After a delay of 0 to 30 seconds participants were retested on A without it
being re-presented. Differences in the duration of A and B were also
manipulated; A=B, A<B, A>B. When tested immediately peak responding occurred at or around that standard, however when retested after a
delay and the encoding of the second standard a systematic shift in peak
responding occurred. In the A<B condition peak responding shifted to
the shortest of the comparison durations and in the A>B condition peak
responding shifted to the longest of the comparison durations. The current series of experiments examined whether comparable interference
effects could be found when both standards are visually presented, or
when one is auditory and one is visual. In all experiments encoding a second standard of a different duration to the first did not lead to performance deterioration or systematic interference. The results suggest that
durations presented in different modalities are stored separately in refer-

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

ence memory and do not interfere with each other. The results also indicate the possible superiority of visual temporal reference memory over
auditory temporal reference memory.
D127
ENEMY OR FRIEND? EFFECTS OF EMOTIONAL FACE
EXPRESSIONS ON PAIN PROCESSING IN ELECTROMAGNETIC
BRAIN RESPONSES Daniel Senkowski1, Janine Kautz1, Michael Hauck1,
Roger Zimmermann1, Andreas K. Engel1; 1University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf — In social settings it seems particular important to
process the facial expressions of people surrounding us, especially if their
actions can induce pain or bodily harm. Painful events automatically capture our attention, which enables us to rapidly evaluate the environmental conditions (e.g., was the painful event due to an accident or caused by
an aggressive act). As such, it seems likely that facial impressions influence pain processing. Here we studied the effects of emotional face
expressions (fear, happy, anger) on the processing of painful events using
magnetoencephalography in a multisensory experimental setting. Subjects showed higher pain ratings when the painful inputs were presented
simultaneously with a face expressing an emotion (fear, happy, anger)
compared to when they were presented with a face with a neutral expression, and compared to unisensory-pain control stimuli. This effect was
paralleled by an early modulation of gamma-band responses over visual
areas. Our study provides behavioural and electrophysiological evidence
that socially relevant inputs from other sensory modalities can affect pain
processing. Furthermore, gamma-band responses and cortico-cortical
synchronisation processes between the pain matrix and visual areas
might play an important role for the integration of painful stimuli with
inputs from other sensory modalities such as visual signals.
D128
IS AWARENESS OF AUDITORY STIMULUS POSITION
NECESSARY FOR AUDIOVISUAL SPATIAL EFFECTS IN
SACCADIC REACTION TIME? Rike Steenken1, Hans Colonius1, Adele
Diederich2; 1Oldenburg University, Institut für Kognitionsforschung, 2Jacobs
University Bremen, School of Humanities and Social Sciences — In a focused
attention paradigm saccadic reaction time (SRT) to a visual target is modulated by the position and time of occurrence of an auditory non-target.
The question addressed here is if and how this response to a visual stimulus depends on whether the participant can localize the auditory stimulus. Two tasks had to be performed in alternating blocks. In one block,
they were required to respond as fast and accurately as possible to a
visual target stimulus positioned while ignoring an acoustical non-target
presented at the same top or bottom position (coincident) or at the opposite position (disparate). In another block, participants had to indicate via
button press whether the acoustical non-target was presented from the
top or bottom position. In the first experiment, localizability of the auditory accessory decreased with masker level while it had a diametrical
effect on SRT: Responses to coincident visual-auditory stimuli were
slowed down, whereas responses to disparate stimuli were speeded up.
This suggests that increasing masker level enlarges the area of possible
auditory stimulus locations implying that perceived distances decrease
for disparate stimulus configurations and increase for coincident stimulus pairs. In the second experiment, an auditory masker was presented
before, simultaneous to, or after the accessory stimulus. In all interstimulus interval (ISI) conditions, SRT enhancement went down both in the
coincident and disparate configuration relative to the same configurations without masker. However, the decrement was fairly stable across
the ISI values suggesting that multisensory integration does not solely
rely on a feed-forward process.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

143

Sunday, April 13, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

D129
FRONTO-PARIETAL INFORMATION PROCESSING FOR ONLINE
ADJUSTMENTS DURING VISUALLY-GUIDED REACH-TO-GRASP
REVEALED BY ELECTRICAL NEUROIMAGING. Eugene
Tunik1,
Scott Grafton2, Sergei Adamovich3, Stephanie Ortigue2; 1New York University,
2
UCSB Brain Imaging Center, Sage Center for the Study of the Mind, 3New
Jersey Institute of Technology — Several human imaging studies have
described the fronto-parietal circuit to be critical for on-line control of
reach-to-grasp movements under visual control. This study simultaneously recorded hand kinematics and evoked-related potentials to relate
spatiotemporal brain dynamics to on-line control of grasping. We used a
perturbation task to dissociate neural mechanisms related to on-line control from planning (Tunik et al., 2005). Healthy humans (n=12) sat in a
soundproof room and used a pincer grip to reach-to-grasp a rectangular
object positioned 15cm away. Between trials, participants pressed a start
button and awaited a tone that cued them to start reaching. The release of
this button triggered a perturbation of the graspable dimension of the
object from 1cm-to-5cm (requiring subjects to re-adjust their finger aperture, 25% of trials). On the remaining trials, the graspable dimension was
unperturbed. Motion of 16 joints of the hand was measured with a CyberGlove (Immersion Inc.), and compared between perturbed-unperturbed
trials. High-density electrical mapping revealed that ERPs for the perturbed trials were distinguished from the unperturbed trials over the 50150 ms period by a distinct scalp topography, indicative of different
intracranial generator configurations. A distributed linear source estimation (LAURA) of this distinct scalp potential field revealed a left-lateralized current density source in the intraparietal sulcus with the maximum
in the anterior extent of the sulcus. These data support the existence of a
specialized fronto-parietal network, notably the anterior portion of the
intraparietal sulcus, for on-line control of movements within the first
100ms of goal-dependent reach-to-grasp actions.
D130
IMAGING A PHANTOM Oliver Turnbull1, Stanley Colcombe1, Robert
Rafal1, David Linden1, Caroline Bowman1; 1School of Psychology, Bangor
University, Gwynedd, Wales, U.K. — Accounts of supernumerary phantoms are rare, but not unusual, in the literature concerning the abnormal
perception of body parts. Such phantoms, which occur after brain injury
rather than amputation, usually manifest as arms or legs, towards which
patients often feel hostile. We introduce the case of E.B., who sustained
extensive brain trauma, including somatosensory and motor cortex, after
falling from a wall. In both the somatosensory and auditory modalities,
E.B. experiences a manifestation of the head and upper torso of a ‘man’,
from the upper-right hand side of his body. Unlike previous reports of
such patients, E.B. attributes a remarkable degree of consciousness/sentience to his phantom, which is perceived as acting with malicious, and at
times murderous, intent. Further, the size and quality of the phantom
appears to be proportional to E.B.’s anger towards it. E.B. has developed
some control over the phantom’s emergence, providing the opportunity
to compare brain activation when the phantom is subjectively rated as
present or not. A functional magnetic imaging (fMRI) investigation,
using an AB block design was created, in which E.B. was presented with
either ‘phantom-eliciting’ or ‘phantom-suppressing’ words in alternating
20s blocks, with ‘phantom-strength’ rated after each word presentation.
A ‘self-paced’ phase of testing where the patient rated phantom-strength
after self-motivated generation and minimisation, without external influence, completed the experimental phase. The results of this study are discussed within the context of the neurobiology of hallucinations, and the
potential role of emotion in their generation and maintenance.
D131
LOCALIZING
SYNAESTHESIA
USING
REPETITION
SUPPRESSION IN FMRI Tessa van Leeuwen1, Karl Magnus Petersson1,2,
Oliver Langner1,3, Mark Rijpkema1, Peter Hagoort1,2; 1F.C. Donders Centre for
Cognitive Neuroimaging, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands, 2Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The

144

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session D

Netherlands, 3Behavioral Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands — In grapheme-colour synaesthesia, perception of letters and/or numbers induces the additional experience of a specific colour. There are two distinct theories explaining the underlying
neural mechanism of synaesthesia: the cross-wiring theory (Ramachandran and Hubbard, 2001) proposes synaesthesia is due to excess anatomical connectivity in the (left) inferior temporal cortex, while the
disinhibited feedback theory (Grossenbacher and Lovelace, 2001)
hypothesizes that synaesthesia does not depend on anatomical differences, but is due to increased feedback derived from higher order multimodal regions. The goal of our study was to distinguish between these
two theories. We used BOLD repetition suppression in a synaesthetic
priming task to localize the synaesthetic colour experience. For synaesthetes, the synaesthetic colour that is induced by a grapheme (the prime)
should lead to a reduced BOLD response for a subsequently presented
colour (the target) in areas that are responsible for (synaesthetic) colour
experience. In matched controls, this effect should not occur. First, we
localized colour areas, grapheme areas and the effect of synaesthesia in a
separate experiment. Data from 18 synaesthetes show stronger activation
for synaesthesia than for real colours in the left inferior parietal lobule,
BA 40 (-34, -47, 39), replicating the results of Weiss (2005) and favoring
the disinhibited feedback theory. Preliminary data from the priming
experiment show stronger activations for neutral (no synaesthetic colour)
than for incongruent synaesthetic priming bilaterally in fusiform gyrus:
left BA 37 (-46, -55, -11) and right BA 37 (51, -53, -14), suggesting inferior
temporal regions are involved in synaesthetic priming.
D132
MODAL
AND
AMODAL
INFORMATION
PROCESSING
DEMONSTRATED IN THE VISUAL AND TACTILE DOMAINS
Christopher Wessinger1, Eric Clapham1, Saloni Sharma1, Aaron Karst1, John
VanMeter2; 1University of Nevada, Reno NV, 2Center for Molecular and
Functional Imaging, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington
DC — Initial information processing that is modality specific has been
linked to learning style preferences. Such preferences can be related to
modality specific, or modal, information processing. Conversely, higher
order conceptual information is often linked to modality non-specific, or
amodal, information processing. Participants either palpated or viewed
pictures of MR-compatible toy animals and tools. Their task was to name
or retrieve the output associated with each item. The presentation of two
levels of processing crossed with tactile and visual presentation of stimuli
allowed us to assess initial and higher order information processing
(naming vs output retrieval), in different modalities (visual vs tactile)
across different categories of stimuli (animals vs tools). The behavioral
data demonstrate significant main effects of modality, stimulus type, and
complexity, as well as significant interactions between modality & category and modality & complexity. Regionally specific activations were
found in a mixed-effects group analysis of the fMRI data that are related
to differences in modal and amodal processing. Visual presentation of
stimuli resulted in greater activation in visual association regions while
tactile presentation resulted in greater activation in somatosensory and
motor regions. Complexity comparisons demonstrate that, regardless of
modality or category, inferior and medial frontal regions are involved in
higher order processing. These data support the notion that modality
specific regions are used for initial perceptual processing (i.e. modal processing) while higher-order conceptual processing relies on a common
network of frontal lobe regions regardless of modality (i.e. amodal processing).

Poster Session E
Emotion
E1
THE PROCESSING OF SYMBOLIC EMOTIONAL HAND
GESTURES: AN ERP STUDY Harald Schupp1, Tobias Flaisch1, Britta
Renner1; 1University of Konstanz — We often use gestures to convey emotional meaning in social interactions. Its practical significance is obvious: It
is a very fast and frugal way of emotional communication. Within a splitsecond, a specific gesture may show approval, calm down a heated
exchange, or can signal strong insult, offense and threat. Such gestures are
referred to as symbolic or emblematic gestures to separate them from other
gestural behaviors accompanying and illustrating verbal behavior. Like
other nonverbal emotional expressions, we predicted that emotional gestures are efficient cues to direct the attention of the receiver. Towards this
end, participants viewed pictures of the sexually insulting middle finger
jerk gesture, the positive thumb up gesture, and as non-emotional control
condition, the forefinger point gesture. Stimuli were presented as serial
stream with each picture shown for 120 ms (880 ms ISI) while dense sensor
ERPs (256 channel) were recorded. Results demonstrate the selective processing of emotional compared to neutral gestures, which appeared most
accentuated for the insult gesture. Specifically, developing around 150 ms
and lasting until 300 ms, emotional gestures elicited a more pronounced
occipital negativity compared to the control gesture. Subsequently (~400600 ms), the insult gesture elicited a more pronounced late positive potential over centro-parietal locations. Interestingly, similar ERP modulations
have been revealed in previous studies showing biologically prepared
emotional picture contents (erotica, mutilation, threat faces). These findings demonstrate that emotionally charged gestures are efficient in shaping selective attention processes already at the level of stimulus
perception. (Supported by the German Reserach Society)
E2
POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE AFFECT MEASUREMENT IN HEALTHY
VOLUNTEERS:
A
FREESURFER
STUDY
OF
CORTICAL
THICKNESS. Judith Segall1, Jeremy Bockholt1, Ranee Barrow1,2, Shirley
Smith1,2, Robert Chavez1,2, Rex Jung1,2; 1The MIND Research Network,
2University of New Mexico — Mood regulation in humans involves a
widely distributed system of interconnected brain regions including limbic, basal ganglia, and frontal-subcortical circuits. Among normal individuals, Tellegen (1999) has argued that mood involves two psychometrically
independent factors – positive affect (PA) and negative affect (NA) – for
which the Positive Affect Negative Affect Scale (PANAS) was developed.
We sought to determine the relationship between the PANAS and cortical
thickness in a cohort of 64 neurologically and psychiatrically normal subjects (34 males, 30 females) ranging in age from 18 to 39. T1 images were
analyzed using FreeSurfer to obtain gray matter volumes of subcortical
structures, and related to mood measures using the General Linear Model.
Briefly, cortical thickness measures were obtained by reconstruction of the
pial surface, the gray-white boundary, and the thickness between the pial
surface and gray-white boundary at approximately 320,000 points comprising the cerebral cortex. We found that PA was significantly related (p <
.0001) to decreased cortical thickness across a broad network of brain
regions, the largest cluster of which included Brodmann Areas (BAs) 20
and 21 within the right temporal lobe. Conversely, NA was significantly
related to increased cortical thickness, the largest cluster of which included
the left parietal lobe/cuneus (BA 40). To our knowledge, this is the first
study to link cortical thickness measures to mood in a cohort of normal

individuals, and may represent susceptibility factors relevant to the emergence of psychopathology across the lifespan.
E3
PARIETAL CORTEX MEDIATES THE SELECTIVE DISRUPTION OF
SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY BY THREAT-INDUCED ANXIETY
Alexander Shackman1, Jeffrey Maxwell1, Brenton McMenamin1, Andrew Fox1,
Lawrence Greischar1, Richard Davidson1; 1University of Wisconsin, Madison,
Wisconsin — Anxiety-inducing threats can exert profound effects on performance via their impact on the more elementary working memory (WM)
processes underpinning goal-directed cognition. A key unresolved issue is
whether the influence of threat on WM is specifically mediated by the
impact of anxiety on task-related processing. We examined the impact of
task-irrelevant threat of shock on activity associated with spatial (“where”)
and verbal (“what”) delayed-recognition WM tasks (n = 40). Anxiety was
assessed using facial electromyography (EMG) from the corrugator supercillii (brow), a well-validated measure of emotional valence. We recorded
high-density event-related potentials (ERP) and modeled the cerebral generators of the delay-spanning posterior slow wave characteristically elicited by the retention of information in WM using a 2-mm3 finite element
model and the Low Resolution Electromagnetic Tomography (LORETA)
algorithm. We predicted that (1) individuals who experienced greater anxiety would show larger decrements in spatial, but not verbal, performance,
and (2) the impact of anxiety on spatial performance would be statistically
mediated by variation in delay-spanning activity under threat. Both
hypotheses were supported. Participants who expressed more anxiety
under threat also exhibited worse performance on the spatial, but not verbal, task and showed amplified delay-spanning activity in posterior parietal cortex (PPC) on correct trials. Voxelwise tests of statistical mediation
showed that threat-induced modulation of delay-spanning activity in PPC
significantly mediated reductions in spatial performance. These results
suggest that the deleterious impact of anxiety on cognition is selective and
may arise from interference with spatial (i.e., vigilance) or executive attentional processes instantiated in PPC.
E4
UNIQUE NEURAL RECRUITMENT DURING SUCCESSFUL
RESPONSE INHIBITION ASSOCIATED WITH SUBSTANCE ABUSE
AND PSYCHOPATHY Matthew Shane1, Amy Byrd1, Carla Harenski1,
Kent Kiehl1; 1The MIND Institute, 2The University of New Mexico — While
one of the core characteristics of psychopathy is a difficulty inhibiting prepotent, maladaptive responses, empirical demonstration of attenuated
response inhibition has been inconsistent. One reason for this may be the
highly comorbid nature of substance abuse, which has also been linked to
response inhibition difficulties. The present study utilized functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to evaluate the unique and shared influences of psychopathy and substance abuse on neural systems underlying
inhibition of prepotent responses. Ten psychopathic substance-abusers (>
28 on the Psychopathy Checklist – Revised, PCL-R; Hare, 2003), 10 nonpsychopathic substance-abusers (< 16 on the PCL-R), and 10 healthy controls performed a speeded Go/No-Go task that required participants to
inhibit prepotent responses to No-Go stimuli. Consistent with previous
reports, activity within frontal regions (e.g. anterior cingulate) and inferior
parietal cortex were associated with successful response inhibition. Differential activation was evident across groups, however. Both substanceabusing groups displayed reduced inferior parietal cortex activity during
successful response inhibition than did healthy controls, suggesting a substance abuse-related attenuation in this region. Psychopathic drug abusers,
however, also evidenced reduced anterior cingulate activity than did non-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

145

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

psychopathic drug-abusers. This attenuated cingulate response may indicate reduced monitoring for, or sensitivity to, the emergence of response
conflict that is specific to the psychopathic disorder. Together, these findings demonstrate that psychopathy and substance abuse are each related
to unique patterns of neural recruitment during the inhibition of prepotent responses.
E5
THE (NEAR) FUTURE IS BRIGHT: HOW EMOTION MODULATES
SIMULATION OF EVERYDAY FUTURE EVENTS Tali Sharot1, David
Johnson2, Candace Raio2, Yadin Dudai3; 1University College London, 2New
York University, 3Weizmann Institute of Science — People often tend to
imagine their own future through rose-colored glasses. Here we examine
(i) if this optimistic tendency extends to ordinary everyday events (such
as “getting stuck in traffic” or “going to the movies”) and (ii) how imagining possible future events is modulated by emotion. Past studies have
reported differences in imagining positive and negative events that may
occur in the future. However, it is unknown if imagination of positive
and negative events is qualitatively different from imaging neutral
events. Here, participants were presented with descriptions of 100 everyday events. They imagined these events happening in the upcoming
month and rated their images on different scales. A month later they
recalled which events had happened. Findings indicate that participants
made optimistic predictions; they estimated positive events to occur with
greater likelihood than either negative or neutral events. Moreover, they
expected positive events to happen closer in time, although in retrospect
there was no difference in the time the different types of events actually
occurred. Second, emotion enhanced the vividness of the image (and
memory); neutral events were imagined (and recalled) with less vividness than either positive or negative events. Positive future events were
also experienced with greater vividness than negative future events, but
positive and negative memories did not differ. The results suggest that
although emotion modulates the subjective experience of imagining
future events in a similar manner that it does memory, imagining future
emotional events is also influenced by motivational factors that are less
prominent in memory.
E6
THE SOUND OF JOY: INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN PROSODIC
ABILITY AND EMPATHY CORRELATE WITH ACTIVITY IN THE
INFERIOR FRONTAL GYRUS Tong Sheng1,2, Julie Werner2,3, Sook-Lei
Liew2,3, Anahita Gheytanchi4, Lisa Aziz-Zadeh1,2,3; 1Neuroscience Graduate
Program, USC, 2Brain and Creativity Institute, USC, 3Division of
Occupational Science and Occupational Therapy, USC, 4Pacific Graduate
School of Psychology — Prosody, the melody and intonation of speech, is
an extremely important and often undervalued component of human
communication. A significant component of human social interactions
depends on prosody. In a previous fMRI study we found that areas in the
inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) are involved during both the perception and
production of prosody. Here, we ask: Why are some individuals better
than others at picking up subtle intonations in speech? Are such individuals more empathetic to the emotions of others? Are they better at simulating another’s prosodic input onto their own motor representations? To
explore how the IFG may be involved in these processes, we administered behavioral measures of prosody production, perception, and empathy. Using regression models to correlate behavioral data with group
fMRI data acquired during prosody production and perception tasks, we
found that scores on certain components of empathy correlate positively
with IFG activity. In particular, activity of the IFG showed positive correlations with aspects of empathy such as the tendency to emotionally identify with fictional characters, the tendency to feel emotional concern for
others, and the tendency to adopt the perspective of others. Additionally,
individuals who scored high on tests measuring the ability to produce
and perceive prosody also showed more activity in the IFG. These results
suggest the IFG plays a role in aspects of empathy and social understand-

146

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

ing, and that these aspects contribute to how well an individual processes
prosodic information.
E7
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF STRESS REACTIVITY: THE
RESPECTIVE CONTRIBUTIONS OF ORBITAL AND LATERAL
PREFRONTAL CORTICES TO COGNITIVE APPRAISAL AND
PHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES TO SOCIAL STRESS Avgusta
Shestyuk1, Michal Levinson2, Michelle Mills1, Margaret Kemeny3, Robert
Knight1,2; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, 2University of California at
Berkeley, 3University of California at San Francisco — Psychosocial stress is
often accompanied by activation of peripheral physiological systems
such as the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the autonomic nervous system (ANS). Although animal studies suggest that the
prefrontal cortex (PFC) plays an important role in HPA and ANS regulation, human work has been limited in identifying how specific PFC
regions contribute to stress appraisal and peripheral activation. The current study examined respective roles of the orbital (OFC) and lateral prefrontal (LPFC) cortices in social threat appraisal and regulation of
peripheral responses to social stress. Individuals with OFC (N=5) or
LPFC lesions (N=5) and matched controls were asked to give a short
speech and perform a serial subtraction task in front of a panel of judges.
Measures of subjective mood and HPA (salivary cortisol) and ANS (heart
rate and skin conductance) activation were taken before and after the
stress task. The control and LPFC lesions groups demonstrated increases
(p<.05) in negative emotions and peripheral activation post-task. In contrast, the OFC lesion group failed to show increases in negative emotions
or salivary cortisol following the task, but had a more sustained increase
in skin conductance than control individuals (p<.05). Individuals with
LPFC lesions had greater baseline levels of cortisol and greater increases
in subjective negative emotions post-task than control individuals (p<.05)
but showed comparable task-related increases in HPA and ANS activation. These findings suggest that the OFC and LPFC play dissociable
roles in subjective appraisal of social threat and are directly involved in
HPA and ANS regulation.
E8
ENHANCED ATTENTIONAL AND VISCERO-INTEGRATIVE
NETWORK ACTIVATION IN RESPONSE TO POVERTY-RELATED
IMAGE STIMULI BY LOW SOCIO-ECONOMIC STATUS
SUBJECTS: AN EMOTIONAL VISUAL FMRI STUDY Michael
Silverman1, Peter Muennig2, Zohn Rosen2, Michael Stitzer1, Thomas Naidich1,
Martin Goldstein1; 1Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 2Columbia University — Objective: Use fMRI to probe functional neural differences between low versus high socioeconomic status (SES) subjects during poverty-related
visual stimulus processing. Background: Low SES is associated with
increased morbidity. Material deprivations account for only part of this
association, prompting study of other ways SES impacts health. One candidate mechanism involves low SES-related psychological stress yielding
deleterious somatic effects. Confirming this would require extending
insights derived from animal and human models involving environmental stress, and determining a mechanism by which low SES-related environmental stressor are neurally transduced (akin to neuroimaging
explorations of acute stressor responses, e.g., PTSD). Design/Methods: 15
African-American subjects (8 low /7 high SES) underwent EPI-BOLD
functional MR imaging while performing an activation paradigm consisting of serially-presented positive, neutral, negative and poverty-related
visual stimuli. Subjects were instructed to judge whether the visual stimulus is a meaningful or scrambled image using a 2-alternative button
press. Contrast of relevance, poverty versus neutral x low versus high
SES, was analyzed via FSL. Regions of interest were defined by clusters of
>30 contiguous voxels revealing a significant difference in brain activity
across conditions (Z>2.81, P<.005 two-tailed). Results: Relative to high
SES, low SES subjects demonstrated greater anterior cingulate, thalamic,
occipital, and insula activation while incidentally-processing povertyrelated visual stimuli. Conclusions/Relevance: Low SES subjects demon-

Poster Session E

strated recruitment of a neural network containing attentional (cingulate,
thalamus), visual (primary, secondary), and viscero-sensory integrative
(insula) components during incidental processing of poverty-related
visual stimuli. These results offer a potential neural mechanism mediating the transduction of environmental stressors within low SES.
E9
ARE THERE VOICE SPECIFIC PROCESSING MECHANISMS?
INTENSITY CHANGES RECRUIT MORE SENSORY PROCESSING
RESOURCES IF ASSOCIATED WITH VOCAL AS COMPARED TO
NONVOCAL SOUNDS Elizabeth Simpson1, Annett Schirmer2, Nicolas
Escoffier2; 1University of Georgia, 2National University of Singapore — Changes
in the intensity of both vocal and nonvocal sounds can be emotionally relevant. However, as only vocal sounds directly reflect communicative
intent, intensity change of vocal but not nonvocal sounds is socially relevant. Here we investigated whether a change in sound intensity is processed differently depending on its social relevance. To this end,
participants listened passively to a sequence of vocal or nonvocal sounds
that contained rare deviants which differed from standards in sound
intensity. Concurrently recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) revealed
a mismatch negativity (MMN) and P300 effect for intensity change.
Direction of intensity change was of little importance for vocal stimulus
sequences, which recruited enhanced sensory and attentional resources
for both loud and soft deviants. In contrast, intensity change in nonvocal
sequences recruited more sensory and attentional resources for loud as
compared to soft deviants. This was reflected in markedly larger MMN/
P300 amplitudes and shorter P300 latencies for the loud as compared to
soft nonvocal deviants. Furthermore, while the processing pattern
observed for nonvocal sounds was largely comparable between men and
women, sex differences for vocal sounds suggest that women were more
sensitive to their social relevance. These findings extend previous evidence of sex differences in vocal processing and add to reports of voice
specific processing mechanisms by demonstrating that simple acoustic
change recruits more processing resources if it is socially relevant.
E10
SUBCORTICAL VOLUMETRIC CONTRIBUTIONS TO MOOD
FUNCTIONING IN NORMAL SUBJECTS Shirley Smith1,2, Judith
Segall1, Robert Chavez1,2, Jeremy Bockholt1, Rex Jung1,2; 1The MIND Research
Network, 2University of New Mexico — Past research has shown a positive
correlation between subcortical brain volumes and indices of psychopathology in patient cohorts. The goal of the current study was to determine
whether this relationship was present within a group of normal subjects.
We hypothesized that volumetric measures of subcortical gray matter
(i.e., caudate, putamen, globus pallidus, thalamus) would relate to measures of psychopathology [Symptom Checklist - 90 (SCL-90)]. We also
explored sex differences in this relationship based on research linking
greater male psychopathology to brain volume abnormalities. We
obtained T1 images and behavioral measures of mood functioning in a
cohort of 64 neurologically and psychiatrically normal subjects (34 males,
30 females) ranging in age from 18 to 39. T1 images were analyzed using
FreeSurfer to obtain gray matter volumes of subcortical structures, and
related to mood measures using regression equations. We found that a
model that included right thalamic and caudate volumes was significantly related the Global Severity Index (GSI) of the SCL-90 (F = 5.90, p =
.005, R2 = .16), and that this relationship was substantially stronger in
males (R2 = .27) as compared to females (R2 = .006). Post hoc analysis,
limited to male subjects, found significant relationships between right
thalamic volume and GSI subscales including Depression (r = .58, p <
.001) and Interpersonal Sensitivity (r = .41, p = .015). To our knowledge,
this is the first report assessing the relationship between subcortical brain
volumes and mood regulation in a cohort comprised exclusively of normal, healthy subjects.

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

E11
AMYGDALA LATERALIZATION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR:
EVIDENCE
FROM
UNILATERAL
SELECTIVE
AMYGDALOHIPPOCAMPECTOMY PATIENTS Stephen D. Smith1,
David H. Zald2; 1University of Winnipeg, 2Vanderbilt University — Damage
to the amygdala leads to reduced reactivity to fear-related stimuli as well
as blunted autonomic-nervous-system responses. However, less is
known about how amygdala damage influences higher-order processes
such as emotional decision-making. Specifically, will reduced sensitivity
to fear influence an individual’s propensity to take risks, and will unilateral damage to the left or right amygdala differentially affect risk-taking
behavior? To examine these issues, ten temporal-lobe epilepsy patients
who had undergone a surgical resection of their left or right amygdala
and anterior hippocampus, as well as matched control participants, completed the Balloon Analogue Risk Task. This task is an empirical measure
of risk-taking that correlates with several ‘real-world’ risk-taking behaviors (Lejuez, et al., 2002). On each trial, participants press the computer
mouse to inflate a computerized balloon. Each mouse-press is worth
money to the participant; however, if the balloon is inflated too much, it
will burst, resulting in no reward. Participants, therefore, must decide
whether to stop inflating the balloon early in each trial, or to continue
inflating the balloon to earn more money (at the risk of the balloon bursting). The results demonstrated an interesting difference between patients
with left or right amygdala damage. Patients with damage to the right
amygdala were risk-seeking; they burst more balloons than did controls.
Surprisingly, left-amygdala patients burst fewer balloons than controls
(and earned less money overall), suggesting that they had become risk
averse. These results demonstrate that damage to the left and right
amygdalae leads to dramatically different effects on emotional decisionmaking.
E12
PREDICTION DETERMINES RELATIVE REPRESENTATION OF
PAIN: A NEUROIMAGING STUDY OF PLEASANT PAIN Gregory
Snyder1,2, Siri Leknes1, Irene Tracey1; 1Functional Magnetic Imaging of the Brain
(FMRIB) centre, University of Oxford, UK, 2Princeton University — Pain
is
subjective and context-dependent. The current study employed functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during two consecutive sessions to investigate how context and prediction modulate pain. In the
‘warm session’ subjects were primed to expect a “high probability” pleasant warm stimulus. Similarly, in the ‘intense session,’ subjects expected a
“high probability” intense pain. In both sessions, a moderate pain stimulus was administered 50% of the time. To disambiguate the moderate
stimuli from the expected stimuli, the moderate pain was accompanied
by a simultaneous visual cue. After each cue-stimulus presentation, subjects rated its sensation or outcome affect (positive versus negative).
Behavioral results demonstrated that subjects felt more positive about the
moderate pain in the intense session than in the warm session, despite
the same temperature being used across sessions. In fact, subjects rated
the moderate pain stimulus as mildly pleasant in the intense session only.
Outcome affect was significantly correlated (p<0.05) with sensation ratings in both sessions. In addition, correlations were seen between subjective dread (p<0.05) or relief (p<0.01) and the moderate pain outcome in
the intense session. Functional data further implicated prediction as significant in the subjective experience of pain, as activation of the ventral
striatum during moderate pain in both sessions is consistent with its role
in positive and negative prediction error. Finally, the primary contrast
between moderate pain across sessions yielded greater activation of the
medial orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) during the intense session, supporting
its role in reward valuation and positive hedonic affect.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

147

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

E13
EMOTION MINING: CONSCIOUS AND UNCONSCIOUS
EMOTIONS RELATED TO THE SOCIAL PERCEPTION OF HABITS
AND ADDICTIONS Thomas Snyder1, George Trksak2; 1Emotion Mining
Company, Wellesley, MA, 2McLean Hospital/Harvard Medical School — Social
perceptions can have notable influence on how distinct concepts are
internalized and subsequently shape the development of schemata. The
social perceptions and/or schemata associated with drug abuse and the
concept of drug addiction have changed dramatically over the past 50
years and are continually shaped by the media and public policy. Hence,
a greater understanding of the current but changing social attitudes associated with drug abuse is critical in initiating social change and public
drug policies. The involvement of conscious and unconscious emotion
may be vital elements in understanding and extrapolating social perceptions and schemata associated with drug abuse and addiction. The
present study was conducted in order to further identify current social
perceptions of drug addiction. The Emotion Mining toolset is comprised
of web-based interfaces that characterize conscious and unconscious
emotional responses to specifically crafted topic questions with analysis
of both categorized emotion words and written responses in an aggregate
database. This innovative methodology was used to characterize the
hypothesized differential emotional response profiles to the concepts of
“ADDICTION” and “HABIT”. 290 subjects responded in two 15-minute
Emotion Mining sessions addressing ‘How does “ADDICTION” or
“HABIT” make you feel?’ The results indicate intriguing differences in
emotions related to “ADDICTION” and “HABIT”, especially on the
unconscious level and as reflected in individual subjects verbatim. Both
the type and magnitude of emotional responses were different for
“ADDICTION” and “HABIT”. Differences were further explained by differences in age and ethnicity. These data are important as the association
of drug addiction to negative, deviant, and pathological behavior has
strong implications both socially and politically. The results may provide
a communication bridge needed for the development of more effective
drug addiction awareness and prevention strategies.
E14
THE ATTRIBUTION OF EMOTIONAL MENTAL STATES IN
PATIENTS WITH PSYCHOPATHY Monika Sommer1, Katrin Döhnel1,
Beate Sodian2, Johannes Schwerdtner1, Jörg Meinhardt2, Göran Hajak1;
1University of Regensburg, 2Ludwig-Maximilians University — The human
ability to make inferences about other people’s mental states is known as
Theory of Mind (ToM). Valid emotion attribution demands the fundamental abilities to conceive other people as intentional agents whose
actions are directed at achieving goals and to understand that the outcome of an intended action influences the protagonist’s emotional state.
Psychopathy is defined by severe impairments of emotional processes
and psychopathic patients show deficits especially in interpersonal emotional components. In the present fMRI study we investigated the neural
correlates associated with inferring emotional states from the outcome of
an intentional action. 16 healthy participants, 16 psychopathic and 16
non-psychopathic forensic patients were included. By presenting identical cartoon stories which only differ in their verbal vignette we realized
three experimental conditions: intention fulfilled, intention not fulfilled
and a non mentalizing reality condition. The task of the participants was
to indicate the emotional state of the protagonist in respect to the fulfilled
or unfulfilled intention. Results revealed a significant task by group interaction in the frontal anterior paracingulate gyrus (BA32) and posterior
midline structures. The contrast unfulfilled vs. fulfilled intentions
showed that in healthy participants emotion attribution in the context of
unfulfilled intentions induced a significant decrease of activity in theses
areas, whereas psychopathic patients showed a significant increase.
These results provide evidence that brain areas associated with the
default mode network play a central role in inferring emotional states
from intentional actions and that psychopathic patients show divergent
activation patterns during such fundamental processes of emotion attribution.

148

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

E15
THE SOCIAL INCENTIVE DELAY TASK (SID): PROBING SOCIAL
MOTIVATION IN HEALTHY SUBJECTS Katja N. Spreckelmeyer1,
Gregor Kohls1, Soeren Krach1, Arda Irmak1, Tilo Kircher1, Kerstin Konrad1,
Gerhard Gruender1; 1RWTH Aachen, Germany — Social reward has been
identified as a strong incentive for goal-directed behavior. In addition,
mesolimbic brain structures have been suggested to play a role in representations of predicted reward, irrespective of reward type. However,
data enlightening the role of mesolimbic structures in social reward anticipation is still scarce. The aim of the present study was to test a new fMRI
paradigm for probing anticipation of social reward. To set the results in
relation to earlier findings on non-social reward prediction, the anticipation of monetary as well as social reward was examined in the same participants (N=16) by making use of the monetary incentive delay
paradigm (MID) by Knutson et al, 2001. To design a comparable social
incentive delay task (SID) the MID-paradigm was adapted by replacing
monetary by social reward (approvingly smiling faces). In both conditions participants were given a cue indicating potential reward. In order
to receive reward a target button had to be pushed within a certain time
window (adapted for individual reaction time). Cues triggering either
monetary or social reward anticipation were presented sessionwise.
Imaging was performed on a 1,5 Tesla Siemens scanner in an eventrelated design. In both conditions activation of mesolimbic brain structures was stronger if reward could be anticipated than if nothing could be
gained. However, regions of activation did only partly overlap between
both conditions. While mesolimbic activation was stronger during anticipation of monetary than social reward, anticipation of social reward activated additional regions that money did not, e.g. the medial prefrontal
cortex.
E16
ANTICIPATORY
ANXIETY
PREDICTS
REDUCED
GAZE
FIXATION ON AVERSIVE STIMULI IN GENERALIZED ANXIETY
DISORDER Alison Staples1, Desmond Oathes1, Melissa Schmidt1, Michael
Jenson1, Jack Nitschke1; 1University of Wisconsin, Waisman Laboratory for
Brain Imaging and Behavior, Madison WI — Consistent with both vigilance
and avoidance theories related to clinical anxiety including generalized
anxiety disorder (GAD), our previous functional brain imaging (fMRI)
results suggest that GAD patients are hypervigilant while anticipating
emotional stimuli (Nitschke et al., 2007) but show a lack of reactivity during actual presentations of those pictures as indexed by amygdala activation (Oathes et al., 2007). In an attempt to uncover the mechanisms by
which GAD patients engage or disengage attention to facilitate these processes, we tracked eye movements while participants viewed negative
emotional pictures from the International Affective Picture System set.
GAD patients were compared with individuals diagnosed with social
anxiety disorder, a major depressive disorder, and non-psychiatric control participants. Significant group differences in fixation time on negative aspects of the pictures as well as anxiety ratings following warning
cues suggest that GAD patients were more anxious during anticipation of
the pictures but then spent less time fixating on negative parts of the pictures compared to non-GAD participants. For the GAD group, alone,
there was a negative correlation between time spent looking at negative
parts of pictures and anxiety ratings following warning cues. The data
suggest that GAD patients are hypersensitive to emotional information
and, as a result, fixate less on negative aspects of emotional stimuli and
that this avoidance tendency is unique to GAD.
E17
EMOTIONAL
ANTI-FACES:
RECOGNITION
OF
FACIAL
EXPRESSIONS AND THEIR STATISTICAL OPPOSITES Joshua
Susskind1, Melissa Ellamil1, Adam Anderson1,2; 1University of Toronto,
2
Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Centre — Basic emotions theory suggests that facial expressions represent distinct emotional entities. By contrast, we hypothesized that facial actions underlying expressions are not
independent and have natural opposites that convey opposing visual

Poster Session E

information. Using a statistical model of facial appearance, we derived a
set of photorealistic expression prototypes and associated anti-faces –
visual-statistical opposites of the prototypes. In Experiment 1 participants’ emotion ratings of model-derived faces established that prototypes express emotions consistent with overlap in their facial actions
while their anti-faces express the opposite emotions. In particular, fear
and disgust were found to have strongly opponent facial actions, with the
fear anti-face recognized as disgust and the disgust anti-face recognized
as fear, respectively. Although expression anti-faces visually oppose their
prototypes, it is not clear whether the visual system is directly sensitive to
contrasts in facial actions characterizing prototype-anti-face relations. In
Experiment 2 we used a perceptual adaptation paradigm to examine discrimination of expressions from neutral after adapting to disgust and fear
anti-faces. The fear anti-face significantly biased perception toward fear,
enhancing fear recognition; likewise, the disgust anti-face biased perception toward disgust, enhancing disgust recognition. These results suggest
that expressions are coded neurally through contrastive mechanisms sensitive to opposing facial actions. These data provide evidence that facial
expression recognition is supported by opponent processes that define
the perceptual space linking expressions to underlying emotions.
E18
AMYGDALA VOLUME PREDICTS RECOVERY FROM NEGATIVE
STIMULI Matthew J. Sutterer1, Carien M. van Reekum1, Brendon M.
Nacewicz1, Regina C. Lapate1, Lawrence L. Greischar1, Catherine J. Norris3,
Stacey M. Schaefer1, David R. Bachhuber1, Gina M. Beguhn-Madeska1, Nicole
M. Rute1, Terrence R. Oakes1, Richard J. Davidson1,2; 1Waisman Laboratory for
Brain Imaging and Behavior, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2University of
Wisconsin-Madison, 3Dartmouth College — Animal and human studies
have demonstrated that the amygdala plays a key role in emotional processing, especially in response to negative challenges. However, the role
the morphometry of this region might have in emotion-related processes
remains unknown. In a study assessing health and well-being across the
life span in the United States, we collected structural magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) scans. Additionally, in a separate session, we also
recorded electromyographic (EMG) activity of the corrugator supercilii
muscle during as well as following the presentation of negative, neutral,
and positive pictures. The amygdala was manually traced on each participant's own MRI using a previously published protocol (Nacewicz et al.,
2006). Larger whole-brain corrected amygdala volumes significantly predicted greater corrugator activity immediately following negative picture
presentation, even when controlling for corrugator activity during picture presentation. These data suggest that individuals with enlarged
amygdalae, while experiencing no deficit in reactivity to negative information, may have a reduced ability to recover from a negative challenge.
E19
EMOTIONAL
FACES
PRODUCED
LESS
REPETITION
SUPPRESSION THAN NEUTRAL FACES Atsunobu Suzuki1,2, Joshua
Goh1, Brad Sutton1, Andy Hebrank3, Lucas Jenkins4, Blair Flicker3, Denise Park3;
1
Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Program of
Gerontological Research, University of Tokyo, 3Center for Brain Health,
University of Texas at Dallas, 4University of California at Davis — Emotional
attributes of stimuli have been shown to modulate, mostly enhance, perceptual processing (Vuilleumier, 2005). In the present study, we investigated effects of emotion on repetition suppression, that is, reduction of
brain activation with repetition of stimuli (Grill-Spector et al., 2006). Previous studies provided contradictory evidence on this issue, such that
emotional stimuli produced less (Rotshtein et al., 2001) and more (Ishai et
al., 2004) repetition suppression than neutral ones. We conducted an
event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiment
designed to resolve differences from the previous studies, and compared
repetition suppression between emotional (angry and happy) and neutral
faces in the fusiform gyrus and in the amygdala. When the same face was
presented consecutively, we found that the peak amplitude of the fMRI
signal in the middle and posterior parts of the fusiform gyrus was smaller
for the second presentation than for the first, and this repetition-suppres-

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

sion effect was the most evidence for neutral faces. Results also suggested
early deactivation of the amygdala associated only with repetition of neutral faces. It thus appears that emotional faces ensured more sustained
activation than neutral ones both in the fusiform gyrus and in the
amygdala, providing support for the notion that emotional information
undergoes extensive processing.
E20
NEURAL
MECHANISMS
OF
COGNITIVE-EMOTIONAL
PROCESSING IN ALEXITHYMIA Marte Swart1, Richard Bruggeman2,
Durk Wiersma2, André Aleman1; 1BCN NeuroImaging Center, University
Medical Center Groningen, The Netherlands, 2University Medical Center
Groningen, The Netherlands — Introduction: Alexithymia, or no words for
feelings, is an impairment of the ability to identify and communicate
one’s emotional state. In order to elucidate the neural mechanisms of the
cognitive-emotional processing underlying alexithymia, we investigated
nonclinical subjects with either high or low scores on an alexithymia
questionnaire using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
Methods: 20 participants (9f) with high- and 20 participants (17f) with
low scores on the verbalizing scale of the Bermond-Vorst Alexithymia
Questionnaire (BVAQ), performed emotion related tasks during fMRI.
Subjects performed a memory association task, an emotional working
memory task and an auditory verbal imagery task. Functional images
were acquired with a 3T Philips scanner using echo-planar imaging (EPI).
We conducted random effects analyses and used t-tests for group comparisons (SPM5) thresholded at p<0.005, uncorrected. Results: Alexithymic participants had more activity in middle- and inferior frontal gyrus
(MFG, IFG) and in superior temporal gyrus (STG) related to emotional
IAPS pictures compared to neutral pictures during the memory association task. In the emotional working memory task alexithymic participants
showed less activation in superior frontal gyrus (SFG) and cingulate cortex (CC) for emotional facial expressions compared to neutral faces. Conclusions: The high and low alexithymic groups showed different
activation patterns in response to cognitive-emotional processing tasks.
Brain areas associated with emotion experience (SFG) and emotion control (CC) were less activated in the alexithymic group. However, areas
associated with emotion regulation and effortful suppression of emotion
were more activated (IFG, MFG) in alexithymic individuals.
E21
LONG-LASTING EFFECTS OF SUBLIMINAL AFFECTIVE PRIMING
FROM FACIAL EXPRESSIONS Timothy Sweeny1, Marcia Grabowecky1,
Satoru Suzuki1, Ken A. Paller1; 1Northwestern University — Unconscious
processing of visual stimuli with emotional content can automatically
bias affective judgments made a moment later. However, it is unclear if
subliminal affective priming is merely a transient phenomenon manifested in fleeting perceptual changes or whether long-lasting behavioral
effects are also induced. We assessed unconscious emotional processing
by requiring people to rate the valence of surprise faces subliminally
primed by 30-ms fearful, happy, or neutral faces. Surprise faces primed
by happy faces were rated as more positive than surprise faces primed by
fearful faces, but only among subjects unaware of the primes. These subjects were categorized as strictly unaware of primes based on the absence
of subjective reports of prime presentations along with chance-level performance at discriminating emotional expressions of subliminal faces.
The next day, memory for surprise faces presented without any subliminal affective expressions was assessed using a four-point recognition confidence scale for each face. Surprise faces that had been primed by happy
faces the prior day were remembered better than surprise faces that had
been primed by fearful and neutral faces, again only among subjects
unaware of the primes. Effects of subliminal affective priming thus were
evident both immediately after prime presentation and 1 day later. The
present findings underscore the power of affective information that
escapes conscious perception and yet can still influence a person’s attitudes and behavior, not just momentarily at the time sensory information
is first processed but in an enduring way that remains operative at least 1
day later.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

149

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

E22
TRAIT-ANXIETY
AFFECTS
EARLY
PROCESSING
OF
IRRELEVANT THREAT WORDS: AN ERP STUDY Isabel
Taake1,
Fern Jaspers-Fayer1, Mario Liotti1; 1Simon Fraser University — Recent evidence has shown that threat signals in the environment can be rapidly
detected at a very early, possibly pre-attentive stage in the information
processing stream. For example, visual event-related potentials (ERPs) to
faces have been found to be enhanced in amplitude as early as 90 ms after
stimulus onset in case of fearful vs. neutral faces (Pourtois and
Vuilleumier, 2006). Such biased processing of negative information has
been found to be exaggerated in anxious individuals, who have been
characterized as hypervigilant to threat (Williams et al, 2006). Bias
towards threat information has been implicated in the etiology and maintenance of anxiety states (Beck and Clark, 1997). In the present study, we
examined whether high trait anxiety enhances early, pre-lexical stages of
emotional word processing (before 200 msec). ERPs were recorded while
healthy students with high and low Anxiety Sensitivity (n=14) performed
a lateralized dot probe task employing word pairs of different types
(threat-neutral, threat-positive and positive-neutral blocks). Reaction
times to the probe revealed no statistical differences as a function of emotion type in either group. ERPs time locked to the onset of the word pairs
revealed an early modulation of the occipital P1 wave (75-115 ms) to the
threat-neutral pairs, with significantly greater P1 amplitude in the high
than low anxiety group (p< 0.026). No P1 group differences were
observed for threat-positive and positive-neutral blocks. Later on,
enhanced N1 activity (120 – 160 ms) over temporo-occipital scalp was
observed in both groups in response to threat-positive relative to positive-neutral blocks.
E23
SEEING RED: ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN NEURAL CORRELATES
OF VISUAL PROCESSING, EXTERNALIZING BEHAVIOR, AND
EMOTION REGULATION IN SCHOOL-AGED CHILDREN Rebecca
M. Todd1, Marc D. Lewis1, Connie Lamm1; 1University of Toronto — Individual differences in temperament, particularly related to anxiety, have been
associated with differences in perceptual processing. Although aggressive behavior is associated with deficits in the capacity for effortful emotion regulation, the relationship between aggression and perceptual
processing in development is still unknown. The goal of the present
study was to use event-related potentials (ERPs) to investigate links
between visual processing, externalizing behavior, and the capacity for
effortful control in late childhood. Participants were 45 children referred
for externalizing behavior problems and 49 age-matched controls, 8 to 12
years of age. EEG was collected while children performed a challenging
3-block Go/Nogo task with a negative emotion induction in the middle
block. The P1, an early posterior ERP component sensitive to both attentional modulation and emotional valence, was measured in correct Go
trials. Temperament questionnaires were also administered. All children
showed increased P1 amplitudes in response to the mood induction, indicating that early visual processing is enhanced by emotion in both normal
and aggressive children. Aggressive children showed longer P1 latencies
than controls, suggesting that slower visual processing is associated with
externalizing behavior. Finally, among the antisocial children, lower
effortful control scores predicted lower amplitude P1s, indicating that
low regulatory capacity is linked to reduced visual processing. Whereas
previous research has revealed associations between visual processing
and anxiety, our results further suggest that, in school-aged children,
neural correlates of rapid visual processing are linked to both externalizing behavior and the capacity for deliberate and flexible emotion regulation.

150

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

E24
ROLE OF INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THE RESPONSE TO
EMOTIONAL DISTRACTION: AN EVENT-RELATED FMRI
INVESTIGATION Sara Tomlinson1, James Kragel2, Jared Stokes2, Florin
Dolcos1, Gregory McCarthy3, Roberto Cabeza2; 1University of Alberta, 2Center
for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, 3Yale University — Increased
susceptibility to emotional distraction is often among the debilitating features of mood and anxiety disorders. Although it is generally accepted
that increased emotional distractibility may be linked to individual differences in the response to emotional challenge, little is known about the
neural circuitry associated with such behavioral differences. The present
study used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in conjunction
with behavioral measures to investigate the role of individual differences
in the response to task-irrelevant emotional distraction. Event-related
fMRI data were recorded while subjects performed a working memory
(WM) task with emotional and neutral distracters presented during the
delay interval between the memoranda and probes. In addition, behavioral data concerning participants’ patterns of response in the affective
and cognitive domains were also recorded using a battery of tools that
assessed both general (e.g., emotional arousability, decision impulsivity)
and specific (e.g., subjective emotional ratings of distracters) aspects of
processing. Analysis of behavioral data revealed that participants showing increased susceptibility to emotional distraction during the WM task
also tended to have higher emotional arousability and attentional impulsivity scores. Complementing these behavioral findings, analysis of the
fMRI data showed that increased emotional reactivity and susceptibility
to emotional distraction were associated with enhanced activity in the
amygdala and the medial prefrontal cortex, consistent with the role of
these regions in the response to emotional challenge. These findings provide novel evidence concerning the role of individual differences in the
response to emotional challenge, which is relevant to understanding differential susceptibility to affective disorders.
E25
LOOK INTO MY EYES: THE EFFECT OF LOOKING BEHAVIOR
ON FACE PROCESSING Nim Tottenham1, Tara Ann Gilhooly1,
Alexander Millner1, Sarah Birch1; 1Sackler Institute for Developmental
Psychobiology, Weill Cornell Medical College — When viewing another’s
face, healthy individuals look at the eyes because they hold information
relevant to face processing, including expression interpretation. This
study experimentally manipulated gaze location to the eyes or to the
mouth region to observe the behavioral and neurofunctional effect on
face processing. Fifteen adults identified the location of a visuallydegraded cue superimposed on a face, forcing foveation to the eye or
mouth region. Results suggest that the eye region holds information relevant for emotion processing. Specifically, adults’ reaction time was relatively slower to angry faces but only when focus was directed to the eyes
(p<0.01) or during a manipulation-free condition, and the effect disappeared when focus was on the mouth. This finding suggests that individuals naturally focus on the eye region and that the experimental
manipulation of forcing foveation to the eye region mimics looking
behavior during natural viewing. We collected concurrent imaging data
(fMRI) and observed that signal change in the amygdala, a region sensitive to the emotional significance of stimuli, and fusiform gyrus, a region
sensitive to faces, were modulated by focus (eyes > mouth), so that signal
intensity changed as a function of where subjects looked. Manipulating
focus within house stimuli did not produce differences in reaction time or
activity in visual areas. These data support the hypothesis that visual
information can bias socio-emotional processing even in typical individuals and raises the possibility that atypical visual information processing
may underlie atypical face processing.

Poster Session E

E26
EMOTION RECOGNITION: THE MODEL OF HUNTINGTON'S
DISEASE Iris Trinkler1,2, Anne-Catherine Bachoud-Levi1,2; 1Departement
d'Etudes Cognitives, ENS, Paris, France, 2INSERM U841, E1 — It has been
repeatedly shown that patients with Huntington's Disease (HD) are
impaired at recognising emotional expressions. Here we asked if this
impairment might be paralleled by a production deficit for emotion
expression which might suggest an implication of a motor mirror system
coding the motor aspect of both recognition and production of emotional
expressions that might be deficient in HD (see also Carr , Iacoboni, et al.,
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003). We tested 13 HD patients and 13 matched
control subjects on recognition of the six basic emotions (anger, disgust,
fear, surprise, sadness and joy) using a forced-choice test using 60 images
from the Karolinska Faces inventory and the 60 Ekman faces. For production subjects were filmed while they produced the six emotional facial
expressions repeatedly. Expressions were rated by a group of naïve raters
as a forced-choice recognition test. We found an impairment of recognition and production overall and specifically for anger, disgust, fear and
suprise. This lends support to a potential impairment in a common motor
(mirror) system. Alternatively, an underlying emotion identification
module could drive both recognition and production deficit. We will discuss the two models of emotion impairment in HD by means of additional data from an assessment of alexithymia (TAS20) in these patients,
and implications for further experiments necessary to disambiguate
between the two.
E27
FRONTOLIMBIC MECHANISMS OF COGNITIVE BIAS IN MAJOR
DEPRESSION Don Tucker1,2, Catherine Poulsen1, Phan Luu1,2, Stacey
Crane1, Jason Quiring1, Pieter Poolman1; 1Electrical Geodesics, Inc., Eugene,
OR, 2University of Oregon, Eugene, OR — We asked depressed persons
from the community and normal controls to complete a self-evaluation
procedure in which they indicated whether or not individual trait words
described themselves. Dense array (256-channel) electroencephalography
(EEG) was recorded. Greater depression (specifically lower Positive
Affect) was associated with endorsement of fewer favorable traits, and
greater anxiety (greater Negative Affect) was associated with endorsement of more unfavorable traits. Consistent with prior literature, depressives evidenced suppressed visual responses over the right hemisphere,
and a reduced P300. They also showed reduced reactivity to positive and
negative self-appraisal. In controls, the trial-averaged EEG (Event Related
Potential or ERP) showed an enhanced N1 over left occipital-temporal
regions for trials in which a “Yes” response was given to “Bad” or unfavorable traits. For depressives, this N1 response was attenuated, specifically for these Yes Bad trials. Similarly, in medial frontal regions controls
showed enhanced medial frontal negativity to Yes Bad items, whereas
depressives showed an attenuated or absent medial frontal response on
these items specifically. To extend conventional scalp ERPs, neural source
analysis was conducted using an atlas-based head model, realistic tissue
conductivities and geometries, and sources distributed throughout the
cortical volume. The medial frontal effects at the scalp could be attributed
to both anterior cingulate and ventromedial frontal sources, with activity
in ventromedial frontal cortex showing a particularly strong response in
controls that was specifically attenuated in the depressed sample.
E28
SLEEP
DEPRIVATION
INDUCED
EMOTIONAL
VISUAL
AGNOSIA Els van der Helm1, Ninad Gujar1, Caitlin Watts1, Matthew P.
Walker1; 1Sleep and Neuroimaging Laboratory, University of California,
Berkeley, CA — Introduction: While the effects of sleep-deprivation on
cognitive function have received considerable research interest, the
impact of sleep loss on emotional processing remains surprisingly understudied. Here we demonstrate that a single night of sleep-deprivation
induces a selective recognition impairment of specific facial emotions; an
effect that was reversible following recovery sleep. Methods: The task
involved evaluating three different affective face categories: Sad, Happy

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

and Angry. For each emotion, ten picture-slides, ranging in a gradient
from neutral to increasingly emotional, were presented in a random
order, with subjects required to make an emotional-strength rating for
each face-slide. Prior to performing the task, subjects either slept normally, or were sleep deprived. Following a recovery night of sleep, both
groups repeated the task again. Results: Under conditions of sleep-deprivation, there was a significant impairment (blunting) in the recognition of
happy and particularly angry facial expressions, yet a relative preservation for the recognition of sad expressions. Moreover, the effect was far
greater in females than in males. This selective “emotional visual agnosia” was, however, ameliorated following a night of recovery sleep in the
deprivation group, with performance returning to similar profiles
observed in the control group. Discussion: Together, these data demonstrate that sleep-deprivation induces profound affective dysregulation,
impairing the ability to identify specific human emotions. Such specificity suggests that sleep-deprivation impacts discrete neural systems,
rather than imposing a global brain deficit, and may offer clinically relevant insights into the co-occurrence of sleep abnormalities in psychiatric
mood disorders, including major depression and post-traumatic stress
disorder.
E29
NEURAL ACTIVATION TO IMPLICIT TRUSTWORTHINESS
JUDGMENTS AND ITS INFLUENCE ON SOCIAL DECISIONMAKING Mascha van 't Wout1, Luke Chang1, Alan Sanfey1; 1Neural
Decision Sciences Laboratory, University of Arizona — Previous studies in
social neuroscience have demonstrated that the face is an important
source of social information from which people infer complex social characteristics such as trustworthiness. Indeed, we recently demonstrated
that facial signals of trustworthiness had a substantial influence on how
people behave towards another person in an interactive two-player risky
decision-making game, the Trust Game. Moreover, the evaluation of
facial trustworthiness is associated with activation of emotional brain
areas including the amygdala and insula. However, there are no studies
that examine how brain activation associated with implicit processing of
subjective trustworthiness influences decision-making. Fifteen people
were scanned in the role of proposer in the Trust Game with 64 partners
that were previously rated on trustworthiness, 32 of whom were trustworthy and 32 untrustworthy. Behavioral results replicated our previous
finding of a significant relationship between subjective trustworthiness
and the amount of money transferred to that partner (p<0.001). Functional MRI results showed increased amygdala activation for untrustworthy faces compared to trustworthy faces. We will further explore whether
activation of emotional areas, including the amygdala, correlates with the
amount of money offered to a partner at the expense of the more cognitive, deliberative brain areas, such as the prefrontal cortex. Interestingly
not every participant showed a significant relationship between subjective trustworthiness and amount of money transferred to that partner.
Therefore, we will test if in these participants amygdala activation might
be down regulated by the prefrontal cortex, resulting in a reduced relationship between subjective trustworthiness and consequential decisions.
E30
INDIVIDUAL ATTACHMENT STYLE MODULATES HUMAN
AMYGDALA AND STRIATUM ACTIVATION DURING SOCIAL
APPRAISAL Pascal Vrticka1,2, Frederic Andersson2, Didier Grandjean1,3,
David Sander1,3, Patrik Vuilleumier1,2; 1Swiss National Center for Affective
Sciences, University of Geneva, 2Laboratory for Neurology & Imaging of
Cognition, Department of Neurosciences & Clinic of Neurology, University
Medical Center of Geneva, 3FPSE, University of Geneva — Adult attachment
theory refers to fundamental individual differences defining how people
affectively perceive and respond to others during social interactions or
conflicts. Recent models propose that different attachment styles might
be mapped on two dimensions defined by orthogonal axes of anxiety and
avoidance, with the secure style corresponding to people in whom both
anxiety and avoidance are low. Although attachment theory has gener-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

151

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

ated a rich body of research in social and clinical psychology, the neural
bases of these individual differences remain unknown. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine how attachment
style modulates brain responses to facial expressions that convey positive
or negative feedback about task performance, and thus appear either
supportive or hostile. Activation of striatum and ventral tegmental area
was enhanced to positive feedback signalled by a smiling face, but such
responses were reduced in participants with avoidant attachment, indicating relative impassiveness to social reward. Conversely, a left
amygdala response was evoked by angry faces associated with negative
feedback, and correlated positively with anxious attachment. Secure
attachment showed mirror effects in striatum and amygdala, but no other
specific correlate. These results reveal a critical role for brain circuits
implicated in reward and threat processing in the biological underpinnings of adult attachment style, and support models postulating two separate affective dimensions to explain these individual differences.
E31
A META-ANALYSIS OF NEUROIMAGING EVIDENCE FOR
DISCRETE BASIC EMOTION STATES Katherine
Vytal1,
Stephan
Hamann1; 1Emory University — Current debate exists regarding the proposal that basic emotion states such as fear, disgust, anger, sadness, and
happiness are reliably associated with characteristic patterns of brain
activation. Proponents of alternative views associated with dimensional
emotion models have pointed out that evidence for differentiable basic
emotions, especially from neuroimaging, has been equivocal. Because
previous meta-analyses reached somewhat discrepant conclusions and
did not include many recent studies or new analysis methods, we reexamined this proposal. Using the recently developed Activation Likelihood Estimation (ALE) meta-analysis method, we analyzed 78
neuroimaging studies that elicited discrete emotion states. Reported activation foci were converted into nonparametric statistical whole-brain
maps and assessed for clustering of activation within each discrete emotion (activations characteristic of each emotion) and for regions reliably
discriminating between emotions in direct contrasts between basic emotions. ALE results demonstrated that all five basic emotion states examined elicited differentiable patterns of regional brain activation (surprise
was omitted because of high variability). Further, activation patterns that
reliably characterized a given emotion also tended to differentiate that
emotion from other emotions (e.g., fear was associated with amygdala
activation, and the amygdala was prominent among several regions reliably differentiating fear from disgust, etc.). These results clarify earlier
meta-analysis results and converge with recent multivariate psychophysiological studies that indicate basic emotions can be reliably differentiated. Along with previous evidence, these results suggest that both
dimensional (arousal and valence) and discrete basic representations of
emotion have characteristic neural correlates.
E32
UNPACKING
PREFRONTAL
FUNCTION
IN
EMOTION
REGULATION:
FMRI
EVIDENCE
FOR
INDEPENDENT
FUNCTIONAL PATHWAYS THROUGH AMYGDALA AND
NUCLEUS ACCUMBENS Tor D. Wager1, Brent Hughes1, Matthew
Davidson1, Martin Lindquist1, Kevin N. Ochsner1; 1Columbia University — A
growing number of studies support a role for the lateral prefrontal cortex
(LPFC) in the cognitive regulation of emotion, but little is understood
about the cortical-subcortical interactions that mediate this process. We
identified ventrolateral (VLPFC) and dorsomedial (DMPFC) frontal
regions that correlated with reduced negative emotional experience during cognitive reappraisal of aversive images. Using these as regions of
interest, we applied path analysis recursively within subcortical regions
to locate mediators of the association between VLPFC activity and reductions in reported emotion. Results showed that two separable pathways
mediated effects of VLPFC on emotion: A path through nucleus accumbens predicted greater reappraisal success, and an additional path
through ventral amygdala predicted reduced success. Together, these
two pathways explained ~50% of the variance in reported emotional

152

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

experience. The results suggest that VLPFC may be involved in both the
generation and regulation of emotion, through different subcortical pathways—roles which are consistent with the idea that VLPFC is involved in
cognitive appraisal that can either increase or decrease emotion.
E33
ACUTE
TRYPTOPHAN
DEPLETION
ALTERS
NEURAL
RESPONSES TO TARGETS AND EMOTIONAL DISTRACTORS
Lihong Wang1,2, O'Dhaniel Mullette-Gillman1, Kishore Gadde2, Cynthia
Kuhn2, Gregory McCarthy1,3, Scott Huettel1,2; 1Duke University/Brain
Imaging and Analysis Center, 2Duke University, 4Yale University — Serotonin (5-HT) is a key neurotransmitter for emotional regulation and memory, and deficits in serotonergic function have been implicated in the
affective symptoms of depression. Although biases toward negative
events are endemic to depression, few studies have investigated the effect
of low 5-HT on the neural systems underlying emotional memory. Using
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and acute tryptophan
depletion (ATD), we investigated the effect of a temporary reduction in 5HT synthesis on emotional encoding and executive function. Thirteen
healthy volunteers participated in an open-labeled design with counterbalanced control and ATD sessions, each with behavioral and fMRI components. Our “emotional oddball” task required subjects to detect
infrequently presented circle targets from frequent rectangle standards
while novel distracting negative and neutral pictures were intermittently
presented. Subsequent memory on the distracting pictures was tested one
hour following the fMRI session. During the ATD session, subjects exhibited enhanced memory for negative pictures relative to neutral pictures,
and lower positive affect scores (PA). Compared to the control session,
ATD increased activation to negative distractors in two regions: the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and the posterior intraparietal sulcus. Conversely,
ATD resulted in decreased activation to attentional targets in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. These findings highlight the importance of central 5-HT in context-dependent control of behavior and may have
implications for neuropsychiatric disorders including depression and
post-traumatic stress disorder.
E34
AUDITORY NARRATIVES MODULATE EMOTIONAL NEURAL
PROCESSING OF NEGATIVE VISUAL STIMULI Helen Weng1, Jenna
Sheftel1, Diane Stodola1, Richard Davidson1,2,3, Antoine Lutz1; 1Waisman
Center for Brain Imaging, 2Department of Psychology, 3University of
Wisconsin-Madison — Interpretation of events is postulated to affect subsequent emotional processing. This has been studied in voluntary emotion regulation paradigms. However, further investigation is needed to
understand how a stimulus is processed after a certain interpretation is
accepted. Therefore, we paired negative social pictures with an auditory
narrative which either enhanced or suppressed the emotional content.
The Enhance narrative told the participants (N=36) that the scene
depicted was happening to a loved one, where the Suppress narrative
stated that the scene depicted was from a movie and not real. Half the
participants viewed the pictures with a specific picture-narrative pairing.
The other half viewed the pictures with the opposite picture-narrative
pairing, demonstrating that neural changes seen between conditions are
due to the interpretation of a given stimulus rather than the visual stimulus per se. Preliminary functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
results show that the Enhance condition recruits greater activation in
right superior frontal gyrus, right medial frontal gyrus, bilateral dorsal
and anterior cingulate cortex, bilateral posterior cingulate, bilateral
insula, and left thalamus compared to Suppress. The Suppress condition
recruits greater activity in the right middle frontal gyrus, left inferior
frontal gyrus, right inferior parietal lobule, visual cortex, and bilateral
superior temporal gyri. These results suggest that the Enhance condition
increases the emotional salience of a visual stimulus and subsequent neural processing in regions associated with emotion. The Suppress condition may recruit prefrontal regions involved in emotion regulation,
increase visual processing of the stimulus, and increase auditory processing of the narrative.

Poster Session E

E35
FEAR OF PUBLIC SPEAKING AND NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES OF FACE PROCESSING Matthias J. Wieser1, Paul
Pauli1, Phillip Reicherts1, Antje B. M. Gerdes1, Martin J. Herrmann1, Andreas
Mühlberger1; 1University of Würzburg — Fear is supposed to interfere with
emotional processing and has been associated with an attentional bias for
angry faces. In this study, the effect of anticipatory fear of public speaking on emotional processing was investigated by means of event-related
brain potentials. Fifty participants were randomly assigned to one of two
conditions: In the fear condition, actual fear of public speaking was
induced by instructing the participants to perform an oral presentation
on an unknown topic later during the experimental session. The participants were made to believe that their rhetoric performance would be
video-taped and evaluated by faculty members. In the control condition,
the participants were told to have to do a brief written summary of arguments on an unknown topic. Participants then viewed angry, happy and
neutral faces for 1000 ms without any task while EEG was continuously
recorded. The fear-induction was successful as enlarged state anxiety
scores for the experimental group revealed. Furthermore, higher fear was
associated with larger P100 amplitudes in response to all facial expressions and shorter latencies for angry faces. The N170 was modulated by
emotion over the right hemisphere for the fear group. Furthermore,
angry facial expressions were associated with an enlarged EPN in fearful
participants (experimental group), whereas emotional modulation of the
LPP was not affected by fear. The results point at an influence of actual
fear of public speaking on early perceptual processing of emotional facial
expressions.
E36
NEURAL CORRELATES OF RECOLLECTION FOR EMOTIONAL
ASSOCIATIONS ASSESSED WITH FMRI Jennifer S. Wilson1, Stephen
M. LaConte2,3, Stephan Hamann1; 1Emory University, 2Baylor College of
Medicine, 3Emory/Georgia Tech Biomedical Imaging Technology Center — Emotional arousal elicited by emotional stimuli has been proposed to specifically enhance recollection and relational binding to neutral, contextual
information, including source information. Associative recognition, in
which two items that occurred together as a paired associate must be distinguished from new, recombined pairs of old items, is typically characterized as supported almost entirely by recollection, vs. item recognition,
which can also be mediated by familiarity. Here we explored the influence of emotion on recollection for associative information, examining
whether successful associative recognition memory for emotional paired
associates would depend on regions typically implicated in the emotional
enhancement of recollection in item memory tasks, particularly the
amygdala and hippocampus/parahippocampal cortex, and whether
these correlates would differ for positive vs. negative emotional stimuli.
Eleven young adults encoded paired associates composed of a neutral
cue and a word with either positive, negative, or neutral valence (e.g.,
camera—PARADISE; camera—DEATH; camera—MUSEUM) with a
deep encoding task while being scanned at 3T in an event-related design.
Subsequent memory was assessed after each run with free recall and
cued recall, and associative recognition for all pairs (vs. recombined
pairs, camera—TONIC) was tested immediately after scanning. Successful memory for positive emotional associations recruited regions implicated in reward and emotional memory, ventral striatum, left amygdala/
hippocampus, and medial PFC, whereas successful memory for negative
emotional associations recruited bilateral amygdala, hippocampus/parahippocampal cortex, and insula. Results suggest that successful encoding
of recollection-based emotional associations recruit amygdala-based
modulatory mechanisms that differ as a function of emotional valence.
E37
AUTOMATIC
OR
ATTENTIONAL
CONTROL?
NEURAL
RESPONSE TO EMOTIONAL EXPRESSIONS Charlene
Wu1,
1
1,2
1
1
Samantha Crowe , Derek Mitchell , James Blair ; National Institute of

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Mental Health, Mood and Anxiety Disorders Program, Unit on Affective
Cognitive Neuroscience, 2University of Western Ontario — An event-related
fMRI study investigated the impact of attentional load on the BOLD
response to emotional expressions. Participants were presented with
composite stimuli consisting of semi-transparent words superimposed
on neutral, fearful, and disgusted faces. This manipulation held stimulusdriven features constant across multiple levels of attentional load. Participants made either (1) gender discriminations based on the face; (2) case
judgments based on the words; or (3) syllable number judgments based
on the words. A significant main effect for processing load was found in
prefrontal cortex, parietal cortex, visual processing areas, amygdala, and
insula. Results indicate activation in attention-related regions, such as
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and parietal cortex, increased with greater
attentional load. Critically, enhanced activity in the amygdala and insula
to emotional expressions during low attentional load (gender discriminations) was significantly reduced during higher levels of attentional load
(linguistic discriminations). Collectively, these data support the view that
processing task-irrelevant emotional information, whether fear- or disgust-based, is like neutral information subject to the effects of attentional
load and top-down control.
E38
SOMATIC MARKER IS NOT NECESSARY TO FACILITATE
DECISION MAKING IN A GAMBLING TASK Nai-Shing Yen1,2, HuiKuan Chung1, I-Chen Chou1, Kuan-Hua Chen1; 1National Chengchi
University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Research Center for Mind, Brain, and Learning,
National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan — The
somatic
maker
hypothesis (SMH) proposed that decision making is guided by emotion
and posited that past emotional bodily experiences (i.e. somatic maker)
can appear before individual makes a decision (Damasio, 1994). An Iowa
Gambling Task (IGT) was used to support SMH. In the IGT, somatic
maker (i.e. anticipatory SCR) is interpreted as correlates with the bad
decks, and it operates as an alarm to make subjects withdraw from bad
decks. Nevertheless, the bad decks are associated with higher magnitude
of reward and punishment than the good decks. To clarify the SMH,
Tomb et al. (2002) changed the schedule of punishments and rewards and
observed that anticipatory SCR was not associated with correct vs. incorrect decision making. On the contrary, they found that anticipatory SCR
was associated with the risk level of the decks. In order to further clarify
the SMH, the expected value (positive or negative) and the risk level (low
risk or high risk) of the decks were manipulated in the present study. In
our modified IGT, a significant interaction between expected value and
risk level was found. That is, participants chose more bad decks in high
risk condition and chose more good decks in low risk condition. More
importantly, the anticipatory SCR showed the same pattern as the behavioral data. Therefore, the SMH is not supported.
E39
PHYSIOLOGICAL FACTORS IN EMPATHIC ACCURACY Jamil
Zaki1, Niall Bolger1, Kevin Ochsner1; 1Columbia University, New York — Empathy research has demonstrated that perceivers whose autonomic activity
covaries with that of social targets (physiological linkage) are more accurate about the negative affect reported by these targets (empathic accuracy, or EA). However, the utility of physiological linkage in facilitating
EA assumes that a target’s autonomic arousal is correlated with their
affective experience (affective coherence), which is not consistently the
case. The current work investigated how affective coherence and physiological linkage affect EA. Targets were videotaped while talking about
emotional autobiographical events, and their skin conductance response
(SCR) was measured concurrently. Targets then watched the videos they
had made and continuously rated the affect they had felt while talking. A
separate group of perceivers watched these videos and made continuous
ratings of the affect they thought targets were feeling; their SCR was concurrently recorded. Timecourse correlations were used to calculate EA
(correlation between target and perceiver affect ratings), physiological
linkage (correlation between target and perceiver arousal), and targets’

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

153

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Poster Session E

emotional coherence (correlation between targets’ arousal and affect ratings). We replicated the finding that physiological linkage predicts EA
only for negatively valenced affect, and further found that a target’s
affective coherence increased perceivers’ EA across valences. For negative emotions, target coherence also predicted physiological linkage, and
its effect on EA was partially mediated through physiological linkage.
These findings suggest that social targets whose reported affect coheres
with their autonomic arousal are more “readable” by perceivers, partially
because they cause perceivers to share their autonomic states.

should also affect the M350. However, our results showed no modulation
of the M350. Window-analyses revealed (1) an early and sustained divergence (200-550ms) of pseudowords from the other conditions, (2) a surprisingly late and brief divergence between nonwords and unprimed
words (450-500ms), and (3) a late and sustained amplitude reduction for
primed when compared to unprimed words (400-600ms). These results
cast doubt on a purely lexical interpretation of the M350, and also suggest
that context plays a functionally similar role across lexical and sentential
processing.

E40
WHAT? DON’T YOU LIKE MY GIFT: USING FMRI TO STUDY
AFFECTIVE-MOTIVATIONAL
INCONGRUENCE
DURING
SOCIAL EXCHANGES Nancy Zucker1,2, James Morris2,3, Steven Green2,
Kevin Pelphrey5, Cynthia Bulik4, Kevin Labar2; 1Duke University Medical
Center, 2Duke University, 3University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 4Yale
University, 5Carnegie Mellon University — Astute
social
perception
requires integration of transitory and often conflicting nonverbal affective and motivational information during social interactions. Prior
research has investigated congruent and incongruent goal-directed
behaviors as prescribed by social context. However, the role of affect
when making inferences from the actions of others warrants further
investigation. We employed fMRI to study affective-motivational incongruence in a controlled, animated environment featuring virtual avatars.
A virtual arm extended from the participants’ field of view to offer a gift
to an avatar. Across trials, the avatar’s facial affect (disgust/happy) was
fully crossed with arm gesture (accepting/rejecting) to create conditions
of: 1) social reward (happy/accepting), 2) social rejection (disgust/rejecting); 3) faux pas (disgust/accepting), and 4) social rebuff (happy/rejecting). Participants were asked to determine the degree to which the avatar
liked a proffered gift. Incongruent facial expression/arm gesture conditions evoked strong activity in the posterior superior temporal sulcus and
anterior cingulate cortex. These regions have been reported to show
strong sensitivity to inconsistencies between expectation and action as
prescribed by social context. Here we show that these inconsistencies
may be introduced via affect during social interaction. Finally, the social
reward condition evoked strong activity in the putamen relative to the
other conditions, suggesting that tokens of social benevolence are capable
of evoking a response in a region often implicated in the processing of
primary rewards. These findings offer promise for the application of this
task to investigate complex, ephemeral affective communication in clinical populations characterized by deficits in reciprocal social interaction.

E42
PHONOLOGICAL FEATURE CONGRUENCY EFFECTS APPEAR
BEFORE THE PHONOLOGICAL MAPPING NEGATIVITY (PMN)
IN VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION: EVIDENCE FROM MASKEDPRIMING Jane Ashby1, Lisa D. Sanders1, John Kingston1; 1University of
Massachusetts, Amherst — Recent evidence indicates that skilled readers
process sub-phonemic feature information in lexical decision tasks. However, it is unclear when this information is activated during lexical access.
Previous experiments indicate phonological congruency effects (PMN)
between 260-320 ms. Two ERP experiments investigated the time course
of the activation of feature information during visual word recognition.
EEG was recorded as adult participants read target words with voiced
and unvoiced final consonants (e.g., fad and fat). A four field maskedpriming paradigm was used to present nonword primes that were incongruent or congruent with targets in terms of voicing and vowel duration
(e.g., fap or faz). Each nonword prime served as an incongruent prime
(e.g., fap) for one target (fad) and served as a congruent prime for another
target (fat). Experiment 1 used a long duration mask (100 ms) between
prime and target, whereas Experiment 2 used a short mask (22 ms). Phonological congruency modulated the amplitude of the first negative peak
(N1) in scalp potentials evoked by targets, with more negative potentials
in the incongruent condition than the congruent condition. The timing of
the N1 peak was delayed in the experiment with longer backward mask,
suggesting that the increased prime-target ISI in Experiment 1 allowed
further processing of the prime than in Experiment 2. Results suggest that
skilled readers use sub-phonemic feature information in the early stages
of visual word recognition.

Linguistic processes: Lexicon
E41
AN MEG STUDY ON SEMANTIC PRIMING Diogo Almeida1, Ellen
Lau1, David Poeppel1; 1University of Maryland, College Park — The
N400
varies as a function of lexical-level variables, such as frequency and
wordlikeness, as well as context-level information, such as semantic fit in
sentences and semantic relatedness in priming tasks. In MEG, lexicallevel attributes modulate a component called M350 (~300-450ms),
whereas sentential context effects are observed around 450ms (Halgren et
al., 2002). This suggests that the MEG signal fractionates in time the individual contributions of lexical and contextual processing. To explore this
hypothesis, we employed the semantic priming paradigm in a lexical
decision task conducted while subjects were undergoing MEG recordings
(n=22), comparing target words that were either semantically primed or
not, and target strings that were either pronounceable/wordlike
(pseudowords) or unpronounceable/unwordlike (nonwords). We predicted that lexicality and pronounceability would modulate the M350.
Moreover, if semantic relatedness in word-pairs acts analogously to
semantic fit in sentences, priming effects should appear around 450ms. If
semantic relatedness also influences lexical-level processes, then priming

154

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

E43
FNIRS BRAIN IMAGING INVESTIGATION OF BILINGUALISM: A
NEW VIEW FROM SIGN-SPEECH BIMODAL BILINGUALS Ioulia
Kovelman2, Katherine White4, Mark Shalinsky3, Shawn Nelson Schmitt5,
Melody Berens1,5, Laura-Ann Petitto1,5; 1University of Toronto Scarborough,
2Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 3Anthinoula A. Martinos Center for
Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
4
University of Rochester, 5Dartmouth College — Does early and systematic
exposure to two languages modify brain tissue that underlies language
capacity? Which brain mechanisms underlie bilinguals' remarkable ability to use two languages without confusion? We employed a unique population and innovative imaging technology to address these questions:
Bimodal bilinguals proficient in sign and spoken languages who can use
both languages simultaneously and functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy neuroimaging (fNIRS; Hitachi ETG-4000), which allows unconstrained speech and sign production. METHODS fNIRS Neuroimaging
(N=32). Groups: (i) hearing ASL-English bilinguals, (ii) Deaf ASL monolinguals, (iii) English monolinguals. Tasks (1) Sign Repetition. (2) Picture
Naming: (2a) in one language - Monolingual context, (2b) in two languages simultaneously – Bilingual context. RESULTS Behavioral. ASL
speakers outperformed English monolinguals on Sign Repetition. Picture
Naming accuracy was equal among groups and conditions. Imaging.
Bilinguals showed lower left parietal activations than ASL monolinguals
during Sign Repetition and lower right parietal activations than English
monolinguals during Picture Naming (2a). Bilinguals in Bilingual context
(2b) showed greater recruitment of posterior temporal regions (BA 21/22,
"Wernike area") than in Monolingual context (2a). SIGNIFICANCE Early
and systematic exposure to two languages in different modalities (sign

Poster Session E

and speech) may modify the way in which bimodal bilinguals recruit
parietal regions to process language thereby rendering a "bilingual brain
signature." Bilinguals' ability to use two languages effortlessly and without confusion may be rooted in posterior temporal regions ("Wernike
area"). Using both fNIRS and bimodal bilinguals shed new light on the
extent and variability of brain tissue that underlies language. FundingPetitto: NIH R21HD05055802, R01HD04582203.
E44
THE TEMPORAL LOCI OF CONSISTENCY EFFECT IN READING
CHINESE PSEUDOCHARACTER: AN ERPS STUDY Wen-Hsuan
Chan1,2, Chia-Ying Lee1, Jie-Li Tsai2; 1The Institute of Linguistics, Academia
Sinica, Taiwan, 2National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan — Previous
study has demonstrated a consistency effect in early (P200) and late ERP
(N400) components and suggested that the phonetic radical is a functional sublexical unit for Chinese lexical processing. The validity of a
phonetic radical in representing the pronunciation of a character affects
lexical processing from the early extraction of orthographic and phonological information to the late lexical competition. The present study
attempts to trace the time course it takes to extract phonology while reading Chinese pseudocharacters by using event-related potentials (ERPs).
Participants were asked to attend to a set of pseudocharacters which
were created by arbitrarily combining a semantic radical and a phonetic
radical. Half of the phonetic radicals were extracted from the consistent
phonograms and the other half were extracted from the inconsistent phonograms. Each pseudocharacter was paired with a spoken syllable which
was either predicable or unpredictable by the constituent phonetic radical of the pseudocharacter. The data showed significant interaction
between consistency and predictability on both P200 and N400. The
pseudocharacters paired with unpredictable pronunciations elicited a
greater P200 and an enhanced N400 than reading pseudocharacters
paired with predictable pronunciations. However, the predictability on
P200 was only found in reading high consistent pseudocharacters and the
N400 effect was only found in reading low consistent pseudocharacters.
These findings suggested that the phonetic radicals played a role in the
pronunciation of pseudocharacters and confirmed that the consistency
effect occurred at both early and late stages of lexical processing.
E45
INVESTIGATING
SIGN
AND
GESTURE
RECOGNITION:
EVIDENCE FROM REPETITION PRIMING IN AMERICAN SIGN
LANGUAGE David Corina1,2, Michael Grosvald1,2, Christian Lachaud1;
1
Center for Mind and Brain, University of California at Davis, 2University of
California at Davis — In our ongoing efforts to develop a theory of sign
language recognition, we have explored how the processing of sign language forms diverges from that of non-linguistic human actions. The
present study uses a novel repetition priming paradigm to investigate
lexical access in American Sign Language and gesture recognition in deaf
signers and hearing non-signers. In this experiment, subjects were presented with short video clips of signs and gestures and were asked to
make a speeded categorization as to whether each stimulus showed a
sign or gesture. Within this self-paced continuous categorization task, we
manipulated sequential co-occurrences of particular image pairs to examine the effects of repetition priming across stimulus class (Signs versus
Gestures) and by viewpoint (Upright, Left or Right side, and Inverted).
We hypothesized that one property which may differentiate language
perception from gesture recognition more generally is the degree to
which sign language recognition may be robust to perceptual changes
that arise from shifts in viewpoint. Preliminary results indicate that, as
expected, deaf subjects were faster and more accurate at making categorizations of signs and gestures than hearing subjects. Surprisingly, effects
of rotation on prime-target pairing were largely similar for signs and gestures across groups; however, a group difference emerged when inverted
sign and gesture targets were preceded by an upright prime. In these
cases, deaf subjects showed little evidence of priming effects, while hear-

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

ing subjects showed robust priming. We explore the implications of these
effects in relation to theories of expertise in visual perceptual processing.
E46
DISSOCIATING CONSTITUENT FREQUENCY EFFECTS IN
COMPOUND
WORDS:
BEHAVIORAL
AND
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE Jon
Andoni
Duñabeitia1,
Marta Vergara1, Itziar Laka2, Manuel Perea3, Manuel Carreiras1; 1University of La
Laguna, 2University of the Basque Country, 3University of Valencia — Wordinto-constituent decomposition of compound words has often been
examined by orthogonally manipulating the frequency of their constituents. Compounds with high frequency second constituents are recognized faster than those with low frequency second constituents.
However, the role of the first constituent remains unclear: facilitative
effects have been found in English and Finnish, while inhibitory effects
have been found in Spanish and Basque. Here we present evidence from
three experiments that consistently show that the frequency of the first
constituent plays an inhibitory role in the whole-word recognition process, whereas the frequency of the second constituent exerts a facilitative
influence. In Experiment 1 Basque and Spanish participants were presented with compound words and completed a go/no-go lexical decision
task on them. In Experiment 2, Spanish participants read sentences with
compound words for comprehension, while their eye movements were
tracked. In Experiment 3, ERPs of Basque participants were recorded
while reading compounds. Results from the behavioral tasks confirmed a
clear dissociation between inhibitory effects of the first constituents and
facilitative effects of the second constituents. Results from the ERP experiment revealed that high frequency first constituents showed less positive
going amplitude in the P200 and more negative going amplitude in the
N400, while high frequency second constituents only showed less negative going amplitude in the N400. Following an activation-verification
framework, we argue that the P200 difference reflects candidate triggering, whereas the N400 difference for the first constituent reflects the
inhibitory effects for selecting the correct candidate (a competition at the
verification stage).
E47
SIGN
LANGUAGE
AND
PANTOMIME
PRODUCTION
DIFFERENTIALLY
ENGAGE
FRONTAL
AND
PARIETAL
CORTICES Karen Emmorey1, Stephen McCullough1,2, Sonya Mehta3,
Laura Ponto3, Thomas Grabowski3; 1San Diego State University, 2The Salk
Institute, 3University of Iowa — We investigated the ramifications for the
neural organization of language production when the primary language
articulators are also used for meaningful, but non-linguistic, expression
such as pantomime. Fourteen hearing non-signers (7 males) and 10 native
Deaf users of American Sign Language (ASL) (6 males) participated in an
H2 15O-PET study in which they generated action pantomimes and/or
ASL verbs in response to pictures of tools and manipulable objects. For
pantomime generation, participants were instructed to “show how you
would use the object.” For verb generation, signers were asked to “generate a verb related to the object.” The objects for this condition were
selected to elicit handling verbs that resemble pantomime, e.g. TYPE (fingers move as if typing) for typewriter. For the baseline task, subjects
viewed pictures of manipulable objects and an occasional non-manipulable object and decided whether the objects could be handled, gesturing
“yes” (thumbs up) or “no” (hand wave). Relative to baseline, generation
of ASL verbs engaged the left inferior frontal gyrus, but when non-signers produced pantomimes for the same objects, no frontal activation was
observed. Both groups recruited left parietal cortex during pantomime
production; however, the activation for Deaf signers was more extensive
and bilateral. We hypothesize that this difference is due to more complex
pantomimes and to larger and more integrated neural representations for
hand actions for Deaf signers. We conclude that the production of pantomime versus ASL verbs (even those that resemble pantomime) engage
partially segregated neural systems that support praxic versus linguistic
functions.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

155

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

E48
MECHANISMS OF SOCIAL AND DISTRIBUTIONAL WORD
LEARNING Michael C. Frank1, Rebecca Saxe1; 1Massachusetts Institute of
Technology — Even early in the process of learning object names, children
rely on two qualitatively different information sources. The first is their
inferences about the speaker’s intended referents (as conveyed by social
cues like pointing and eye-gaze, c.f. Bloom, 2002). The second is the crosssituational statistics of which words co-occur with which objects (Yu &
Smith, 2007). Recent computational work suggests that combining these
two information sources in a single model via mechanisms of probabilistic inference allows for the explanation of many experimental results in
early word learning (Frank, Goodman, & Tenenbaum, 2007). In the current project, we used an artificial language paradigm to test whether
adult participants could learn words from each of these information
sources independently. A cartoon face presented a pair of objects accompanied by a single word (referring to one of the objects). Across trials,
participants either saw multiple distractor objects along with a wordobject pairing, disambiguating the referent of the word via distributional
information, or an eye-movement to the target object, disambiguating the
referent via social information. We found that social disambiguation was
very useful for adult participants: they were able to learn word-object
pairings as well from two socially-cued presentations as they were from
six ambiguous presentations. An fMRI study currently in progress tests
whether the process of learning using these separate information sources
are subserved by separate neural mechanisms and whether regions
involved in the perception of social stimuli (e.g., Pelphrey et al. 2003) are
also involved specifically in social word learning.
E49
AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY OF THE EFFECTS OF
PHONOLOGY AND ORTHOGRAPHY ON PSEUDOWORD
PROCESSING Beth Friedman1, Joyce Tam1, Maya Misra1; 1The
Pennsylvania State University, University Park — Previous
event-related
potential (ERP) studies have shown that pseudohomophones
(pseudowords that sound like real words) are processed more like real
words than are non-homophonic pseudowords. These effects are
observed even when care is taken to ensure that the two types of
pseudowords are closely orthographically matched. However, the question still remains of the extent to which orthographic and phonological
features of these items may interact. In the present study, ERP correlates
of pseudoword phonology and orthography were further investigated.
Participants read real words, pseudohomophones, and non-homophonic
pseudowords while 32 channels of ERPs were recorded. A semantic monitoring task was used to encourage naturalistic reading rather than directing attention to orthographic and/or phonological features of these
items. The pseudowords were carefully designed to be either orthographic neighbors of the real word basewords they were derived from
(e.g., pseudohomophone “skar” or non-homophonic pseudoword
“smar” for baseword “scar”) or orthographically distinct from their basewords (e.g., “stupe” or “stape” for “stoop”). Results suggest that the two
levels of orthographic similarity impacted pseudohomophones and nonhomophonic pseudowords in different ways, with N400 amplitudes
being larger for orthographically distinct pseudohomophones than for
pseudohomophones which were neighbors of their basewords, while the
opposite pattern was observed for non-homophonic pseudowords.
Effects of item type began as early as the P200 component and continued
throughout the recording epoch. Implications for the interactions
between orthography and phonology during skilled reading will be discussed.
E50
UNDERSPECIFICATION
IN
NEURONAL
WORD
FORM
ACTIVATION Claudia K. Friedrich1, Ulrike Schild1, Brigitte Röder1;
1Biological Psychology and Neuropsychology/University of Hamburg — The
featurally underspecified lexicon (FUL-model) proposed by Lahiri and
Reetz (2002) assumes that not all features contained in the speech signal

156

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

are specified in the listener’s mental lexicon. For example, the coronal
value of the place of articulation feature (PLACE) is not stored in the lexicon, whereas other values of PLACE are specified. We recorded eventrelated potentials (ERPs) in a unimodal auditory word fragment priming
paradigm to test whether a neuronal correlate of word form activation,
namely the P350 deflection (Friedrich, 2005, BMC Neuroscience), reflects
underspecification. Spoken fragments preceded spoken target words that
either began with a coronal PLACE (e.g., Drache [engl. dragon]) or with a
non-coronal PLACE (e.g., Münze [engl.coin]). In an Identical condition,
the target matched the fragment (e.g., dra-Drache, mün-Münze); in a
Control condition, fragment and target were completely unrelated (pulDrache, trep-Münze). Crucially, in a Variation condition fragment and
target only varied in the initial PLACE: Fragments preceding coronal targets began with a non-coronal PLACE (e.g., gra-Drache); fragments preceding non-coronal targets began with a coronal PLACE (e.g., nünMünze). The ERP results support the FUL model’s assumption of asymmetric effects in the Variation condition: Coronal targets elicited similar
P350 amplitudes in the Variation and in the Identity condition; non-coronal targets elicited comparably P350 amplitudes in the Variation and in
the Control condition. That is, coronal word forms can be activated by
PLACE variation, because no PLACE value is specified in the lexicon. By
contrast, non-coronal word forms have a PLACE value specified, and,
therefore, cannot be activated by PLACE variation.
E51
EFFECT OF LANGUAGE TASK DEMANDS ON NEURONAL
RESPONSE DURING VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION: A
FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (FMRI)
PRIMING-STUDY Gabriela Gan1,3, Christian Buechel2, Frederic Isel1,2;
1
Research Centre on Multilingualism, University of Hamburg, Germany,
2University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,
3Heinrich-Heine University, Duesseldorf, Germany — We investigated to
what extent language task demands shape the neuronal networks, which
are assumed to support the processes involved during visual word recognition. We approached this issue by varying systematically the language
task in two fMRI priming experiments. Native speakers of German saw
two consecutive German words [repetition priming: koffer (suitcase) KOFFER; associative priming: koffer - REISE (journey)]. In experiment 1,
sixteen participants performed a semantic categorization task (natural vs.
manmade) on the target words. In Experiment 2, sixteen other participants were presented with the same word pairs but they had to think
silently of the meaning of each target (pure semantic task). We predict
that whereas semantic categorization should allow us to tap automatic
semantic processes, pure semantic task should lead to study more controlled semantic processes. Behavioral data of experiment 1 indicate a significant 45-ms repetition priming effect. The fMRI data of experiment 1
reveal a repetition suppression (RS) effect in the posterior part of the left
visual ventral stream (L VVS; middle occipital gyrus) and a repetition
enhancement (RE) effect in the anterior part of the L VVS (i.e. inferior
temporal gyrus). In experiment 2, a RE was found in a left fronto-temporo-parietal network, as well as in a right temporo-parietal network. For
associative priming, we observe associative suppression effects. While
semantic categorization activated a fronto-temporal network, pure
semantic task involved an occipital region and a temporo-parietal network. Taken together, the present results suggest involvement of different neuronal networks depending on the language task demands.
E52
AN EVENT RELATED POTENTIAL ANALYSIS OF NOVEL
DENOMINAL VERB INTERPRETATION Micah Goldwater1, David
Schnyer1, Arthur Markman1, Victoria Williams1, Caitlin Tenison1, Natalie
Dailey1; 1University of Texas at Austin — Linguistic and conceptual abilities are crucially involved in comprehension of novel uses of words. We
used Event Related Potentials (ERP) to investigate the novel uses of
nouns as verbs, i.e. novel denominal verbs. Participants read a total of 160
passages, 26 that contained a sentence with a novel denominal verb, e.g.

Poster Session E

“He hairpinned the lock open” and 26 that contained a paraphrase “He
used a hairpin to jiggle the lock open”. The critical sentences were presented one word at a time in the center of the screen so that ERP
responses could be recorded to the critical use of the denominal verb.
After the completion of each critical sentence participants were asked to
judge the sensicality of the sentence; approximately 15 % of sentences
were non-sensical. ERP’s were examined for 3 conditions: 1) The novel
verb, e.g. “hairpinned,” 2) The root noun of the novel verb, e.g. “hairpin”
and 3) The verb from the paraphrase, e.g. “jiggle.” Preliminary results
have indicated that, relative to conditions 2 and 3, the novel verb elicited
an increased negative potential in the range of 300-500 msec. consistent
with the location of the N400 amplitude, which has been demonstrated to
reflect ease of semantic processing. The novel verb also elicited a more
positive wave from 500-700 ms post stimulus onset, consistent with the
P600, which has been shown to be sensitive to detection of a syntactic
anomaly. This pattern suggests that both semantic and syntactic processes are involved in novel word interpretation.
E53
MOTOR INVOLVEMENT DURING PERCEPTION OF HUMAN
ACTIONS: EVIDENCE FROM AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE
Michael Grosvald1,2, Christian Lachaud1, David Corina1,2; 1Center for Mind
and Brain, University of California at Davis, 2University of California at
Davis — There is now growing evidence for motor system involvement
during the perception of human actions. To investigate the relevance of
this phenomenon for linguistic processing, we compared hearing individuals and deaf signers as they performed a handshape monitoring task.
Each subject saw a series of 180 brief video clips, each of which showed
either an American Sign Language (ASL) sign or a phonologically possible but non-lexical "non-sign." Subjects were asked to configure their
dominant hand in a particular handshape, and then to respond as quickly
as possible with their non-dominant hand when a video clip displayed an
action (sign or non-sign) formed with a particular handshape. The monitored-for handshape and the handshape held by the subject were sometimes the same ("consistent") and sometimes different ("inconsistent").
We explore the effect of consistency on this task and discuss its implications. Our findings show evidence of consistency effects that were modulated by group variables and temporal progression of the task. These
effects suggest that age of language acquisition may impact the degree of
motor interference on language processing.
E54
ERP INDICES OF ORTHOGRAPHIC AND PHONOLOGICAL
CONTRIBUTIONS IN BACKWARD MASKING Laura Halderman1,
Charles Perfetti1; 1University of Pittsburgh — Backward masking has been
useful for teasing apart the pre-lexical contributions of orthography and
phonology in behavioral research. In this experiment, EEG was recorded
from 128 electrodes while participants completed a backward masking
task in order to further investigate the time course of these processes. In
this task, participants saw a pattern mask (e.g. XXXX) immediately followed by a target word (e.g. crew). The target word was backward
masked by a nonword that was orthographically and phonologically similar (e.g. CRUE; O+P+), orthographically similar but phonologically dissimilar (e.g. CRAE; O+P-), orthographically dissimilar but phonologically
similar (e.g. KROO; O-P+) or unrelated (e.g. FAMS; O-P-). The nonword
was backward masked by another pattern mask (e.g. XXXX). Each component of the trial was presented for 67 ms with a 0 ms ISI. Participants
recognized the target word in a two-alternative forced choice task. Targets and distractors differed by only one letter (e.g. crew, brew). The EEG
record indicated a significant effect at 460 ms after the onset of the nonword. At this time point, the O-P+ and O-P- conditions were not statistically different and were more negative than the O+P+ and O+Pconditions which were also not statistically different. We interpret this
effect as a marker of the ease of recovery from the nonword mask which
interrupts processing of the target word. Within this time frame, orthog-

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

raphy, but not phonology allows for easier integration of the target and
nonword mask.
E55
DO YOU RESTORE WHAT YOU THINK YOU RESTORE? Ronny
Hannemann1, Carsten Eulitz1; 1University of Konstanz — Phonemic restoration, which means perceiving complete words despite missing segmental
information, is an intriguing phenomenon in speech perception and was
mostly examined behaviourally. The present EEG study was designed to
overcome possible caveats by attentional or decision-making processes
by directly assessing the pre-attentive mechanisms of speech perception
by means of induced gamma band responses (GBR). Subjects listened to
small blocks of German nouns being a minimal pair and a derived stimulus where the onset of the contrastive second syllable (noise-superimposed) was noise-replaced. Assuming underspecification of certain
phonological features, one of the critical consonants was not specified for
place of articulation in the mental lexicon. Behavioural pre-tests suggested that noise-replaced stimuli behave like the noise-superimposed
nouns with the underspecified place of articulation. Pivotal to this study
were the brain responses to the noise-replaced stimuli which were preceded by either a noise-superimposed stimulus containing a specified or
underspecified place of articulation compared to the corresponding
noise-replaced stimuli with identical precursors. The modulation in
induced GBR indicating the phonemic restoration of missing segmental
information was dependent on the phonemic information in the preceding stimulus category. The GBR was larger when the place of articulation
was specified compared to the underspecified condition. Contrary to the
behavioural results, our finding suggests that restoration of phonological
place features is pre-attentively based on predictions derived from the
preceding stimulus category. Thus, assessing phonemic restoration at the
pre-attentive level can shed light on the top-down influences on speech
perception which goes beyond the findings gained behaviourally.
E56
EVENT-RELATED REGRESSION ANALYSIS OF THE EEG
REVEALS EARLY DIFFERENCES IN WORD AND PSEUDOWORD
PROCESSING Olaf Hauk1, Matthew H. Davis1, Michael Ford1, William D.
Marslen-Wilson1, Friedemann Pulvermuller1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain
Sciences Unit, Cambridge — Results are presented from a multiple linear
regression analysis of event-related electrophysiological responses to
words and pseudowords in a visual lexical decision task. This analysis
yields event-related regression coefficients (ERRCs) instead of the traditional event-related potential (ERP) measure, avoiding the need to select
a restricted or unrepresentative stimulus sets. In this study we attempted
to disentangle the earliest effects of word length and neighbourhood size
(N) on the brain response. Data were taken from our previous study
using similar methodology, which did not include pseudoword data into
the regression analysis (Hauk et al, Neuroimage 2006, 30(4), 1383-1400).
Our results demonstrate that N and word length have distinct neurophysiological manifestations around 100 ms after written word onset.
The effect of N differed in topography between word and pseudoword
processing. Source distributions obtained using minimum norm estimation for N were left-lateralised, with the most dominant activation peak
located more anteriorly in the left temporal lobe for words compared to
pseudowords. The earliest effects of word length were localised to bilateral posterior brain areas consistent with early visual processing of written words. However, these length effects did not differ between words
and pseudowords. We discuss the implications of these results for the
time course of word recognition processes, and emphasise the value of
ERRCs in combination with source analysis in psycholinguistic and cognitive brain research.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

157

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

E57
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF REPETITION AND
TRANSLATION PRIMING IN DIFFERENT SCRIPT BILINGUALS
Noriko Hoshino1, Katherine Midgley1,2, Phillip Holcomb1, Jonathan Grainger2;
1Tufts University, 2CNRS, Université de Provence — Past research on bilingual word recognition has shown that there is resonance among the lexical codes across two languages even when only one language is required.
The present study examined the time course of reading words with same
and different scripts in the first language (L1) and in the second language
(L2) using a masked priming paradigm with event-related potentials
(ERP). In the present study, Japanese-English bilinguals whose two languages differ in script read Japanese and English words in separate
blocks. Target words were preceded by a related (the same word) or
unrelated prime in the same or different language. Similar to previous
behavioral studies on masked translation priming, Japanese-English
bilinguals showed within-language repetition priming in both languages
but cross-language repetition priming in the L1-L2 direction only. The
N250 (sensitive to orthographic processing) was observed only for
within-language priming in different script bilinguals, whereas the N400
(sensitive to semantic processing) was obtained for both within- and
cross-language priming. Furthermore, the N250 was delayed both in L1
and in L2, whereas the N400 wasn’t. These results suggest that script differences delay orthographic processing but not semantic processing.
Implications for models of bilingual word recognition will be discussed.
E58
TWO DISCRETE PROCESSING STRATEGIES FOR ACCESSING
WORDS IN A SECOND LANGUAGE DEPENDING ON THE AGE
OF ONSET OF ACQUISITION: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION.
Frederic Isel1,2, Jürgen Meisel1, Christian Büchel2; 1Research Centre on
Multilingualism, University of Hamburg, Germany, 2University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany — The
present
study
investigates whether the visual processing of concrete nouns in first- (L1)
and second (L2)-language involves overlapping neuronal networks in the
bilingual brain. We examined to what extent the age of onset of acquisition (AOA) of L2 has an effect on (1) the magnitude of overlap between
the neuronal networks, and (2) the L2 word recognition strategy. The
functional magnetic resonance adaptation paradigm was used in simultaneous (acquisition of both languages before the age of three-years) and in
successive (acquisition of L2 after the age of ten-years) French-German
bilingual speakers. Words were repeated across language [e.g.
valise(suitcase)-Koffer(suitcase)] and participants performed a semantic
categorisation task (natural/artificial) on the second word of the pairs,
i.e. the target [e.g. Koffer]. Critically, if French and German word processing involves neuronal networks that largely overlap, then a repetitionrelated effect should be observed on the target words. Whereas simultaneous bilinguals showed a repetition enhancement (RE) effect in the left
superior temporal gyrus (lexical processing), successive bilinguals
showed a RE effect in the left anterior insula (phonological processing)
and in the left middle frontal gyrus (language switching). Our data suggest that both the extent of the overlap between the neuronal networks
assumed to support words in L1 and L2 and the L2 word recognition
strategies might depend on the AOA. Taken together, the present results
lend support to dual route models of reading words that postulate two
different routes for accessing a mental lexicon: a direct lexical route and a
phonologically mediated route.
E59
DISSOCIATION OF STEM AND AFFIX SELECTION PROCESSES
IN POLISH FLUENT AND NON-FLUENT APHASIA Aleksandra
Jelowicka1,3, Thomas Bak2, Joanna Seniow3, William Marslen-Wilson1; 1MRC
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK, 2University of Edinburgh,
UK, 3Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland — Word
production in morphologically rich languages such as Polish requires accessing both the stem of a word and appropriate inflectional affixes. Several
lines of research suggest that stem access primarily involves posterior

158

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

temporal cortex (possibly bilaterally), while inflectional processes implicate a strongly left-lateralised fronto-temporal circuit. This predicts different patterns of impairment of word production in individuals with
aphasia caused by LH damage that varies in its anterior/posterior distribution. Ten non-fluent and eight fluent aphasic Polish speakers diagnosed on the basis of neuropsychological tests and neurological
assessment were tested using a verb elicitation task. Subjects heard a sentence, e.g. ‘Oni wczoraj pisali, a teraz ty…’ [Yesterday they wrote and
now you…] and were asked to complete it with the correct form of the
same verb (here ‘piszesz’ [write]). This required the choice of the correct
stem (alternated or not) and of the appropriate person/number/tense
inflection. Stem and inflectional complexity varied across conditions. The
two groups of patients exhibited contrasting impairments. Non-fluent
subjects, with more left frontal damage, had difficulty changing the stem
to an alternated form and frequently made contextually inappropriate
inflectional errors. The more posterior (left temporal) fluent aphasics
showed a general impairment in verb stem retrieval but made very few
errors of inflectional choice. These results are consistent with cross-linguistic evidence for the separability of stem-based and inflection-based
neural systems, and with behavioral evidence for differential effects of
stem and inflectional complexity in speeded production studies with
young normal Polish speakers.
E60
THE SHAPE OF WORDS IN THE BRAIN Vanja
Kovic1,
Kim
1
1
1
Plunkett , Gert Westermann ;
Oxford University, Oxford Brookes
University — The principle of arbitrariness in language assumes that
there is no intrinsic relationship between linguistic signs and their referents. For instance, the label ‘dog’ has no intrinsic relationship with the
animal to which it refers. However, a growing body of sound-symbolism
research suggests the existence of some naturally-biased mappings
between phonological properties of labels and perceptual properties of
their referents (Köhler, 1929/1947; Wertheimer, 1958; Holland & Wertheimer, 1964, Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2001; Maurer, Pathman, & Mondloch, 2006). Nevertheless, the sound-symbolic choices that participants
make in these experiments may not reflect the processes that are involved
in natural language interpretation. The aim of our study was to investigate whether sound-symbolic preferences could be demonstrated in a
complex categorisation task (Medin & Schafer, 1978; Rehder & Hofmann,
2005) in which the sound-symbolic relationships were incidental to task
performance and where participants were unlikely to be aware of such
contingencies during the study. The behavioural results showed that participants were faster to identify novel objects when label-object mappings
are sound-symbolic than when they are not. Moreover, early negative
EEG-waveforms indicated a sensitivity to sound-symbolic label-object
associations (within 200ms of object presentation) highlighting the nonarbitrary relation between the objects and the labels used to name them.
This sensitivity to sound-symbolic label-object associations may reflect a
more general process of auditory-visual feature integration where properties of auditory stimuli facilitate a mapping to specific visual features.
E61
A WITHIN-SUBJECTS COMPARISON OF WORD- AND
SENTENCE-LEVEL MEG RESPONSES Ellen Lau1, Diogo Almeida1,
Paul Hines1, David Poeppel1; 1University of Maryland, College Park — The
ERP response to words shows a negative deflection around 300-500 ms
(N400). Variation in N400 amplitude has typically been demonstrated
through sentential-context and word-priming manipulations: Higher
amplitudes are observed for incongruous sentence completions (relative
to congruous), and for unrelated word pairs (relative to related). This
amplitude difference has been observed to be greater in sentential contexts than in word pairs (Kutas, 1993), but a direct comparison across elicitation conditions has not been performed using MEG, where
topographical differences across these two manipulations could be better
explored. In our experiment both a sentential-context and a word-pair
manipulation were carried out in the same MEG session for each partici-

Poster Session E

pant. Our results are consistent with those observed in the ERP literature.
Preliminary analysis (n=17) reveals a clear sentential effect in RMS amplitude at 300-500 ms, in the left hemisphere only. The word-pair conditions
showed a trend towards a reduction in amplitude for the related pair.
However, there was no correlation within individuals between the size of
the amplitude reduction for sentences and for words. Further analyses
explore differences in topography between words and sentences within
individuals. Interestingly, a side-by-side comparison of word and sentence conditions showed a reduction in amplitude in the congruous sentential context compared to all other conditions, supporting a model in
which the sentential-context effect in MEG actually results from a relative
facilitation in congruous cases, rather than an increase in difficulty in
anomalous cases as the N400 ERP effect has often been framed.
E62
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES
OF
MASKED
MORPHOLOGICAL PRIMING Minna Lehtonen1, Philip J. Monahan1,
David Poeppel1; 1University of Maryland, College Park — Masked priming
has been used to study the representation and processing of morphologically complex words. We aim to combine this psycholinguistic tool with
an electrophysiological measure magnetoencephalography (MEG) particularly adept at indexing processes involved in lexical access (Pylkkänen
& Marantz 2003). Morphologically transparent (cleaner–CLEAN) and
opaque (corner–CORN) prime/target pairs show facilitation under
masked priming conditions. Prime/target pairs with only an orthographic relationship (brothel–BROTH) do not show similar priming (Rastle, et al. 2004). This suggests early, obligatory morphological
decomposition, opposing models that claim no role for structure in lexical representations. The neural correlates, however, are controversial.
Monahan et al. (ms.) used masked identity priming in MEG and found
earlier latencies for repeated (VIDEO–video) than unrepeated words in a
component peaking around 230ms. We investigate the neuromagnetic
correlates of masked morphological priming. Visual lexical decision with
simultaneous MEG recording was performed (n=11). Target words were
preceded by primes (duration=39ms) that were either morphologically
(transparent or opaque) or orthographically related to the target, or unrelated. Transparent (p<.001) and opaque (p=.007) morphological conditions elicited behavioral facilitation, while the orthographic overlap
condition did not (p=.289). The MEG results showed that the latency of a
component peaking roughly 220 ms post-onset of the target was sensitive
to morphological (transparent, p=.012; opaque, p=.059) but not to solely
orthographic (p=.717) relations. Thus, the timing of a robust MEG component is sensitive to the morphological relatedness of prime/target
pairs and can be used to further understand the neural substrates and the
timeline of lexical processing.
E63
MODALITY- AND TASK-SPECIFIC BRAIN REGIONS INVOLVED
IN CHINESE LEXICAL PROCESSING LI LIU1,2, Xiaoxiang Deng1,
Danling Peng1, Fan Cao2, Guosheng Ding1, Zhen Jin3, Yawei Zeng3, Ke Li3, Lei
Zhu3, Ning Fan1, Yuan Deng4, James Booth2,5; 1State Key Laboratory of
Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, PR
China, 2Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 3MRI Center, 306 Hospital of
Beijing, PR China, 4Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, PR China, 5Evanston Northwestern Healthcare, Evanston, IL — Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was used to examine lexical
processing in native adult Chinese speakers. A 2 task (semantics, phonology) ×2 modality (visual, auditory) within subject design was adopted.
The semantic task involved a meaning association judgment and the phonological task involved a rhyming judgment, to two sequentially presented words. The overall effect across tasks and modalities was used to
identify 6 regions of interest, including left fusiform gyrus (FG), left superior temporal gyrus (STG), left ventral inferior frontal gyrus (VIFG), left
dorsal inferior frontal gyrus (DIFG), left inferior parietal lobule (IPL) and
left middle frontal area (MFG). ROI analyses revealed two modality-specific areas: FG for visual and STG for auditory; three modality-indepen-

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

dent but task-specific areas: IPL and DIFG for phonology, and VIFG for
semantics. The modality and task effects in Chinese revealed by this
study are similar to those found in alphabetical languages. Brain-behavior analysis showed greater DIFG activation was correlated with higher
error rates for the visual rhyming task suggesting that lower accuracy
was associated with inappropriate reliance on the phonetic radical. In
addition, we found that MFG was both modality- and task-specific suggesting that MFG may be responsible for the visuo-spatial analysis of
Chinese characters and the orthography-to-phonology integration at a
syllablic level, demanded by the logographic and monosyllabic nature of
written Chinese.
E64
THE EFFECTS OF AGE-OF-ACQUISITION AND FREQUENCY ON
CHINESE WORD PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FROM BEHAVIORAL
AND EVENT-RELATED FMRI STUDIES Youyi Liu1, Hua Shu1,
Brendan Weekes2; 1State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience & Learning,
Beijing Normal University, Beijing, PR China, 2University of Sussex — Frequency effects on behavioral responses and brain activation during Chinese word recognition were widely reported previously, but the age at
which a word is acquired i.e. age-of-acquisition (AoA), which correlates
highly with frequency, was not controlled. Recently, AoA was found to
have effects on both behavioral indexes and brain activation in English
and German, whereas the frequency effects were relatively weak. Zevin
& Seidenberg (2002) suggested that there may be a lasting advantage for
early learned words in Chinese because of the more arbitrary nature of
the mapping. Our aim here was to examine the relationship between
AoA and frequency in Chinese during word processing and to test
whether effects of AoA in alphabetic scripts can be generalized to Chinese. Behaviorally, both factorial manipulation and large-scaled multiple
regression methods found the main effects of AoA and frequency, and
also the interaction between AoA and frequency on the response time in
word naming and lexical decision tasks when other variables were controlled. The results from event-related fMRI showed that early-acquired
words generate more activity than late-acquired words in the left precuneus, whereas late-acquired words generate more activity than earlyacquired words in left mid-inferior frontal cortex, medial frontal gyrus,
fusiform gyrus and right middle occipital gyrus. These effects were
largely though not completely independent of frequency effects that were
widespread throughout the cortex. We argue that although AoA effects
may vary across script, common areas of modulation across languages
suggest these effects are real.
E65
DEVELOPMENTAL STABILITY AND CHANGES IN THE NEURAL
SUBSTRATE FOR LEXICAL PROCESSING: A LONGITUDINAL
FMRI STUDY Dong Lu1, Douglas Burman1, Donald Bolger1, James
Booth1,2; 1Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 2Evanston Northwestern
Healthcare, Evanston, IL — Previous cross-sectional neuroimaging studies
on lexical processing cannot provide information about brain stability
within individuals over development and may also be limited in demonstrating developmental changes because of differences between individuals. In the current study, children were asked to make rhyming
judgments to two visually presented words during functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). One cohort was examined at 9 and 11 years
old and another at 13 and 15 years old. Across age groups and time
points, peaks of brain activations were found in left inferior frontal gyrus
(IFG, BA 47 and BA 9), left fusiform gyrus (FG, BA 19 and BA 37), right
fusiform gyrus (BA 37), left superior temporal gyrus (STG, BA 22), and
left inferior parietal lobule (BA 40). Regions of interest (ROIs) were
defined as cubes centering on group peaks and beta values were
extracted from individuals. Significant correlations between Time 1 and
Time 2 beta values were found in left FG (BA 19 and BA 37), left IFG (BA
47) and left STG (BA 22), suggesting that areas involved in orthographic
and phonological processing have high stability over development. In
support of this stability, activated clusters around these peaks also had

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

159

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

high overlap between Time 1 and Time 2. Interestingly, a 2 Cohort x 2
Time analysis of variance (ANOVA) on beta values for each peak
revealed significant interactions between Cohort and Time for left STG
and left FG (BA 37). Thus, brain areas demonstrating high stability also
demonstrated large developmental changes during lexical processing.
E66
THE REPRESENTATION OF VOWELS AND CONSONANTS IN
EARLY WORDS: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY
Nivedita Mani1, Kim Plunkett1; 1University of Oxford — Using behavioural
tasks such as the inter-modal preferential looking task, previous research
has found that infants look longer at a familiar target object when the
label is correctly pronounced than when the label is mispronounced by
either a single consonant or a single vowel (Swingley & Aslin, 2000; 2002;
Mani & Plunkett, 2007a, b). This suggests that infants’ lexical representations contain adequate phonological specification of the consonants of
familiar words. The current study examines whether Event-Related
Potential studies (ERPs) lead to the same conclusions regarding infants’
sensitivity to mispronunciations of familiar words. Furthermore, the
experiments separately test 14- to 18-month-old infants’ sensitivity to
mispronunciations of the vowels and consonants in familiar words, in
order to test a perspective supported by some previous research that the
role of consonants and vowels differs in speech recognition (Nazzi, 2005).
In contrast to a previous study (Mills et al., 2004) where labels were presented in the absence of visual stimuli, in the current experiment, infants
were presented with an image of a familiar object, followed by a label for
the image. The label was either correctly pronounced, mispronounced
(by the word-initial consonant in Experiment 1 and the word-initial
vowel in Experiment 2) or a nonsense word unrelated to the label for the
image. A systematic difference in ERPs to the different conditions suggest
that infants are sensitive to word mispronunciations in the presence of
pictorial context and raise further questions regarding the roles of vowels
and consonants in early lexical representations.
E67
STATISTICAL AND COMPUTATIONAL INVESTIGATIONS OF
THE TIME COURSE OF SPOKEN WORD RECOGNITION IN
APHASIA Daniel Mirman1,2, Eiling Yee3, James Magnuson1,2, Sheila
Blumstein4; 1University of Connecticut, 2Haskins Laboratories, 3University of
Pennsylvania, 4Brown University — The time course of spoken word activation and the effects of lexical competition on word recognition processes are critical to understanding the dynamics of spoken language
processing in non-impaired and aphasic individuals. A recent visual
world paradigm eye-tracking study examined cohort (beaker-beetle) and
rhyme (beaker-speaker) competition in Broca’s and Wernicke’s aphasic
patients, and age-matched control participants (Yee et al., in press). We
applied a combined statistical (growth curve analysis) and computational
modeling approach to examine the time course of lexical activation and
competition at a finer grain and possible bases for differences between
aphasic and control groups. Statistical modeling revealed that both
Broca’s and Wernicke’s aphasics were slower to activate target lexical
representations, and that the two patient groups contrasted in that Wernicke’s aphasics had greater and longer-lasting cohort activation and
Broca’s aphasics had greater rhyme activation. These results suggest differences in the dynamics of lexical activation for the two aphasic groups.
We used the TRACE model of speech perception (McClelland & Elman,
1986) to examine what kind of changes in processing dynamics could
lead to these patterns. Preliminary results suggest that increased decay
(possibly reflecting degraded phonological memory function) and
increased processing noise produce a pattern of results consistent with
Broca’s aphasia, and reduced inhibition between lexical nodes (possibly
reflecting failure to inhibit competitors) produces a pattern of results consistent with Wernicke’s aphasia. We discuss the effects of manipulating
other parameters and how our results provide empirical and computational constraints of theories of spoken language processing impairments
in aphasia.

160

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

E68
CLOZE PROBABILITY DOES NOT ALWAYS AFFECT N400
AMPLITUDE: THE CASE OF COMPLEX PREPOSITIONS Nicola
Molinaro1, Francesco Vespignani1, Paolo Canal2, Cristina Cacciari2; 1DiSCoF,
Università degli studi di Trento, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche,
Università degli studi di Modena e Reggio Emilia — Complex prepositions
(CP) are multi-word bound strings (P1NP2, e.g., “with respect to”) in
which the final constituent is rather predictable without manipulation of
semantic or pragmatic constraints. It is well known that N400 inversely
correlates with cloze probability. When closed class words are unexpected in semantically constrained sentences, they elicit modulations of
the N400 amplitude (DeLong et al., 2005). We compared the ERPs elicited
by the third constituent of a CP with those elicited by another preposition
collocationally unexpected. Both were inserted in Italian well-formed
sentences. The third constituent of the standard CP elicited the two leftlateralized components usually associated with the parsing of closed
class words: the N280 and the N400-700, a frontal slow wave. These two
components typically emerge when closed and open class words are
compared (Kutas et al., 2006). When the final preposition of the CP was
changed, no N400 emerged despite the large cloze-probability difference
between the changed and unchanged CP. In contrast, only the N280
emerged, while the N400-700 was suppressed. The paradigm we used in
which we compared two closed-class words allowed us to functionally
dissociate the two components. Our results show that the N400-700, differently from the N280, is not a mandatory brain response to closed-class
words. The N400-700 found for the standard CP can be related to a preparatory slow wave activity. This finding claims against the uniqueness of
anticipatory mechanisms during language comprehension.
E69
ORTHOGRAPHIC
AND
ASSOCIATIVE
NEIGHBORHOOD
DENSITY EFFECTS: WHAT IS SHARED, WHAT IS DIFFERENT?
Oliver Müller1, Jon Andoni Duñabeitia1, Manuel Carreiras1; 1University of La
Laguna — Words with a high number of orthographic neighbors elicit a
larger N400 than words with a low number of orthographic neighbors.
Holcomb, Grainger, and O'Rourke (2002) interpreted this in terms of an
increasing overall semantic activation: Not only is the semantic representation of the presented word activated, but also the semantic representations of its orthographic neighbors. To test this semantic explanation of
orthographic density effects on ERPs, we conducted an experiment
manipulating orthographic as well as associative neighborhood density.
Similar to the results of the orthographic neighborhood study, we
expected that words with a high number of associates would elicit a
larger N400 than words with a low number of associates, as this characteristic can be assumed to directly influence overall semantic activation.
The results showed that at frontal sites words with dense orthographic or
associative neighborhoods produced a more negative amplitude than
words with sparse orthographic or associative neighborhoods in the
N400 window. In addition, words with dense orthographic neighborhoods elicited an increased N400 at more posterior sites, whereas words
with dense associative neighborhoods did not. We suggest that the common frontal ERP effect reflects increased overall semantic activation, a
factor shared by the two neighborhood groups. We further argue that the
additional posterior effect for orthographic neighborhood density derives
from lexical competition between formally similar stimuli, since this process did not occur for neighbors by association, lacking orthographic
overlap. In addition, this study is the first to report an ERP effect of the
semantic variable number of associates.
E70
THE DORSAL AND VENTRAL PATHWAYS WERE MODULATED
BY THE SPATIAL DEVIATION IN CONFIGURATION OF
CHINESE CHARACTERS Dan-ling Peng1, Yan-lin Luo1,2, Guo-sheng
Ding1, Yan-hui Yang3, Wen-ping You1; 1State Key Lab of Cognitive
Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China, 2Lab of

Poster Session E

Higher Function of Brain, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China, 3MRI
Center of Xuan Wu Hospital, Beijing, China — Previous studies have conformed that the ventral pathway was responsible for word form recognition. Recently, several researchers found that the dorsal pathway was
also involved in the word processing with unfamiliar configuration such
as mixed-case words or shifted words. However, more investigation
needs to be done to reveal the role of the dorsal pathway in word form
processing across different languages and methods. The present study
aims to use fMRI to explore the function of the dorsal and ventral pathways in the processing of both normal Chinese characters and shifted
ones (with radicals shifted). Twelve healthy undergraduate students participated in this study. 120 Chinese characters were divided into 3
groups, one of which were characters in normal forms, the other two
were shifted characters with one of their radicals shifted 1/3 or 2/3 from
its original position respectively. Activation was observed in bilateral
fusiform gyri, the left precuneus gyrus and the right lingual gyrus in both
shifted characters and normal characters, yet more activation was found
in the processing of shifted characters compared to that of normal characters. As the degree of spatial-shift increased, the activation of the left precuneus gyrus and the right lingual gyrus became stronger accordingly. In
conclusion, the left precuneus gyrus in the dorsal pathway and the right
lingual gyrus in the vental pathway play important roles in spatial processing of word forms. It is suggested that the dorsal pathway and ventral pathway tend to work in a synergistic fashion.
E71
NEURAL ACTIVITY IN LANGUAGE AREAS REFLECTS VERB
GENERATION PERFORMANCE IN CHILDREN Jerod
Rasmussen1,
Jennifer Vannest1, Vincent J. Schmithorst1, Prasanna Karunanayaka1, Anna W.
Byars1, Scott K. Holland1; 1Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center — Covert Verb Generation is a convenient functional MRI (fMRI) task for mapping language areas in pediatric neurosurgery patients. Because the
covert responses are not monitored explicitly, the relationship between
fMRI activation and task performance is unknown. Our study compared
the activation from this task with a version of the Verb Generation task
including overt responses. Fifteen children, ages 11-13, were presented
with a series of concrete nouns and were prompted to respond with
related verbs. The paradigm alternated between 30-second blocks of
covert response, overt response, and control task of overt noun repetition. A clustered fMRI acquisition method allowed for recording of overt
responses during quiescent scanner intervals. Individual covert generation versus noun repetition (covert-rep) and overt generation versus
noun repetition (overt-rep) contrast t-maps were generated using the
General Linear Model (GLM). GLM regression analysis determined correlations between contrasts and the mean number of verbs generated
overtly per subject, modeling full-scale IQ as a confounding factor. For
the covert-rep contrast, the left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG, BA 44) and
left posterior superior temporal gyrus (LSTG, BA 22) showed positive
correlations with verb generation performance (LIFG: r-squared=.62,
p<.001; LSTG: r-squared=.53, p<.003). Overt-rep contrast also showed
positive correlations in both LIFG (r-squared=.31, p<.039) and LSTG (rsquared=.36, p<.023). These results suggest that increased verb generation performance leads to increased fMRI activation. In addition, overt
performance may be used as an effective estimator of covert performance.
E72
DISENTANGLING
FIBER
TRACT
AND
CORTICAL
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PROCESS OF NAMING VARIOUS
CATEGORIES OF CONCRETE ENTITIES David Rudrauf1, Sonya
Mehta1, Carissa Philippi1, Thomas Grabowski1,2; 1Laboratory of Computational
Neuroimaging, University of Iowa, 2University of Iowa — Lesion
studies
have identified regions of the cerebral cortex necessary for naming concrete entities, but these analyses have not been able to formally distinguish critical cortical damage from fiber tract damage. We developed a
novel lesion analysis approach that incorporates probabilistic fiber tract

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

information, to detect lesion-deficit associations related to damage to
major association fiber tracts, and to reduce effects attributed to the cerebral cortex due to confounding fibers of passage. We re-analyzed a
dataset of 129 brain damaged subjects (Damasio et al. 2004), tested for
naming impairments in 5 categories of concrete entities. Using voxelwise
logistic regressions, we incorporated covariates for probable damage to
the inferior frontooccipital fasciculus (IFOF), superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF), uncinate fasciculus (UNC), and inferior longitudinal fasciculus (ILF). Inclusion of tract information removed some cortical regions
previously implicated in category-related deficits. The SLF explained
many of the significant voxels associated with naming animals and tools,
and the UNC and IFOF explained some of the voxels associated with
naming famous faces. Some perisylvian and inferotemporal cortical
regions remained associated with impaired naming, even after the effects
of nearby association fiber tracts were modeled. For musical instruments
and fruits/vegetables, tract effects and gray matter effects were statistically confounded. Supplementary tractwise analyses implicated the IFOF
and UNC for naming famous faces, and the SLF for animals, tools and
fruits/vegetables. The results suggest a possible distinction between cortical and fiber tract systems underlying naming unique versus non
unique concrete entities.
E73
LEARNING TO READ SHAPES SPEECH RECOGNITION Ulrike
Schild1, Brigitte Röder1, Claudia K. Friedrich1; 1Biological Psychology and
Neuropsychology/ University of Hamburg — Learning to read and write
requires the knowledge that words consist of phonemes and that each
phoneme has a corresponding grapheme. Using event-related potentials
(ERPs) we investigated whether reading acquisition modifies neuronal
speech recognition. We recorded ERPs in an unimodal auditory word
fragment priming paradigm. Former research with adults suggests that
the amplitude of the P350 deflection reflects neuronal word form activation as a function of the goodness-of-fit between the target words and
their preceding fragments (Friedrich, 2005, BMC Neuroscience). In an
Identity condition, fragments matched following target words (e.g., draDrache [engl. dragon]). In a Variation condition, fragments and targets
differed in the initial place of articulation (PLACE, e.g., gra-Drache). In a
Control condition, fragments and targets were completely unrelated (pulDrache). Adults, beginning readers and preschoolers were tested. P350
amplitudes for adults replicate gradual activation of word form representations: Most positive amplitudes were found in the Control condition,
medium amplitudes in the Variation condition, and weakest amplitudes
in the Identity condition. Beginning readers did not tolerate the variation:
P350 amplitudes in the Variation condition did not differ from P350
amplitudes in the Control condition. By contrast, preschoolers tolerate
the variation in PLACE: Targets in the variation condition did not differ
from identical targets. Thus, lexical representations appear to represent
more detail after literacy acquisition. All groups showed a central negativity that was more negative for unrelated control words compared to
the other two conditions. This negativity is associated with rapid phonological expectancies, which might not be altered by literacy acquisition.
E74
MONITORING OF SPEECH ERRORS: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
EVIDENCE FROM DUTCH Niels Schiller1,2, Iemke Horemans2, Dirk
Koester3,2; 1Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, Leiden University, The
Netherlands, 2Maastricht University, The Netherlands, 3F. C. Donders Centre
for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Nijmegen, The Netherlands — When we perceive speech, our goal is to extract the meaning of the verbal message
which includes semantic processing. However, how deeply do we process speech that we encounter while carrying out another task? In two
experiments, native Dutch participants heard spoken sentences describing simultaneously presented pictures. Sentences either correctly
described the pictures or contained an anomalous final word (i.e. a lexical
substitution error or a phonemic perseveration error). In the first experiment, when spoken sentences were task-irrelevant, we found that the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

161

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

amplitude of a centro-parietal N400 was the same for both anomalous
conditions as compared to the correct condition. In the second experiment, we ensured that participants processed the sentences and the pictures to a semantic level. In an early time window, we found similar
phonological mismatch negativities in both anomalous conditions compared to the correct condition. These negativities were followed by an
N400 that was larger for lexical than perseveration speech errors. These
data suggest that we process speech, even if task-irrelevant, deeply
enough to allow semantic processing. Furthermore, once we allocate
more cognitive resources to the processing of speech, we try to predict
upcoming words, presumably by means of the internal monitoring loop,
to facilitate lexical access.
E75
WHEN 'UMKOMMEN' (PERISH) PRIMES 'KOMMEN' (COME):
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR STEM ACCESS IN
SEMANTICALLY OPAQUE DERIVATIONS Eva Smolka1, Matthias
Gondan2, Frank Rösler3; 1University of La Laguna, Spain, 2University of
Regensburg, Germany, 3University of Marburg, Germany — This
study
investigated whether semantically transparent and opaque derivations
are accessed via their constituent units or as whole words. Reaction times
(RTs) and event-related potentials (ERPs) were measured when verb targets (e.g. 'kommen', come) were preceded by a purely semantically
related verb ('nahen', approach), by a morphologically and semantically
related verb ('mitkommen', come along), by a purely morphologically
related verb ('umkommen', perish), by an orthographically similar verb
('kämmen', comb), or by an unrelated verb ('schaden', harm). Morphological relatedness produced robust RT facilitation and N400 modulations
regardless of semantic relatedness. These morphological effects were
even stronger than pure semantic effects. Moreover, morphological derivations induced an early frontal negativity indicating prefix-stripping.
Orthographic similarity produced RT interference and early frontal
effects that differed from those of the morphological effects. Behavioral
and ERP data favor a single system that accesses the stems of both semantically transparent and opaque derivations.
E76
EVIDENCE FOR EARLY MORPHOLOGICAL DECOMPOSITION IN
VISUAL
WORD
RECOGNITION:
A
SINGLE
TRIAL
CORRELATIONAL MEG STUDY Olla Solomyak1, Alec Marantz1; 1New
York University — We employ a single trial correlational MEG analysis to
investigate early processing in the visual recognition of morphologically
complex words. Three classes of affixed words were presented in a lexical
decision task: free stems (e.g. taxable), bound roots (e.g. tolerable) and
pseudo-affixed words (e.g. vulnerable, the root of which does not appear
elsewhere). Analysis was focused on brain responses within 100-200ms
post-stimulus onset, in the letter string and visual wordform areas. MEG
data were analyzed using cortically constrained minimum-norm estimation. Correlations were computed between activity at functionally
defined regions of interest and continuous measures of the words’ morphological properties. ROIs were identified across subjects on a reference
brain and then morphed back onto each subject’s brain (N=9). We find
evidence of decomposition for all three classes of affixed words. Peaks
corresponding to letter-string (~130ms) and wordform (~170ms) components in the literature are shown to be sensitive to affix properties, such
as affix frequency, for both bound roots and pseudo-affixed words. For
free-stemmed affixed words, the M170 response is shown to be sensitive
to the conditional probability of the word given the stem. These morphological properties are contrasted with orthographic form features (letter
string frequency, transition probability from one string to the next).
Effects of decomposition can in fact be attributed to morphological properties of complex words, rather than purely orthographic and form
related properties. Our data support a model of word-recognition in
which decomposition is attempted, and possibly utilized, for complex
words of all three classes.

162

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

E77
EARLY COMPOUND CONSTITUENT PROCESSING BY RIGHT
AND LEFT FUSIFORM GYRUS Linnaea Stockall1, Roberto de Almeida1,
Michael von Grunau1; 1Concordia University — Stockall et al (2008), investigate the lateralization of the early visual processing of morphological
complexity with a lexical decision experiment. Compounds (teacup) and
monomorphemic pseudocompounds (carpet) were presented briefly (74
ms) and centered on the screen, but with the point of visual convergence
(fixation) falling either at the constituent boundary (e.g., TEA+CUP) or
one character off the boundary (e.g., TE+ACUP). We obtained a main
effect of word type (compounds faster than monomorphemics) and a
main effect of morphological legality, with convergence at morphological
boundary yielding faster RTs than at off-boundary, suggesting hemifield
of presentation plays a role in early morphological processing. In an MEG
experiment Zweig and Pylkkänen (2006) found that morphologically
complex forms (teacher, refill) evoke increased activation from sources in
the left and right fusiform gyrus (Visual Word Form Area; Cohen et al.,
2000) peaking approximately 170 ms after stimulus onset (M170; Tarkiainen et al., 1999), as compared to matched monomorphemics (winter,
resume). Our experiment combines the design of the lexical decision
experiment (compound vs. monomorpheme, aligned vs. unaligned constituent boundary, short SOA) with the dependent measure of the MEG
experiment: left and right fusiform gyrus activity. Preliminary results
(N=18) show that participants exhibit a significant M170/VWFA
response, which initial analyses confirm is sensitive to the morphological
complexity of the stimuli. Many participants also show a second evoked
posterior response 50-80ms after the M170. Further analysis will be
required to determine the relationship of this second response component to the stimulus manipulations.
E78
THE
FUNCTIONAL
ACTIVATION
AND
NETWORK
CHARACTERISTIC
IN
THE
LEFT
TEMPOROPARIETAL
CORTEX Xiaoyi Wang1, Xia Wu1, Haiyan Zhou2, Jie Lu3, Li Yao1, Hua
Shu1; 1State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing
Normal University, Beijing, China, 2International WIC Institute, Beijing
University of Technology, Beijing, China, 3Xuanwu Hospital, Capital
University of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China — This fMRI study aimed to
examine the functional activation and network characteristic in each part
of the left temporoparietal cortex in Chinese. BOLD changes were
recorded in thirteen healthy right-handed speakers in Mandarin Chinese
during auditory Chinese word, visual Chinese word and picture dangerous judgment tasks. The results of functional activation and conjunction
analysis showed the supramaginal gyrus(SMG) and angular gyrus(AG)
were activated in all the three tasks and the superior parietal lobule(SPL)
for two visual tasks, while the posterior superior temporal gyrus(pSTG)
was for none, suggesting visual Chinese word approach to the picture in
the activation feature. The further ROI analysis for the contrast between
the AG and SMG of each judgment task showed that the AG were more
activated than the SMG, indicating the AG was more sensitive to the
semantic judgment than the SMG. The contrasts of among the different
tasks in the same area showed that the activations of the AG, SMG and
SPL were larger in the visual tasks than of in the auditory task and there
were not significant between the two visual task. Furthermore, the structural equation modeling analysis to three areas for three tasks found the
left temporoparietal cortex connected the left prefrontal cortex to be center at the AG in the word tasks (auditory or visual), while taking the SPL
as the center for the picture task. This result implied the universal mechanism in the network of language processing in spite of the difference
among the functional activation tasks.

Poster Session E

E79
MODULATION OF BRAIN REGIONS INVOLVED IN OVERT
PICTURE NAMING BY PARAMETRIC VARIATION IN WORD
FREQUENCY, WORD LENGTH AND REACTION TIME Stephen
Wilson1,2, Lisette Isenberg1, Gregory Hickok1; 1University of California, Irvine,
2
University of California, San Francisco — Picture naming is a cognitive
task commonly used to study lexical access. However it is a complex
operation, entailing not only semantic and phonological stages of lexical
access, but also ancillary processes including visual processing, articulation, self-monitoring and executive functions. Previous neuroimaging
studies have revealed a wide range of brain areas which presumably support these various components of the task. In order to better delineate the
functions of regions activated by picture naming, we used fMRI to identify brain areas where BOLD responses to picture naming were modulated by three different parametric variables: word frequency, word
length and reaction time, each of which we hypothesized to be associated
with different aspects of the task. Twelve subjects were scanned while
they named 165 pictures in a rapid event-related design, and digital signal processing was used to extract vocal responses from background
scanner noise. Lower frequency words were associated with greater
BOLD responses in occipitotemporal cortex bilaterally. These regions are
associated with visual and semantic processing. Longer words led to
increased activity in speech motor areas as well as superior temporal cortex. Longer reaction times resulted in greater activity in several areas,
including inferior frontal regions associated with both cognitive control
and linguistic processes, and the pre-SMA. Of particular interest was a
region in the left superior temporal sulcus where activity was correlated
both with word length and reaction time (each independently of the
other). We argue that such a pattern suggests a role for this region in
retrieval of phonological form.
E80
THE INTERACTION OF MEANING AND COHORT SELECTION
IN SPOKEN WORD RECOGNITION: AN FMRI STUDY Jie
Zhuang1, William Marslen-Wilson2, Billi Randall1, Mike Ford1, Emmanuel
Stamatakis3,1, Lorraine Tyler1; 1Centre for Speech, Language and the Brain,
University of Cambridge, UK, 2MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit,
University of Cambridge, UK, 3School of Psychological Sciences, The University
of Manchester, UK — Spoken word recognition involves the activation of
multiple word candidates based on the initial speech input - the “cohort”
- and selection amongst these competitors. Selection may be purely a sensory process or it may be facilitated by other aspects of lexical representation, such as a word’s meaning (Marslen-Wilson, 1987). Here we tested
this latter hypothesis in an fMRI study by presenting subjects with words
and pseudo-words for lexical decision. In a factorial design we manipulated (a) cohort size (large cohorts where there is high competition
amongst candidates and small cohorts where there is less competition),
and (b) the word’s meaning (high or low imageability). In a previous
behavioural study (Tyler, et al 2000), we found that imageability facilitated word recognition but only for words with large cohorts and many
competitors. In the imaging study, we found greater activity in left inferior parietal lobule with increased cohort competition, an imageability
effect in right inferior parietal lobule and STG/MTG, and a significant
interaction between imageability and cohort size in left STG/MTG
including Wernicke’s area. In words with large cohorts and high competition, highly imageable words generated stronger activity than low
imageable words, whereas for words with small cohorts and low competition, there was no difference in the amount of activity generated by high
or low imageable words. These results support the behavioural data in
showing that selection processes do not rely solely on the sensory input
but rather that the meaning of candidate words facilitates discrimination
between competitors.

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Perceptual processes: High-level vision
E81
CONCEPTUAL STRUCTURE MODULATES BEHAVIOURAL
RESPONSES AND NEURAL ACTIVITY DURING OBJECT
PROCESSING Kadia Acres1, Kirsten I Taylor1, Billi Randall1, Michael A
Ford1, Barry Devereux1, Lorraine K Tyler1; 1Centre for Speech, Language and
the Brain, University of Cambridge, UK — How are meaningful objects represented in the brain? Some distributed models of conceptual knowledge
(e.g., Conceptual Structure Account, CSA) claim that the meanings of
objects are represented in a distributed feature-based system where the
statistical properties of concepts (e.g., distinctiveness, sharedness and cooccurrence of features) determine processing. Thus, distinctive features
aid object identification, while features shared by many concepts aid category identification. Study 1 tested these claims; subjects named or made
living/nonliving decisions to 412 object pictures. A principal components
analysis on visual, psycholinguistic and conceptual structure variables
resulted in eight components (including co-occurrence, sharedness, distinctiveness) which were entered into regression analyses. Consistent
with the CSA, naming RTs were facilitated by feature distinctiveness,
which is essential for unique identification, while domain decisions were
facilitated by feature co-occurrence and sharedness, which allow domain
identification. Study 2 investigated how the meanings of visual objects
are processed in the brain by exploring how conceptual structure modulates ventral occipitotemporal activity during visual object identification
using fMRI. Subjects covertly named the same object stimuli, and the
aforementioned principal components were used as parametric modulators in the fMRI model. Object naming (compared to an orientation
judgement baseline) resulted in bilateral ventral occipitotemporal activity, as expected. Significantly, although the sharedness and distinctiveness factors were orthogonal, both factors modulated activity in partially
overlapping areas in the left fusiform and parahippocampal gyri with
decreasing sharedness additionally activating more extensive and bilateral regions. These results demonstrate that the neural processing of
meaning objects is modulated by their conceptual structure.
E82
EMBODIED COGNITION: CHANGING PERCEPTION THROUGH
ONLINE EMULATION OF MOTOR ACTIONS Sabine
Blaesi1,
1
1
Margaret L. Wilson ; University of California, Santa Cruz — The theory of
perceptual emulation proposes that motor representations are activated
to simulate another person’s action in real time in order to perceive and
interpret the ongoing motor action (Wilson & Knoblich, 2005). While previous studies have shown that visual perception is influenced by previously learned motor skills (Casile & Giese, 2006), our present study will
explore the influence of current, ongoing motor action on visual perception. We investigated if (1) an induced smile-like motor activation
increases the likelihood of perceiving ambiguous facial expressions as
“happy” and (2) an induced frown-like motor activation increases the
likelihood of perceiving ambiguous facial expressions as “sad”. Stimuli
for facial expressions consist of a series of eleven photos of the same
model on a continuum from smile to frown. Using previously tested
methodology, participants were asked to rate the photos as either
“happy” or “sad” while either holding a pen between the teeth without
touching it with their lips (smile manipulation by Strack et al. 1988) or by
asking participants to touch the tips of two golf tees applied to the brow
region (frown manipulation by Larsen et al, 1992). Significantly greater
“happy” responses were found for the smile condition than for the control condition. Results for the frown manipulation are thus far inconclusive. Further studies will examine whether the effect is mediated by
emotion. These findings give partial support to the theory of perceptual
emulation.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

163

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

E83
THE TIME COURSE OF VISUAL OBJECT CATEGORIZATION
FROM UNUSUAL AND CANONICAL VIEWS: EVIDENCE FROM
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Meena Bolourchi1, Lisa Lucia1, Haline
Schendan1; 1Tufts University — Rapid and accurate categorization of
objects is necessary to interact appropriately with the visual environment. When does visual object categorization occur? Categorization
depends upon object model selection processes to first evaluate whether
the visual percept matches candidate models of known object categories
in memory, and to then select the best match. Prior event-related potential (ERP) studies indicate that model selection is indexed by a frontopolar N350. Key evidence is that the N350 is the first ERP component to be
modulated with the success of categorization, being smaller for correctly
categorized than for unidentified fragmented line drawings of visual
objects after 200 to 300 ms. In this experiment, ERP categorization effects
were investigated using photographs of real known objects. Images of
objects in unusual and canonical views were degraded by scrambling the
phases of the spatial frequency spectrum to yield successful categorization half of the time. Participants rated their categorization success by key
press, followed by naming. Performance and ERP results replicated
known view-dependent effects: Performance was better for canonical
than unusual views, and N350 amplitudes were larger for unusual relative to canonical views of categorized objects. Critically, for both unusual
and canonical views, categorized and unidentified ERPs began to differ
after 200 ms with unidentified waveforms being more negative throughout the N350. This provides further evidence that the frontopolar N350
directly measures model selection processes in the cerebral cortex, consistent with the two-state interactive account of visual object knowledge
retrieval (Schendan & Kutas, 2007.)
E84
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN PERCEPTUAL ORGANIZATION AND
HIGH-ORDER VISUAL COGNITION Gabriella
Brick1,2,
Csilla
Antonovsky1, Tahela Davidov1, Daniel D. Kurylo1,2; 1Brooklyn College CUNY,
2
The Graduate Center CUNY — Perceptual organization represents a subordinate process to high-order visual functions. The present study investigated whether perceptual organization capacities correspond to
measures of visual cognition that rely heavily on the organization of
stimulus patterns. Subjects viewed dot patterns that progressively varied
in intrinsic organization, and indicated the manner in which patterns
were perceptually organized. Psychophysical measurements of grouping
thresholds and critical stimulus durations were made across spatial and
temporal domains. In addition, subjects received standardized tests associated with visual organization (WASI Block Design and Matrix Reasoning; DANVA2 Adult Faces 2). With one exception, measurements of
perceptual organization did not correlate significantly with high-order
vision tests. These results indicate that visual cognitive capacities measured here do not correspond to the efficiency of perceptual organization,
emphasizing the role of non-perceptual cognitive function in high-order
vision.
E85
NEURAL CORRELATES OF VISUAL PERCEPTION AND
AESTHETIC PREFERENCE: EXPERTISE EFFECTS IN JUDGMENTS
ABOUT DANCE MOVES Beatriz Calvo-Merino1, Patrick Haggard1;
1
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, UK — Neuroimaging studies show that observation of familiar actions increases
motor simulation in an observer. This neural mechanism might represent
a link between the personal experience of one’s own action system and
the observed action. However, are the same perceptual processes
engaged regardless of the observer’s intentions during viewing? Here we
investigated how brain mechanisms underlying aesthetic judgements
about actions might differ from simple visual perception, and how these
two ways of seeing interact with an observer’s previous experience. 12
professional classical ballet dancers and 12 non-expert controls viewed
point-light videos of ballet moves. Participants watched pairs of videos

164

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

during two different tasks. On half the trials, participants performed a
visual discrimination task (i.e. same / different judgement), while on the
other half of trials they performed an aesthetic preference task (i.e. judge
which move they preferred). This design allowed us to identify whether
the brain circuits for aesthetic evaluation of dance moves differ from
those merely engaged in seeing these moves, and also whether such circuits might be susceptible to the observer’s expertise. Movements were
presented in both their canonical and inverted orientation. Brain imaging
data were analysed using SPM5. The results showed expertise-specific
effects in medial and temporal regions for aesthetic judgements and in
frontal and motor structures in the visual discrimination task. The results
suggest engagement of different memory-related brain networks for aesthetic judgements. Funding: The Leverhulme Trust and Economical and
Social Research Council (ESRC)
E86
SEMANTIC PRIMING DURING BINOCULAR SUPPRESSION
Patricia Costello1, Jiang Yi2; 1Gustavus Adolphus College, 2University of
Minnesota — In general, stimuli that are familiar and recognizable dominate during binocular rivalry, and this is usually thought to be due to
superior processing during the dominant phase. Recent research has
demonstrated that familiar and recognizable stimuli such as upright faces
and words presented in a native language also have an advantage of
breaking suppression during binocular rivalry. In the current study, a
visible prime was presented before either a semantically and conceptually related or unrelated word that was gradually introduced to one eye,
competing against a standard high-contrast dynamic noise pattern presented to the other eye. We measured how long it took for semantically
and conceptually related words to break out of suppression and compared the timing to a non-related word breaking from suppression. Preliminary results show that related words are faster to gain dominance.
This suggests that words, even when suppressed and invisible, are processed faster when previously primed.
E87
CORTICAL
UNDERCONNECTIVITY
COUPLED
WITH
PRESERVED
VISUOSPATIAL
COGNITION
IN
AUTISM:
EVIDENCE FROM A FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE
IMAGING STUDY OF AN EMBEDDED FIGURES TASK. Saudamini
Damarla1,2, Timothy Keller1,2, Marcel Just1,2; 1Carnegie Mellon University,
2Center for Cognitive Brain Imaging — Individuals with high-functioning
autism sometimes exhibit intact or superior performance on visuospatial
tasks, which often contrasts with impaired functioning in other domains
like language comprehension, executive tasks, and social functions. The
goal of the current study was to investigate the neural bases of preserved
visuospatial processing in high-functioning autism from the perspective
of the cortical underconnectivity theory. We used a combination of
behavioral, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), functional
connectivity, and corpus callosum morphometric methodological tools.
Thirteen participants with high-functioning autism and 13 controls (age-,
IQ- and gender-matched) were scanned while performing an embedded
figures task (EFT). No reliable behavioral differences were found
between the groups, but the imaging results revealed several intriguing
group differences. First, the autism group showed less activation in left
frontal and inferior parietal areas and more activation in visual and spatial areas (bilateral superior parietal/intraparietal sulcus and right occipital). Second, the autism group demonstrated lower functional
connectivity between language/verbal working memory areas and visuospatial areas (left frontal- right occipital).Third, the mean segment size
of the corpus callosum, through which many of the bilateral cortical areas
communicate, was reliably smaller in the autism group. Finally, the sizes
of relevant regions of corpus callosum were positively correlated with
left frontal-right occipital functional connectivity in the autism group, but
not in controls. Thus, even in the visuospatial domain, where preserved
performance among people with autism is observed, neuroimaging signatures of cortical underconnectivity can be found.

Poster Session E

E88
TAKING A LONG, HARD LOOK IN THE MIRROR: INFLUENCE OF
LEFT-RIGHT REVERSAL ON THE PROCESSING OF SELF AND
FAMILIAR FACES Sebastian Dieguez1, Jakob Scherer1, Olaf Blanke1;
1Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience, Brain Mind Institute, Ecole
Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, Switzerland — There is controversy as
to the neural correlates subtending self-face recognition. Because one’s
own face is primarily known through our interactions with mirrors, part
of the difficulties in this area might arise from insufficient consideration
of the constraints of mirrored self-perception. Here we investigated the
impact of two such constraints: compared to one’s actual face, one’s
observed reflection is i) left-right reversed and ii) half as big. Subjects
were asked to imagine they were looking into a mirror instead of a computer screen and shown normal or mirror reversed pictures of their own
face varying in size. The task was a forced-choice size estimation of the
shown face, i.e. whether the seen face was bigger or smaller than a real
mirror reflection would be. In two different experiments, subjects were
shown an actual mirror at screen distance prior to the experiment or did
an additional size-estimation task with the face of a close friend, respectively. Psychometric thresholds of subjective size estimation of the reflection were obtained. The results confirmed previous findings that even
with prior perception of a real mirror, subjects tended to overestimate the
size of reflected faces. However, this overestimation was significantly
reduced with mirror-reversed stimuli of one’s own face, while increased
for mirror-reversed stimuli of a friend’s face. These results point out the
importance of the left-right reversal of faces, which seems to influence
differentially the processing of self and familiar faces. Future neuroimaging studies of self-face recognition should take this factor into account.
E89
REDUCED GAMMA-BAND ACTIVITY FOR REPRESENTATION OF
FACES IN CONGENITAL PROSOPAGNOSIA Christian
Dobel1,
Markus Junghöfer1, Thomas Gruber2; 1Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität
Münster, Münster, Germany, 2Institute for Psychology I, University of Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany — Electrophysiological correlates of face processing
were investigates in seven subjects suffering from congenital prosopagnosia and seven matched controls using magneto¬encephalography. Pictures of familiar and unfamiliar persons were presented in upright and
inverted orientation. Across all subjects, we found a peak of induced
gamma band activity (iGBM) between 50 and 100 Hz and between 170
and 330 ms post stimulus onset. Differences between conditions and
groups were analyzed in source space with VARETA (Variable Resolution Electromagnetic Tomography) estimations. Significant differences
were depicted as statistical parametric maps (SPMs) constructed on the
basis of the average Montreal Brain. In contrast to the evoked response in
this time interval we found higher iGBR activity in response to upright
compared to inverted faces. This was most pronounced in the left and
right superior parietal lobes and occipital gyri. Unfamiliar faces compared to familiar faces induced significantly higher Gamma-Band oscillations in the right superior parietal lobe, the right middle temporal gyrus
and the right lateral occipitotemporal gyrus. Finally, subjects with
prosopagnosia revealed significantly reduced iGBR in the left lateral
occipitotemporal gyrus and the left inferior temporal gyrus as opposed to
the control participants. We conclude the iGBR reflect different processes
than evoked brain activity and are most likely related to memory access.
These processes seem to be disturbed in congenital prosopagnosia which
can be seen in left-hemispheric areas. We will discuss these results with
respect to recent fMRI and ERP studies on congenital prosopagnosia.
E90
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION OF MASKED
REPETITION PRIMING EFFECTS WITH OBJECTS ROTATED IN
DEPTH Marianna Eddy1, Phillip Holcomb1; 1Tufts University — We have
previously reported a series of ERP effects in masked repetition priming
with pictures. One effect we observed, the N190/P190, appears to reflect
processing of perceptual aspects of the stimuli. Another effect, the N300,

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

has been show to reflect picture specific processing, while the N400 is a
more a-modal effect, reflecting semantic processing. We were interested
in investigating how changes in viewpoint (rotations in depth) would
affect these previously observed ERP components. The current experiment investigated masked repetition priming effects with objects rotated
in depth. Conventional views of target objects were primed with a 30, 60
or 150 degree rotation of that object in the repetition condition, whereas
in the unrepeated condition 30, 60 or 150 degree rotation of an object
primed a conventional unrelated target object. An early effect (N190/
P190) was observed for all priming conditions. However, N300 and N400
effects were only observed for target objects that were primed with a 30
degree rotation of that object. Intact N190/P190 priming effects for all
conditions possibly indicate that enough overlap between shape or features occurs between prime and target objects even when rotated in
depth. We suggest lack of N300 and N400 effects in the 60 and 150 degree
rotation conditions reflect a lack of overlap in the object representation
activated by the prime and target, while for the 30 degree rotation, there
is a sufficient amount of overlap, leading to a decrease in effort to process
higher level semantic information about the conventional target object.
E91
THE TEMPORAL PROPERTIES OF OBJECT SEGREGATION AND
RECOGNITION IN THE LATERAL OCCIPITAL COMPLEX
Stephen Emrich1, Bernhard Ross2, Douglas Cheyne3, Susanne Ferber1,2;
1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest, 3Hospital for
Sick Children Research Institute — Traditional models of visual object recognition argue that figure-ground segregation processes must operate on
a visual scene before object recognition can take place. This means that
figure segregation should be resolved in early visual cortical regions,
with object processing emerging further up the ventral visual stream in
the lateral occipital complex (LOC). However, recent evidence has called
into question the theory that object recognition is preceded by figure segregation. We used magnetoencephalography (MEG) to investigate the
temporal sequence of object processing steps. Participants observed
images of moving line segments containing scrambled or intact objects
moving in counter-phase, or simple coherent motion. While relative
motion served as the cue to segregate both the scrambled and the intact
objects from the background, only the intact objects had a recognizable
form. An event-related beamformer was used to identify regions of maximal activation in response to the processing of intact objects, and source
activity in these regions was estimated for each condition. Peak activations were first demonstrated in extrastriate regions and the motion sensitive MT. This activity was followed closely by peaks in the object
sensitive LOC. Interestingly, source activity demonstrated that in the
extrastriate, MT and LOC regions, responses to both intact and scrambled
objects were similar at early latencies. Differences between the two conditions, however, were observed in the LOC at later latencies. Our results
suggest that the LOC may initially perform figure segregation processes
regardless of the presence or absence of a recognizable gestalt, followed
later by object recognition processes.
E92
TIME COURSE OF THE PERCEPTION OF BIOLOGICAL MOTION:
AN ERP STUDY Jonathan Fawcett1, Aaron Newman1; 1Dalhousie
University — Humans appear to have developed specialized mechanisms
for recognizing the movements of other humans, involving the posterior
superior temporal sulcus as well as ventral temporal regions. One previous study (Jokisch et al., 2005. Behav. Brain Res., 117:195) reported eventrelated potentials sensitive to biological motion, including N170 and
N300 components, but did not distinguish between the onset of visual
stimuli depicting human forms and biological motion specifically. In the
present study, we addressed the specificity of these components to biological motion by presenting static dot arrays that began to move after
200-400 msec as point-light videos depicting upright and inverted human
actions. Adult participants had EEG recorded from 128 electrode sites.
For both static and moving stimuli, differences between upright and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

165

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

inverted human forms were observed in the amplitude of a negativity
peaking at ~230 msec and maximal over right ventral occipital-temporal
electrodes. Therefore, this component may be sensitive to recognizing
human forms rather than biological motion. On the other hand, a later
negativity (N300) that differentiated upright and inverted forms was
observed only following motion onset. This component was maximal at
right parietal-occipital electrodes and inverted at ventral electrodes.
These results suggest that the perception of biological motion involves an
initial stage of human form recognition shared with the perception of
non-moving forms, followed by a stage specific to moving biological
forms. JMF supported by NSERC and the Killam Trusts; AJN supported
by NSERC, CFI, and the Canada Research Chairs program.
E93
FUSIFORM FACE AREA SENSITIVITY TO FACIAL IDENTITY
CATEGORIES IS MODULATED BY THE PERCEPTUAL TASK.
Christopher J Fox1,2, Giuseppe Iaria2, Jason J S Barton2; 1Graduate Program in
Neuroscience, University of British Columbia, 2Division of Neurology,
University of British Columbia — The fusiform face area (FFA) has been
identified as a cortical region involved in the perception of facial identity
and shows categorical sensitivity to changes in identity. Using fMRI
adaptation we examined categorical sensitivity within the FFA to
changes in facial identity and facial expression, and the degree to which
this sensitivity was modulated by perceptual task. Stimuli consisted of
pairs of morphed faces that did or did not cross a categorical boundary
between expressions or between identities. Fifteen subjects participated
in the study and a right FFA was identified in twelve. Each subject participated in two adaptation runs during which they made same-different
judgments on morph pairs. The same image pairs were presented on each
of the two runs but the subject was required to judge identity and expression on separate runs. Behavioral data demonstrated categorical sensitivity to changes in both identity and expression, with greater detection of
differences when pairs were located on either side of a category boundary. Analysis of the fMRI data showed: 1) No categorical sensitivity to
expression during either perceptual task, suggesting that expression categories may not be encoded within the FFA. 2) Categorical sensitivity to
identity, such that pairs which crossed a categorical boundary generated
a larger response than pairs which did not. However, the latter result was
found only when subjects were judging identity, not when judging
expression. This task modulation of sensitivity to identity categories
within the FFA shows the importance of considering task demands in
fMRI experiments.
E94
VISUAL MENTAL IMAGERY AFFECTS NEURAL PROCESSES OF
FACE PERCEPTION INDEXED BY THE P150/N170 COMPLEX
Giorgio Ganis1,2,3, Stephen Maher4, Lisa Lucia4, Haline Schendan4,2; 1Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, 2Massachusetts General Hospital, Athinoula A.
Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Charlestown, MA, 3Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA, 4Tufts University, Medford, MA — Neuroimaging evidence indicates that visual mental imagery of faces can affect neural activation in face processing regions in the ventral stream. Consistent
with these results, psychophysical studies have shown that visual mental
imagery of faces can affect the subsequent perception of faces. However,
the precise timing of these effects is unknown because of the limited temporal resolution of the techniques used. We addressed this issue by
employing event-related potentials (ERPs). We asked whether visual
mental imagery of faces affects processing of subsequently presented
faces by modulating early face-sensitive neural processes in the ventral
stream indexed by the P150/N170 complex. Seventeen subjects took part
in the study. On each trial, subjects first visualized the face of a celebrity
(e.g., Uma Thurman) or common objects (e.g., guitar) and then saw a picture of a face, after a brief delay. We predicted that the category of the
visualized stimulus (face vs. object) would modulate the amplitude of the
P150/N170 complex elicited by the following face. Results confirmed this
prediction: The amplitude of a P150 with a centro-frontal scalp distribu-

166

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

tion and that of an N170 with an occipito-temporal distribution was modulated by the visualized category. This effect began by about 130 ms after
stimulus onset.These findings suggest that one of the mechanisms by
which visual mental imagery affects processing of subsequent visual
stimuli is the modulation of neural processes in networks engaged during the early phases of bottom-up processing of these stimuli.
E95
THE ROLE OF THE LEFT FUSIFORM GYRUS IN READING: AN
EXAMINATION OF CHINESE CHARACTER RECOGNITION Yi
Guo1, E. Darcy Burgund1; 1Rice University — The left fusiform gyrus is
hypothesized to be activated selectively during visual word processing.
Nevertheless, the particular components of reading to which this area
responds is the subject of much controversy. The purpose of the present
study was to determine whether the left fusiform gyrus responds preferentially to the semantics or the phonology of visual words, and to examine the extent to which this region responds to word regularity.
Accordingly, activity in the left fusiform gyrus was measured using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while subjects performed
semantic and phonological tasks with regular and irregular Chinese characters. In the semantic task, regular characters were those containing elements that provide semantic information for the whole character, and
irregular characters were those without such semantic elements. In the
phonological task, regular characters were those containing elements that
provide phonological information for the whole character, and irregular
characters were those without such phonological elements. fMRI results
revealed greater activity in the left fusiform gyrus during the semantic
task than during the phonological task and no effect of character regularity. Thus, the left fusiform gyrus responds to the semantics of visual
words and is not sensitive to character regularity.
E96
BYPASSING THE BOTTLENECK: ENSEMBLE CODING HAPPENS
AUTOMATICALLY
EVEN
WHEN
CHANGE
BLINDNESS
OCCURS. Jason Haberman1,2, David Whitney1,2; 1UC Davis Center for
Mind and Brain, 2UC Davis — Change blindness suggests that, contrary to
intuition, our representation of the visual world is sparse and limited to a
few objects or features; observers cannot report salient changes between
two successive images unless attention is directed to the region or object
that changes. Here, we use a variation of the traditional change detection
task to show that ensemble coding (i.e. statistical representation) still
occurs even when subjects experience change blindness. Observers were
exposed to two successively presented sets of 16 faces that varied in
expression from neutral to disgusted. In the second interval, 4 of the 16
faces were changed from one emotional extreme to the other, thus shifting the emotional mean of the set. Observers performed two tasks in each
trial: 1) indicate which of the sets (intervals) had a more neutral mean
emotion and 2) indicate any one of the four faces that changed between
the two sets. Mean discrimination performance was significantly better
than change detection performance and significantly better than chance.
Further, change detection performance did not improve even in the
absence of the mean discrimination task. This suggests that observers
could detect a change in the high-level scene statistics of each set (a gist or
ensemble percept) without explicit knowledge of the items contributing
to that change. Although change blindness for individual features and
objects does exist, our results show that a great deal of additional information is simultaneously conveyed by summary statistics.
E97
EXPERIENCE WITH TEXT MODIFIES EARLY VISUAL EVOKED
RESPONSES Anthony Herdman1,2, John Gaspar1, Ross Stogryn1,
Alexander Moiseev2; 1Simon Fraser University, 2MEG Research Unit, Down
Syndrome Research Foundation — Because letters are frequently viewed
visual objects, the neural network is likely reorganized for fast recognition of highly experienced visual objects as compared to inexperienced
objects. This might manifest as increased neural firing synchrony. Thus
we hypothesized that the early visual event-related fields should peak

Poster Session E

earlier and with greater amplitudes to letters (experienced objects) than
to non-letters or symbols (inexperienced objects). To evaluate this
hypothesis, we recorded behavioural and event-related fields using magnetoencephalography (MEG) from adults while they judged visual stimuli as letters, non-letters, or symbols. Stimuli consisted of either a single
character or three characters. Accuracies were not different amongst the
conditions or character length. Reaction times to letter stimuli were significantly faster by 59 ms than to non-letter and symbol stimuli (p<.0001).
No differences were found between reaction times to non-letter and symbol stimuli. An event-related field that reached maximum amplitude
around 130 ms peaked significantly earlier by 4 ms to letter and symbol
stimuli than to non-letter stimuli (p=.01). We found no amplitude effects
for stimulus type for this event-related field. The reaction time and
latency effects demonstrate that early perceptual processing is faster for
experienced than inexperienced characters. This is consistent with our
previous findings which also indicate that the source of this event-related
component is located in bilateral extrastriate visual areas. Source modeling results will also be presented for these data.
E98
PERCEPTION
OF
GLOBAL
GESTALT
BY
TEMPORAL
INTEGRATION IN SIMULTANAGNOSIA Elisabeth Huberle1,2, Paul
Rupek1, Markus Lappe3, Hans-Otto Karnath1; 1Section Neuropsychology,
Center of Neurology, Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 2Center of Neurology, Hertie-Institute for
Clinical Brain Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,
3Psychological Institute II, University of Münster, Münster, Germany — The
coherent processing of our environment requires the integration of local
elements into a global gestalt. Patients with bilateral parieto-occipital
brain damage show intact processing of individual objects, while their
simultaneous perception of multiple objects at the same time is disturbed.
This deficit is termed simultanagnosia and has been discussed in the context of restricted visual working memory and impaired visuo-spatial
attention. Recent observations indicated that the perception of global
gestalt can be modulated by the spatial distance between individual
objects in patients with simultanagnosia and thus is not an all-or-nothing
phenomenon depending on spatial continuity. However, grouping mechanisms not only require the spatial integration of visual information, but
also involve integration processes over time. The present study investigated motion defined integration mechanisms in patients with simultanagnosia. We applied hierarchical organized stimuli of global objects that
consisted of coherently moving dots (‘Shape-from-Motion’). In addition,
we tested the patients’ ability to recognize biological motion by presenting characteristic human movements (‘Point-like Walker’). The data
revealed largely preserved perception of biological motion, while the perception of motion defined shapes was impaired. These findings suggest
separate mechanisms underlying the recognition of biological motion
and shape-from-motion. They thus argue against a restriction in the overall capacity of visual working memory over time as a general explanation
for the impaired global gestalt perception in patients with simultanagnosia.
E99
OSCILLATORY
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAM
ACTIVITY
ASSOCIATED WITH SUBJECTIVE AWARENESS OF A MASKED
STIMULUS Gethin Hughes1, Max Velmans1, Jan De Fockert1; 1Goldsmiths,
University of London, UK — The aim of this investigation was to explore
post-stimulus gamma oscillations associated with conscious perception
of a target stimulus, as well as pre-stimulus differences that predict subsequent awareness. Participants were presented with arrow stimuli
superimposed on a checkerboard pattern, which were masked using the
alternative checkerboard such that they were at the threshold for conscious perception. Participants were asked to determine whether the
arrow was pointing upwards or downwards, and to give a subjective rating of whether they could see the arrow. Post-stimulus gamma increases
were observed for subjectively perceived arrows and were associated

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

with an increased temporal separation of the two bursts of gamma activity associated with the target and the mask respectively. This suggests
that successfully disentangling the stimulus from the mask is crucial for
conscious awareness of the target. Importantly, in the pre-stimulus
period we observed a negative relationship between gamma and beta
power and later successful perception of the stimulus. We suggest that
the increased gamma and beta activity reflects the building of a top-down
representation of the upcoming stimulus, which interferes with perception of the stimulus itself. This finding suggests that the best method for
successfully perceiving the stimulus is to passively allow perception of
the target to be built from the visual stimulation.
E100
A COGNITIVE MODEL FOR FACE PERCEPTION Alumit
Ishai1;
1Institute of Neuroradiology, University of Zurich, Switzerland — Face
perception elicits activation within a distributed cortical network in the
human brain. The network includes visual (“core”) regions, i.e., the inferior occipital gyrus, lateral fusiform gyrus (FG) and superior temporal
sulcus (STS), which process invariant facial features, as well as limbic and
prefrontal (“extended”) regions, i.e., the amygdala, inferior frontal gyrus
(IFG), insula and orbitoforntal cortex (OFC), which process changeable
aspects of faces. Analysis of effective connectivity reveals that the major
entry node in the ‘face network’ is the FG and that the functional coupling between the core and the extended systems is content-dependent.
Thus, viewing emotional faces increases the neural coupling between the
FG and the amygdala, whereas viewing famous faces results in increased
effective connectivity between the FG and the OFC. A model for face perception is proposed, which postulates bidirectional connections between
all face-responsive regions and further assumes that the flow of information through the network is stimulus- and task-dependent. Consequently,
several new testable predictions are suggested: Focusing attention on
gaze direction would increase the coupling between the STS and the FG;
viewing animated faces would increase the effective connectivity
between the STS and the IFG/OFC; viewing disgusted faces would
increase the coupling between the FG and the insula; and an indeterminate facial input would increase the top-down connectivity from the OFC
to the FG. Future studies will determine the extent to which various cognitive task demands are indeed associated with differential coupling
among face-responsive regions.
E101
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN TASK-MODULATED GAZE
PROCESSING AS MEASURED BY EYE MOVEMENTS Roxane Itier1,
Tanya Brown1, Christina Villate1, Jennifer Ryan1; 1Rotman Research Institute,
University of Toronto — Age effects on the explicit and implicit processing
of gaze direction was studied using eye movement monitoring. Younger
(n=15) and older (n=20) adults were compared on two tasks in which pictures of faces were presented with different head orientations and gaze
directions. Subjects judged the direction of the gaze (“Gaze” task) or the
head orientation (“Head” task). Looking at the eyes was task-irrelevant in
the “Head” task. Measures of reaction times and d’ revealed that, compared to younger adults, older adults had slower response times but similar accuracy, except for the incongruent conditions of the “Gaze” task
(i.e. when the direction of head and gaze did not match) for which a
marked decrease in accuracy was seen. In both groups, the proportion of
viewing time and eye fixations were equivalent and similarly modulated
by task; more viewing was directed to the eye region compared to the
lower face area, but this difference was not as pronounced in the “Head”
task. In contrast, the first saccade after stimulus onset showed marked
group differences. While both groups had a similar number of first saccades that landed in the eye region in the “Gaze” task, older adults had
more first saccades that landed in the eye region in the “Head” task. This
suggests that although gaze processing is similar between groups, older
adults are less able to suppress looking at the eyes when performing the
head orientation judgment. This may reflect a general decrease of inhibitory control with increasing age.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

167

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

E102
DISTORTIONS IN THE BRAIN? EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL
EFFECTS OF CARICATURING FAMILIAR AND UNFAMILIAR
FACES Juergen M. Kaufmann1, Stefan R. Schweinberger1; 1Institute of
Psychology, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany — It has been suggested that caricatures are particularly incisive representations of familiar
faces which can be recognized better than original portraits. We report
two experiments in which participants performed speeded familiarity
tasks and provided best-likeness ratings of photorealistic spatial caricatures and anti-caricatures (up to a distortion level of 30%) in comparison
to veridical pictures of famous faces (Experiment 1) and personally familiar faces (Experiment 2). In Experiment 2, event-related potentials (ERPs)
were recorded in addition to behavioural data. In both experiments there
was no evidence for faster or more accurate recognition of caricatures.
Furthermore, caricatures of famous and personally familiar faces at an
exaggeration level of 30% were rated less representative than veridical
pictures and anti-caricatures. In Experiment 2, ERPs for personally familiar faces were largely unaffected by spatial caricaturing. In contrast, caricaturing of unfamiliar faces elicited increased amplitudes of N170 and
N250 components. Whereas N170 effects were limited to the first half of
the experiment, differences in N250 amplitudes became prominent in the
second half of the experiment. After three stimulus repetitions, N250
responses for caricatured unfamiliar faces were larger than for veridicals
and anti-caricatures of unfamiliar faces, and became similar to N250
responses for familiar faces. These results imply that spatial information
is of minor importance for the recognition of highly familiar faces. In contrast, spatial caricaturing of unfamiliar faces may increase a face’s distinctiveness and thereby enhance face learning.
E103
NEURAL CORRELATES OF ADAPTATION TO FACE AND VOICE
GENDER: IS THE N170 SENSITIVE TO GENDER ADAPTATION
OR TO FACE DETECTION? Nadine Kloth1, Stefan R. Schweinberger1,
Gyula Kovács2,3; 1Friedrich-Schiller-University of Jena, Germany, 2Budapest
University of Technology and Economics, Hungary, 3University of Regensburg,
Germany — Recently, adaptation effects have been found for high-level
processing of complex visual stimuli such as human faces. For example,
adaptation to male faces caused participants to judge faces morphed
along a male-female continuum as more feminine (Webster et al., 2004,
Nature). In an event-related potential (ERP) study, Kovács et al. (2006,
Cerebral Cortex) reported reduced N170 amplitudes and increased latencies for test stimuli following female gender adaptation as opposed to test
stimuli following control stimulus (a phase randomized version of a face)
adaptation. They concluded that these effects reflect mechanisms of
shape-selective adaptation at higher levels of object processing. We
examined whether N170 amplitude reduction to test faces was due to
adaptation to gender-specific information in faces, or to adaptation to
“faceness” per se. We compared N170 effects after adaptation to either
female or androgynous faces - therefore providing face stimuli as adaptors in both gender-specific adaptation and gender-neutral control conditions. Additionally, crossmodal adaptation conditions, with either female
or androgynous voice adaptors, were used to test for any cross-modal
gender adaptation effects on the perception of test faces. We found
behavioural gender adaptation effects from both face and voice adaptors,
suggesting that gender adaptation modulates higher-level, modalityinvariant gender representations. While N170 amplitudes were reduced
for face-adapted test faces relative to voice-adapted test faces, no genderspecific adaptation effects were seen in the N170. We conclude that the
present N170 amplitude reductions reflect adaptation of general face
detection mechanisms, rather than adaptation to gender-specific facial
information.

168

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

E104
REPRESENTATIONAL MOMENTUM: BIOMECHANICS AND THE
EXPERTISE OF SIGNERS Jessy Lancaster1, Margaret Wilson1, Karen
Emmorey2; 1University of California, Santa Cruz, 2San Diego State
University — It has been shown that conceptual knowledge of inanimate
objects affects representational momentum (RM). For this series of experiments, we first asked whether experience with a particular type of
human body movement could affect how the movement is perceived.
More specifically, we hypothesized that Deaf signers would perceive the
motion of American Sign Language (ASL) signs differently than nonsigners. Instead, the Deaf and hearing groups showed similar patterns of
responding, with both groups showing greater RM for downward movements. This led us to believe that knowledge of biomechanics was influencing both groups. In a follow-up study using only hearing non-signers,
we again found that RM is maximized for downward movements of the
arm. It was also found that RM is maximized for movements shown as
they were originally filmed, as opposed to being shown in reverse. Both
of these findings suggest that viewers are sensitive to biomechanical factors. We further investigated the effects of biomechanical knowledge on
RM by using movements that are easier and more natural to perform in
one direction rather than another. For example, we compared moving the
arm into a twisted posture versus moving it out of that posture. We
found that RM is maximized for movements shown in a biomechanically
easier and more natural direction. Taken together, these experiments
show that RM is influenced by the viewer’s own implicit knowledge of
body movement, but is surprisingly unaffected by lifelong experience
with a particular system of movement.
E105
WITHIN-CATEGORY
OBJECT
AGNOSIA
WITHOUT
PROSOPAGNOSIA: A DEVELOPMENTAL CASE Laura Germine1,
Cashdollar Nathan2, Duzel Emrah2, Duchaine Brad2; 1Harvard University,
2University College London — A number of papers have shown that individuals who have not suffered from brain damage can show deficits with
face recognition coupled with normal object recognition. However, the
opposite developmental condition has not been documented. We report
the case of A.W., a neurologically healthy, 19 year old female with a deficit of within-category object recognition and normal face recognition. She
performed outside the normal range on 7 tests of within-category object
recognition memory while also scoring normally on 7 tests of face recognition memory. Testing confirmed that her impairment was not based on
a general deficit in memory, basic-level recognition, or visual perception.
Taken together with developmental prosopagnosia, A.W.'s pattern of
impairment provides a functional and developmental double dissociation between face and object recognition memory.
E106
IS SELF-FACE RECOGNITION SPECIAL? EVIDENCE FROM
LATERALIZED UPSIDE DOWN FACES Yuan Hang Li1, Eran
Zaidel1,2; 1UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, 2Brain Research Institute, UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA — INTRODUCTION: Is self-face recognition an example of a
more general process for recognizing familiar faces? We presented rightside-up and upside-down photos of self or familiar faces to the two hemispheres of normal participants. We hypothesize that self-face recognition
is less lateralized (Uddin et al, 2005), and that it is more holistic, and thus
more impaired by upside-down inversion than friend-face recognition.
METHODS: Thirty four normal UCLA undergraduates were shown
right-side-up or upside-down faces of themselves or of familiar friends in
the left or right visual hemifield. They were required to identify the faces
as ‘self’ or ‘not self’ with bimanual button presses. Data was analyzed
using a repeated measures ANOVA: Face Type (Self-Face, Friend-Face) x
Face Inversion (upside-down, right-side-up) x Visual Field (VF) (Left,
Right). RESULTS: We found the expected advantage for right-side-up
faces (latency and accuracy), and the expected overall Left VF (LVF)
advantage (latency). There was a significant Face Type by Visual Field
interaction, such that Self-Faces showed no asymmetry, whereas Friend-

Poster Session E

Faces showed a strong LVF advantage (latency). Furthermore, Self-Faces
suffered more from upside-down inversion than did Friend-Faces (accuracy). Upside-down face showed a Right VF (RVF) advantage (accuracy),
whereas right-side-up faces showed no VF difference. CONCLUSION:
As predicted, Self-Faces were more impaired by upside-down inversion,
and Self-Faces also showed weaker lateralization than Friend-Faces.
These findings echo split-brain data (Uddin et al., 2005), and suggest that
the two hemispheres use similar, but special strategies for recognizing
Self-Faces.
E107
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS OF THE TIME
COURSE OF VISUAL OBJECT CATEGORIZATION: EFFECTS OF
NAMING,
RATINGS
OF
CATEGORIZATION
SUCCESS,
REPETITION, AND EXEMPLAR TYPICALITY Stephen
Maher1,
1
1
Haline Schendan ; Tufts University — Two event-related potential (ERP)
experiments defined the timing of visual object categorization and longterm memory. Previously, a frontopolar N350 and posterior late positive
complex (LPC) were modulated as a function of naming accuracy. Other
experiments find N350 and LPC repetition effects on indirect memory
tests. The N350 was proposed to index object model selection processes
supporting categorization and implicit object memory, whereas the later
LPC indexes post-categorization processes and recollection. The N350
and LPC are more positive for categorized than unidentified objects and
for repeated than new objects. In experiment 1, participants saw novel
and repeated fragmented line drawings of objects during an indirect
memory test, rating each on the success of categorization from 1 to 4 followed by naming. Results demonstrated that naming and repetition
modulate the same N350 and LPC components in the same individuals.
Moreover, the N350 decreased linearly as categorization was rated to be
more successful, while the LPC did not. In experiment 2, ERPs were compared to photographs of high versus low typicality exemplars of a basic
level object category (e.g., cell- vs. rotary- phone). For high relative to low
typicality exemplars, the N350 was larger, while the LPC was smaller.
Altogether, findings further support the N350 and the LPC as indices of
distinct visual object categorization and long-term memory processes,
and the two-state interactive account of visual object knowledge, wherein
the N350 reveals the functional properties of object model selection processes critical for categorization (Schendan & Kutas, 2007; Schendan &
Stern, 2007).
E108
A BILATERAL OCCIPITOTEMPORAL NETWORK MEDIATES
FACE PERCEPTION Denise Minnebusch1,2, Boris Suchan1, Odo Köster3,
Irene Daum1; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Ruhr-University of Bochum,
Germany, 2Ruhr-University Research School, Bochum, Germany, 3Institute for
Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, St Josef
Hospital Bochum, Germany — Exploring the neuronal mechanisms of face
processing in healthy subjects may help to understand the difficulties
experienced by prosopagnosia subjects. The aim of the present study was
to further investigate FFA and OFA activation patterns associated with
famous faces and caricatures in four DP individuals who differ considerably with respect to behavioural and electrophysiological indicators of
face recognition (Minnebusch et al. 2007). A second goal of the study was
to elucidate interactions between face processing areas in healthy subjects
and their specific contributions to the processing of different representations of faces such as photographs and caricatures of famous people
using fMRI and psychophysiological interaction analysis (PPI). Control
subjects showed higher face related activations in the right compared to
the left FFA, and right FFA activation correlated with right OFA activation. Caricatures of faces of famous people yielded higher percent signal
changes in the OFA compared to photographs, which supports the face
processing model by Haxby and colleagues (2000). DP subjects showed
heterogeneous activation patterns. PPI analysis yielded evidence for a
close relationship between activity in the right FFA and the left FFA and
the OFA bilaterally. In summary, all four face related brain regions have

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

to be activated for successful face processing. A disruption of processing
in one part of this network may lead to prosopagnosia.
E109
THE DEVELOPMENT OF MEANING WITH INCREMENTAL
OBJECT AWARENESS: AN EFMRI STUDY OF STAGES OF VISUAL
OBJECT PROCESSING. Lorina Naci1, Richard N. A. Henson2, Kirsten I.
Taylor1, Lorraine K. Tyler1; 1Centre for Speech, Language and the Brain,
University of Cambridge, 2MRC Cognition and Brain Science Unit — Visual
objects are rapidly interpreted by the brain as meaningful objects. This
research investigates the neural processes involved by contrasting two
theoretical accounts of object recognition. Feedforward models postulate
that increasingly complex visual features are processed in a hierarchically
organized ventral object processing stream, where the meaning of a
visual object is accessed at the last stage of object recognition, in anteromedial temporal cortex. In contrast, interactive accounts claim that object
processing involves interacting and parallel feedforward and feedback
processes, where visual meaning emerges gradually in a distributed network of regions. Crucially, we tested these competing accounts by measuring how an object’s meaning (real vs abstract objects) modulates
BOLD activity at early and later stages of object processing. To tap into
incremental object processing, we used fast (17ms), repeated presentations (5), of double-masked visual objects. Subjects initially lacked object
awareness, but later showed knowledge of shape and identity. Object
meaning modulated occipito-parietal, temporal, and frontal activity in
the 2nd and 3rd presentations. Within this broad network, activity was
more anterior in the 3rd presentation, and was stronger for real than
abstract objects, suggesting network modulation as a function of object
meaningfulness. These data argue against feedforward models, suggesting instead that the neural signature of visual meaning emerges gradually, engaging increasingly more anterior regions in a wide anterior to
posterior network. The dynamically changing activity patterns in this
network suggest that interactions between functionally distinct, remote
neural regions underpin the representation of visual object meaning.
E110
FROM LOW TO HIGH: DISTINCT BRAIN REGIONS ACTIVATED
BY CONTRAST MODULATED ‘NATURAL’ AND ‘UNNATURAL’
VISUAL SCENES Norberto Nawa1,2, Hiroshi Ando1,2; 1Multimodal
Communication Group, NICT Universal Media Research Center, 2ATR
Cognitive Information Science Labs., Kyoto, Japan — Innumerous
studies
have investigated the brain areas involved in the processing of physical
attributes of visual stimuli such as color, luminance and contrast, but relatively little is known about how such attributes affect the perception of
complex scenes as ‘natural’ looking, as opposed to ‘unnatural’ or ‘artificial’. Using functional MRI, we examined whether distinct activity patterns are elicited by natural and unnatural visual stimuli. Stimuli were
black and white pictures portraying various scenes (e.g., cities, country
fields, objects in various environments); natural pictures had their contrast curves unaltered, while unnatural pictures were produced by
reversing their contrast curves (negative images). Additional sets of lowcontrast pictures (natural and unnatural) were used to find contrast-sensitive areas within the visual cortex. The luminance level of the pictures
across sets was not significantly different. During scanning, participants
viewed blocks of five pictures of the same type, interleaved with rest
blocks, and performed a simple discrimination task. Although reaction
time and classification accuracy were not affected by stimulus type,
BOLD contrasts revealed that activity was greater in the right angular
gyrus, right middle temporal gyrus, and cingulum for natural stimuli. In
contrast, activity was greater in the fusiform gyrus bilaterally, right inferior temporal cortex, left middle occipital cortex, and left inferior frontal
operculum for unnatural stimuli. The effect of the stimuli contrast level
was limited to the calcarine cortex. These findings suggest that the perception of stimuli as natural or unnatural involves areas other than those
known to take part in low-level visual processes.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

169

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

E111
APPRAISAL-DRIVEN INTERACTION OF FACIAL EMOTION AND
GAZE DIRECTION IN THE HUMAN AMYGDALA USING
COMPUTER-GENERATED DYNAMIC FACES Karim
N'Diaye1,2,
David Sander1, Patrik Vuilleumier1,2; 1Swiss Center for Affective Sciences,
Geneva, 2Neurology and Imaging of Cognition, NeuroCenter, University of
Geneva — Recent behavioural evidence has shown a specific pattern of
interaction between facial emotion and gaze-direction in the processing
of facial displays. However, neuroimaging results on this topic have
proved somewhat contradictory. These discrepancies could be due to differences in the nature of the tasks and in the material used which sometimes include mild-intensity blends of facial expressions. In the present
experiment we addressed this issue using a highly-controlled set of computer-generated stimulus faces animated to produce emotional expressions of various intensities (fear, anger, happiness) with direct and
averted gaze direction. Our prediction, based on appraisal theory of emotion, was that perceived emotion by healthy subjects would show a specific pattern of interaction driven by the self-relevance dimension of the
facial displays, namely that averted fearful faces, which may signal a
nearby danger would be more relevant than fearful faces gazing directly
at the observer, while the converse would be true for angry faces -- for
which direct gaze, signalling aggressiveness, may be more relevant. Confirming our hypothesis, this interaction pattern was observed both at the
behavioural level in the ratings of perceived intensity and at the neural
level in the left and right amygdala BOLD responses and only for lowintensity facial displays. These results underscore the role of expressed
intensity as a possible source of discrepancy between studies and substantiate the involvement of human amygdala in the appraisal of affective stimuli, in particular with respect to their self-relevance dimension.
E112
PREDICTIVE CODING DURING DETECTION OF OBJECTS. Spiro
Pantazatos1, Thomas Meitzler2, Mary Bienkowski2, Euijung Sohn2, Joy Hirsch1;
1fMRI Research Center, Columbia University, New York, 2U.S. Army
RDECOM TARDEC Visual Perception Laboratory, Warren, MI — "Predictive coding" proposes that the brain resolves perceptual ambiguity by
anticipating forthcoming visual stimuli and generating a template that
enhances the match to incoming visual stimuli. Although predictive coding mechanisms have been demonstrated for detection of faces*, it is not
known if these same mechanisms can be generalized to other visual stimuli. In the current fMRI study, 12 subjects were asked to search for an
expected target in which task difficulty (target size) was parametrically
modulated and related to detection performance. During the search
phase of the task, activities of ROIs in medial frontal cortex (dmPFC and
vmPFC, previously implicated in predictive coding using a “perceptualset” paradigm*) were also observed to correlate with increasing task difficulty in the current study. A PPI analysis using activity in the vmPFC as
the physiological factor and increasing task difficulty as the psychological factor identified clusters in the cuneus and lateral occipital cortex,
higher visual regions known to be involved in visual searching and object
identification, respectively. Whereas the prior study demonstrated
upregulation of face-sensitive regions (FFA) by the vmPFC during a facedetection task*, the current work generalizes this observation to object
detection. These findings extend the previous model of predictive coding
to enhance detection of faces to detection of other target stimuli, and are
consistent with a general model of top-down enhancement of visual perception. * Summerfield, C., T. Egner, et al. (2006). "Predictive codes for
forthcoming perception in the frontal cortex." Science 314(5803): 1311-4.
E113
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY OF OTHER RACE FACE RECOGNITION Lara Pierce1, James Tanaka1; 1University of Victoria — Although
it is established that people are better at recognizing own- versus otherrace faces, the neural mechanisms mediating this advantage are not well
understood. In this study, Caucasian participants were trained to differentiate African (or Hispanic) faces at the subordinate individual level and

170

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

classify Hispanic (or African) faces at the basic level of race. Training
occurred during 5 sessions spaced over 10 days. During identical preand post-training assessments brain activity was recorded using scalp
electrodes in order to investigate changes in posterior brain components
that are involved in face processing, the N170 and the N250. The N170 is
thought to index level of exposure, while the N250 is thought to be a
marker of subordinate level representations. No differences were found
in the N170 between conditions, supporting its role as indexing exposure
alone (all conditions received identical exposure to all faces, only the
depth of processing of the faces was varied between conditions). The
main finding, however, was that faces from the race trained at the subordinate level elicited an enhanced N250 compared to faces trained at the
basic level. These differences were mirrored in an old/new recognition
task suggesting that participants learned to process other race faces at the
subordinate level, and that the N250 component is a reliable marker of
other-race face recognition.
E114
BISTABLE PERCEPTUAL REVERSALS: ERP COMPONENTS AND
THEIR NEURAL GENERATORS Michael Pitts1, Antigona Martinez1;
1University of California, San Diego — Bistable figures are useful for investigating the neural basis of object perception because they allow an isolated examination of endogenous processes. Currently, debate exists over
the neural mechanisms involved in bistable perceptual reversals. fMRI
studies (e.g. Slotnick and Yantis, 2005) have reported increased activity in
posterior parietal and inferior temporal areas during shifts in perception
of the Necker cube. Event-related potentials (ERP) studies (e.g. Pitts,
Nerger, and Davis, 2007; Kornmeier and Bach, 2004) have reported a
reversal negativity (&#8776;250msec) and a late positive component
(&#8776;400msec) associated with perceptual reversals. It is currently
unclear how these ERP components relate to fMRI activations. The goal
of the current study was to localize the neural generators of the reversal
ERP components in order to evaluate their functional significance. A
Necker-type stimulus was presented for 800msec with 500msec ISIs to
allow time-locking of ERPs to stimulus onset. Observers pressed one of
two response buttons after each trial to indicate how they perceived the
cube. The reversal negativity and late positive component were identified, and dipole modeling (BESA) and statistical-based source analyses
(LAURA) were conducted to estimate the locations of the neural generators. For the reversal negativity, both localization techniques suggested
sources in the fusiform gyrus (with a right hemisphere lateralization).
The generators of the late positive component were more anterior and
medial, in middle/inferior temporal gyri. Localization of these sources
allows comparisons between fMRI and ERP data, and provides converging evidence in support of top-down theories of bistable perception.
E115
NATURE VS. NURTURE IN VENTRAL VISUAL CORTEX: AN FMRI
STUDY OF TWINS Thad Polk1, Joonkoo Park1, Mason Smith1, Denise
Park2; 1University of Michigan, 2Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign — The patterns of neural activity in twins were estimated using functional magnetic resonance imaging in order to assess
the role of genetics in the functional organization of human ventral visual
cortex. METHODS: 13 pairs of monozygotic and 11 pairs of dizygotic
twins performed visual one-back tasks with pictures from four experimental conditions (faces, houses, pseudowords, and chairs) and one control condition (phase-scrambled versions of the same pictures). There
were three runs with 15 20-second blocks per run (three blocks of each
condition in pseudorandom order) with a 20-second rest period preceding each run. Each block consisted of 10 items from the same category
presented for 1500ms each, followed by a 500ms intertrial interval. Normalized statistical parametric maps of activity for each experimental condition vs. control in ventral visual cortex were computed. The activation
maps from each participant were then compared with the maps from
their twin using the Pearson correlation coefficient. RESULTS: The activation patterns in monozygotic twins were significantly more similar than

Poster Session E

in dizygotic twins for the face and house stimuli, but there was no effect
of zygosity for pseudowords or chairs. The effect of zygosity on similarity was also significantly larger for the face and house conditions compared with the pseudoword and chair conditions. CONCLUSION: These
results demonstrate that genetics play a significant role in determining
the cortical response to faces and places, but play a significantly smaller
role (if any) in the response to orthographic stimuli. [Supported by an
NIH grant (R01AG060625) to D.C.P. and T.A.P.]
E116
A HOUSE IS NOT A FACE: THE EFFECTS OF EARLY VISUAL
DEPRIVATION ON THE LATER DISCRIMINATION OF SPACING
AND FEATURAL CHANGES IN A NON-FACE OBJECT Rachel A.
Robbins1, Daphne Maurer1, Catherine J. Mondloch1,2, Mayu Nishimura1, Terri
L. Lewis1,3,4; 1McMaster University, 2Brock University, 3The Hospital for Sick
Children, 4University of Toronto — Patients deprived of patterned visual
input during early infancy by dense bilateral cataracts later show deficits
in discriminating spacing information in faces (e.g, distance between the
eyes); however, they are normal at discriminating feature information
(e.g., eye shape; Le Grand et al., 2001, 2003). Here, we tested whether this
deficit is specific to faces by examining the ability of such patients to discriminate spacing changes and feature changes in a non-face object class
(houses). We created two sets of 10 houses that were identical except for
the position of windows and doors (spacing set), or the particular windows and doors (feature set). On each trial a single house was presented
for 200 ms, followed by a pair of houses; participants indicated which
house matched the original. The eight patients (10 to 23 years of age), all
of whom had been treated for bilateral cataract during infancy, performed normally on both sets (patients means: spacing = 75.5%, feature =
83%; adult norms: spacing = 75.9%, feature = 84.1%), with every patient
within 1 SD of adult norms for the spacing set. The sub-set of three adult
patients tested on spacing in upright human faces on the same day confirmed a deficit on that task (patients = 62.2%, adult norms = 82.2%).
Together, the results indicate that early visual input is necessary for the
normal development of sensitivity to spacing in faces, but not in non-face
objects.
E117
INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES
IN
GRAPHEME-COLOR
SYNESTHESIA Romke Rouw1, Steven Scholte1; 1University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands — Grapheme-color synesthetes experience
specific colors with particular letters or numbers (e.g. ’the A is bright
red). In this study, we examine the neurological basis of individual differences in the synesthetic experiences. DTI showed increased anisotropic
diffusion when compared to matched controls. Increased anisotropic diffusion indicates more coherent white matter. Anisotropy furthermore
differentiates subtypes of grapheme-color synesthesia. Increased connectivity in the inferior temporal cortex is particularly strong for synesthetes
who see synesthetic color in the outside world ('projectors') as compared
with synesthetes who see the color in their mind's eye only ('associators').
In contrast, increased connectivity (as compared with non-synesthetes) in
the superior parietal or frontal cortex did not differentiate between subtypes of synesthesia. Furthermore, we present new data showing how
individual differences in grapheme-color synesthesia are reflected in differences in the neurological mechanisms involved.
E118
INTERHEMISPHERIC TRANSFER OF PHOSPHENES INDUCED BY
TMS OVER OCCIPITAL AND PARIETAL CORTE Silvia
Savazzi1,
Francesca Mancini1, Carlo Marzi1; 1University of Verona, Verona, Italy — It is
well established that one characteristic structural feature of the visual
cortex is that it does not give rise or receive callosal connections beyond
the central visual field representation. Therefore, peripheral visual stimuli lateralized to one hemisphere cannot be transferred from one visual
cortex to the other via callosal connections. In contrast, the visual areas in
the parietal lobes have widespread callosal connections that can ensure a
direct interhemispheric transfer (IT) for the whole visual field representa-

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

tion. Thus, one could predict that phosphenes generated by applying
TMS to V1 should show a slower IT than those obtained by stimulating
areas with more widespread callosal connections such as the parietal cortex. To test these predictions we applied TMS over the occipital pole (OTMS), or to the posterior parietal cortex (P-TMS) and we measured IT
with the Poffenberger paradigm, by asking normal participants to
respond to the onset of a phosphene with the hand ipsilateral or contralateral to the stimulated hemisphere. The difference between crossed
and uncrossed conditions (CUD) is taken as an estimate of IT which in
normals is around 4 ms. We found a dramatically lengthened CUD for RT
to O-TMS-induced phosphenes (36-37 ms) while the CUD for RT to PTMS-induced phosphenes and for visually presented stimuli was in the
normal range (3-4 ms). The thrust of these results is twofold: they show
that phosphenes transfer from one hemisphere to the other via callosal
connections. Moreover, they provide novel evidence of phosphenes
obtained by stimulation of posterior parietal cortex.
E119
NEURONAL TUNING TO WHOLE REAL WORDS IN THE
VENTRAL VISUAL PATHWAY Laurie Schwarz Glezer1, Xiong Jiang1,
Maximilian Riesenhuber1; 1Georgetown University Medical Center,
Washington, D.C. — Numerous studies have identified an area in the ventral visual pathway that responds preferentially to written real words
(RW) and pseudowords (PW), termed the “visual word form area”
(VWFA). It has been proposed that the VWFA is responsible for creating
an abstract representation of visually perceived letter strings that is prelexical. In contrast, we hypothesized that the requirement to discriminate
similar real words (i.e. “farm” and “form”) leads to experience-driven
refinement of neurons tuned to whole RWs. In contrast, response boundaries of these RW-tuned neurons to PWs are less sharp due to lack of
refinement, causing low-level activation of a number of RW neurons to a
particular PW. We used fMRI rapid adaptation to test these contrasting
hypotheses. We compared two groups of 12 subjects presented with
either RW pairs or PW pairs. We examined three conditions: 1) “same”, in
which the same stimulus was presented twice, 2) “1L”, in which the two
stimuli differed by one letter, and 3) “different”, in which the two stimuli
shared no letters. In both groups, we found significant adaptation for
“same” vs. “different” and “1L”. Interestingly, the RW pairs showed no
difference between “1L” and “different” in the VWFA, showing that even
though the two RWs in “1L” shared sublexical units, there was no adaptation. In contrast, the PW pairs showed a significant difference between
“1L” and “different, suggesting broad tuning to PWs. These results suggest that VWFA neurons are tightly tuned to whole real words and not
sublexical units as previously proposed.
E120
PERCEPTUAL LOAD AND EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL (ERP)
MEASURES OF HEMISPHERIC COOPERATION Andrea
Shafer1,
Barry Haimson1; 1University of Massachusetts Dartmouth — Prior research
with behavioral methods has demonstrated that task complexity is a factor influencing within and across hemisphere processing. Previously, this
laboratory obtained behavioral and ERP differences in hemispheric processing by manipulating the timing (delayed vs. simultaneous) of the target and probe. An across hemisphere advantage was obtained in the
delayed condition, but was contingent on the visual field of the target.
This finding could have resulted from differences either in perceptual
load or task complexity. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate
ERP correlates of hemispheric cooperation associated with perceptual
load not confounded with task complexity. Subjects were randomly
assigned to either a single probe or multiple probe condition. The target
appeared in the left visual field (LVF) or the right visual field (RVF) while
the matching probe (match-location) appeared in the same visual field as
the target (within match) or the opposite visual field (across match). A
matching probe appeared on half the trials. Participants indicated on a
keypad whether one of the probes above a fixation point matched a letter
target below it. Statistical analyses indicated match-location differences

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

171

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

in RT associated with visual field but not perceptual load. The ERP peak
amplitude data revealed greater positivity for the multiple condition and
for the within condition in both the P200 and P300 time windows. Peak
latency occurred earlier in the within condition for P200, but later for
P300. These results suggest increasing perceptual load influences hemispheric cooperation differently from increasing task complexity.

Poster Session E

late positive complex (LPC), but not earlier feedforward processes of perceptual categorization during a P150-N170 complex. 24 participants categorized fragmented line drawings of known objects. Impoverishment
was defined by a median split of response time with slower times defining more impoverished (MI) and faster times defining less impoverished
(LI) objects. As predicted, after 200 ms, the N350 was larger for MI than
LI objects, whereas the LPC was smaller for MI than LI objects. Consistent with the two-state interactive account, object model selection processes supporting categorization occur after 200 ms and can be
modulated by top-down processes of model verification implemented in
VLPFC-parietal networks to facilitate object constancy under impoverished viewing conditions.

E121
MODULATION OF FACIAL AFFECT PROCESSING BY VISUAL
DESIGN: ERP EVIDENCE AT P1 AND N170 Bernadette Sibuma1, John
Black2, Karen Froud2; 1SUNY Oswego, 2Columbia University — A continuing point of debate in the electrophysiology literature is whether the facesensitive N170 event-related potential is modulated by facial affect (Batty
& Taylor, 2003; Eimer & Holmes, 2007; Blau, Maurer, Tottenham, &
McCandliss, 2007). However, little is known about the impact of the
visual design on face processing. The initial P1 component is said to
reflect feature-based processing, whereas the N170 reflects more structural and holistic processing (Latinus & Taylor, 2006). Using a perceptual
decision-making task, we examined the P1 and N170 in the processing of
cartoon, computer-agent, and photographs of faces with neutral and fearful expressions. Results indicated that the most realistic presentations
elicited the largest P1 amplitudes. In addition, although there was no significant effect of facial affect on the N170 amplitude within cartoons and
photos, fear significantly enhanced the N170 negativity in agents. Since
variance in the amplitude of a component has often been associated with
the degree to which the associated cognitive process is engaged (Donchin
& Coles 1988; Otten & Rugg, 2005), we hypothesized that realistic faces
significantly heighten neural engagement in early perceptual processing.
These findings suggest that visual design modulates the time course of
facial affect processing. Batty, M., & Taylor, M. J. (2003). Early processing
of the six basic facial emotional expressions. Cognitive Brain Research,
17, 613-620. Blau, V. C., Maurer, U., Tottenham, N., & McCandliss, B. D.
(2007). The face-specific n170 component is modulated by emotional
facial expression. Behavioral and Brain Functions, 3(7), 1-13. Eimer, M., &
Holmes, A. (2007). Event-related brain potential correlates of emotional
face processing. Neuropsychologia, 45(1), 15-31. Donchin, E. & Coles,
M.G.H. (1988). Is the P300 component a manifestation of context updating? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 11, 355-372. Latinus, M., & Taylor, M.
J. (2006). Face processing stages: Impact of difficulty and the separation of
effects. Brain Research, 1123, 179-187. Otten, L.J. & Rugg, M.D. (2005).
Interpreting event-related brain potentials. In Handy, T.C. (ed.) Eventrelated potentials: a methods handbook. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Pp.
3-16.

E123
PERCEPTION OF HUMAN WALKING IN NEUROSURGICAL
PATIENTS WITH LEFT CEREBELLAR LESIONS Arseny
A.
Sokolov1, Alireza Gharabaghi1, Marcos Tatagiba1, Marina A. Pavlova2;
1University of Tuebingen Medical School, Tuebingen, Germany, 2Children’s
Hospital, University of Tuebingen Medical School, Tuebingen, Germany, and
MEG-Center, Institute of Medical Psychology and Behavioral Neurobiology,
University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany — The ability to perceive
actions of others is essential for our daily-life behavior, e.g. for non-verbal
communication or safe car driving. The cortical network for perception of
body motion has been widely explored (Pavlova et al., Cereb Cortex 2006;
Puce and Perrett, Phil Trans R Soc Lond B 2003; Pelphrey et al, Cereb Cortex 2005). Recent brain imaging data also suggest cerebellar involvement
in perception of biological motion (Grossman et al., J Cogn Neurosci
2000; Calvo-Merino et al., Curr Biology 2007). However, there is still a
lack of consensus as to cerebellar substructures engaged. By using pointlight stimuli, we assessed the sensitivity to human locomotion in neurosurgical patients with lateral or medial lesions to the left cerebellum. Our
psychophysical findings show that patients with left cerebellar lesions
exhibit a lower sensitivity to human walking than healthy controls, and
that lateral lesions account for more pronounced deficits than medial
lesions. We also report a patient SLO with an extensive left cerebellar
lesion. Her preoperative sensitivity to human walking was at a chance
level. Eight months after neurosurgery, her sensitivity improved substantially and reached the level of healthy controls after 24 months. The findings point to the cerebellum as an important structure subserving
perception of human walking and shed light on its plasticity. Brain imaging in combination with neuropsychological assessment is required to
determine the role of the cerebellum in the neuronal network for body
motion perception.

E122
TOP-DOWN
PROCESSES
OF
MODEL
VERIFICATION
FACILITATE VISUAL OBJECT CATEGORIZATION UNDER
IMPOVERISHED VIEWING CONDITIONS AFTER 200 MS Emily
Slocombe1, Giorgio Ganis2,3, Haline E. Schendan1; 1Tufts University, 2Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, 3Massachusetts General Hospital, Athinoula A.
Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Charlestown, MA — While objects
seen under optimal visual conditions are rapidly categorized, categorizing objects under impoverished viewing conditions (e.g., unusual views,
in fog, occlusion) requires more time and may depend more on top-down
processing, as hypothesized by object model verification theory. Object
categorization involves matching the incoming perceptual information to
a stored visuostructural representation in long-term memory. Functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) work found evidence for model verification theory, and implicated ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC)
and parietal lobe in top-down modulation of posterior visual processes
during the categorization of impoverished images of objects. We replicated the fMRI study with event-related potentials (ERPs) to time model
verification processes. The two-state interactive account of visual object
knowledge predicts that top-down processes of model verification modulate object model selection processes supporting categorization during a
frontopolar N350, and later categorization processes during a parietal

E124
AN OSCILLATORY SIGNATURE OF VISUAL FEATURE-BINDING
IN OBJECT PERCEPTION Kevin Spencer1,2, Robert McCarley1,2; 1VA
Boston Healthcare System, 2Harvard Medical School — Single-unit
recordings in animals have found evidence that neuronal synchronization in the
gamma band (30-100 Hz) of the electroencephalogram (EEG) may underlie the linking of stimulus features into the perception of coherent objects.
In humans, EEG/MEG studies have reported evidence that non-stimulus-locked gamma oscillations are related to object perception, but close
links have not been established. Previously we observed a gamma oscillation at occipital electrodes in a Gestalt perception task that occurred prior
to the overt response on shape-present but not shape-absent trials, and
was phase-locked to reaction time, suggesting that it was closely related
to the perceptual decision. Here we sought to determine whether this
response-locked oscillation (RLO) could be elicited by both real and illusory shapes, as would be required by a mechanism involved in featurebinding. Fifteen subjects performed a task in which they indicated
whether or not a diamond shape was present in a stimulus array. The
shape could be formed by Real or Illusory contours. On No-Shape trials
the inducer disks forming the Illusory contour were rotated outwards.
On Real- and Illusory-Shape trials, an RLO was found at occipital electrodes prior to the overt response (48-64 Hz; Real: -198 to -172 ms; Illu-

172

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

sory: -160 to -140 ms). The RLO was detected in the phase-locking but not
the power data, and was not apparent on No-Shape trials. These findings
suggest that the RLO may be the manifestation of an oscillatory mechanism for visual feature binding, which operates via modulation of the
temporal precision of gamma activity.
E125
ANOREXIA NERVOSA IS ASSOCIATED WITH A REDUCTION OF
GRAY MATTER DENSITY IN THE EXTRASTRIATE BODY AREA:
A VOXEL BASED MORPHOMETRY STUDY. Boris Suchan1, Martin
Busch2, Dietmar Schulte1, Dietrich Grönemeyer2, Stephan Herpertz3, Silja
Vocks1; 1Ruhr University Bochum, 2Institute for Micro Therapy, 3Westfälische
Klinik Dortmund — Anorexia nervosa (AN) is a widely distributed disease in the western society. One striking feature of subjects suffering AN
is the disturbance of body size estimation. A plausible explanation for
this phenomenon of body size disturbance is discussed controversially in
the literature. The present study aimed at characterising the morphological changes in the brain of women suffering AN. Voxel based morphometry was applied to high resolution T1 weighted magnetic resonance
images of 12 healthy controls and 12 women diagnosed with AN according to the criteria of the DSM IV. Contrasts of the segmented gray matter
images of AN and healthy controls yielded evidence for a reduction of
gray matter density in the left lateral occipital cortex covering the so
called extrastriate body area (EBA) as well as the superior temporal sulcus in AN if compared to healthy controls. This finding suggest that
structural alterations in parts of the visual cortex (EBA) which are sensitive for processing body specific information are responsible for the disturbance in body size estimation in AN.
E126
THE VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX DETECTS
MATCHES BETWEEN EXPECTED AND OBSERVED EVENTS
Christopher Summerfield1, Etienne Koechlin1; 1Ecole Normale Supérieure,
Paris, France — Visual perception is shaped by ‘top-down’ information –
foreknowledge about what is likely to be perceived. Prior information
allows the brain to build an internal model (or ‘template’) of coming sensation, thereby reducing the problem of perceptual inference to assessing
the match between this template and information in the external world.
Which brain regions might participate in monitoring for this ‘match’
between expected and observed perceptual information? Here, we
acquired functional magnetic resonance images (fMRI) whilst subjects
performed a simple perceptual decision task that involved either forcedchoice judgments with two alternatives (e.g. is the stimulus A or B?) or
‘matching’ decisions that involved the comparison between an external
event and an internal template (e.g. is the stimulus A or not?). These two
types of judgment, which we respectively call A-B and A-nA decisions,
were presented in blocks, with an identical stimulus train, that were tailored not to differ in terms of overall task demand as indexed by either
reaction times (RTs) or errors. Nevertheless, they led to strikingly different patterns of brain activity. A-nA decisions, which required the subjects
to explicitly match each stimulus to an internal template, activated the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and connected structures. We
argue that matching expected and observed information may be a basic
function of the vmPFC and other ‘default network’ structures, and that
increased signal during an uneventful resting period may reflect the continuous fulfillment of sensory predictions.
E127
ALTRUISM AND FUNCTIONAL SPECIFICITY OF THE SUPERIOR
TEMPORAL CORTEX Dharol Tankersley1,3, Chinchun Ooi1, Scott A.
Huettel1,2; 1Brain Imaging and Analysis Center, 2Psychiatry, Duke University
Medical Center, 3Philosophy Department — Social perception requires the
identification of agents and their goal-oriented behaviors, processes that
preferentially evoke activation in the right superior temporal cortex
(rSTC). Recent work suggests that a specific perceptual capacity -- the
discrimination of movement contingency -- influences both the perception of agency and hemodynamic activity in the rSTC. In parallel, we

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

have shown that pSTC activation predicts individual differences in prosocial behavior. Although the rSTC is activated by social perception
tasks, this region is also reliably recruited in simple visual attention tasks,
including oddball and target-detection tasks. The common activation
across these disparate tasks poses challenges for understanding its functional organization and specificity. Indeed, the role of physical parameters such as movement contingency in inducing perception of animacy
suggests that social percepts might be composed of simple, non-social
computations. We conducted a functional magnetic resonance imaging
study in which subjects performed a variety of tasks tapping visual attention and social perception. Our imaging results confirmed two previous
findings. First, the rSTC was preferentially activated when watching
apparently goal-oriented actions, compared to watching random movements. Second, the amplitude of this rSTC activation during social perception was predicted, across subjects, by individual differences in
altruism, as measured by self-report surveys and a giving task. Furthermore, we found that individual differences in the ability to discriminate
movement contingency were correlated with rSTC activation. Future
analyses will investigate the degree to which neuronal activity associated
with visual attention tasks predict trait-level social phenomena like altruism.
E128
EPISODIC REPRESENTATIONS OF OBJECT COLOR Sarah
Vollmer1, Robert Gordon1; 1North Dakota State University — The
episodic
representation of colored letters was investigated within a transsaccadic
preview paradigm. While participants fixated on a central cross, a preview was displayed consisting of two letters located above and below a
peripheral cross. Participants initiated a saccade to the peripheral cross
immediately upon the appearance of the preview display. During the
saccade, the preview display was replaced by a target display, consisting
of a single familiar letter in one of the previewed locations; the participant's task was to name the letter as quickly as possible after the eyes
landed. The target’s letter either matched or was different from its color
in the preview display. The results revealed an object-specific priming
effect: that is, participants named the letter more quickly when it
appeared in its previewed location than when it appeared in the opposite
location. This priming effect was unaffected by a change in the target’s
color; however, a follow-up study, in which the preview and target stimuli were colored objects, revealed a significant effect of color change on
object-specific priming. The results suggest that whether or not color
change affects object continuity depends on the extent to which it plays a
role in defining the object’s identity.
E129
THE AGE OF THE BEHOLDER: ERP EVIDENCE FOR AN OWNAGE BIAS IN FACE MEMORY Holger Wiese1, Kerstin Hansen1, Stefan
R. Schweinberger1; 1Friedrich Schiller University of Jena — Unfamiliar faces
from an observer’s own ethnic group are more accurately memorized
than other-race faces. This own-race bias has been explained in terms of
relatively enhanced perceptual expertise with own- in comparison to
other-race faces. Using behavioral and event-related potential (ERP) measures, the present study examined whether similar interactions between
the age of stimulus faces and the participants’ age occur. In study phases,
young (M=22 years) and elderly participants (M=66 years) categorized
old and young faces according to stimulus age. Recognition memory for
the faces was subsequently tested. Whereas young participants demonstrated enhanced recognition for own-age faces, no corresponding effect
was observed in elderly participants. ERPs in the test phases revealed
enhanced N170 amplitudes for old in comparison to young faces, probably reflecting more configural processing of young faces. In the subsequent right posterior P2 (200-300 ms), an interaction of face age and
participants’ age was observed: Whereas young participants demonstrated more positive amplitudes for young in comparison to old faces,
this effect was absent in the elderly. Finally, enhanced old/new effects
(more positive ERPs to hits than correct rejections) to own-age in compar-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

173

Monday, April 14, 8:00 - 10:00 am

ison to other-age faces were observed in the young participants’ waveforms. These findings thus demonstrate an own-age bias to the
recognition of unfamiliar faces in young, but not in elderly participants,
which is in line with a perceptual learning account of the phenomenon.
Asymmetric perceptual experience of young and elderly participants
with faces from different age groups may underlie the current results.
E130
BINOCULAR RIVALRY: STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY AND A
TRULY NONRIVALROUS COMPARISON CONDITION Juliane C.
Wilcke1, Robert P. O'Shea3, Richard Watts1,3; 1University of Canterbury, New
Zealand, 3University of Otago, New Zealand, 3Van der Veer Institute for
Parkinson's and Brain Research, Christchurch, New Zealand — Is there an
anatomical network connecting those fronto-parietal areas that several
reviews have suggested as necessary for conscious perception? To investigate this question, we used a phenomenon in which visual awareness
changes randomly every few seconds without any change in the stimuli
shown to the eyes: binocular rivalry. In one experiment, we induced binocular rivalry by showing a red grating to one eye and a green grating of
different orientation to the other. Observers pressed keys to signal
changes in the perceived colour of the display while undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). To remove confounding brain
activity due to motor reports, we asked observers not to press keys in a
second experiment. Here, the rivalling stimuli were green gratings of different orientation, which alternated with blocks of identical stimuli presented to the two eyes, leading to binocular fusion. The fMRI results in
our first experiment were consistent with the fronto-parietal activity
reported in previous studies of binocular rivalry. Probabilistic tractography based on diffusion tensor imaging data of the same participants
showed that most areas associated with perceptual switches during binocular rivalry had direct white matter connections to other activated
areas. When we compared binocular rivalry without motor reports to
binocular fusion, we found, as expected, no activity related to the key
presses, but activity in frontal and parietal areas was again present.
Taken together, these findings support the necessity of activity in a
fronto-parietal network for changes in visual awareness during binocular
rivalry.
E131
ACCUMULATING EVIDENCE FOR AN ACCUMULATOR: AN
FMRI STUDY Drew Erickson1, Brad Buchsbaum1, Andrew Kayser1,2, Mark
D'Esposito1; 1University of California, Berkeley, 2University of California, San
Francisco — How the brain might accumulate evidence for a decision,
whether perceptual, mnemonic, or otherwise, has been the subject of a
number of recent studies ranging from macaque single-unit recordings to
human psychophysics. In many, if not most, of these cases, the data can
be explained by a simple model in which evidence for a decision is integrated over time to a threshold, at which point a decision is generated.
One brain region in particular, the intraparietal sulcus (IPS), has been
implicated by Shadlen and colleagues as an important locus of such
"accumulator" activity. In this study, we investigated the signal in the IPS
in response to dot displays in which the coherence of dot motion was varied parametrically. We found that the BOLD response in the medial posterior bank of the IPS varied linearly with dot coherence, and that correct
and incorrect trials could be differentiated by the magnitude of the IPS
signal. In contrast, areas in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex showed an
inverse relationship with dot coherence and subject accuracy, suggesting
that these regions were required as the perceptual difficulty of the decision increased. Our data support the idea of an accumulator in the IPS,
and provide further evidence for the role of more distributed brain areas
in such perceptual decision-making tasks.

174

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session E

Poster Session F
Attentional processes: Visual
F1
ABNORMAL VISUAL-SPATIAL ATTENTION IN MIGRAINEURS
Marla J. S. Mickleborough1, Todd C. Handy1; 1University of British
Columbia — Migraineurs show consistent abnormalities in basic sensorylevel visual processing. Specifically, migraineurs do not habituate to
repeated innocuous visual stimuli , which means they do not show the
normal gradual decrease in the strength of cortical visual sensory
response. Given that one of the central roles of executive functioning is to
modulate visual-sensory processing via attentional control signals, the
specific goal of this project was to examine whether migraineurs show
abnormal top-down control of sensory responses in visual cortex as measured via ERPs. We tested four participant cohorts in a canonical spatial
cuing task: migraineurs with aura (i.e., visual or somatosensory warning
signals that a migraine headache is impending), migraineurs without aura,
tension type headache controls, and age-matched non-headache controls.
Our data indicate that migraineurs do not show the normal ability to modulate sensory-evoked visual brain responses via spatial attention. In particular, we found that attention related changes in both foveal and parafoveal
visual locations differed in migraineurs relative to both control groups, as
measured via the P1, N1, and N2 ERP components. Not only does this
research indicate that there may be significant neurocognitive abnormalities in migraineurs visual-attentional function, but also that we may need
to begin thinking about controlling for migraine states in our "normal"
populations.
F2
VISUAL ATTENTION AND PERCEPTION ORGANIZATION
Mariofanna Milanova1, Tomasz Smolinski1,2; 1University of Arkansas at Little
Rock, 2Emory University — In recent years, it has become clear that many
problems in perception organization are difficult to solve without introducing the contextual information of a visual scene. Subjects often
searched for the component feature of a target rather that the target itself,
even if the target is a simple geometric form. Another reason for features driven attention is that this reflects the attempt of the eye to maximize the
information it can gather at each fixation. Barlow’s hypothesis is that the
purpose of early visual processing is to transform the highly redundant
sensory input into more efficient factorial code. A perceptual system
should be organized to transmit maximum information. At the same time
the human visual system has evolved multiple mechanisms for controlling
gaze. Tracking can be formulated in a probabilistic framework in both the
future- driven and intensity-driven settings. Among existing techniques
which make probabilistic treatment possible are principal component
analysis (PCA) and independent component analysis (ICA). These techniques do not allow noise to be modeled separately from the signal structure, and they do not permit overcomplete codes in which there are more
basis functions than input dimensions. In our proposed model, a sequence
of images is described as a linear superposition of space-time functions,
each of which is convolved with a time varying coefficient signal. When a
sparse, independent representation is sought over the coefficients, the
basis functions that emerge are space-time inseparable functions that
resemble the motion-selective receptive fields of cortical simple cells. Our
approach utilizes a spatio-temporal generative model that can be viewed
as an extension of the spatial generate model used by Olshausen and Field
, Rao and Ballard .Contrary to previous computational models, results on
static images, which gave only filters at the finest possible spatial scale,
spatio-temporal analysis yields filters at a range of spatial and temporal

scales. Filters centered at low spatial frequencies are generally tuned to
faster movement than those at high spatial frequencies. It is shown that
performing sparse learning codes on video sequences of natural scenes
produces results with qualitatively similar spatio-temporal properties of
simple receptive field of neurons. The proposed framework was tested
using neurobiological (event related potentials ERP’s) and behavioral ( eye
tracking) data. We also discuss some of the challenging directions for
future research.
F3
ROLE OF ATTENTION IN PERCEPTUAL LEARNING Ikuko Mukai1,
Olivia Wu1, Leslie Ungerleider1; 1National Institute of Mental Health, NIH,
Laboratory of Brain and Cognition — Results from our previous study
(Mukai et al., 2007) suggested an important role for attention in perceptual
learning, in that the responses of attention-related areas (IPS, FEF, and
SEF): 1) were negatively correlated with behavioral improvement on the
task; 2) were initially greater for subjects who subsequently learned compared to those who did not; and 3) showed stronger functional connectivity with early visual areas in subjects who learned. In the current study, we
directly examined the relationship between attention and perceptual learning by using a dual task paradigm. In the main perceptual learning task,
we used the same contrast discrimination task employed in Mukai et al.
(2007), where subjects were trained to detect a fine difference in the contrast of two sine wave gratings. Each trial of this main task was preceded
by a rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) task in which subjects had to
identify a white target letter in a temporal string of black letters. Behavioral data showed that subjects improved only by about 10% while performing the dual tasks, compared to the 20% improvement seen in our
previous study of perceptual learning using a single task (Mukai et al.,
2007). Our findings suggest that depleting attentional resources impedes
perceptual learning of the contrast discrimination.
F4
PRIMING BY UNATTENDED FACES: ERP EVIDENCE Markus
F.
Neumann1, Stefan R. Schweinberger1; 1Friedrich-Schiller-University of Jena,
Germany — It is a matter of considerable debate whether attention to initial
stimulus presentations is required for repetition-related neural modulations to occur (e.g., Henson et al., 2007, NeuroImage). Recently, eventrelated potential (ERP) evidence for long-term repetition effects of unattended famous faces has been reported (Neumann et al., 2007, NeuroReport). This finding is in line with the assumption that faces are particularly
hard to ignore and tend to capture attention. The present study investigated influences of attention to prime face stimuli on repetition effects in
ERPs. We manipulated attention to first-presentations (S1) of task-irrelevant famous faces according to the perceptual load theory (Lavie, 1995,
Journal of Experimental Psychology – Human Perception and Performance). Participants attended to letter strings superimposed on face
images, and identified target letters “X” vs. “N” in letter strings consisting
of either 6 different (high load, e.g. “HXZWMK”) or 6 identical letters (low
load, e.g. “NNNNNN”). Letter identification was followed (SOA=2000ms)
by presentations (S2) of a) identical repetitions of S1 faces, b) new famous
faces, or c) butterflies. Participants responded to infrequent butterfly
images (~12%) by button press. Our behavioural results showed that S1
load was manipulated successfully (higher accuracies and shorter reaction
times for low vs. high load conditions). ERPs to S2 faces, however,
revealed comparable repetition effects from 220 ms (N250r) at occipitotemporal regions irrespective of whether S1 face presentation occurred
under low or high load conditions. This finding provides further electro-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

175

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

physiological evidence for processing of task-irrelevant faces, even under
high perceptual load which usually prevents distractor processing.
F5
ATTENTIONAL MODULATION OF STIMULUS APPEARANCE:
ERP EVIDENCE FOR A POSTPERCEPTUAL PROCESS Michael
Niedeggen1; 1Experimental Psychology and Neuropsychology, Free University
Berlin, Germany — Numerous psychophysical studies indicated that a
transient visuospatial shift of attention induced by a salient peripheral
cue increases the apparent contrast of a target stimulus. Here, a similar
cuing paradigm was used to examine the effect of covert attention on the
appearance of visual motion coherence: A short sequence of coherence
(100 ms) was embedded in two dynamic random dot kinematograms
(RDK) presented left and right of a fixation. Subjects had to decide which
RDK was apparently defined by a higher level of coherence. The target
was preceded by a short reduction in luminance in one RDK serving as a
cue (SOA: 100 ms). Psychophysical data revealed that the apparent
motion coherence was reduced by an invalid cue (higher coherence in the
contralateral RDK), and attenuated by a valid one (higher coherence in
the ipsilateral RDK). A corresponding modulation of the event-related
brain potentials (ERPs) was obtained in the range of a late cognitive component (P300), but not within the negativity associated with sensory
motion processing (N200). Here, invalid cues were found to prolong the
time course of sensory processing. The results indicate that reflexive
attention does not necessarily enhance a visual signal, and that the corresponding shift in stimulus appearance reflects the activation of a postperceptual process.
F6
A LOWER LOADED HEMISPHERE AIDS IRRELEVANT
PROCESSING Ritsuko Nishimura1, Kazuhito Yoshizaki1, Kimiko Kato1,
Takeshi Hatta2; 1Aichi Shukutoku University, 2Nagoya University — Our
study aimed to investigate whether or not a distractor was processed in
the hemisphere which is loaded with the lower perceptual load. This
question was motivated by the assumption that each hemisphere has an
independent resource. Right-handed 16 participants were asked to discriminate a target letter in briefly presented five task-relevant letters,
while ignoring a distractor presented in the periphery outside the taskrelevant letters. We manipulated perceptual load of the target (high-load
or low-load), presentation mode between a target and a distractor
(within- or across-field), and compatibility of a target and a distractor
(compatible or incompatible). In the high-load condition, a target and
three non-target letters were presented in either left (LVF) or right visualfield (RVF) and a non-target letter was presented in the opposite visualfield. In the low-load condition, a target was presented in either LVF or
RVF and four non-target letters were presented in the opposite visualfield. In the within-field condition, the target and the distractor were presented in the same visual-field. By contrast, in the across-field condition,
they were presented in the divided visual-fields. Results showed that in
the low-load condition the compatibility effect was larger in the withinfield condition than in the across-field condition. On the contrary in the
high-load condition, the compatibility effect was larger in the across-field
than in the within-field condition. These results suggested that the distractor was processed in the hemisphere which was loaded with lower
perceptual load, irrespective of the presentation mode.
F7
TEMPORAL EXPECTANCY INFLUENCES ORIENTING IN TIME
BUT NOT THE TIME COURSE OF ORIENTING IN SPACE Nathan
Parks1, Paul Corballis1; 1Georgia Tech — It has long been known that attention may be oriented to regions of visual space. More recently, it has been
proposed that attention may also be directed to instants in time. That is,
an endogenous cue of attention may carry information regarding the
temporal validity of an upcoming target. In the case of both spatial and
temporal orienting, endogenous cues must be informative and the cuetarget validity of these cues must be learned. We wondered whether the
time course of spatial orienting is learned and is dependent on the tempo-

176

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

ral validity of endogenous spatial cues. We examined interactions
between temporal orienting and the time course of spatial attention by
biasing cue-target stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) in an endogenous
spatial attention paradigm. Subjects (N=72) performed an endogenous
spatial cuing task (75% validity) with cue-target SOAs 100, 200, 300, 400,
500, 600, or 700 ms. The temporal validity of spatial cues was manipulated between groups by weighting the occurrence of one SOA over the
others. In the three groups (N=24), the validity of 100, 400, or 700 ms was
manipulated by weighting the corresponding SOA to occur 40% of the
time versus the 10% occurrence of each remaining SOA. Simple reaction
time data were examined for interactions between spatial and temporal
orienting. There were significant within-subjects effects of spatial orienting and significant between-subjects effects of temporal orienting, but no
interaction between the two. Results are consistent with the idea that spatial and temporal orienting operate via separable mechanisms.
F8
BEHAVIORAL
AND
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
LINKS
BETWEEN DRD4 AND ATTENTION ORIENTING IN CHILDREN
Koraly Perez-Edgar1, Nathan Fox2, Louis Schmidt3; 1George Mason University,
2University of Maryland, College Park, 3McMaster University — Numerous
studies have shown that the D4 dopamine receptors (DRD4s) play important roles in attentional and motivational processes. With children, much
of the focus has been on Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD). Less work has focused on the role of DRD4 in normal development. In the current study, we examined the links between DRD4 allelic
status and performance in a standard measure of attention orienting, the
Posner cued-attention paradigm, in 7-year-old children. Building on previous work, the Posner task was modified to include a baseline, affectneutral, condition and a second condition completed in an emotionallycharged environment. The impact of this manipulation on attention orienting was examined using behavioral (RT) and psychophysiological
(ERP) measures. The children with the long-allele (LA) were significantly
slower in the task than their peers in the short-allele (SA) group, F(1,
47)=8.57, p<.01. The LA group was particularly slow when presented
with invalidly cued trials, F(1, 47)=6.59, p=.01, across both neutral and
affective conditions. For the N1 component, children in the SA group
showed the expected validity effect, which increased from the neutral to
affective Posner condition. However, the LA group displayed a decrease
in the validity effect across conditions, F(1, 43)=4.85, p=.03. For N2, the
LA group had smaller peak amplitudes and failed to show the validity
effect in the affective task, F(1, 43)=7.61, p=.01. The data indicate that children with the long allele have greater difficulty with basic attention-orienting processes, perhaps contributing to the link between DRD4 and
attention problems, including ADHD.
F9
MENTAL IMAGERY AND VISUAL PERCEPTION OF THE MENTAL
NUMBER LINE Lorenzo Pia1,2, Alessia Folegatti1, Marco Neppi-Mòdona1,2,
Luigi Cremasco3, Lucia Spinazzola1,4, Patrizia Gindri5; 1University of Turin,
2
Neuroscience Institute of Turin (NIT), University of Turin, 3Fondazione Don
Carlo e Centro Santa Maria ai Colli, Turin, 4Hospital Company S. Antonio
Abate, Gallarate, 5San Camillo Hospital, Turin — It has been suggested a
relationship between spatial thinking and number representation, such
that numbers are represented along a continuous, left-to-right mental
number line with smaller quantities located to the left of larger ones.
Some evidence comes from the joint deficits of space and numbers processing in left-neglect patients. These patients, when required to indicate
which number is halfway between two orally presented numbers that
define a numerical interval, may displace the midpoint progressively
rightwards as the interval grows. This raises the question of whether
shifting attention within a mental representation produces a corresponding attentional shift in the visual field, and vice-versa. To address this
question, we selected 10 neglect patients with the aforementioned pattern
of numerical error. The same numerical intervals were then employed in
a “numerical-endpoint task” that consisted of two conditions: 1) Marking

Poster Session F

the midpoint of the empty space enclosed between two numerical
extremes; 2) Same as 1), but now patients were asked to mark the midpoint by writing down the number that is numerically halfway between
the two numerical extremes. The results indicate that the size of numerical intervals equally influenced the rightward numerical bias in the number bisection and in the “numerical-endpoint” tasks. The same was not
true for spatial bias (defined as the position of the bisector number): in
this case no modulation by the size of the numerical interval was present.
These results suggest that attention shift across internal spatial representation and external space might be underpinned by (at least some) different mechanisms.
F10
THE INFLUENCE OF REWARD AND PUNISHMENT ON
ATTENTION: EVIDENCE USING ERPS Nikki Pratt1, Dennis Molfese1;
1University of Louisville — Event-related potentials (ERPs) investigated
the influence of motivation and expectation on the neural processes
involved in selective visual attention. The research design was adapted
from Derryberry & Reed’s (1994) paradigm. Cues preceded target location in peripheral boxes that contained positive or negative incentives.
Points were awarded for a fast response in the positive incentive box and
subtracted for a slow response in the negative incentive box. The electrophysiological recordings utilized a 256-hydrocel electrode net to investigate valid and invalid targets in positive and negative boxes. The current
analysis examined the ERP to targets with cues predicting target location
in 80% of the trials. Preliminary results indicated that the P1 in the occipitotemporal region generated a larger response to trials with congruent
cue and target locations. This was enhanced for targets that appeared in
the negative incentive box. The N1 in the occipitotemporal region generated a larger response to incongruent cue and target locations. Specifically, a greater N1 response occurred to invalid targets in the negative
incentive box. A cue presented in the positive incentive box followed by a
target in the negative incentive box generated the largest N1. The results
suggest that early selective attention in the occipital cortex is influenced
by motivation as well as target validity.
F11
THE RIGHT TIME AND THE LEFT TIME: SPATIAL
ASSOCIATIONS OF ENDOGENOUS TEMPORAL CUES AFFECT
TARGET DETECTION IN RIGHT BRAIN-DAMAGED PATIENTS
Carson Pun1, Maha Adamo1, Ulrich W. Weger2, Sandra E. Black3, Susanne Ferber1;
1University of Toronto, Canada, 2Keynes College, University of Kent, Canterbury,
United Kingdom., 3L.C. Campbell Cognitive Neurology Research Unit,
Neurosciences Research, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Canada — Right
brain-damaged patients have slowed reaction times in detecting visual
targets presented on the contralesional (left) side of space when a prior
cue is presented on the ipsilesional (right) side. Typically, the types of
cues used to demonstrate this are sudden onsets in the periphery leading
to exogenous shifts in attention. The role of endogenous cues, however, is
still unclear. Some studies have shown that endogenous processes can be
relatively intact after right brain damage, though generally slowed. We
tested stroke patients with right hemisphere lesions on a spatio-temporal
cueing task to see whether spatial associations of endogenous temporal
cues would elicit the same cognitive deficits as do typical exogenous
cues. An association between the representation of time and space has
been found in healthy subjects using a spatio-temporal cueing task with
centrally presented time words, such as “yesterday” or “future.” Such
time cues are mapped onto a mental timeline that holds temporally earlier events on the left side of space and temporally later events on the
right side. We administered a spatio-temporal cueing task to right braindamaged patients and manipulated the spatial validity of a target following the central presentation of a time word. Our patients demonstrated
the greatest disengagement deficit for targets presented on the contralesional side of space when the centrally presented time word cued them to
the ipsilesional side. Our results indicate that the deficit in disengaging

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

from invalidly cued locations persists for endogenous cues that elicit spatial mental representations.
F12
ATTENTION
PLAYS
A
ROLE
IN
SUBITIZING:
AN
INATTENTIONAL BLINDNESS STUDY Henry
Railo1,2,
Mika
Koivisto1,2, Antti Revonsuo1,2,3 Minna M. Hannula1,4; 1University of Turku,
Finland, 2Centre for Cognitive Neuroscience, University of Turku, Finland,
3School of Humanities and Informatics, University of Skövde, Sweden, 4Sackler
Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University — Subitizing refers to the effortless process of enumerating
small numbers of items. Whether subitizing rests purely on parallel preattentive processeses, or, is actually an attention demanding process, has
been debated previously. Previous studies that have examined the attentional requirements of subitizing have based their conclusions on conditions where the participants have explicitly attended on the task of
enumeration and attention has been focused on the item location. Enumeration latencies have also been shown to increase already in the subitizing range, suggesting that some serial, attentional components may be
involved. The present study is the first that directly contrasts the preattentive and the attentive models of subitizing. We used inattentional
blindness paradigm to test whether enumeration is possible when the
effects of attention are minimized by presenting the items unexpectedly
while the participants were focusing on another task. Divided- and fullattention conditions were also included. The results showed that only
numbers one and two could be enumerated under inattention, that is,
when the effects of attention were minimized. Moreover, freeing attentional resources in the divided- and full-attention conditions increased
the enumeration accuracies considerably, including for number two.
Thus, the results suggest that even for enumerating small numbers, the
attentional demands increase as the number of objects increases.
F13
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL INDICES OF ASYMMETRIES IN
ATTENTIONAL GRADIENTS John C. Richiedei1, William Bush1, Lisa
D. Sanders1, Kyle Cave1; 1University of Massachusetts, Amherst — Previous
evidence suggests that if the possible locations of stimulus presentation
are delineated, spatial attention affects processing in a graded manner.
Specifically, stimuli presented close to cued regions elicit larger visual
evoked potentials (VEPs) than those presented farther away. However,
both position in the visual field and allocation of attention may contribute
to the observed gradients. These relative contributions can be distinguished by comparing responses on physically identical trials when
attention is directed to locations at various distances from the stimuli. In
the current study, participants attended to one of 12 squares arranged in
a circle around fixation. Letters appeared individually, each in one of the
squares; 80% were O’s (standards) and 20% were X’s (deviants). Participants pressed a button when an X appeared at the attended location.
VEPs elicited by standards showed evidence of asymmetric attentional
gradients. Specifically, the largest amplitude N1s were observed when
participants attended to the location where a standard was presented.
Responses were also larger to standards when attention was directly
above the stimulus compared to when it was directly below. However, all
of these conditions resulted in larger amplitude N1s than when participants were attending to more distant locations. These results confirm that
attention can be applied to visual processing in a spatial gradient and
reveal its asymmetric distribution.
F14
DEFICITS IN EARLY DETECTION AND DISCRIMINATION
PROCESSES
OF
ATTENTION
DURING
NICOTINE
ABSTINENCE Anthony Rissling1, Dana Smith1, Irene Yang1, Michael
Dawson1, Anne Schell2, Keith Nuechterlein3; 1University of Southern California,
2
Occidental College, 3University of California Los Angeles — Impaired performance during continuous performance tasks (CPTs) has been reliably
reported in smokers following nicotine abstinence when compared to
nicotine intake. However, the specific processes of attention that account

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

177

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

for the overall changes in performance are not well understood. Furthermore, it remains unresolved whether such changes are due to a withdrawal relief or a facilitation effect of nicotine. Signal detection indices
were measured during three CPTs following both smoking and overnight abstinence among 29 student smokers to measure the effects of
smoking on the early processes (detection, discrimination) and later process (vigilance). A group of 39 nonsmokers were tested twice without nicotine manipulation. Subjects responded whenever they saw the digit “0”
in three CPTs: (1) with visually degraded stimuli and an SOA paced by
the subject, (2) visually degraded stimuli with a fixed 1s SOA, (3) clear
(non-degraded) stimuli with a 1s fixed SOA. Abstinence among smokers
produced reliably lower vigilance performance compared to ad lib smoking in the two degraded tasks. However, there were no differences
between smokers smoking and nonsmokers, suggesting a relief of withdrawal effect. The results indicate that smoking abstinence affects the
early stages of stimulus processing (detection, discrimination) but not the
maintenance of attention (vigilance) in tasks that put a heavy burden on
early perceptual processing. However, nicotine abstinence does not affect
either early or late processes in tasks with a low cognitive load.
F15
IN THE BLINK OF AN EYE: REFLEXIVE ORIENTING TRIGGERED
BY NONPREDICTIVE EYE GAZE DIRECTION MODULATES THE
ATTENTIONAL BLINK. Jelena Ristic1, Barry Giesbrecht1; 1University of
California Santa Barbara — In the past decade several studies argued that
nonpredictive eye direction elicits strongly reflexive attentional orienting.
We tested this notion by examining the influence of a nonpredictive central gaze cue on the magnitude of the attentional blink (AB). The AB is a
deficit in the report of a second target (T2) that follows a correctly identified first target (T1) within 200-500 ms. If orienting to gaze direction is
reflexive, then the AB should be attenuated when T2 appears at a gazedat location. Participants were asked to report the identity of two masked
letters, presented randomly on either left or right side of a central fixation
face, separated by 320 or 800 ms. The nonpredictive gaze cue, which
looked equiprobably to the left, right or straight ahead, was presented
between 0 and 160 ms before the onset of T2. The results indicated that
there was an effect of lag, indicative of an AB. The results also indicated
that both overall performance and the magnitude of the lag effect
decreased as cue-T2 interval increased. Importantly, these effects were
only present when T2 appeared at a gazed-at location. Together the combined effects of lag and gaze cue-T2 delay suggest that (i) in agreement
with the notion that gaze direction elicits reflexive orienting, the AB is
modulated by reflexive orienting to gaze direction, and/or (ii) the overall
performance deficit reflects a difficulty in disengaging attention from the
central gaze cue.
F16
ATTENTIONAL BIAS TO STIMULUS FEATURE MODULATES
ATTENTIONAL ALLOCATION FOR BOTTOM-UP DEVIATION
Risa Sawaki1,2, Jun’ichi Katayama3; 1Graduate School of Education, Hokkaido
University, 2Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, 3Faculty of Education,
Hokkaido University — Top-down direction of attention to a stimulus feature facilitates processing of not only the attended, but also the unattended features of the same object. However, it is unclear whether this
attentional bias to stimulus features modulates processing of bottom-up
deviations. We investigated this issue by using event-related brain potentials (ERPs). In this paradigm, target (50 %) and non-target (50 %) objects
were defined by a stimulus feature (shape; circle or triangle) and they
were serially presented at a central location in random order. In the
change condition, stimulus color and size were infrequently changed in
the target or non-target object. In the appearance condition, distractor
objects appeared infrequently around either of the objects. Participants
were asked to respond to the target object, regardless of task-irrelevant
deviation. For both conditions, reaction time for the target and P3 ERP
response for the target and non-target trials were increased by the change
or appearance deviation. This deviant effect on P3 was larger for target

178

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

than for non-target trials in the change condition. In contrast, it was
smaller for target than for non-target trials in the appearance condition.
These results demonstrated that the attentional bias to stimulus features
of objects modulates processing of bottom-up deviations; attentional allocation for deviations was enhanced in objects with the attended stimulus
feature whereas it was inhibited for distractors which appeared around
the objects. This modulation suggests that the attentional bias to stimulus
features of objects provides a competitive advantage for the objects in
both bottom-up and top-down processing.
F17
IS SPATIAL ATTENTION NEEDED TO EXTRACT MEANING
FROM WORDS? EVIDENCE FROM ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY
Amanda Scott1, Mei-Ching Lien1, Eric Ruthruff2, Joel Lachter3; 1Oregon State
University, 2University of New Mexico, 3NASA Ames Research Center — Do
we need to attend visual words in order to identify them and extract
meaning? Recent behavioral studies have shown that unattended prime
words do not influence responses to a target (e.g., “dog” fails to prime
“DOG”; Lachter, Forster & Ruthruff, 2004). This finding suggests that
word identification does not occur without spatial attention. A viable
alternative explanation, however, is that unattended words are fully
identified, but somehow fail to influence response processes. To test this
hypothesis, we used a more direct measure of word processing: the N400
component of the event-related potential (ERP). The N400 effect is the
difference in ERPs between words that match and mismatch the current
semantic context (known as mismatch negativity). Only identified words
processed up to the semantic level can produce a significant N400 effect.
This effect thus provides a highly specific, continuous index of semantic
activation from a word. We used a spatial cuing paradigm, in which cued
(attended) words and non-cued (non-attended) words could match or
mismatch the semantic context. We found an N400 effect only for cued
words, suggesting that spatial attention is critical for semantic activation
from a visual word.
F18
THE EFFECT OF EMOTIONAL CONVERSATION ON VISUAL
DETECTION DURING SIMULATED DRIVING: A BEHAVIORAL
STUDY Sean Seaman1, Li Hsieh1, Richard Young2; 1Wayne State
University, 2School of Medicine, Wayne State University — We present an
investigation into multitask processing, using an ecologically valid task: a
simulation of driving while engaging in a hands-free cellular conversation. We employed a validated event-detection paradigm with lane-tracking to measure driving performance. Specifically, we look at what factors
influence multitasking performance; in this case, we investigated emotional prosody. We compared the RT differences among three conditions
of multitasking situations: driving without cellular conversations, driving with cellular conversations spoken in a neutral tone, driving with cellular conversations spoken in an angry tone. 20 participants viewed a
video recording of a driving scene while using a foot pedal to respond to
visual events occurring in the periphery of the display. Lane-tracking,
using a steering wheel, was employed to ensure participants were
engaged with viewing the driving video. Behavioral analyses based on 20
subjects showed the expected pattern of events occurring during concurrent conversations while driving being associated with slightly longer
RTs than those events during driving without conversation. One-way
ANOVA analysis showed a significant condition effect at p<0.05. However, this effect was moderated by the emotional tone of the conversation;
events occurring during angry conversations were responded to significantly faster than events occurring during neutral conversations, and
were only marginally slower than events occurring in absence of conversation. Preliminary results in this study suggest that emotional conversation may have some influence on visual detection during simulated
driving.

Poster Session F

F19
SALIENCE ENCODING OVER TIME IN HEMISPATIAL
NEGLECT Victoria Singh-Curry1,2, Masud Husain1,2; 1Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, 2Institute of Neurology,
University College London — Evidence from functional imaging studies
points to a crucial role for right inferior parietal and frontal structures in
detecting salient items and sustaining attention. We hypothesized that
impairments in detecting salient items over time may interact with spatial deficits in the neglect syndrome. Right-hemisphere neglect patients
were compared to stroke controls and healthy individuals. Stimuli were
presented either centrally, or just left or right of fixation. Participants
responded to targets of high or low salience, but had to withhold
responses to non-targets. We also evaluated the effect of alerting tones on
performance. Neglect patients demonstrated reduced response sensitivity which deteriorated with time, even for central stimuli. Importantly,
target salience and location interacted with the ability to sustain attention, such that low salience stimuli to the left were more likely to be
missed over time. An alerting tone improved performance to central, as
well as left-sided stimuli, particularly those of low salience. While deficits
in encoding salience, sustaining attention and spatial attention were associated with lesioned fronto-parietal voxels, the greatest benefit from an
alerting tone was associated with damage to frontal cortex. In summary,
neglect patients have deficits in sustaining attention, with performance
modulated by both target salience and location. These components of
neglect are associated with damage to specific sub-regions of right parietal and frontal cortex. Alerting stimuli ameliorate some of these deficits,
particularly in patients with right frontal lesions. Interacting fronto-parietal networks for salience encoding, sustaining and directing spatial
attention underlie the cognitive deficits in the neglect syndrome.
F20
AGING, SUSTAINED ATTENTION, AND MIND WANDERING
Daniel Smilek1, J. Allan Cheyne1, Grayden J. F. Solman1, Jonathan S. A.
Carriere1; 1University of Waterloo — As individuals age they report less
mind wandering. Consistent with these reports, older individuals make
fewer errors than younger individuals on the Sustained Attention to
Response Task (SART), known to be associated with mind wandering.
Specifically, speeding of RTs on the SART is an index of mind wandering,
which leads to SART errors. On this task, older individuals show slower
RTs than younger individuals and the age difference in RTs completely
explains age difference in errors. The present report examined RTs for trials immediately preceding and following SART errors in 504 subjects
aged 14-63. A common SART finding is a slowing of RTs following
errors, suggesting increased attention to task in response to errors. Consistent with this, we found a marked increase in RTs following SART
errors, but only for older individuals (age 25 being the break-point), this
slowing persisting until the early 60s. Adolescents and young adults
showed no evidence of slowing following errors. Older subjects appear to
have been brought on-task following an error, whereas younger subjects
remain off-task. Older individuals may engage in less mind wandering
because they are more readily brought back on task because of sensitivity
to the quality of task performance. This is consistent with findings that, at
equivalent SART performance levels, older adults show greater pre-SMA
and ACC activation, the latter having been previously associated with
greater post-error slowing, and interpreted as reflecting greater error
monitoring. Such age difference may be related to late PFC white matter
development and/or compensatory additional cortical recruitment.
F21
EFFECTS OF AGE AND FOCAL BRAIN INJURY ON
VISUOSPATIAL ATTENTION IN CHILDREN Sabrina
Smith1,2,3,
Gray Vargas1, Anjan Chatterjee2,3; 1Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia, 2University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 3Center for
Cognitive Neuroscience — Visuospatial neglect is well-characterized in
adults and has been reported in children. While visuospatial attention
becomes more developed during childhood, the effects of age on visu-

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

ospatial neglect in children are not known. The purpose of this study was
to evaluate how chronic focal brain injury affects visuospatial attention in
children of different ages. Fifty children (2-18 years) with chronic unilateral focal brain injury (subjects) and 130 healthy children (controls) were
assessed using line bisection, cancellation, pre-attentive visual search and
attentive visual search. Brain-injured subjects with visuospatial deficits
were identified using age-appropriate (2-4 y, 5-6 y, 7-8 y, 9-12 y, 13-18 y)
Z-scores. 15/50 subjects showed neglect on line bisection (mean age 7.1
years), 4/45 on cancellation (mean age 8.0 years), 4/43 showed slower
contralesional reaction times on pre-attentive visual search (mean age
10.0 years) and 8/42 on attentive visual search (mean age 12.6 years).
There was no significant difference in frequency of neglect based on
hemisphere of injury. Line bisection accuracy improved as subjects and
controls got older. Brain-injured children ages 5-12 years were more variable on line bisection than controls. Older control and left brain-injured
subjects were more likely to orient to the left of cancellation arrays than
younger subjects, an effect not seen in right brain-injured subjects. In conclusion, line bisection tasks are relatively sensitive in assessing neglect in
children. Even when taking account of normal variability in performance,
detection of lateralized and non-lateralized deficits of attention in braininjured children varies with age.
F22
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL CORRELATES OF ATTENTIONAL
CAPTURE BY VISUAL MOTION Matthew Tata1, Aja Mason2, Nazia
Alam1, Andrew Butcher1, Gregory Christie1; 1The University of Lethbridge,
2The University of Victoria — The human visual pathways include regions
in extrastriate visual cortex that are sensitive to motion in the visual field.
An onset, acceleration and/or change in direction of motion triggers
activity in this area, and that activity can be modulated by the attentional
set of the viewer. Motion can also reflexively change the viewer’s attentional set, leading to complex interactions. In a recent study we investigated attentional modulation of the Event-Related Potential (ERP)
elicited by reversals in the directions of coherently moving dots. We
found that such reversals elicited a robust Event-Related Potential peak
at 200 ms latency. Furthermore, attention directed to a field of interspersed stationary dots led to an unexpected enhancement of this peak.
We hypothesized that this ERP component might reflect a reflexive perceptual re-segregation of the moving dots into a coherent sheet with each
reversal. In the present study we tested this hypothesis by comparing
reversal-evoked ERPs when the dots were 100% radially coherent (i.e.
toward and away from fixation) and 0% coherent. We predicted that random motion should reduce the saliency of the moving dots and thus
reduce or eliminate the 200 ms component. The data fit this prediction
and support the hypothesis that the 200 ms peak is associated with the
reflexive orienting of attention in response to salient visual motion.
F23
EVIDENCE
SUGGESTING
A
FUNCTIONAL-ANATOMIC
ORGANIZATION
OF
PARIETAL
CORTEX
DURING
ATTENTIONAL CONTROL Preston P. Thakral1, Scott D. Slotnick1;
1
Boston College — The control of spatial attention – shifting attention
between visual field locations or sustaining attention at one location –
involves the prefrontal cortex and parietal cortex. Within the parietal cortex, shifting attention has been linked to the superior parietal lobule,
while the neural substrates associated with sustained attention are under
active investigation. The present fMRI study aimed to identify the cortical
regions associated with sustained attention during two different protocols (to obtain stimulus independent results). While maintaining central
fixation, participants viewed a moving dot stimulus or a flickering checkerboard stimulus. Both protocols alternated between sustained periods of
attention to motion/flicker (with a detection task), perception of motion/
flicker, and perception of stationary stimuli. To confirm differential stimulus processing, a region-of-interest analysis was conducted to assess
attention and perception effects in motion processing region MT+. A conjunction analysis was used to examine the neural regions associated with

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

179

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

sustained attention (commonly active for both stimulus types). Supporting previous results, sustained attention was associated with activity in
the middle frontal gyrus and intraparietal sulcus. The present and previous findings suggest a functional-anatomic organization of parietal cortex, where shifts in attention are mediated by superior regions and
sustained attention is mediated by more lateral regions.
F24
INHIBITION OF RETURN AFTER DAMAGE TO THE FRONTAL
EYE FIELDS Michel Thiebaut de Schotten1, Richard Levy1, Hugues Duffau2,
Paolo Bartolomeo1; 1INSERM-UPMC UMRS 610, Paris, 2CHU Montpellier,
France — When two visual events appear consecutively in the same spatial location, normal subjects’ response to the second event is slower than
that to the first, an effect known as inhibition of return (IOR). Ro et al.
[Exp. Brain Res. 150 (2003) 290-296], using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) over the right frontal eye field (FEF), were able to decrease
IOR for targets occurring on the stimulated side. Here we present evidence from 10 patients who underwent restricted resections of prefrontal
cortex (including the FEF) for low-grade gliomas and six age-matched
controls. Resections were in the right hemisphere for 4 patients, in the left
hemisphere for 6 patients. We employed a cue-target detection task with
non-predictive peripheral cues, and 150, 550 or 1,000-ms stimulus-onset
asynchronies (SOAs). Trials in which an eye movement occurred and RTs
below 150ms or above 1500ms were discarded from analysis. A repeatedmeasures analysis of variance with group as between subjects factors and
cue validity, target side and SOA as within-subjects factors revealed an
interaction between all the factors, F (4, 26) = 4.53; P = 0.007. As expected,
controls showed IOR starting from 550-ms SOA. Patients, however, demonstrated no IOR at 550-ms SOA, consistent with the TMS results. IOR
was present at longer SOAs for ipsilesional targets in right-brain damaged patients and for contralesional targets in left-brain damaged
patients. These results suggest that both the right and the left FEF play an
important role in the generation of an orienting component of IOR.
F25
USING FREQUENCY TAGGING TO INVESTIGATE THE
NEUROCORRELATES OF DIVIDED ATTENTION Paolo Toffanin1,
Sander Martens1, Ritske de Jong2, Addie Johnson2; 1BCN-NeuroImaging
Center, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands,
2
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands — Frequency
tagging is an EEG method to investigate the neural mechanisms of spatial
attention and the competition for resources of simultaneously displayed
stimuli. The method is based on the steady state evoked potentials
(SSEPs) elicited from stimuli which flicker with different frequencies. The
SSEP response changes according to the attentional condition (attend or
ignore one of the stimuli). The attended stimuli elicit larger amplitudes
SSEPs than do ignored stimuli. In other words, attention modulates the
SSEP power, and the changes in SSEP reflect a mechanism of attentional
switch to the relevant stimulation. In this experiment, resource competition between simultaneously displayed items was measured comparing a
divided versus a focus attention condition. Two squares, at the left and
right of fixation, were tagged with different frequencies while participants performed a detection task (respond to the digit 5 embedded in an
alphanumeric stream of characters superimposed on each square). At the
beginning of the trial a cue indicated which side to attend: left, right, or
both. Behavioral results showed that the divided attention condition is
more taxing then the focus attention condition. The electrophysiological
response to the frequency tagging showed an enhanced SSEP during the
focused attention condition and also during the divided attention condition. The dynamics of the enhanced neural processing during divided
attention conditions reflect the competition for resources between stimuli. Future research will focus on the temporal and topographical dynamics of the resource competition, and investigate the possible role of
frequency tagging in enhancing or reducing task performance.

180

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

F26
TOP-DOWN & BOTTOM-UP REGULATION OF FEATURE
PRIORITIZATION IN COMPARATIVE VISUAL SEARCH Michelle
Umali1, Marc Pomplun1, Joy Hirsch2; 1fMRI Research Center, Center for
Neurobiology and Behavior, Columbia University, New York, 2University of
Massachusetts-Boston — According to the Guided Search theory, preattentive parallel processes almost instantaneously guide search along
the most informative stimulus dimension, making it difficult to observe
the top-down and stimulus-driven mechanisms of feature prioritization,.
In this fMRI and eye-tracking study, we employed the Comparative
Visual Search task which requires repeated assessment of feature relevance based on local information content in the display. Healthy subjects
(n=7, 4F) indicated whether two side-by-side distributions of assorted
colors and shapes were identical or contained an item of discrepancy differing in either color or shape. Top-down attentional guidance was
assessed by comparing a condition in which subjects were previously
told the dimension of the mismatch (color or shape) to that in which they
received no information. Prior knowledge had no beneficial behavioral
effects in identifying shape mismatches, despite increased ventral stream
activation. However, search for color mismatches led to longer fixations,
fewer gaze switches between the display halves, and shorter response
times. In addition, greater activation in the anterior cingulate, a region
implicated in motivated attention and error detection was observed. This
inequality suggests that top-down guidance is more effective in processing low rather than high-level features. Stimulus-driven guidance was
studied by eliminating variation in the irrelevant dimension, i.e., by
showing only objects of one color during shape search and vice versa.
This manipulation had no behavioral or relevant neurophysiological
effects for either color or shape mismatches, suggesting that bottom-up
influences cannot further reduce perceptual interference of irrelevant features at any stage in the visual processing hierarchy.
F27
ATTENTIONAL SELECTION IN VISION: AN ERP STUDY ON
HIERARCHY IN FEATURE SPACE Vinod K. Unni1, Kim M. W.
Verhoef1, Peter A. van der Helm1; 1Radboud University Nijmegen — The
reverse hierarchy theory (RHT) postulates different functional roles for
feedforward and feedback pathways in the human visual system. The
feedforward pathway serves to encode stimulus properties in a hierarchy
of receptive fields, going from V1 cells with small receptive fields to
higher cortical cells with large receptive fields. Later, starting at the
higher areas with coarse stimulus representations, the feedback pathway
serves to direct attention back to lower areas to access individual stimulus properties. Hence, according to RHT, attention is deployed in a hierarchy defined in spatial terms. In this study we used the N2pc which has
been shown to be especially sensitive to deployment of visualspatial
attention to investigate the relevance of an alternative account of hierarchy, namely hierarchy in terms of features. ERPs were recorded when
participants had to detect one of three features in a modified spatial cuing
paradigm. Stimuli consisted of three nested features (shape: circle or
square; color: red or green; and orientation: grating oriented left-oblique
or right-oblique). The physical stimulus was the same across conditions
but the deployment of attention differed for three feature conditions. For
the orientation condition reaction times (RTs) were longer compared to
the shape and color conditions. For the early N2pc with a latency of 180240 ms a significant amplitude increase was found at P07/P08 for the orientation compared to the color and shape condition. Thus a similar pattern was observed for ERP and RT data. This suggests an attentional
selection bias due to a hierarchy in feature space.
F28
DISTINCT
AND
COMMON
NEURAL
RESPONSES
TO
UNEXPECTED LOCATION AND FEATURE CHANGES IN THE
LOCATION-CUEING PARADIGM Simone Vossel1,2, Ralph Weidner1,2,
Christiane M. Thiel3, Gereon R. Fink1,2,4; 1Institute of Neuroscience and
Biophysics - Medicine, Research Centre Jülich, Jülich, Germany, 2Brain Imaging

Poster Session F

Centre West, Research Centre, Jülich, Germany, 3Institute of Biology and
Environmental Sciences, University of Oldenburg, Germany, 4University
Hospital Cologne, Germany — Within parietal cortex the temporo-parietal
junction (TPJ) and the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) seem to be involved in
both spatial and non-spatial functions: Both areas are activated when
misleading information is provided by invalid spatial cues in Posner’s
location-cueing paradigm, but also when infrequent deviant stimuli are
presented within a series of standard events. In the present study elements of an oddball paradigm were included within the context of a location-cueing paradigm. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
was used to dissociate the neural correlates of visuospatial attentional
reorienting and visual oddball distraction as well as to reveal shared neural processes. Twenty subjects were investigated. The fMRI results are
reported at p<.05 corrected at cluster-level. Both invalid spatial cueing
and the occurrence of deviant targets resulted in a significant slowing of
reaction times. Bilateral TPJ and right superior parietal lobe (SPL) activation was observed in response to invalidly as compared to validly cued
targets. In contrast, bilateral inferior occipito-temporal cortex, left inferior
parietal cortex, right frontal areas and the cerebellum showed stronger
activation in response to deviant than to standard targets. Common activations were observed in the right angular gyrus along the IPS and the
right inferior frontal gyrus. The data show that the superior parietal and
temporo-parietal activations observed here as well as previously in location-cueing paradigms do not merely reflect the detection and processing
of unexpected stimuli. Furthermore, the right IPS and inferior frontal
gyrus are involved in attentional selection and distractor processing of
both spatial and non-spatial features.
F29
ASYMMETRICAL TRAINING EFFECTS OF REPETITIVE STIMULI
REPRESENTATION Peng Wang1, Tiangang Zhou1, Siyuan Hu1, Silu
Fan1, Xiaoming Du1, Lin Chen1, Yan Zhuo1; 1Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences — When subjects were exposed to repeated stimuli,
two possible consequences may be observed. One is that they became less
sensitive to the stimuli, which was referred as adaptation. The other one
is that they respond more efficiently, which was regarded as learning
effects. It would be an interesting to investigate the relation of the two
apparently contrary phenomena and the neural mechanism underlying
them. In our study, both behavioral and EEG data were recorded when
subjects were performing perceptual tasks for days. We found the performance keep improving either within days (between sessions) or between
days, for the first several days. But in later days, the performance may
still improve between days, but may remain or even became worse
within days. This suggests possible isolation of adaptation and learning
behaviorally. However, in the ERP data, the N1 components decreased
with training even in the first training day, comparing with its increase
between days in one task. Besides this "pattern asymmetry" of within-day
and between-day, "task asymmetry" was also observed. The N1 component evoked by the target condition in another task did not have obvious
decrease within the first day in the "triangle task", though the physical
stimuli and training paradigm was totally identical. To give a satisfying
interpretation and seek for the underlying neural substrates, further analysis is still going on.
F30
DYNAMICS OF THE LOCUS COERULEUS-NOREPINEPHRINE
SYSTEM PREDICT EXTENDED SPARING IN THE ATTENTIONAL
BLINK Christopher Warren1, Daniel Fiset1, Caroline Blais2, Justin Kantner1,
Andreas Breuer1, Mike Masson1; 1University of Victoria, 2University of
Montreal — This research supports the theory that the locus coeruleus –
norephinephrine system (LC-NE) is the neurophysiological basis of the
attentional blink (AB). The AB refers to decreased accuracy for reporting
the second of two targets (T1 and T2) inserted into a rapid serial visual
presentation (RSVP). Findings that an AB is not observed when three targets are inserted consecutively in an RSVP have been held as evidence
against the LC-NE theory. However, in these experiments, accuracy for

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

identifying T1 is decreased. We demonstrate that when the difficulty of
identifying T1 is manipulated, by shortening the time between T1 and the
subsequent item or by lowering the contrast of T1, the ensuing period of
attentional deficit is delayed. We describe how the effect of T1 difficulty
on the AB is predicted by the LC-NE theory.
F31
OPPOSITE VERTICAL ASYMMETRIES FOR OVERT AND COVERT
ORIENTING IN HUMANS David Westwood1, Kristin Greenlaw2; 1School
of Health and Human Performance, Dalhousie University, 2Dalhousie
University — Visual stimuli can be selected for elaborated processing
through overt (i.e., moving the eyes to the target) or covert (i.e., moving
attention, but not the eyes) orienting. There has been considerable debate
about the degree of overlap between overt and covert orienting, with
convincing evidence in favor of opposing points of view. Building on
past research on vertical asymmetries in visual processing, we used a
cue-target task (SOA range: 150-450 ms) with cues and targets in the
upper and lower visual fields to compare vertical asymmetries in overt
and covert orienting. The location of the peripheral visual cue was not
correlated with the location of the target (30% valid, 30% invalid, 30%
neutral; 10% catch trials). In the covert task, participants pressed a single
key in response to target onset and trials were excluded if the eyes moved
away from central fixation. In the overt task, participants made a saccade
to the target location. In the overt task, reaction time was smaller for targets in the upper (242 ms) versus lower field (269 ms), regardless of cue
validity. In the covert task, reaction time was smaller for targets in the
lower (346 ms) versus upper field (385 ms), regardless of cue validity.
These results argue against the notion that overt and covert orienting
engage common processing systems, supporting instead the hypothesis
that overt and covert orienting mechanisms are distinct and evolved to
support different behavioral functions.
F32
MINDFULNESS TRAINING REDUCES MIND WANDERING
DURING A SUSTAINED ATTENTION TASK Ling
M.
Wong1,
Marieke van Vugt1, Jonathan Smallwood2, Jane Carpenter-Cohn3, Michael
Baime1, Amishi P. Jha1; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2University of Aberdeen,
3Naropa University — Attentional lapses can have deleterious consequences during task performance. Lapses are often associated with mind
wandering, which is the tendency of one’s attention to drift away from a
task and toward task-irrelevant thoughts. The present study investigated
the impact of mindfulness training on mind wandering. Participants (n =
16) were tested on a sustained attention to response task (SART) before
(T1) and after (T2) participation in an intensive one-month mindfulness
meditation retreat. The primary mindfulness practice required attending
to present moment experience using the breath as the anchor of attention.
The SART required responses to frequent "non-target" digits and
response inhibition for an infrequent “target” digit. Mind wandering was
assessed behaviorally, as failures to withhold responses to targets, and
subjectively, via self-report responses to thought probes. At both T1 and
T2, errors of commission to targets were greater during periods of selfreported mind wandering relative to periods of being on-task. In addition, response times to non-targets were reduced during both behaviorally- and subjectively-identified off-task periods. To better characterize
the structure of response times to non-target events, principal components analysis (PCA) was performed (Smallwood et al., 2007). Two previously reported indices of mind wandering (Smallwood et al., 2007) were
less prominent at T2 relative to T1. Finally, there were fewer errors of
commission and increased self-report of being on-task and aware of
present moment experience at T2 relative to T1. These results suggest that
mindfulness meditation training may reduce the frequency of attentional
lapses due to mind-wandering during task performance.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

181

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

F33
AUTOMATIC AND CONTROLLED SPATIAL ORIENTING IN THE
TWO CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES Eran Zaidel1,2, Yuan Hang Li1,
Deanna Greene1, Anat Barnea3; 1UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, 2Brain Research
Institute, UCLA, 3Bio-Keshev Clinic, Kibbutz Givat-Chaim Ichud, Israel —
INTRODUCTION: The Lateralized Attention Network Test (LANT) is a
variation of the centrally presented Attention Network Test (ANT) that
enables measurement of three attentional networks (Conflict resolution,
spatial Orienting, and Alerting) in each hemisphere. Here we focus on
results with spatial Orienting. We modified the LANT to include measures of both automatic and controlled spatial Orienting. Targets consisting of up- or down-pointing arrows were flashed randomly to one visual
hemifield or the other for 150ms. These targets were preceded by valid,
invalid, and central cues, which could be automatic (peripheral, non-predictive) or controlled (central, predictive). We asked whether automatic
and controlled cues have different effects in the two hemifields of the
normal brain. METHODS: Fifty normal college undergraduates were
tested in two separate blocks, one including single peripheral cues (asterisks), the other including two central cues (hands pointing left, right, or
center) presented simultaneously in both visual fields. Additionally, two
Cue-to-Target Intervals (CTIs) were used: 150ms and 500ms. RESULTS:
We found that automatic spatial Orienting was superior in the Left Visual
Field, whereas controlled spatial Orienting was superior in the Right
Visual Field. Furthermore, valid automatic cues facilitated target decision
more at short CTIs (150ms) than at long CTIs (500ms) (Inhibition of
Return). By contrast, valid controlled cues facilitated target decisions
more at long CTIs than at short CTIs. CONCLUSION: This dissociation
confirms that cognition in each normal hemisphere is orchestrated by a
different set of attentional networks.
F34
DISTRIBUTED
REPRESENTATIONS
OF
TASK-RELEVANT
INFORMATION
WITHIN
HUMAN
FRONTOPARIETAL
CORTEX Mark Stokes1, Rhodri Cusack2, John Duncan2; 1University of Oxford,
2MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge — Understanding executive processing within frontoparietal cortex (FPC) is of
central importance to the neurobiological study of high-level human
behaviour. Although recent functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) studies have sought to segment FPC into distinct sub-regions
associated with different sub-units of executive function, meta-analyses
typically reveal a more generic processing space within the FPC (e.g.,
Cabeza and Nyberg, 2000; Duncan and Owen, 2000). Rather than dedicated sub-divisions, a distributed network within the FPC may rapidly
adapt to code task-relevant information (e.g., Duncan, 2001; Miller and
Cohen, 2001). Indeed, monkey neurophysiology studies reveal task-relevant neural representations that are distributed throughout the FPC with
little or no overall spatial specificity (e.g., Freedman et al, 2003; Freedman
and Assad, 2006). In human studies, however, evidence of adaptive neural coding has remained limited by the coarse resolution of standard neuroimaging analysis techniques because mean changes in brain activity
cannot differentiate overlapping representations. In the present study,
we applied a multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) to resolve patterns of
neural activity representing task-relevant activity in the human FPC. In a
series of event-related fMRI studies, participants categorized visual stimuli according to variable task-contexts. Linear discriminant analysis of
neural patterns within the FPC reliably predicted target categories within
task-relevant, but not irrelevant, stimulus dimensions. This evidence supports the role of the FPC in high-level selection and task-relevant representations, and is consistent with an adaptive coding model of FPC in
which functionally distinct, although spatially overlapping, neural representations flexibly code task-relevant information.

182

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

F35
TOWARDS AN INDEPENDENT BRAIN - COMPUTER INTERFACE:
RELIABILITY ACROSS RECORDING SESSIONS Allison Brendan1,
McFarland Dennis2, Schalk Gerwin2, Zheng Shi Dong3, Moore Jackson
Melody3, Wolpaw Jonathan2; 1Institute for Automation, University of Bremen,
2
Laboratory of Nervous System Disorders, Wadsworth Lab, NY State
Department of Health, 3School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of
Technology — Different brain - computer interface (BCI) systems rely on
different types of neural activity for control. The three most common
approaches for non-invasive BCIs utilize the P300, SSVEP, or ERD/ERS
activity (Birbaumer, 2006; Allison, Wolpaw, and Wolpaw, 2007).
Although studies have explored the stability of P300 and ERD BCIs
across several recording sessions over different days, this has not been
well explored with SSVEP BCI systems. In this study, subjects focused
attention on one of two oscillating stimuli that could be used in a BCI.
Different conditions used displays that either did or did not rely on gaze
shifting to explore the hypothesis that some SSVEP BCIs may not require
gaze shifting, and thus could operate independent of any movement.
Subjects participated in four recording sessions, each on different days, to
explore how three key parameters varied across recording session and
display type: optimal recording site(s); magnitude of EEG differences
elicited by selective attention; and the frequency at which this difference
was greatest. These parameters were used to estimate information
throughput in an online BCI. Results showed that an independent SSVEP
BCI is feasible. Further, the best recording sites and frequencies were consistent across sessions for most subjects. However, there was considerable inter - subject variability in both the best display type and the
magnitudes of resulting EEG differences. This suggests that automated
algorithms to identify parameters to optimize performance should be
used with most subjects.

Cognitive and brain development
F36
INCREASING RECRUITMENT OF A PARTIALLY OVERLAPPING
NETWORK DURING IMPLICIT LEARNING IN ASD AND TYPICAL
DEVELOPMENT: AN FMRI STUDY Kelly Anne Barnes1, Anne Della
Rosa2, Philip S. Lee1, James H. Howard, Jr.1,3, Darlene V. Howard1, Lauren E.
Kenworthy2, William D. Gaillard1,2, Chandan J. Vaidya1,2; 1Georgetown
University, 2Children's National Medical Center, Children's Research Institute,
3Catholic University — Symptoms of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD)
suggest impairment in social, language, and motor skills, behaviors that
are supported in typical development by implicit learning. Implicit probabilistic sequence learning enables the detection of regularities in the
environment (e.g., where something is likely to occur). This type of learning depends upon dynamic changes in activation in adults but remains
unstudied in childhood ASD. Thus, we performed event-related fMRI
during a visual-motor task in 13, 7–12 year old children with high-functioning ASD and 13 matched control children. Children were presented
with a display comprising three sequential stimuli, 2 cues and 1 target.
Unbeknownst to participants, the location of the first cue predicted the
target appearing in one location on 80% of trials (High Probability condition) and in another location on 20% of trials (Low Probability condition).
Learning was defined as faster and more accurate performance on High
relative to Low Probability trials. Overall, children demonstrated learning but magnitude of learning did not differ between groups. Using
SPM2, we identified brain regions in which the difference between High
and Low Probability trials increased linearly over the duration of the
task. These changes were in frontal cortex (e.g., BA 6) and cerebellum for
both groups. ASD children recruited additional regions including the
insula and ventral striatum. Increasing recruitment of additional frontal
and striatal regions in ASD suggests that intact implicit learning in ASD
children requires additional neural resources.

Poster Session F

F37
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE FACE-SPECIFIC M170 RESPONSE
Jennifer N. Barrie1, Anthony Herdman1,2, Mario Liotti1; 1Simon Fraser
University, 2Down Syndrome Research Foundation — The goal of the current
study was to use magnetoencephalography (MEG) to study the developmental trajectory of the M170 response and the development of holistic
face processing, using faces and objects presented in different spatial frequencies, in children (9-12 years), adolescents (15-17 years), and adults
(>19 years). It was hypothesized that all groups would have faster
response times (RT) to Low Spatial Frequency (LSF) faces, and that LSF
faces would elicit an M170 with a shorter latency and greater peak than
High SF (HSF) faces. This would indicate that holistic face processing
(supported by LSF) has developed by 9 years of age and remains stable
thereafter. Also, this LSF advantage was expected to be specific to faces.
Finally, it was hypothesized that the M170 latency would continue to
shorten with increasing age. Results indicated that, in adults and adolescents, LSF faces elicited faster RTs, and earlier and smaller M170
responses than HSF faces. This effect was specific to faces, suggesting
that LSF faces are processed faster and require less effort than HSF faces.
Conversely, in children, results indicated no difference in RT or in the
M170 elicited by faces and objects, and no effect of SF. This suggests that
holistic face processing has not developed by late childhood, but rather
develops during adolescence. Lastly, between-group comparisons
revealed the adult M170 was elicited earlier than the adolescent and child
M170, which were not significantly different. These findings suggest that
face processing continues to develop until adulthood.
F38
READING, THE BRAIN, AND READING THE BRAIN: DOES
WORKING MEMORY AFFECT N400 AMPLITUDE? Erik
Benau2;
1Hampshire College/University of Pittsburgh — The connection between
working memory (WM), development, and N400 amplitude was
explored using a Daneman and Carpenter (1980) complex-span task and
a Kutas and Hillyard (1980) semantic priming task. The priming task
used three types of sentence endings: congruous, moderately incongruous, and strongly incongruous. Children age 8-12 and adults age 18-24
completed both tasks. It was hypothesized that there would be a correlation between N400 amplitude and working memory scores in both ages.
It was also hypothesized that strongly incongruous sentences would
have larger N4’s than moderate in both children and adults. The results
show a moderate correlation between WM capacity and N400 amplitude
in adults, but not in children. Additionally, adults’ N4’s at the strongly
incongruous condition were significantly stronger than the moderately
incongruous. This was not shown in children.
F39
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF VOCABULARY
DEVELOPMENT IN PRESCHOOL-AGED CHILDREN Jeannette E.
Benson1, Lindsay C. Bowman1, Jennie M. B. Ito1, Mark A. Sabbagh1; 1Queen's
University — While much is known about the neurological systems associated with language in adult populations, comparatively less is known
about the brain regions associated with vocabulary acquisition in children. An emerging body of work suggests that young children who incur
damage to the right cerebral hemisphere have subsequent impairments
in word learning (e.g. Bates & Roe, 2004). Although these findings suggest that neural systems within the right hemisphere are critical for
vocabulary acquisition, no studies to date have directly tested the extent
to which this is true in typically developing populations. Thus, the goal
of this study was to investigate the neurophysiological correlates of
vocabulary development in typically developing preschool-aged children. We obtained resting electrophysiological data (EEG) from 29 4year-old children using a 128-channel Geodesic Sensor Net (EGI, Eugene,
OR). To measure language skills, we administered the Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test (PPVT, Dunn & Duun, 1981). For each participant, crossspectral power was computed within the alpha band, the results of which
were submitted to sLORETA for source localization. The focal partial cor-

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

relation analyses showed that PPVT scores were correlated with activation in the right posterior regions of the middle temporal gyrus and
superior temporal gyrus (BAs 21, 22, & 39). Specifically, children with
greater activation in these regions had higher PPVT scores. These findings confirm that right hemisphere development is important for vocabulary development in healthy, typically developing preschoolers. Further,
these findings provide specific insight into to the neurocognitive processes that might support word learning in the first four years.
F40
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MATURATIONAL FACTORS
AND AUDITORY CORTICAL PROCESSING: AN ERP STUDY
Patrizia Bisiacchi1, Giovanni Mento1, Agnese Suppiej2; 1University of Padova,
Italy, 2Children’s Hospital, University of Padova, Italy — Introduction: Newborns of less than 30 weeks of gestational age show an immature cortical
pathway; nevertheless they are more exposed to the extrauterine environment and therefore to a longer and richer sensorial stimulation, such as
mother’s voice, speech sounds and parental care. Therefore, they could
be supposed to approximate cortical maturational delay before reaching
the same post-conceptional age compared to the older ones. Auditory
event-related potentials represent an useful and non-invasive tool to
asses cortical functioning in non-collaborative subjects such as newborns.
Aims: The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of gestational age on the auditory event-related potentials (AERPs) in low-risk
preterm newborns of extremely low (23-29 weeks, N=20) and low gestational age (30-34 weeks, N=19). Methods: All subjects were tested at the
same post-conceptional age of 35 weeks. An auditory oddball paradigm
was used with frequently occurring ‘standard’ tones at 1000 Hz and
rarely occurring ‘deviant’ tones at 2000 Hz. Both exogenous and endogenous evoked responses were recorded. Results: Newborns of less than 30
gestational weeks showed smaller AERP responses (P1, N2 and Mismatch Negativity) than the older ones. Furthermore, Mismatch Negativity peak amplitude resulted significantly related to maturational indices
such as weight, length and cranial circumference measured at birth Conclusion: Our results suggest the role of gestational age as the main factor
in explaining cortical functioning at this early age: The longer environmental sensorial exposure doesn’t seem to approximate the gestational
development.
F41
HEMISPHERIC DOMINANCE FOR SPEECH IN PREVERBAL
INFANTS Heather Bortfeld1, Eswen Fava1, David Boas2; 1Texas A&M
University, 2Martinos Imaging Center, Harvard Medical School — By using
various cues found in adult speech, infants gradually come to understand
and use their native language. However, relatively little is known about
the neural mechanisms that are responsible for this rapid gain in language processing abilities across the first year, in large part because there
are a limited number of non-invasive neuroimaging techniques available
for use with human infants. Using near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS), an
optical imaging technique that uses relative changes in the concentration
of oxygenated (HbO2) and deoxygenated (HbR) blood as an indicator of
neural activation, we currently are assessing the relation between language processing and brain function in infants. In earlier work, we demonstrated that this procedure is viable for use with awake, active infants
(Bortfeld, Wruck, and Boas, 2007). Specifically, we established a dissociation of activity in the left temporal and primary visual regions in infants
(aged 6- to 9- months; N = 35) during exposure to audiovisual and visualonly stimuli. In the current study, we examined bilateral temporal activation while 6- to 9-month-old infants (N = 21) were exposed to the same
audiovisual and visual-only materials. Results revealed heightened activity in the left superior posterior temporal region relative to the right in
the audiovisual condition but not in the visual-only condition, a finding
that is consistent with brain-behavior models of language processing.
These findings highlight the utility of NIRS for establishing neural correlates of language development in older infants, a task that is difficult to
accomplish without the use of attention-getting visual stimuli.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

183

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

F42
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES
OF
IMAGINARY
COMPANION CREATION IN PRESCHOOLERS Lindsay C Bowman1,
Jennie M Baxter Ito1, Mark A Sabbagh1; 1Queen's University — During
the
preschool years, approximately 65% of children develop Imaginary Companions (ICs) -- invisible characters or personified objects that are named,
directly referred to in children’s conversation, and played with for at
least several months (Svendsen, 1934). An interesting question concerns
why ICs emerge for some but not all children. Previous research suggests
that children who create ICs differ from those who do not on some
aspects of social-cognitive development. However, there has been no
investigation of whether the two groups might differ with respect to neurophysiological functioning. To address this question, we obtained resting electrophysiological data (EEG) from 29 typically developing 4-yearolds using a 128-channel Geodesic Sensor Net (EGI, Eugene, OR). The
prevalence of ICs was measured via parent-report questionnaire where
parents were given the definition of an IC, asked if their child had one,
then asked to describe the IC as well as their child’s interactions with it.
For each participant, cross-spectral power was computed for the EEG
within the alpha band (6 to 9 Hz) and submitted to sLORETA for source
localization. Statistical analysis revealed that children with ICs (n = 10)
showed less tonic alpha power in the inferior temporal and fusiform
gyrus (BAs 37, 20), the precentral and middle frontal gyrus (BAs 4, 6), and
the inferior frontal gyrus (BAs 45, 9), relative to children without ICs (n =
19). Findings are discussed with respect to implications for current theories of IC development, and the neurodevelopmental basis for fantasy
play more generally.
F43
DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF PRENATAL ALCOHOL EXPOSURE
AND ADHD ON NUMBER PROCESSING Matthew J. Burden1, Sandra
W. Jacobson1, Charles A. Nelson2, Alissa J. Westerlund2, Malcolm J. Avison3,
Rafael Klorman4, Leslie H. Lundahl1, Stanislas Dehaene5, Joseph L. Jacobson1;
1Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, 2Children’s Hospital /
Harvard Medical School, 3Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, 4University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY, 5INSERM-CEA, Orsay, France — Fetal
alcohol
spectrum disorder (FASD) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) are both associated with adverse effects on number processing
(e.g., arithmetic), but distinct etiologies and abnormalities in brain function specific to each disorder suggest that the neural bases of these deficits are likely to differ. We examined event-related potentials (ERPs)
during a number comparison task in 62 young adults (18-20 years) with
documented histories of prenatal alcohol exposure and ADHD. Participants pressed a button to the larger of two presented numbers when
numerically far apart (“easy”) or close together (“difficult”); in the control condition (“letters”), they chose a letter rather than a symbol. Within
a 2 (alcohol-exposed, non-exposed) x 2 (ADHD, non-ADHD) analysis
design, the expected linear decrease in accuracy across the three conditions (letters, easy, difficult) was seen across groups, F(1,58) = 15.15, p <
.001, as was the expected linear increase in RT, F(1,58) = 119.41, p < .001,
but between-group comparisons showed no significant differences (all ps
> .05). Average amplitude (&#956;V) for a late positive component (600 –
1100 ms) also increased progressively across conditions, F(1,58) = 25.59, p
< .001, and follow-up analyses showed disproportional increases associated with number problems for the alcohol-exposed group, F(1,60) = 4.11,
p < .05, but no differences by ADHD group (p = .85). These results, which
suggest increased cognitive effort for number comparison associated
with prenatal alcohol exposure, are discussed in contrast to poorer performance associated with ADHD on a mathematics achievement test
(WIAT-R) administered at 14 years.
F44
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF SOCIAL EMOTION IN
ADOLESCENTS AND ADULTS Stephanie Burnett1, Geoff Bird2, Jorge
Moll3,4, Chris Frith5,6; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, UCL, UK, 2UCL,
UK, 3National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 4LABS-D'Or Hospital

184

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

Network, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 5Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging,
UCL, UK, 6Centre of Functionally Integrated Neuroscience, University of
Aarhus, Denmark — In this fMRI study, we investigated the development
during adolescence of the neural network underlying the understanding
of social emotions. Social emotions, such as guilt and embarrassment, are
emotions that require a representation of others’ mental states. In contrast
basic emotions, such as disgust and fear, require only the awareness of a
somatic state. 19 adolescents (aged 10–18 years) and 10 adults (aged 22–
32 years) were scanned using fMRI. A factorial design was employed
with between-subjects factor Group and within-subjects factor Emotion
(social or basic). In both adults and adolescents, medial prefrontal cortex
(MPFC) was activated when imagining situations in which a social emotion (guilt or embarrassment) would be felt vs. imagining situations in
which a basic emotion (disgust or fear) would be felt. In addition, there
was a significant interaction between group and task in MPFC: during
social relative to basic emotion, adolescents activated part of the MPFC
more than did adults. In contrast, adults activated a region of the left temporal pole more than did adolescents. These results suggest that the neural strategy for social emotion processing changes between adolescence
and adulthood. Activity moves from anterior (medial prefrontal) to more
posterior (temporal) regions with age.
F45
DEVELOPMENTAL
DIFFERENCES
OF
NEUROCOGNITIVE
NETWORKS
FOR
PHONOLOGICAL
AND
SEMANTICS
PROCESSING IN CHINESE WORD READING Fan Cao1, Danling
Peng2, Li Liu2, Zhen Jin3, Ning Fan2, Yuan Deng4, James Booth1,5;
1Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 2State Key Laboratory of Cognitive
Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, P.R. China,
3
fMRI Center Hospital 306, Beijing, P.R. China, 4Institute of Psychology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R. China, 5Evanston Northwestern
Healthcare, IL — Developmental differences in the neurocognitive networks for phonological and semantic processing in Chinese word reading were examined in 13 adults and 13 children using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Participants made rhyming and
semantic association judgments to two-character words that were presented sequentially in the visual modality. These lexical tasks were compared to a nonlinguistic control task involving judgment of line patterns.
The first main finding was that adults showed greater activation than
children in right middle occipital gyrus on both the meaning and rhyming task, suggesting adults more effectively engage right hemisphere
brain regions involved in the visual-spatial analysis of Chinese characters. The second main finding was that adults showed greater activation
than children in left inferior parietal lobule for the rhyming as compared
to the meaning task, suggesting greater specialization of phonological
processing in adults. The third main finding was that children who had
better performance in the rhyming task on characters with conflicting
orthographic and phonological information relative to characters with
non-conflicting information showed greater activation in left middle
frontal gyrus, suggesting greater engagement of brain regions involved
in the integration of orthography and phonology. We also found that
children showed greater activation than adults in right pre/postcentral
gyri for the rhyming task suggesting that children may rely on a compensatory strategy of articulation and phonological rehearsal.
F46
DEVELOPMENTAL DIFFERENCES IN THE FUNCTIONAL
ORGANIZATION
OF
AUDITORY
AND
AUDIOVISUAL
DISCOURSE NETWORKS. Anthony Steven Dick1, Steven L. Small1;
1
The University of Chicago — We used functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) to investigate the developmental biology of discourse
comprehension. Using a cross-sectional design, we compared 13 typical
children (8-13 years; M = 10.3 years; SD = 1.6 years) to 24 adults (M = 23.0
years; SD = 5.6 years) during two story comprehension conditions. In an
audiovisual condition, participants viewed a storyteller narrating a story
during which her mouth and hands were visible. In an auditory-only

Poster Session F

condition, participants listened to stories while viewing a fixation cross.
Compared to baseline, both groups showed activation in bilateral inferior
frontal, superior and middle temporal, and inferior parietal regions for
both conditions, although the audiovisual condition evoked greater activity bilaterally in the posterior superior temporal gyrus and sulcus, and
middle temporal gyrus and inferior parietal lobule. In a direct comparison between adults and children, both conditions showed greater activity
for adults in the posterior superior temporal gyri bilaterally, and in the
posterior superior temporal sulcus and inferior parietal lobule on the left.
In the audiovisual condition, adults also showed greater activity in the
left precentral gyrus. These results support the notion that over the
course of development, neural activity during language processing tends
to become less diffuse and more focused in posterior superior and middle
temporal, and inferior parietal regions, with a relative bias toward the
left. Further, the present findings suggest that development of this specialization continues into later childhood.
F47
NEURAL DEVELOPMENT OF PERSPECTIVE TAKING IN
SCHOOL-AGED CHILDREN Mengia Dosch1, Peter Klaver1,2, Ernst
Martin1, Loenneker Thomas1,3; 1MR Center, Children’s University Hospital,
2University of Zurich, 3Center for Integrative Human Physiology, University of
Zurich, Switzerland — Neuroimaging studies in adults have thoroughly
investigated brain regions that are recruited when we put ourselves in
another person’s shoes. We know, however, little about the development
of the neural network that yields cognitive perspective taking. Taking a
third-person perspective (3PP) as opposed to a first-person perspective
(1PP) has been associated with brain activation in the inferior parietal
cortex, the medial posterior cortex and the medial prefrontal cortex. Yet,
neurodevelopmental studies indicate that parietal and prefrontal areas
are not fully mature until early adulthood. We hypothesize and confirm
that perspective taking becomes increasingly efficient in children aged 813 years. Our data showed that children can correctly answer according
to the other perspective but they are less efficient in processing a thirdperson perspective. The response latencies for 1PP and 3PP judgments
both decrease with age, but the response latencies for 3PP judgments
decrease significantly stronger with age than for the 1PP judgments.
Whereas adults yielded neural activity in the posterior cingulate cortex,
the precuneus and the left inferior parietal cortex, children additionally
enhanced activity in the medial prefrontal cortex and the right inferior
parietal cortex during 3PP as compared with 1PP judgments. We found a
significant difference between groups in the right inferior parietal cortex
with adults showing activity only in the left inferior parietal cortex,
whereas children activated the inferior parietal cortex bilaterally. These
results suggest that increasing efficacy in the self-other judgment during
maturation accompanies a shift of activity from bilateral to unilateral
inferior parietal cortex.
F48
THE AGE-RELATED EMERGENCE OF THE CORTICAL
CONNECTIVITY UNDERLYING FACE PROCESSING REVEALED
BY DIFFUSION TENSOR IMAGING. Jaime L Doyle1, K. Suzanne
Scherf1, Cibu Thomas1, Marlene Behrmann1; 1Carnegie Mellon University — In
adults, face processing is associated with a distributed circuit involving
multiple cortical regions, some of which form the ‘core’, and others which
form the ‘extended’ part of the face-related processing network (Fairhall
& Ishai, 2007; Gobbini & Haxby, 2006). fMRI studies reveal reduced faceselectivity in both the core (the FFA, OFA, and STS in adults) and
extended (associated anterior regions) network in children, whereas adolescents evince a more adult-like pattern in the core but not extended
region (Scherf et al., 2007). To examine the developmental emergence of
the structural circuitry of the face-processing network, we used diffusion
tensor imaging to asses the integrity of the two major white matter tracts
that pass through the fusiform gyrus, the pre-eminent face processing
region (Kanwisher et al., 1997), which is effectively connected to other
face-related regions. We quantified the macrostructural (density/vol-

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

ume) and microstructural (fractional anisotropy) properties of the two
tracts, the inferior longitudinal fasciculus (ILF) and the inferior frontooccipital fasciculus (IFOF) in children, adolescents, and adults. The findings suggest a significant improvement in the structural integrity of the
right ILF as a function of age on all dependent measures. This gives new
insight into the structural changes in the cortical regions mediating face
perception and may explain the protracted course of acquisition of face
selectivity over development.
F49
5-YEAR-OLD CHILDREN ALLOCATE SPATIAL ATTENTION TO
RIGHT VISUAL FIELD EMOTIONAL FACES Kit
Elam1,
Josh
Carlson1, Karen Reinke Pressley1, Lisabeth DiLalla1; 1Southern Illinois
University Carbondale, University of Illinois at Springfield — Behavioral
studies reveal an attentional bias to the location of threatening stimuli in
both adults and children as young as 9 years old. Additionally, as early as
age 4, children demonstrate an ability to discriminate between emotional
faces, and this ability becomes increasingly automatic with age. However, it is unclear whether preschoolers’ developing abilities to discriminate emotional faces may contribute to decreased spatial attention to
emotional faces. The present project addressed this by studying 5-yearold participants who performed a modified dot probe task. Two faces
(from Gur et al., 2002) were simultaneously presented (500 ms) to the left
and right of fixation and were followed by a target cartoon character
appearing in one of the two locations. The children’s task was to indicate
the location of the cartoon character as quickly as possible by pressing a
button on the left or right side of the keyboard. Spatial attention trials
consisted of one emotional face (fearful or positive) and one neutral face.
Children produced faster reaction times for emotional congruent (target
cartoon appearing on the same side as the emotional face) compared to
incongruent trial types in the right visual field (RVF). This is the first such
study of 5-year-olds. Most adult spatial attention studies have found congruency effects either bilaterally or in the left visual field. The presence of
a RVF effect in preschoolers may represent an early developmental lefthemisphere mechanism that matures as processing becomes more automatic with age.
F50
DEVELOPMENTAL
CHANGES
IN
PREFRONTAL
AND
HIPPOCAMPAL CONNECTIVITY DURING WORKING MEMORY:
A LONGITUDINAL FMRI STUDY Amy S. Finn1, Margaret A.
Sheridan2,3, Stephen Hinshaw1, Mark D'Esposito1,4; 1University of California,
Berkeley, 2Harvard University School of Public Health, 3Children’s Hospital
Boston, 4Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute — The human prefrontal cortex
(PFC) matures well into adulthood, while the hippocampus reaches
adult-like status before adolescence. Classically, PFC is proposed to support working memory (WM) whereas the hippocampus supports longterm memory (LTM). However, recent studies suggest this distinction is
blurred since the PFC is involved in LTM processes and the hippocampus
in WM processes. Developmental studies can help clarify this distinction.
Given that PFC development is later, young adolescents may recruit compensatory areas for WM. In particular, they may recruit hippocampus.
Young adolescents’ performance on basic WM tasks is often indistinguishable from adults, making this an excellent cognitive domain to
study compensation. We studied 10 female adolescents longitudinally—
mean age 14 years for time 1 (T1) and 17 for time 2 (T2)—by administering a delayed match-to-sample task during fMRI scanning. During both
scans, participants viewed either 2 or 6 upper-case letters for 2 seconds
(encoding), followed by a 13.2 second delay period (maintenance), and
responded as to whether a lower-case letter matched one of the encoding
letters. Group analyses revealed that adolescents recruited the hippocampus at T1 not at T2 during encoding. Connectivity analyses reveal that at
T1, hippocampal and PFC activity were correlated during encoding. At
T2 no such correlation was detected; instead, PFC activity correlated with
parietal areas more than at T1. The hippocampus therefore appears 1) to

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

185

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

compensate for an underdeveloped PFC and 2) to be part of the PFC-parietal network only during early stages of development.
F51
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MUSIC AND LANGUAGE SKILLS
IN NORMAL-READING AND DYSLEXIC CHILDREN Marie
Forgeard1,2, Ellen Winner1,2,3, Andrea Norton1, Gottfried Schlaug1; 1Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, 2Boston College,
3Project Zero, Harvard Graduate School of Education — Past research has
shown that music and language skills appear to be related in normal as
well as in impaired readers. Children suffering from dyslexia have been
found to suffer from deficits in pitch and rhythm perception, and to have
difficulty reading musical notation. It has also been reported that daily
sessions of a rhythm-based intervention successfully remediated some of
the language skills found to be deficient in children with dyslexia. Results
from an ongoing longitudinal study with normal-reading children as
well as from a pilot study with dyslexic children confirmed that a strong
relationship exists between auditory musical discrimination abilities and
language-related skills. In normal readers, melodic discrimination abilities predicted both phonological and reading skills, but rhythmic discrimination predicted only reading skills. These relationships were
stronger in music-trained children than in controls, suggesting that musical training may help develop language-related skills. In children with
dyslexia, melodic and rhythmic discrimination skills predicted phonological skills, which in turn predicted reading abilities. Phonological skills
may therefore mediate the link between musical and reading abilities in
children with language impairments. Furthermore, children with dyslexia appear to have both melodic and rhythmic discrimination deficits
compared with a matched control group of normal readers. Normalreading children with at least one year of musical training surpassed both
the dyslexic and control groups on melodic discrimination. These results
suggest that a music intervention aimed at improving dyslexic children’s
basic auditory musical perception skills might also have a beneficial
effect at remediating some of their language deficits.
F52
CORPUS CALLOSUM MORPHOLOGY AND INTELLIGENCE
Amanda Hutchinson1,2, Benjamin Jacobson1, Luka Ruzik1, Jane Mathias2,
Marie Banich1; 1Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Colorado at
Boulder, 2School of Psychology, University of Adelaide, Australia — The corpus callosum is the largest fibre tract in the human brain and connects
homologous areas of the left and right cerebral hemispheres. The corpus
callosum plays an important role in integrating information between the
cerebral hemispheres, and is thought to contribute to the allocation of
attention between the hemispheres and in maintaining hemispheric
arousal. Recently, the size of posterior regions of the corpus callosum has
been found to be related to intelligence in a group of healthy adults (Luders et al., 2007) with larger callosal area related to higher intelligence. The
current study investigated the relationship between the morphology of
the corpus callosum and IQ in a sample of individuals in their late teens
and early 20s because recent evidence suggests that maturation of white
matter tracts continues through the 20s (Barnea-Goraly et al., 2005; Sowell
et al., 2003). Area measurements of seven sub-sections of the corpus callosum, as defined by Witelson (1989), were obtained at the midsagittal slice
and correlated with Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence scores,
while controlling for overall brain volume. The relationship between IQ
and callosal size held for individuals in this age range as well, providing
further evidence for the relationship between callosal morphology and
cognitive task performance.
F53
SOCIAL INPUT AND THE EVOLUTION OF PRIMATE
INTELLIGENCE: THE INFLUENCE OF THE PRE-WEANING
PERIOD Jeffrey Hutsler1, Oscar Ybarra1; 1University of Nevada, Program in
Neuroscience, University of Michigan — Many animals, especially primates, require social contact and social bonds with mothers and caretakers in order to survive and develop properly. Such bonds allow for

186

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

protection and nourishment, but may also be critical to cognitive development and the expression of complex cognitive skills to adapt to and
exploit the environment. Greater levels of cognitive ability and intelligence in primates are often associated with larger brains and larger neocortices (Reader & Laland, 2003), but when survival and fitness depend
on acquiring complex skills, the cognitive system should be predisposed
to learning from others, especially caretakers. Here we show that the
development of complex cognitive skills is associated not only with the
expansion of neocortex, but also the early social input that is a central
aspect of the environmental milieu in which the enlarged primate brain
originally evolved. We examined the relationship between measures of
intelligence and the length of the pre-weaning (birth to weaning) and gestation periods in 68 primate species. Controlling for phylogeny, these
findings show that longer pre-weaning periods and, less consistently,
shorter gestation lengths, predict higher frequencies of social learning,
tool use, and innovation as reported in the primate literature. Additional
analyses suggest that the rates of evolutionary change for both intelligent
behaviors and the pre-weaning period are highest in apes as compared to
other major primate sub-branches. This pattern of results indicates that
the amount of social contact infants have with their caretakers may be
related to both the expression and evolution of intelligent behaviors.
F54
IMPAIRED EYEBLINK CONDITIONING AS A BIOMARKER OF
FETAL ALCOHOL SYNDROME Sandra Jacobson1, Mark Stanton2,
Christopher Molteno3, Matthew Burden1, Douglas Fuller1, Joseph Jacobson1;
1Wayne State University School of Medicine, 2University of Delaware,
3University of Cape Town — Eyeblink conditioning (EBC) is a Pavlovian
paradigm that involves contingent temporal pairing of a conditioned
stimulus with an unconditioned stimulus. Animal studies have shown
that binge consumption of alcohol during pregnancy impairs EBC and
that this impairment is likely mediated by a loss of neurons in the inferior
olive and the cerebellar cortex and deep nuclei, as well as a reduction in
neural plasticity in the cerebellar deep nuclei. Short delay EBC was examined in 98 5-year-old children born to women from the Coloured (mixed
ancestry) community in Cape Town, South Africa, who were recruited
prenatally and are participating in the first prospective study of children
with fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS). FAS status was assessed at 5 years by
expert dysmorphologists. Two sessions of 50 trials each were administered to the children; a third session was administered the following day
to those children who did not meet criterion of 40% conditioned
responses in session 2. Not a single child with FAS met criterion for conditioning as contrasted with 75.0% of the nonexposed controls. Only
33.3% of the children with partial FAS and 37.9% of heavy exposed nonsyndromal children met criterion. These alcohol effects on EBC persisted
after controlling for IQ. Three of four microcephalic children who were
not exposed to alcohol were successfully conditioned. Successful EBC in
a microcephalic group supports the inference that the eyeblink conditioning deficit is specific to prenatal alcohol exposure and a potential biomarker for diagnosis of exposed children lacking the distinctive FAS
dysmorphology.
F55
PLASTICITY IN RIGHT LIMBIC STRUCTURES MEDIATES
HARMONY
INCONGRUITY
PROCESSING
IN
MUSICAL
EXPERTS Clara James1, Juliane Britz1, Patrik Vuilleumier1, Claude-Alain
Hauert1, Christoph Michel1; 1FPSE, University of Geneva, Switzerland — Western tonal music follows relational syntactical rules that regulate harmonic
transitions. Although laymen of western culture can detect violations of
musical syntax to a certain extent, refined syntactical transgressions may
be distinctively apprehended by musical experts, who have incorporated
the rule system more extensively due to intensive training. This differential sensitivity can best be observed at musical closure, where a very specific harmonic consequent is expected. We hypothesized that a subtle
incongruity of standard closure should evoke a profound reaction in an
expert, whereas an auditor lacking musical training may hardly detect it.

Poster Session F

Using electrical source imaging, we identified the temporal dynamics of
neuronal responses in highly trained pianists and musical laymen to syntactic harmonic incongruities in expressive music, that were easily
detected by the experts, but not by the laymen. We demonstrate that, in
musical experts only, a unique response in limbic areas encompassing the
right amygdala and hippocampal complex is evoked by subtle musical
closure incongruity. Its early onset (~200 ms) precedes a response of frontal areas that may reflect more conscious processing. No such differences
between the two groups were found for compositions with correct endings or in early auditory processing. These results go beyond previous
work demonstrating enhanced activity of primary sensory and motor
areas in professional musicians, and suggest that plasticity in limbic
structures also mediates the processing of fine harmonic incongruities in
professional musicians.
F56
THE NEURAL MOSAICS OF FACE SENSITIVITY ACROSS
DEVELOPMENT: LOOKING BEYOND PEAK ACTIVITY Rebecca
M. Jones1, Jason D. Zevin1, Jeremy Skipper1, BJ Casey1, Nim Tottenham1;
1
Sackler Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, NY — Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) reports in children and adolescents that
rely on univariate analyses suggest that the neural network for face processing continues to mature until young adulthood with a progressive
focalization of neural activity (Aylward et al., 2005; Golarai et al., 2007;
Passarotti et al., 2007). No imaging study, however, has quantified diffuse
versus focal activity to faces versus non-face objects in the inferior temporal cortex as a function of age. Examining distributed information across
a number of voxels throughout development can show more subtle
changes in activity, by characterizing the landscape of neural representations rather than simply measuring the “peak” activity. Sixty-two participants (ages 5-35 years old) were shown pictures of faces and houses
while fMRI scans were acquired. Our initial univariate analyses confirm
that there was a positive correlation between age and the BOLD signal in
both the bilateral fusiform gyrus (p<0.03) to faces relative to houses, and
in the bilateral parahippocampal gyrus to houses relative to faces
(p<0.03). In order to look beyond peak activity, we demonstrate a method
to quantify the degree to which category-specific activity in the inferior
temporal cortex changes from diffuse to focal as a function of age and
performance. These results provide a better understanding of how the
neural representation of faces changes across development.
F57
THE DEVELOPMENTAL PATTERN OF STIMULUS AND
RESPONSE INTERFERENCE IN A STROOP TASK: AN ERP
STUDY Ellen Jongen1, Lisa Jonkman1; 1Maastricht University — Eventrelated potentials (ERPs) were employed to investigate the temporal
course and development of stimulus and response interference (SI; RI). A
color-object version of the two-choice button-press Stroop task (de Houwer, 2003) was used. Twenty-one adults and fifty-four children, allocated
to one of three age groups (6-7, 8-9, 10-12 year-olds), participated. Behavioral results showed no effect of SI in any of the groups. Regarding RI,
children made more errors than adults. Reaction time results showed no
developmental differences, but an effect of RI in every group. ERPs indicated there was SI, but only in the two youngest groups. More specifically, SI evoked (1) an early right-hemispheric occipital modulation (80140 ms) in 6-7 year-olds, most likely indicating an early perceptual conflict caused by the incongruency of the presented object’s color and it’s
canonical color; (2) a sustained negative modulation (400-560 ms) spread
over the entire scalp in 6-7 year-olds and 8-9 year-olds. Given the absence
of SI in behavioral data, the latter may be a reflection of interference control. RI evoked (1) a posterior negative modulation (440-540 ms), distributed over both hemispheres in 10-12 year-olds and lateralized over the
left hemisphere in adults; (2) a sustained positive modulation (680-960
ms) in all groups at fronto-central and central sites, and additionally over
centro-parietal and posterior sites in 8-9 year-olds. The implications of
these results will be discussed.

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

F58
DIFFERENT DEVELOPMENTAL PATTERNS OF STIMULUS
VERSUS RESPONSE INTERFERENCE CONTROL IN A FLANKER
TASK; AN ERP STUDY. Lisa Jonkman1, Floortje Sniedt1; 1Maastricht
University, The Netherlands — The present study investigated how much
the development of the ability to suppress interfering information
depends on whether conflict is present at stimulus level or at response
level. Stimulus and response conflict was manipulated by presenting
subjects with a letter flanker task in which subjects had to respond to 4
target letters with a left- (B,H) or a right-hand (F,T) response. The target
letters were flanked by either 1) neutral flankers (NT: *F*), 2) congruent
flankers (CO:FFF), 3) incongruent flankers mapped to the same hand
(Stimulus-Interference(SI):BHB). In a fourth condition, additional
response interference was manipulated (RI) by presenting flankers that
were mapped on the opposite response hand (i.e.:BFB). Performance and
60-channel ERP data was collected from three groups of children; 6-7 yrolds (n=19), 8-10 yr-olds (n=20), 10-12 yr-olds (n=17) and young adults
(n=21). Behavioral analyses showed that SI only caused interference in
the 6-7 year-old children by slowing RT and enhancing errors. Response
interference (RIvsSI) only slowed responses in 10-12 year-olds and
adults, but enhanced errors in all age groups. The P170 component at
PO7 and PO8 was significantly enhanced in response to all stimuli
flanked by letters (independent of congruency) compared to neutral stimuli, this effect was stronger in children than adults. Preliminary analyses
showed no effect of SI or RI on fronto-central P2 and N2, but early centroparietal positivity (P3) was significantly influenced by response interference in adults (reduced positivity to RI than SI), but not in children. These
results will be discussed.
F59
ADOLESCENTS WHO WERE BORN VERY PRETERM HAVE
DECREASED THALAMIC VOLUMES Anastasia Kalpakidou1, Tiago
Marques1, Larry Rifkin1, Robin Murray1, Chiara Nosarti1; 1King's College
London Institute of Psychiatry, UK — Very preterm birth (VPT) is associated with structural and functional brain alterations and cognitive and
behavioral deficits in adolescence. The thalamus has been found to be
decreased in volume and to be implicated in language and response inhibition processing in VPT adolescents compared to controls. The aim of
this study was to quantify thalamic volume in VPT adolescents and controls. As the thalamus has been found to modulate behavioral responsiveness and externalizing symptoms in humans, we further examined
the association between thalamic volume and behavioral functioning.
Structural MRI was performed in 70 adolescents who were born before 33
weeks of gestation (mean age 14 years), and 41 age and gender-matched
controls. Thalamic volumes were calculated using a region of interest
approach. The Rutter Behavioral Scale was administered, which assesses
emotional, conduct problems and hyperactivity. A previous study with
the same sample found that hyperactivity scores were higher in VPT adolescents compared to controls. After adjusting for whole brain volume
and ventricular size, VPT adolescents had a 6.5% decrease in total thalamic volume compared to controls (F (109) =1.63, P = 0.013). No significant correlations between total thalamic volume and behavioral scores
were observed in either group. We conclude that VPT adversely affects
the development of the thalamus possibly due to the consequences of
hypoxic-ischemic damage. Thalamic volume was however not significantly associated with the selective behavioral variables studied, possibly
due to alterations in patterns of structure-function relationships following early brain injury, which will be further investigated with connectivity analysis.
F60
NEUROPLASTICITY-BASED
COGNITIVE
TRAINING
IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA
NORMALIZES
MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY AUDITORY DURATION MISMATCH RESPONSES IN
CORTEX Kasra Khatibi1, Anne M. Findlay1, R. Alison Adcock3, Karuna
Subramaniam1,2, Stephanie Aldebot1,2, Adelaide Hearst1,2, Mary Vertinski1,2,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

187

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

Elysa J. Marco1, Srikantan Nagarajan1, Sophia Vinogradov1,2; 1UCSF, 2San
Francisco VA Medical Center, 3Duke University — Patients with schizophrenia show a number of abnormal cortical responses during early sensory processing, including an abnormal (reduced or absent) duration
mismatch response (MMR) to auditory stimuli. We investigated whether
intensive neuroplasticity-based cognitive training of auditory processes
could normalize the MMR in schizophrenia subjects. Sixteen subjects
were matched based on IQ, age, gender, and symptom severity, and then
randomly assigned to receive either 40-60 hours of neuroplasticity-based
targeted cognitive training (TCT) of auditory processing, or an equivalent
number of hours of a computer games (CG) control condition. Eight
healthy control (HC) subjects were also studied. Whole-head MEG
responses were obtained before and after interventions, while subjects
passively listened to auditory tones in noise (-7 dB signal to noise ratio).
Stimuli consisted of frequently occurring complex tones (standards, 80
ms long) randomly interspersed with deviants (40 ms long) at a probability of 0.16. Using in-house noise and interference suppression algorithms,
we extracted the average stimulus locked responses for deviant tones,
and for the standards that immediately preceded deviants. At baseline,
schizophrenia subjects showed an absence of the normal MMR at 200-250
ms post-deviant stimuli, compared to HCs. After training, TCT subjects
(4 out of 5 of currently analyzed subjects) displayed an MMR at 200-250
ms, comparable to the response in the HCs, while the CG subjects did
not. Thus, neuroplasticity-based training conferred normalization of
early cortical responses to auditory stimuli, while computer games did
not.
F61
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL CUES IN LONG-TERM MEMORY IN
INFANTS Franziska Kopp1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Development,
Berlin, Germany — Social cues have a facilitating effect on object processing in infants as was shown using event-related brain potentials (ERP).
The aim of the present study was to test whether this facilitating effect
could be observed for long-term memory processes as well. 4-month-old
and 9-month-old infants were familiarized with visual stimuli: In the
joint attention condition the experimenter alternated gaze between infant
and object while expressing short vocalizations and positive affect. In the
non-joint attention condition the experimenter looked constantly to the
toy and not to the infant while vocalizations were presented via loudspeakers. The procedure was applied until infants had reached a cumulative looking time of 20 s per object. EEG was recorded in a recognition
test phase where familiar items were presented with novel items in random order. This test phase was repeated after one week to test for longterm memory effects. Event-related potentials were calculated for familiar and novel objects. Results showed a novelty effect in both recognition
phases. Furthermore, 9-month-olds’ ERP responses differed between the
joint attention and the non-joint attention condition. Differential effects
were found for 4-month-olds and 9-month-olds for immediate recognition and recognition after one week. Results indicate the importance of
social interactions for infant learning and long-term memory.
F62
WORKING MEMORY FOR NUMBERS, LETTERS AND FACES IN 8YEAR-OLD CHILDREN AND ADULTS Melissa Libertus1,2, Elizabeth
Brannon1,2, Kevin Pelphrey2,3; 1Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke
University, 2Duke University, 3Carnegie Mellon University — According to
Baddeley’s model of working memory (WM), verbal WM relies on storage and rehearsal processes in the phonological loop. Neuroimaging
studies typically find activation in the prefrontal and parietal cortices
during verbal WM tasks. However, a recent study also reported stimulus-specific activation for a numerical WM task in the intraparietal sulcus,
a brain area typically associated with semantic processing of numerical
information (Knops et al., 2006). In the present study, we investigate
whether letters and faces in addition to numbers elicit stimulus-specific
activation in a WM task. Furthermore, we were interested in determining
whether children who have less experience with numerical symbols and
letters than adults also show automatic activation of these stimulus-spe-

188

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

cific brain regions. To this end, 8-year-old children (N=13) and adults
(N=13) performed a 2-back WM task with three different stimulus conditions (numbers, letters and face images) while their brain activity was
measured using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Overall,
children performed significantly slower and less accurate on all three
working memory conditions; however, within each age group, performance between the three conditions was very similar. For adults, we
found stimulus-specific activation in the intraparietal sulcus in the
numerical WM condition, in the inferior temporal lobes in the letter condition, and in the fusiform gyrus in the face condition. In contrast, for
children we only found stimulus-specific activation in the fusiform gyrus
in the face condition. These results suggest that children do not yet automatically activate brain regions associated with semantic processing for
numerical symbols and letters.
F63
HOW THE BRAIN REPRESENTS FULFILLED AND UNFULFILLED
INTENTIONS Jörg Meinhardt1, Beate Sodian1, Claudia Thoermer1, Katrin
Döhnel2, Monika Sommer2; 1University of Munich, 2University of
Regensburg — The understanding of intentional action is one of the building blocks of a Theory of Mind (ToM), the ability to interpret and predict
human behaviour by attributing inner states to the agent. Understanding
intentions and desires are developmental precursors to belief-based reasoning. Studies seek to tap into neurophysiological distinct processes of
these different abilities in adults. However, whereas several ERP studies
investigated belief reasoning only little is known about the electrophysiological correlates of intention attribution. In the present ERP study we
presented cartoon stories which only differ in their verbal vignette and
realized three experimental conditions: intention fulfilled, intention not
fulfilled and a non mentalizing reality condition. The task of the participants (N = 16 adults) was to indicate the emotional state of the protagonist in respect to the fulfilled or unfulfilled intention. In the non
mentalizing condition participants have to judge the ongoing action. The
ERP waveforms at anterior frontal sites (AF7) were affected by the experimental conditions in two epochs. Both intentional (mental) conditions
(fulfilled and not fulfilled) showed more negative waveforms at 400 ms
poststimulus in comparison to the reality condition. In addition, a late
negative slow wave (500-800 ms poststimulus) was larger for fulfilled
intentions than for not fulfilled intentions or the reality condition. The
earlier waveform may reflect a matching process between intention and
reality whereas the later waveform may indicate ongoing processing of
fulfilled intentions. These results are discussed on the basis of distinct
neurocognitive processes associated with intention processing and belief
reasoning.
F64
ERPS TO PLACE OF ARTICULATION CUES IN PRESCHOOLAGED CHILDREN WITH SPECIFIC LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT
Scott Miller1, Jeanne Johnson2, Paul Yoder3, Dennis Molfese4; 1University of
Wisconsin – Madison, 2Washington State University, 3Vanderbilt University,
4
University of Louisville — Efforts to test the hypothesis that deficits in
temporal acuity account for specific language impairment (SLI) have
tended to focus on children who are at least school-aged, because of difficulties in quantifying relevant perceptual abilities in infants, toddlers,
and preschoolers. Event related potentials (ERPs) to speech place of articulation cues, which are carried by rapid changes in acoustic information,
may offer a sensitive, developmentally appropriate measure for testing
this theory across all age groups; but the only study to date that has
examined ERPs to speech stimuli in this population sampled children
who were 5 years old and older. The current study showed that early
ERP components in response to an equal probability presentation of the
synthesized syllables /da/ and /ga/ differentiated preschoolers with SLI
from age-matched typically developing peers (n = 28, N = 56) to a significant but limited degree. Because variance accounted for and classification
accuracy were low to moderate, a multi-factorial model of SLI may be
most consistent with these results.

Poster Session F

F65
RELATIONSHIPS
BETWEEN
BRAIN
STRUCTURE
AND
BIMANUAL
TASK
PERFORMANCE
IN
HEALTHY
ADOLESCENTS Ryan Muetzel1, Paul Collins1, Kelvin Lim1, Monica
Luciana1; 1University of Minnesota — Adolescent development is characterized by dramatic behavioral changes in motor dexterity, executive
functioning, and attention as well as changes in neural architecture. The
structural brain changes associated with adolescent development have
been studied primarily with conventional magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) and to a lesser extent, diffusion tensor imaging. With the exception
of functional imaging, limited work has examined relationships between
brain development and behavioral change. The current study incorporated a longitudinal design to examine the development of bimanual
motor performance in relation to brain structure. Healthy adolescents
(n=45) were scanned twice, with a two-year period between scans.
Bimanual performance was assessed at both time-points. Automated tissue parcellation (FreeSurfer) was applied to T1-weighted images yielding
cortical thickness, surface area, and gray and white matter volume for
pre- and post-central gyri. Volumes for five regions of the corpus callosum (CC) were also computed. Changes in tissue over the two-year time
span were assessed by computing difference scores for each region
between sessions. The same approach was used for bimanual motor performance. Significant relationships were observed between bimanual
task performance and posterior-CC volume changes, as well as white
matter changes in the pre- and post-central gyri. Similarly, gray matter
volume changes in pre- and post-central gyri were significantly related to
improvements in task performance. These preliminary findings relate
structural brain characteristics to behavioral performance using a longitudinal design. To our knowledge, this is the first study to examine
bimanual task performance in relation to callosal and gyral structure in
the developing adolescent brain.
F66
THE DEVELOPMENT OF BRAIN SYSTEMS FOR EPISODIC
MEMORY RETRIEVAL Noa Ofen1, Xioaqian Jenny Chai1, Karen D.I.
Schuil1, Ayesha Hameed1, John D.E. Gabrieli1; 1Brain and Cognitive Sciences,
MIT, MA — Multiple brain regions are involved in episodic memory
retrieval in adults, but the brain regions that support episodic memory
retrieval in younger children have not been identified. This study investigated the development of brain regions involved in episodic memory
retrieval. Participants (age range 8-21, n = 24) studied 140 pictures of
indoor and outdoor scenes and then were given a recognition test while
being scanned with 3T MRI scanner. Participants made old/new decisions for the previously studied pictures and 140 new pictures. Participants correctly recognized 0.51 ± 0.13 of the studied pictures (Hit rate,
mean ± SD) and correctly gave a ‘new’ response to 0.76 ± 0.10 of the new
pictures (CR rate). Recognition accuracy (Hit + CR) increased with age (r
= 0.53, p = 0.007). Frontal, parietal, and temporal cortical regions and
basal ganglia regions were active for successful retrieval (Hits > Misses).
Within these regions activations associated with successful retrieval
increased with age in left anterior PFC (BA 10), left lateral parietal cortex
(BA 7/40) and left medial PFC (BA 9/32). Activations for successful
retrieval correlated with recognition accuracy, across participants, in left
parietal cortex and medial PFC but not in anterior PFC. These results suggest that with age, frontal and parietal regions are progressively recruited
to reach adult-like pattern of brain activation during episodic memory
retrieval. Furthermore, these results suggest differential developmental
trajectory for anterior PFC and lateral parietal cortical regions supporting
episodic memory retrieval.
F67
LONGITUDINAL CHANGES IN DELAY DISCOUNTING RATE
DURING ADOLESCENCE AND EFFECTS OF WHITE MATTER
DEVELOPMENT Elizabeth Olson1, Paul Collins1, Catalina Hooper1, Ryan
Muetzel1,2, Kelvin Lim1,2, Monica Luciana1,3; 1University of Minnesota,

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

2

University of Minnesota/ Center for Magnetic Resonance Research,
of Minnesota/ Institute of Child Development — Discounting
tasks assess the extent to which the subjective value of a reward decreases
as the time until the delivery of the reward increases. This lab has previously demonstrated differences in discounting behavior across adolescent age groups (Olson et al., 2007). In this study, healthy adolescents
ages 11-25 returned for a follow-up visit at which the delay discounting
rate was assessed longitudinally after a 2-year interval. In addition, they
completed a follow-up diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) brain scan using a
3T magnet. A voxelwise approach was used to analyze the data. We
examine how within-subject developmental changes in white matter
organization are associated with within-subject developmental changes
in delay discounting behavior. These findings will be discussed relative
to theories of adolescent brain development and the neural networks presumed to underlie discounting behavior.
3University

F68
WORD READING IN BILINGUAL CHILDREN: AN FMRI STUDY
Elizabeth A. Owens1, Noemí Aznar-Besé1, Gayane Meschyan1, Arturo E.
Hernandez1; 1University of Houston — The purpose of the present study
was to compare neural mechanisms in bilingual children and adults, and
to determine the effects of language proficiency level on neural activity
during a single word, reading task. All children (8 - 13 yrs.) and adults (18
- 40 yrs.) were right-handed, early Spanish-English bilinguals, having
learned Spanish first, followed by English before the age of 7 years. A list
was compiled of 30 Spanish and 30 English, early learned, high frequency
words, which were controlled for age of acquisition (AoA), frequency,
concreteness, and length. During the functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) experiment, words were presented on a screen one at a
time, in block design, and counterbalanced across participants. Participants were instructed to read the words silently and press a hand-held
button after they had read each word. Children showed differences in
English and Spanish. Increased neural activity for Spanish was found in
the middle and superior temporal gyrus. In English, there was increased
activity in the left anterior cingulate gyrus. Although adults showed similar differences between Spanish and English, the neural activity differences were much larger in magnitude. Taken together these results
suggest that adults show larger differences between languages as proficiency changes across development.
F69
FMRI CONFIRMATION OF MEG EXPRESSIVE LANGUAGE
LOCALIZATION IN A GROUP OF TEENAGERS Elizabeth Pang1,2,
Frank Wang1, Marion Malone1, Darren Kadis2, Elizabeth Donner1,2; 1The
Hospital for Sick Children, 2The University of Toronto — Functional MRI is
the gold standard for the non-invasive localization of expressive and
receptive language to Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas, respectively. Magnetoencephalography (MEG) is a newer neuroimaging technology that
combines the spatial resolution of fMRI with high temporal resolution.
While there are established MEG protocols for receptive language, there
is a paucity of data regarding expressive language localization. In this
study, we had a two-fold objective: to develop MEG expressive language
tasks suitable for use in our clinical paediatric population, and to directly
compare these new MEG tasks to homologous fMRI tests. Ten healthy,
right-handed, English-speaking teenagers were tested with both fMRI
and MEG. Three covert tasks were included: picture naming, picture verb
generation (think of an action that corresponds to the presented object),
and word verb generation (think of an action that corresponds to the presented word). fMRI acquisition and analysis followed our standard clinical protocols. MEG data were analysed with differential synthetic
aperture magnetometry (SAM). As expected, the fMRI group averaged
data demonstrated significant activation in left inferior frontal gyrus for
all three tasks. The group averaged MEG results demonstrated significant
beta band (13-30 Hz) desynchrony at 300-600 msec post-stimulus in left
inferior frontal gyrus. Desynchrony in this frequency band has been
found to correlate with fMRI localizations with other cognitive tasks. In

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

189

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

summary, our three MEG expressive language tasks showed high localization concordance with traditional fMRI tasks. Furthermore, our use of
picture-based stimuli makes this a promising candidate for localizing
expressive language in the clinical paediatric setting.
F70
NEUROCOGNITIVE
DEVELOPMENT
OF
MEMORY
SUPPRESSION Pedro M. Paz-Alonso1, Simona Ghetti2, Michael J. Souza1,
Michael C. Anderson3, Silvia A. Bunge1; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute,
University of California, Berkeley, 2University of California, Davis, 3University
of Oregon, Eugene — The Think/No-Think (TNT) paradigm has attracted
substantial interest for the study of the intentional suppression of memories. Neuroimaging evidence with adults suggests that this suppression
results from interactions between lateral prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus. Specifically, attempts to suppress memory retrieval were
associated with increased lateral prefrontal activation and decreased hippocampal activation relative to unregulated memory retrieval. Our
behavioral research indicates that children aged 8-9 have difficulty suppressing memories in the TNT paradigm, whereas children aged 11-12
perform similarly to adults. Thus, we hypothesize that children aged 8-9
exhibit weaker prefrontal control over hippocampal activation than older
children or adults. The present fMRI study is aimed at investigating the
neurodevelopmental underpinnings of memory suppression. A total of
54 healthy participants from three age groups (8-9-yr-olds, 11-12-yr-olds,
and adults) will participate (current N = 12). After learning a series of
word-pairs (e.g., Vacation-Palm), participants are presented with the first
word (Vacation), and are asked to either remember (i.e., Think condition)
or suppress (i.e., No-Think condition) the second word (Palm). fMRI data
is acquired during this Think/No-Think phase. In the final recall phase,
suppressed targets typically are remembered less than baseline items
(Baseline condition). Preliminary fMRI data indicate that, in 11-12-yearolds but not 8-9-year-olds, hippocampal activation is reduced for NoThink trials that were subsequently forgotten relative to Think trials that
were subsequently remembered. We predict that the negative correlation
between prefrontal and hippocampal activation during memory suppression will increase with age, as a function of improved control over mnemonic processing.
F71
DEVELOPMENTAL DIFFERENCES IN PREFRONTAL AND
SUBCORTICAL ACTIVATION DURING INHIBITION
AS
DETERMINED USING MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY (MEG)
Brendan Rich1, Laura Onelio1, Tom Holroyd2, Frederick Carver2, Richard
Coppola2, Daniel Pine1, Ellen Leibenluft1; 1Mood and Anxiety Program,
National Institute of Mental Health, 2MEG Core Facility, National Institute of
Mental Health — Introduction: The neural circuitry mediating inhibition
varies developmentally, likely because frontal regions, central to inhibition, are among the last brain regions to mature. Magnetoencephalography (MEG), with excellent temporal resolution, allows for the
measurement of distinct components of cognitive activity. We used MEG
to differentiate neural activation that occurs before compared to after successful and failed inhibition, and thereby explore the neural developmental progression of the inhibitory process.Method: 15 youths (14.27 ± 2.25
years) and 15 adults (34.75 ± 10.18 years) completed the stop-signal task
of behavioral inhibition. Neuromagnetic data were collected with a
whole-head 275-channel SQUID sensor. We examined neural activation
in the theta, alpha, beta, and gamma bands. Results: Whole-sample MEG
analyses identified a fronto-thalamic-parietal network active prior to successful inhibition, and a temporal-occipital network active following successful inhibition. Developmental comparisons found that before
successful inhibition, youths compared to adults had greater alpha
desynchronization of the right superior frontal gyrus (SFG), while adults
compared to youths had greater gamma synchronization in the left thalamus. Whereas alpha desynchronization in the left anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) preceded successful inhibition in youths, it preceded failed
inhibition in adults. Discussion: Whereas youths may rely on working

190

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

memory and planning mediated by the SFG for successful inhibition,
adults may rely more on automatic processing mediated by thalamo-cortical circuitry. These MEG results both agree with and contrast recent
fMRI studies of inhibition, supporting the utility of MEG as an important
neuroimaging technique for improving our understanding of neural maturation.
F72
TRAINING EXECUTIVE ATTENTION: LASTING EFFECTS AND
TRANSFER TO AFFECTIVE SELF-REGULATION M Rosario Rueda1,
Purificacion Checa1, Milagros Santonja1; 1University of Granada, Spain — Executive attention development appears to be subject to important constitutionally-based individual differences such as those rooted in genetic and
temperamental variability. However, we have shown in the past that the
efficiency of the executive attention network also seems to be influenced
by experience. We have developed a series of computer exercises
designed to train children’s executive attention. Data from several studies
show that both normal children and children suffering from attentionrelated deficits (e.g. autism) show signs of greater attentional efficiency
after training as measured by both behavioral assessments and patterns
of brain activation. In the current study, we have tested the lasting effects
of a 10 session program of training attention in a group of 37 five-year
olds. In addition, we have explored the transferring effects of attention
training to aspects of intelligence and affective regulation. Data replicated beneficial effects of training in cognitive and brain measures of
attentional control. In addition, the trained group still showed significant
benefits on attention and reasoning abilities in two months follow up.
Our data also showed a modest transfer of attention training to performance of affectively-relevant control tasks.
F73
TEMPORAL REWARD DISCOUNTING IN CHILDREN AND
ADOLESCENTS
WITH
ADHD:
EFFECT
OF
REWARD
MAGNITUDE Anouk Scheres1, Allison Lee1, Chandra Tontsch1, Antonia
Kaczkurkin1; 1University of Arizona — Background - Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is a common child psychiatric condition,
of which the underlying neuropsychological mechanisms remain largely
unclear. Theories have proposed that ADHD is associated with relatively
strong preferences for small immediate rewards over large delayed
rewards, also termed “delay aversion”. However, paradigms in previous
research were not optimized for measuring the trade-off between reward
magnitude and delay durations. Methods – We used a temporal reward
discounting paradigm that was optimally designed to measure this tradeoff. Participants were between 6 and 17 years of age, and had ADHD (n=
15), or were healthy controls (n=20). Participants were presented with
choices between a small immediate reward and a large delayed reward.
Rewards were small amounts of money. The large reward was delayed
between 5 and 60 seconds, and was either 10 or 5 cents. The small immediate reward varied in magnitude, and was between 1 and 4 cents when
the large reward was 5 cents. It was between 2 and 8 cents when the large
reward was 10 cents. Results – Preliminary data suggest that the ADHD
group had a stronger preference for small immediate rewards than controls when the large delayed reward was 5 cents, but not when it was 10
cents. Conclusions - These findings suggest that delay aversion in ADHD
may not be a robust finding, but rather one that is highly sensitive to specific task manipulations. Reward magnitude appears to be an important
factor that determines whether or not delay aversion is observed in
ADHD.
F74
FIFTEEN MONTHS OF MUSICAL TRAINING INCREASES THE
SIZE OF THE CORPUS CALLOSUM IN YOUNG CHILDREN
Gottfried Schlaug1, Marie Forgeard1,2, Andrew Norton1, Andrea Norton1,
Justin Bachorik1, Udita Iyengar1, Ellen Winner2; 1Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, 2Boston College and Project Zero,
Harvard Graduate School of Education — As the main interhemispheric
fiber tract, the corpus callosum (CC) is of particular importance for musi-

Poster Session F

cians who simultaneously engage parts of both hemispheres to process
and play music. Past research has shown that professional musicians
who began musical training before age seven have larger anterior CC
areas than nonmusicians. These results suggest that plastic changes due
to musical training may occur in the CC during early childhood. However, no study to this date has demonstrated that the increased CC area
found in musicians is due to musical training rather than to preexisting
differences. We tested the hypothesis that fifteen months of instrumental
musical training would cause a significant increase in total CC area (corrected for total brain volume) in a group of six-year-old children compared with a matched control group. The two groups did not differ at
baseline in total CC area. After fifteen months, children who practiced
their instrument at least 1.5 hour per week showed significantly larger
proportional increases in total CC area than controls did. Furthermore,
the average number of minutes per week children practiced their instrument predicted the amount of proportional change in CC area, thus
showing that there is a dose-response relationship between instrumental
training and increase in CC size. Our results confirm that musical experience, and not preexisting differences, are responsible for the larger CC
area found in adult professional musicians
F75
AFFECT REGULATION AFTER SOCIAL EXCLUSION IS STILL
DEVELOPING DURING ADOLESCENCE Catherine Sebastian1, Essi
Viding1, Kipling Williams2, Tony Charman1, Sarah-Jayne Blakemore1;
1
University College London, 2Purdue University — Adolescents are particularly susceptible to peer pressure, and sensitivity to social exclusion may
be a contributory factor. This is a powerful social tool; with Williams et al.
(2000) showing that sensitivity to social exclusion predicts later conformity levels. Regulation of the distress resulting from social exclusion
depends on ventrolateral prefrontal regions (Eisenberger et al., 2003),
which are still developing during adolescence (Gogtay et al., 2004). The
current study looked at affective and cognitive reactions to an experimental social exclusion manipulation (Cyberball) in two groups of adolescent
girls (aged 11-13 and 14-15) and adult women. Exclusion led all groups to
report that key psychological needs were threatened (belonging, control
and meaningful existence) relative to baseline. Despite levels of need
threat being equivalent across groups, the affective consequences were
stronger in the adolescents, with greater anxiety, lower self esteem and
lower mood reported after exclusion than in adults. The findings suggest
that the ability to regulate distress associated with social exclusion develops between adolescence and adulthood. This may depend on the maturation of the relevant neural structures.
F76
ESTABLISHING A RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PREFRONTAL
CORTEX FUNCTION, SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS, AND
CORTISOL REACTIVITY IN CHILDREN Margaret
Sheridan1,2,
Sarsour Khaled3, D'Esposito Mark4,5, Boyce W. Thomas6; 1School of Public
Health, Harvard University, 2Children's Hospital Boston, 3Eli illy & Company,
4
University of California, Berkeley, 5Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute,
6
College for Interdisciplinary Studies and Faculty of Medicine, University of
British Columbia — Population health research has consistently demonstrated that children who grow up in low socioeconomic status (SES)
environments experience poor health outcomes in childhood and adulthood. Environmental conditions associated with poverty such as
crowded and noisy environments are associated with increased stress
reactivity and decreased cardiovascular health in childhood. Animal
studies confirm that exposure to stressful experience early in development results in increased stress reactivity in adulthood. Stress exposure is
associated with a peripheral and central increase in catecholamines and
glucocorticoids, hormones known to have short and long term effects on
neural structure and function. Poverty could modify neural function in at
least two ways, by early modification of stress reactivity, or by continuous exposure to stress hormones directly modifying neural structures. In
the current study we measure prefrontal function in 18 children (aged 8-

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

11) from either high or low SES backgrounds. We measured cortisol reactivity to fMRI scanning, a moderately stressful and novel experience.
During scanning, participants performed two rule-based previously
learned arbitrary stimulus response (SR) mappings and learned two
novel SR mappings. While performance on the previously learned SR
mappings was not different between groups, children from low SES
backgrounds learned the novel SR mappings less quickly than children
from high SES backgrounds. Performance on this task was significantly
correlated with a measure of income to needs ratio and cortisol reactivity
during scanning. These results replicate and extend previous studies
demonstrating a relationship between SES and performance on tasks
requiring prefrontal function.
F77
THE PROCEDURAL LEARNING OF ACTION ORDER AND
TIMING IN YOUNG CHILDREN IN A SERIAL REACTION TIME
TASK Jacqueline Shin1; 1Indiana State University — The procedural learning of timed movement sequences was investigated in elementary school
children grades 1-3 and adults. A version of the serial reaction time task
was used in which spatial information that specified the order of manual
responses and timing information (response-to-stimulus intervals) varied
from trial to trial. Response order and timing were presented in repeating
sequences simultaneously in a phase-matched manner. Learning for
either sequence was probed by observing performance costs associated
with randomizing one dimension while maintaining the sequenced presentation of the other. Similarly, a phase shift between the initially correlated response and timing sequences was introduced to evaluate whether
the two sequences had become integrated into a common sequence representation. The main results were that in both children and adults, learning for the response sequence as well as integrative learning were
significant. The current finding that the pattern of learning was similar in
both age groups suggests that the neural mechanisms for acquiring temporal coordination in sequenced actions may already be mature by early
childhood.
F78
EFFECT OF DOPAMINE TRANSPORTER GENOTYPE ON
WORKING MEMORY MAINTENANCE IN CHILDREN Devon
Shook1, Jennifer Foss-Feig1, Colin Brady1, Edwin Cook2, Mark Stein2, Laura
Kenealy3, Chandan Vaidya1; 1Georgetown University, 2University of Illinois
Chicago, 3Children’s National Medical Center — Neuroimaging studies of
adults have shown that prefrontal contribution to executive function differs by the polymorphism of the dopamine transporter genotype (DAT1).
In typically developing children, studies of individual differences by
DAT1 have focused upon behavioral differences in inhibitory function. It
is unknown whether prefrontal contribution to working memory differs
by DAT1 in typically developing children. We performed functional
magnetic resonance imaging during the Sternberg working memory task
with loads 5 and 3 letters (relative to 1 letter) in 8-12 year old children
with either two copies (10/10) or 1 copy (9/10) of the 10 repeat allele of
DAT1. Performance accuracy did not differ between groups but was
reduced for memory load of 5 than 3 letters relative to 1 letter. Accuracy
was marginally reduced for load 5 than 3 letters. Thus, behaviorally, both
groups had a similar response to working memory load. In the brain,
response to memory load, i.e., regions that were more activated for memory set of 5 vs. 1 letter relative to 3 vs. 1 letter, was mediated by bilateral
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex in the 10/10 children but by right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in the 9/10 children. Differences in prefrontal
engagement based upon DAT1 in childhood suggests that genotypic
modulation of dopaminergic function is evident early in maturation.
Funded by NIMH MH065395

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

191

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

F79
DECREASED FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF MOTOR
CIRCUITS IN AUTISM Daniel J. Simmonds1, James J. Pekar1,2, Stewart H.
Mostofsky1,2; 1Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, 2Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine — Recent studies using functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) have demonstrated decreased functional connectivity in
autism across a wide range of brain regions and tasks. Abnormalities in
motor development are common in children with autism and may also be
associated with poor connectivity between regions important for motor
skill learning and execution. To address this, we investigated functional
connectivity differences in autism during performance of a motor task.
Thirteen children with high functioning autism (HFA) ages 8-13 and thirteen age- and gender-matched typically-developing (TD) controls completed a simple finger-sequencing task during fMRI, alternating between
30s periods of rest, right-handed finger-sequencing (RHFS) and lefthanded finger-sequencing (LHFS). Functional connectivity between
seven task-relevant regions (bilateral primary motor, bilateral anterior
cerebellum, bilateral thalamus and supplementary motor area) was measured as the correlation between fMRI time courses for each pair of
regions (21 pairs) during each condition (rest, RHFS, LHFS). Repeated
measures ANOVA revealed decreased connectivity across all regionpairs for each condition (rest:F=9.0,p=.007; RHFS:F=11.0,p=.003;
LHFS:F=10.5,p=.004), particularly notable for ROI’s involving the cerebellum (F=15.2,p<.001). Additionally, during finger-sequencing, differences were more pronounced in motor circuits for the hand not in use
(RHFS:F=15.6,p<.001 vs. F=8.6,p=.007; LHFS:F=16.2,p<.001 vs.
F=8.7,p=.007). Decreased functional connectivity of motor circuits in
autism is consistent with findings of motor impairment in the disorder;
moreover, decreased connectivity in circuits for the hand not in use may
reflect poor bilateral motor regulation and may contribute to impaired
acquisition and execution of motor skills in children with autism.
F80
A POSSIBLE COMMON NEUROCOGNITIVE BASIS FOR AT
LEAST THREE DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS Tony J. Simon1, Hui
Zhang2, Brian Avants2, James Gee2, Elliott Beaton1, Michele Mazzocco4, Randi
Hagerman1, Juidth Ross3; 1M.I.N.D. Institute, University of California Davis, 2School
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 3School of Medicine, Thomas Jefferson
University, 4Kennedy Krieger Institute, Johns Hopkins University — Chromosome 22q11.2 deletion, Turner and fragile X syndromes share some phenotypic but not genotypic characteristics. Individuals from each population show relative strength in verbal and weakness in visuospatial,
visuomotor and numerical cognition domains and some impairments of
executive function. This overlap was the basis for our detailed neurocognitive investigation into possible common biological and functional bases
for the shared impairments. We studied children aged 7 to 14 years using
Magnetic Resonance Imaging to measure brain structure, function and
connectivity and a set of experimental cognitive tests to examine the performance of neural circuits, particularly frontoparietal networks that subserve the operation of attentional and numerical functions. Despite
intergroup differences in IQ measures, all three developmental disorder
groups produced a strikingly similar performance pattern on the experimental tests that was significantly different to the one produced by typical controls. There was also a clear overlap in neural changes relative to
controls. At least one common region of anomalous connectivity in the
right parietal lobe was detected. Also neural activation in response to a
multiple object tracking task, measured using fMRI, was significantly different in each developmental disability group to the pattern produced by
controls. Results suggest the first evidence of similarities in the neurodevelopmental trajectory of these distinct disorders. We will discuss the
patterns of similarity and difference that we have found and discuss
some implications for future plans involving the design of therapeutic
interventions.

192

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

F81
CHILDHOOD POVERTY AND LEARNING: MEDIAL TEMPORAL
VERSUS STRIATAL LEARNING SYSTEMS Elizabeth Smith1, Martha
Farah1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Memory performance on two
implicit learning tasks was assessed in adolescents from low and middle
socioeconomic status (SES) families. Prior work with these and other participants has demonstrated an SES disparity in declarative memory performance. Declarative memory relies on the medial temporal lobe,
including the hippocampus, and is sensitive to stress hormone levels.
Chronic stress exposure is associated with lower SES and could explain
differences in hippocampal declarative memory performance, but what
about other learning systems? Current computational memory models
describe multiple interacting memory systems. Animal, patient, and neuorimaging studies corroborate these models and suggest hippocampal
declarative memory is distinct from, and may even inhibit, striatal habit
learning. If SES effects on declarative memory performance are driven by
stress-related impairment of the hippocampus, then the SES disparity in
neurocognitive performance should not extend to striatally-mediated
learning. We assessed performance on two classic striatal habit learning
tasks, a serial reaction time task and a probabilistic category learning
task. As predicted, SES was not related to performance. We are in the
process of replicating these findings and the earlier findings with declarative memory to more explicitly contrast non-declarative and declarative
memory performance.
F82
REPETITION SUPPRESSION OF INDUCED GAMMA ACTIVITY
PREDICTS ENHANCED ORIENTING TOWARD A NOVEL
STIMULUS IN 6-MONTH-OLD INFANTS Kelly Snyder1, Andreas
Keil2; 1University of Denver, 2University of Florida — Habituation refers to a
decline in orienting to a repeated stimulus, and can be inferred to reflect
learning about the properties of the repeated stimulus when followed by
increased orienting to a novel stimulus (i.e., novelty detection). Habituation and novelty detection paradigms have been used for over 40 years to
study perceptual and mnemonic processes in the human infant, yet
important questions remain about the nature of these processes in
infants. The aim of the present study was to examine the neural mechanisms underlying habituation and novelty detection in infants. Specifically, we investigated changes in induced alpha, beta, and gamma
activity in 6-month-old infants during repeated presentations of either a
face or an object, and examined whether these changes predicted behavioral responses to novelty at test. We found that induced gamma activity
to faces decreased with stimulus repetition (t(25) = 2.98, p < .01), and that
greater decreases in the gamma-band were associated with enhanced orienting to a novel face at test (r(17) = -0.52, p = .03). In contrast, increases
in induced alpha activity (t(25) = -2.66, p = .013) and decreases in induced
beta activity (paired t(25) = 2.20, p = .04) with stimulus repetition were
not associated with infants’ behavioral responses to novelty. These findings suggests that gamma activity may play a role in encoding featural
information about faces in infants, and that encoding in infant habituation paradigms may reflect a form of perceptual learning.
F83
NATURALLY-BIASED AND LEARNED INFLUENCES ON THE
DEVELOPMENT OF SENSORY ASSOCIATIONS: THE COLORS
OF THE ALPHABET Ferrinne Spector1, Daphne Maurer1; 1McMaster
University — Many letters of the alphabet are consistently mapped to specific colors in English-speaking adults, both in the general population
and individuals with grapheme-color synaesthesia who perceive letters
in color (e.g., Simner et al., 2005). Such associations may be naturallybiased by intrinsic sensory cortical organization, or based in literacy (e.g.,
“A” is for “apple”, apples are red, therefore A is red). To distinguish
these hypotheses, we tested pre-literate children (aged 2.5-3), literate children (aged 7-9), and adults. For two letters (I/white, B/black), all three
age groups (n= 20/age) made consistent mappings (all ps <.05). A followup study with toddlers (n= 40) indicated that the mapping was based on

Poster Session F

the shape of the letter (p<.05). and not its sound (ns). This is similar to the
pattern we found previously for O(white) and X(black) and suggests that
some color/letter mappings may be naturally-biased by sensory organization (Spector & Maurer, in press). In contrast, B and Y were mapped to
blue and yellow by the literate groups (ps< .05) but not the toddlers (ns).
This is similar to the pattern we found previously for A(red) and
G(green), and suggests that some color/letter mappings are based in literacy. The results provide evidence that sensory cortical organization initially binds color to some shapes and that learning to read can induce
additional associations, likely through the influence of higher order networks as letters take on meaning. In ongoing work, we are investigating
the characteristics of shape and color that underlie these naturally-biased
mappings.
F84
DEVELOPMENT OF REASONING AND EXECUTIVE CONTROL IN
CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT ADHD Melanie
Stollstorff1,
1
1
2
Stephanie Bean , Christopher Tsang , Laura Kenealy , Ericka Ruiz1, Michael
Billington1, Devon Shook1, Chandan Vaidya1,2; 1Georgetown University,
2
Children's National Medical Center — Logical reasoning is an important
process that develops throughout childhood and has been shown to rely
critically on working memory and inhibitory control in normal control
populations. The present study investigates logical reasoning, both
abstract (content-free and belief-neutral) and concrete (belief-laden), in
children with ADHD and age and IQ matched Controls. For Controls,
overall reasoning ability and abstract reasoning increased linearly with
age. Belief bias (the inability to suppress beliefs in favor of logic) significantly declined with age. Working memory correlated positively with
overall reasoning ability, while inhibitory control correlated positively
with belief bias suppression. The ADHD group had impaired logical reasoning relative to controls. In contrast to Controls, overall reasoning and
belief bias did not correlate with age in the ADHD group. This group
showed impairment in both working memory and inhibitory control relative to Controls and these measures did not relate to reasoning or belief
bias. Therefore, different components of executive control related to different components of logical reasoning in Controls. In contrast, there was
considerable variance in the development of reasoning in children with
ADHD.
F85
LATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX ACTIVATION DURING
MEDIA-RELATED AGGRESSION IN MALE ADOLESCENTS Maren
Strenziok1,3, Frank Krueger1, Rhoshel Lenroot2, Elke van der Meer3, Jordan
Grafman1; 1National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National
Institutes of Health, MD, 2National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes
of Health, MD, 3Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany — Although
clinical
observations indicate that the prefrontal cortex modulates aggressive
behavior in adults, little is known about the neural mechanisms of mediarelated aggression in male adolescents - a population that is exposed to
media violence on a daily basis and bears a high risk for aggressive
behavior. In an event-related fMRI experiment, 17 healthy male adolescents (mean age = 15.9, SD = 1.03 years, range 14 to 17) viewed three runs
of realistic video scenes displaying different degrees of age-appropriate
aggressive behavior. In a prestudy, videos were rated for aggression and
excitement by a different group of age-matched males. Based on these
ratings, we established three sets of videos that differed in aggression levels (low, mild, moderate), but not in excitement. First, we found deactivations in the lateral orbitofrontal cortex (lOFC) and dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (dlPFC) with increasing aggression levels in the scenes. Activation
changes in both regions correlated with self-reported use of violent video
games; the more violent the games subjects played, the stronger the deactivation. In addition, the dlPFC deactivation correlated with the personal
distress scale of the Interpersonal Reactivity Index indicating a stronger
deactivation corresponding to lower levels of personal distress. Second,
comparing activation changes across runs, we found progressively
reduced lOFC engagement over the course of the experiment. In conclu-

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

sion, our results demonstrate that brain responses to aggressive media in
the lateral prefrontal cortex are shaped by the strength of aggressive stimuli, continued exposure to violence, and the use of violent video games.
F86
THE ROLE OF CONTRAST POLARITY AND SUBCORTICAL
VISUAL PATHWAYS IN RAPID ORIENTING TO FACE-LIKE
STIMULI Przemyslaw Tomalski1, Gergely Csibra1, Mark Henry Johnson1;
1Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, School of Psychology, Birkbeck,
University of London — Preferential orienting towards upright schematic
face (white oval with three black dots) is present in newborns, indicating
an innate bias in directing gaze towards faces. We investigated whether
adults orient towards an upright schematic face faster than an inverted
face and whether such effect is dependent on the contrast polarity of the
stimuli. Participants were instructed to make speeded saccades to peripheral targets flashed briefly on the left or right side of the screen while
their saccadic reaction times were measured by electrooculography. In
Experiment 1, they made significantly faster saccades to upright than to
inverted schematic faces with normal contrast polarity (black elements on
white background), while failed to do so with reversed contrast polarity
(white elements on black background). Restoring normal contrast properties within the eye region (black pupils within the white eyes) restored
the orienting effect. In Experiment 2, the contribution of retinotectal pathway to this effect was assessed by presenting the normal contrast polarity
stimuli to either the temporal or the nasal visual field. We found that saccades were faster to upright than inverted schematic faces predominantly
in the temporal but not in the nasal visual field of each eye. Our results
are consistent with the existence of a low-level, subcortical, face-biasing
mechanism that is active in humans from birth through adulthood,
allowing automatic and rapid detection and orienting towards face-like
stimuli. In addition, the contrast polarity sensitivity of this effect suggests
that preferential orienting is especially tuned to stimuli with gaze-relevant information.
F87
BRAIN RESPONSE TO OVERT AND MASKED HAPPY AND
NEUTRAL FACES: AN FMRI STUDY WITH ADULTS AND
CHILDREN Angela Tseng1, Kathleen M. Thomas1; 1Institute of Child
Development, University of Minnesota — The amygdala has been consistently identified as a critical neural substrate for processing affective
facial expressions, even when emotions are not consciously perceived.
Prior research in children has suggested a neutral greater than fearful
response that is opposite to the adult pattern, perhaps indicating a
heightened sensitivity to neutral expressions in childhood. However, this
developmental sensitivity to neutral faces has yet to be examined beyond
the context of fearful faces. The present study utilized fMRI and a backward masking paradigm to examine the amygdala response to overt and
covert presentations of happy and neutral faces. Eighteen children (8-9
years) and 12 adults completed 3 runs: 1) alternating blocks of fixation
and neutral faces; 2) fixation and overt happy and neutral faces; and 3)
fixation and masked (covert) happy and neutral faces. In the covert condition, participants viewed a brief (26ms) face stimulus (neutral or
happy) masked immediately by a neutral face (169ms). Data from adults
replicated previous reports of increased but equivalent amygdala activity
to overt happy and neutral faces. Children showed amygdala activity to
neutral greater than happy in both overt and masked conditions. Adults
showed this same pattern with covert presentations. Notably, signal
change to masked faces was significantly higher in children than adults.
Additional analyses are underway to examine activity in other brain
areas. Initial results indicate regions consistent with previous studies,
including nucleus accumbens and cingulated gyrus. Results will be discussed in terms of developmental differences in the amygdala response
to facial emotion.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

193

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

F88
ADOLESCENT RISKY DECISION MAKING; THE RELATIVE
CONTRIBUTIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL AND CONTROL
CIRCUITRY Linda Van Leijenhorst1,2, Bregtje Gunther Moor1,2,3, Zdenja
op de Macks1, P. Michiel Westenberg1,2, Serge A.R.B. Rombouts1,2,4, Eveline A
Crone1,2; 1Leiden University- Institute for Psychological Research, the
Netherlands, 2Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, the Netherlands,
3University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands, 4Leiden University Medical
Center, the Netherlands — Adolescence is often characterized as a period
of increased risky behavior. It has been suggested in previous studies that
immature decision-making abilities are related to the protracted development of prefrontal relative to limbic brain regions (Ernst, Pine & Hardin,
2006; Galvan et al., 2006). An imbalance between relatively mature motivational circuitry and immature cognitive control circuitry could bias
adolescents to focus on potential rewards and engage in risky behavior.
Our approach to studying decision-making under risk is to use tasks that
require participant to choose between actions associated with uncertain
rewards and punishments. To test the relative contributions of prefrontal
and limbic regions in adolescent and adult risky decision-making, adolescents (10-12, and 14-15 years of age) and young adults (19-25 years of age)
participate in an event related fMRI study using a child friendly version
of a gambling task (Rogers et al., 1999). Participants choose between two
gambles; a safe gamble, gambling with 50 cents and a 67% chance of winning, or a risky gamble, gambling with 2, 4, 6 or 8 euros and a 33% chance
of winning. Feedback is presented on each trial, allowing us to dissociate
brain activation related to risky decision-making and outcome processing. Behavioral results have shown an increase in risk-taking with an
increase in the potential monetary reward (Van Leijenhorst, Westenberg
& Crone, in press). We expect increased responsivity of motivational
brain circuitry related to rewards for adolescents compared to adults, and
decreased lateral prefrontal cortex activation related to negative outcomes.
F89
THE NEURAL BASIS OF PHONETIC PROCESSING SEEN
THROUGH THE NEW LIGHT OF FNIRS Katherine White1, Ioulia
Kovelman3, Mark Shalinsky4, Douglas McKenney5, Matthew Dubins2, Melody
Berens2, Laura-Ann Petitto2; 1University of Rochester, 2University of Toronto
Scarborough, 3MIT, 4MGH, 5Jerusalem University — K.
White2,
I.
Kovelman3, M. Shalinsky4, D. McKenney5, M. Dubins1, M. Berens1, and
*L-A. Petitto11-University of Toronto Scarborough, 2-University of Rochester, 3-MIT, 4-MGH, 5-Jerusalem University. * = Corresponding Author.
All infants discover the set of phonetic units that comprise their native
language by 10-12 months. Is this capacity mediated by brain regions
devoted to language processing or general auditory processing? We use
Near-infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS), which, like fMRI, measures hemodynamic change. But fNIRS is quiet, small, tolerates subtle movement
and has good spatial and temporal resolution. In our pilot work, threemonth-olds were presented with non-native (visual) phonetic units,
Infant-Directed Speech (IDS), and a visual checkerboard control. With
non-native phonetic units and IDS, neural activation increased robustly
in Left STG, but not in the RH homologue (checkerboard stimulation did
not cause increased STG activation)—suggesting that infants recruit classic LH areas when processing language. Here we tested young (2-6months) and older (12-14-months) infants, and adults. Participants heard
native and non-native phonetic units, and non-speech (tones), while neural activity was assessed with Hitachi fNIRS ETG-4000 (24- & 48-channel). Results will reveal whether (i) speech processing in 2-4 month-olds
is initially mediated by the lateralized "language networks" (left Broca’s,
LSTG) observed in adults or by general auditory areas (bilateral STG),
and (ii) how the processing of different types of phonetic units changes
over development as a function of native language exposure/experience.
The results will provide new clarity into long-standing debate about our
capacity to discriminate, categorize, and process the linguistic stream

194

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

when acquiring language. Funding-Petitto (PI): NIH R21HD05055802
and R01HD04582203.
F90
RELATIONSHIP OF VERBAL FLUENCY PERFORMANCE TO
BRAIN VOLUMES DURING CHILDHOOD AND ADOLESCENCE
Samantha White1, Rhoshel Lenroot1, Gregory Wallace1, Mark Celano1, April
Timberlake1, Liv Clasen1, Kristin Taylor1, Jay Giedd1; 1Child Psychiatry
Branch, NIMH, NIH — BACKGROUND: Phonemic and semantic verbal
fluency (VF) tasks are frequently used measures of neuropsychological
functioning. Previous work has shown that the number of words generated (whether phonemic or semantic) increases with age from childhood
into young adulthood (White 2007). To explore the neuroanatomical substrate of VF ability we examined the relationship between changes in VF
performance and changes in brain morphometry in a large cohort of typically developing children, adolescents, and young adults. METHODS:
Participants were 209 screened typically developing subjects ranging in
age from 7 to 28 years. Subjects generated word lists under time constraints (60 seconds) after being cued with a source letter (phonemic fluency: F, A, or S) or category (semantic fluency: animals or foods).
Structural MRI scans were acquired and analyzed using a previously
described algorithm (Zijdenbos 1994) yielding gray and white matter volumes of left and right frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes. The relationship between VF and brain measures was examined cross-sectionally
using regression analysis with and without covariation for age.
RESULTS: VF was significantly related to brain volumes (ps<.05). After
co-varying for age, phonemic VF was associated with volumes of the
frontal and temporal lobe (ps<.05), but semantic VF did not show relationships to any brain region. CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate
a relationship between anatomic brain development and VF performance, and suggest that phonemic and semantic VF performance are
associated with brain volumes in different ways.
F91
DECONSTRUCTING VISUAL-SPATIAL COGNITION IN EARLY
CHILDHOOD Meagan Williamson1, Kim Cornish1, Gerry Stefanatos1;
1
McGill University, Temple University — Objective: A critical component
of human cognition is the ability to efficiently perceive and process visual
information. This ability is often termed ‘visual-spatial cognition’. Relatively little is known about how this aspect of cognition develops in early
childhood, or how performance across the varying sub-domains change
as a function of task complexity, age, IQ and gender. This research seeks
to demonstrate that ‘visual-spatial cognition’ does not present a unified
construct but rather an array of specific sub processes that interact across
other cognitive domains and across developmental time. Methods: 40
children aged between 4 and 7 years of age completed a novel battery of
cognitive tasks that tapped core components of visual-spatial functioning: visual-spatial memory and learning, visual-spatial reconstruction
and organization, visual-spatial mental manipulation, and visuo-perceptual processing. Results: Preliminary analyzes demonstrate that task
complexity and age interact across all visual-spatial sub-domains. Additionally, gender differentially impacts across performance with the greatest difference on skills involving mental rotation. Conclusions: The
findings clearly demonstrate age-related trajectories across visual-spatial
domains confirming the necessity of teasing apart cognitive domains into
their component parts and systematically investigating profiles across
age and gender. These findings will guide future research that seeks to
understand the pattern of visual-spatial performance in atypical populations known to have visual-spatial deficits.
F92
CHANGES IN CORTICAL ACTIVATIONS DURING VISUAL
LETTER PROCESSING ACROSS THE KINDERGARTEN YEAR: A
LONGITUDINAL FMRI STUDY Yoshiko Yamada1, Courtney Stevens1,
Laura Sabourin1, Scott Klein1, Mark Dow1, Beth Harn2, David Chard2,

Poster Session F

Danielle Parisi2, Helen Neville1; 1University of Oregon, 2College of Education,
University of Oregon — Neuroimaging studies of reading have revealed a
recruitment of a left-hemisphere network (frontal, temporo-parietal, and
occipito-temporal regions) in skilled, adult readers. However, very little
is known about the development of these reading-related cortical regions
in young children who have just begun to develop reading skills. In this
study, hemodynamic responses to visually presented letters were examined in five-year-old kindergarteners at three different sessions - at the
beginning of the kindergarten year, after the fall term, and at the end of
the kindergarten year. Children were either typically developing (TD) or
at risk for later reading difficulty (RD). During image acquisition, children were asked to respond when the same letter or false font, presented
in separate blocks, was repeated in two successive trials. In the TD group,
increases in the BOLD signals to letters relative to false fonts were
observed in the temporo-parietal region at all three sessions while activations in the inferior temporal region to letters were not observed until the
second session. These regions were close to cortical areas activated in
adults performing the same task. In contrast, the RD group showed no
significant increase in temporo-parietal activations to letters until the
third session, and no robust activations were found in the inferior temporal region at any of the sessions. These results suggested that, when processing visually presented letters, typically-developing children begin to
develop adult-like reading networks during the first year of reading
instruction, whereas children at-risk for reading failure are delayed in
recruitment of the same systems.

Memory: Memory systems
F93
TEMPORAL
LOBE
ACTIVITY
DURING
COMPLEX
DISCRIMINATIONS OF FAMILIAR AND NOVEL OBJECTS AND
FACES Morgan Barense1, Richard Henson1, Kim Graham2; 1MRC
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK, 2Wales Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, University of Cardiff, UK — Recent studies indicate
that structures in the medial temporal lobe (MTL) support processes
beyond long-term declarative memory, including complex visual discrimination. In addition, there appears to be an influence of stimulus
familiarity on visual discrimination ability in patients with temporal lobe
damage. For example, discrimination performance in patients with focal
lesions to the MTL (e.g., from herpes viral encephalitis) was improved by
the use of meaningful stimuli. By contrast, patients with semantic dementia, a neurodegenerative condition characterized by progressive deterioration of conceptual knowledge and atrophy to the anterolateral
temporal lobes, showed no benefit from the use of meaningful stimuli. To
further investigate these findings, healthy volunteers were scanned while
they performed oddity discriminations involving familiar and unfamiliar
objects and faces using a dual echo EPI sequence (spin and gradient echo)
to minimize MTL susceptibility artefacts. A baseline task of size oddity
was employed. Outside the scanner, subjects’ memory for the stimuli was
assessed. Across the different conditions, different patterns of temporal
lobe activation were observed. Discriminations involving familiar stimuli
were associated with activity in the perirhinal cortex, anterior hippocampus, amygdala and temporal pole when compared to oddity judgements
for unfamiliar stimuli. When compared to object discriminations, face
oddity judgements were associated with activity in anterior temporal
lobe structures, including the anterior hippocampus, perirhinal cortex,
amygdala and temporal pole. These observations support previous
patient and imaging findings and provide further evidence that the MTL
is recruited during complex visual discriminations which place minimal
demand on mnemonic processes.

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

F94
DELAYED DISCRIMINATION OF SPATIAL FREQUENCY FOR
GRATINGS OF DIFFERENT ORIENTATION: BEHAVIORAL AND
FMRI EVIDENCE FOR LOW-LEVEL PERCEPTUAL MEMORY
STORES IN EARLY VISUAL CORTEX Oliver
Baumann1,2,3,
Tor
3
3
2 1
Endestad , Svein Magnussen , Mark W. Greenlee ; Queensland Brain
Institute/University of Queensland, 2Institute for Experimental Psychology/
Regensburg University, 3Center for the Study of Human Cognition, University
of Oslo — The concept of perceptual memory refers to the neural and cognitive processes underlying the storage of specific stimulus features such
as spatial frequency, orientation, shape, contrast, and colour. Using 3 T
fMRI we examined the pattern of neural activation evoked when subjects
discriminated the spatial frequency (SF) of Gabors presented with the
same or orthogonal orientation (Magnussen et al, 1998 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 24 707 - 718).
On each trial, subjects viewed a ±45° Gabor followed by a delay period (8
s) and a test Gabor with either the same or orthogonal orientation. They
responded whether the SF of test and reference were the same or different. RTs were shorter for Gabors sharing the same orientation. Bloodoxygen level dependent (BOLD) fMRI revealed significantly elevated
bilateral activity in visual areas (V1, V2) when the gratings to be compared had an orthogonal orientation, compared to when they had the
same orientation. These findings suggest that a change in an irrelevant
stimulus dimension requires additional processing in primary and secondary visual areas. The finding that the task-irrelevant stimulus property (orientation) had no significant effect on the prefrontal and
intraparietal cortex supports a model of working memory which consists
of high level components that extract task relevant information from low
level resources for dimensions like spatial frequency and orientation.
Accessing different stores requires time and has metabolic costs.
F95
WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY AND IMPLICIT SEQUENCE
LEARNING IN YOUNGER AND OLDER ADULTS Ilana J. Bennett1,
Chandan J. Vaidya1, David J. Madden2, Darlene V. Howard1, James H. Howard
Jr.3,4; 1Georgetown University, 2Center for the Study of Aging and Human
Development, Duke University Medical Center, 3The Catholic University of
America, 4Georgetown University Medical Center — Implicit sequence learning (ISL) describes non-conscious sensitivity to sequential regularities.
Functional imaging and patient studies have shown that ISL relies on
frontal, striatal, and cerebellar gray matter regions. However, white matter correlates of ISL and age differences in these brain-behavior relationships have not been examined. In the present study, 14 younger (18.9 ±
0.7 years; 9 female) and 13 older (67.8 ± 3.2 years; 10 female) adults completed the Alternating Serial Reaction Time task (ASRT) and underwent
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). The ASRT measured ISL by comparing
response times on alternating trials in which targets occurred at predictable locations based on a repeating sequence versus randomly determined locations. DTI measured fractional anisotropy (FA), the degree of
directionally restricted water movement. Behavioral analyses revealed no
group differences in learning. A between-group t-test showed that older
adults had lower FA in anterior callosal and association white matter.
Whole brain voxel-wise positive correlations in younger adults revealed
that ASRT learning was related to FA in frontal (anterior coronal radiata,
corticospinal tract), cerebellar, parietal, and corpus callosum regions, primarily in the left hemisphere. In older adults, these ASRT learning x FA
correlations were seen in similar cortical white matter in both hemispheres. These findings are consistent with ISL relying on a lateralized
frontal-cerebellar network in younger adults, and suggestive of agerelated compensation in that learning was related to similar, but bilateral
cortical white matter in older adults who learn as well as younger adults
despite age differences in underlying white matter.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

195

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

F96
DIRECT FMRI EVIDENCE FOR PRESERVED HIPPOCAMPUS
FUNCTIONING AFTER PARTIAL REMOVAL OF ANTERIOR
TEMPORAL-LOBE INPUT STRUCTURES. Ben Bowles1, Ed O'Neil1,
Jordan Poppenk1,3, Seyed M. Mirsattari2, Stefan Köhler1,3; 1University of
Western Ontario, ON, 2Clinical Neurological Sciences, University of Western
Ontario, London Health Sciences Centre, ON, 3University of Toronto, ON — In
a recent single-case study, we demonstrated that NB, an individual who
underwent resection of the left anterior temporal lobe for treatment of
intractable epilepsy, exhibits a selective impairment in the familiarity
component of recognition memory with intact recollection. The surgery
included partial removal of medial temporal-lobe (MTL) structures previously implicated in familiarity, the perirhinal and entorhinal cortex, but
spared the hippocampus, an area known to support recollection. Because
NB displays intact performance on memory tasks that require the integrity of the left hippocampus, this behavioral evidence suggests that NB’s
spared left hippocampus operates normally. Neuroanatomically, this
finding is somewhat surprising as perirhinal and entorhinal cortex also
provide much of the input to the hippocampus. Therefore we sought
more direct functional neuroimaging support for our interpretation and
examined whether NB’s surgically spared left hippocampus does indeed
show normal activation under task conditions that typically involve this
structure. We compared NB’s fMRI response to novel auditory sentences
with that of controls in a task that engages associative encoding processes
and that has previously been shown to elicit hippocampus activation. NB
exhibited a normal left anterior hippocampus novelty response in a
region that was comparable to that observed in the controls. This evidence indicates that the hippocampus can indeed function normally even
when input from adjacent anterior MTL structures is partially compromised. The remaining input from more posterior aspects of perirhinal
and entorhinal cortex and/or from parahippocampal cortex appear to be
sufficient to support its functional integrity.
F97
LESION TYPE DETERMINES MEMORY DEFICITS IN HUMANS
WITH HIPPOCAMPAL DAMAGE Mischa Braun1, Carsten Finke1,
Florian Ostendorf1, Thomas-Nicolas Lehmann1, Karl-Titus Hoffmann1,
Christoph J. Ploner1; 1Charite University Medicine Berlin — The pivotal role
of the medial temporal lobe (MTL) for memory is undisputed in neuroscience. Based on behavioral findings in subjects with discrete cerebral
lesions of various etiologies, several competing theories have been
advanced to further explain why MTL damage affects some memory
domains and leaves others unimpaired. Here, we chose a new approach
and investigated whether lesion type affects memory performance in
humans with MTL damage. Patients with selective lesions of the right
MTL following surgical treatment of hippocampal sclerosis (n = 9) or
benign brain tumors (n = 5) were tested for short-term memory of colors,
locations and color-location associations. The basic clinical variables in
both patient groups were similar, except for the duration of preoperative
symptoms (hippocampal scleroses: 16.8 yrs; tumors: 1.8 yrs). Compared
to controls, tumor patients showed a significant delay-dependent
decrease in memory of color-location associations. No such decrease was
observed in hippocampal sclerosis patients, although both patient groups
received comparable resection of MTL structures. Obviously, hippocampal sclerosis patients benefited from a compensatory process that was
absent or inefficient in tumor patients. Consistent with recent findings in
monkeys, we propose that early hippocampal pathology allows for significant recovery of memory functions in the human brain. This implicates that preserved memory domains in patients with early
hippocampal damage might not solely be due to a division of labor
within the MTL, but could at least partly result from brain reorganization
processes. Consequently, developmental disorders may represent unsuitable models for inferences on normal MTL function.

196

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

F98
NEURAL OSCILLATIONS IN SEMANTIC OBJECT RETRIEVAL
Matthew Brier1, Thomas Ferree2, Gail Tillman1, Mandy Maguire1, Clifford
Calley1, Priya Xavier2, Mary Kathryn Reagor1, John Hart1,2, Michael Kraut3;
1Center for BrainHealth, University of Texas at Dallas, 2University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, 3The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine — Previous fMRI studies of the retrieval process in semantic
memory have implicated the medial pre-SMA bilaterally, bilateral temporo-occipital regions, and left thalamus. To investigate the time course
of these activations, we studied 19 healthy young adults with the Semantic Object Retrieval Test (SORT) where they were asked to determine if
two features (e.g. “desert” and “humps”) resulted in retrieving an object
memory (e.g. “camel”) as opposed to non-retrieval pairs, while continuous EEG data were recorded. These data were transformed to the average
reference and a moving window Fourier analysis (500ms window, 100ms
step) was performed to compute power. A series of Principle Components Analyses was performed to reduce these results in the frequency,
spatial, and temporal domains, respectively. Significant differences
between retrieval and non-retrievals were investigated and isolated in
two frequency bands of interest high alpha (10-15 Hz) and gamma (25-40
Hz). At ~400 msec, there were alpha differences in the superior frontal
and right parietal-occipital regions, and gamma differences in the left
parietal-occipital area. At ~1100ms, there were alpha differences in the
temporal regions bilaterally and gamma differences at the left temporal
pole. There were also later gamma differences in the left posterior temporal region. Several other frequency bands will be investigated. These EEG
power findings are generally consistent with previous fMRI findings, but
with the added feature of temporal resolution. The EEG and fMRI studies
begin to provide a neural mechanistic account for object memory
retrieval as well as markers of the retrieval process.
F99
ANTICIPATORY PREFRONTAL CORTEX (PFC) ACTIVITY
DURING CONTEXTUAL REMEMBERING Norbou Buchler1, Roberto
Cabeza1, Ian Dobbins2; 1Duke University, 2Washington University in St.
Louis — Neuroimaging studies contrasting memory for context and item
memory have found relatively increased activation of a highly left lateralized network for context retrieval, particularly in the left prefrontal cortex
(PFC). Additionally, recent work using a jittered cue-test paradigm suggests that the increased PFC recruitment for context trials is initiated
early, perhaps as soon as subjects formulate retrieval plans in response to
a context task-cue (Dobbins & Han, 2006). Here we further examine memory cue processing and whether this preparatory activation reflects context memory specific processes, or instead reflects proactive recruitment
in anticipation of general retrieval demands, regardless of its contextual
specificity. The current study crossed retrieval demands with type of
memory retrieval to critically examine whether these PFC regions are
also recruited early in anticipation of increased retrieval-difficulty as well
as increased retrieval-specificity (item versus context). Retrieval difficulty
was manipulated by varying the retention interval. Before each testprobe, a cue (easy, hard, context) signaled upcoming retrieval difficulty
and whether the upcoming memory question required discrimination of
old/new words or the specific prior context of a studied word. Anticipatory or cue-dependent processing was isolated using cue-only catch trials. Our results found PFC activation in a number of specialized regions
involved in the early engagement of a contextual memory retrieval orientation as this activation was independent of anticipated retrieval difficulty. These results suggest that functionally specialized PFC regions (left
precentral, medial-frontal, right frontopolar) underlie a contextual
retrieval orientation and contribute to our understanding of key anticipatory and self-initiated context memory specific processes.

Poster Session F

F100
CUEING AND DETECTING MEMORY: THE ROLE OF THE
PARIETAL CORTEX Elisa
Ciaramelli1, Cheryl Grady1,2, Morris
1,2
1
Moscovitch ; Rotman Research Institute, 2University of Toronto — Based on a
review of the fMRI literature (Ciaramelli et al., 2007), we hypothesized
that superior parietal lobe (SPL) is activated during memory search and
inferior parietal lobe (IPL) during target detection (i.e. retrieval success).
To test this hypothesis, we devised a paradigm that isolates the search
and recovery components of memory retrieval. Participants studied pairs
of words. During each test trial, a CUE stimulus, that could be either a
studied word, a new word, or a meaningless stimulus, appeared first.
The cue was followed by a TARGET word, that could be either studied or
new, and participants were required to make an old/new recognition
judgement on this word. Healthy individuals were faster at recognizing
the target word if it was preceded by the word with which it was paired
at study (intact condition) relative to another studied word (rearranged
condition), a new word, or a meaningless stimulus (no-search conditions). These results suggest that cueing can aid memory search and this
facilitates memory detection. In a neuropsychological investigation, we
found that cueing effects were abolished in 2 patients with lesions in SPL,
who did not show a memory advantage under intact relative to recombined or no-search conditions. By contrast, they were preserved in a
patient with IPL lesions. This evidence is in line with our hypothesis that
SPL supports memory cueing signals. Preliminary findings from an fMRI
study using the same paradigm will be presented to determine whether
SPL and IPL activity is preferentially associated to memory search and
detection.
F101
DIFFERENCES IN PREFRONTAL CONNECTIVITY DURING
TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL CONTEXT MEMORY TASKS David
Crane1, M.N. Rajah2; 1Graduate Program in Neuroscience, McGill University,
2Geriatric Psychiatry Division, Douglas Hospital, McGill University — Functional neuroimaging and neuropsychological studies show frontal-parietal network involvement during retrieval of contextual information.
Recent neuroimaging studies report differential regions of PFC activity
during the retrieval of spatial versus temporal context information, compared to item recognition. However, little consideration is given to the
spatial patterns of brain activity engaged during these tasks. This study
uses a multivariate approach to investigate the relation between acquired
fMRI images and behavior during contextual retrieval tasks. Sixteen
healthy adults participated in an event-related fMRI study in which they
performed temporal and spatial context memory tasks for faces. The
number of responses was parametrically manipulated to control for
response selection processing. We performed a multivariate analysis of
the data using Spatial-Temporal Partial Least Squares to identify networks that covary with task type and response selection. Preliminary
results show differential engagement of the frontal-parietal network during retrieval versus encoding tasks, especially in the dorsal-lateral PFC
(DLPFC). The response selection manipulation correlates with early
reduction in frontopolar activity followed by increased activity in bilateral PFC. Differences in spatial versus temporal context tasks will be
investigated by examining differences in functional connectivity amongst
frontopolar, lateral PFC and parietal cortices.
F102
SOURCE-MEMORY JUDGEMENTS AND THE LATE FRONTAL
ERP OLD/NEW EFFECT Damian Cruse1, Edward Wilding1; 1Cardiff
University, School of Psychology — Event-related potential (ERP) correlates
of successful source (contextual) retrieval include a greater relative positivity for items attracting correct source judgments than for those attracting correct new judgments. This old/new effect is largest at frontal
electrodes, onsets 500-600 ms post-stimulus, and lasts up to 1500ms. In
some experiments, but not others, this frontal ERP old/new effect has
varied according to whether source judgments were correct or incorrect.
One possibility is that the disparities across studies arise because of the

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

stimulus types employed at test: visually presented words in studies
where the effect predicts source accuracy, spoken words or pictures in
those where it does not. The effects reported in this experiment rule out
this possibility, however. Participants studied words shown in two
colours (red/green). ERPs were acquired time-locked to the onset of test
words, and participants made old/new judgments, followed by a red/
green source judgment for words judged to be old. Old/new recognition
and source accuracy were off ceiling, and the frontal old/new effects
were right-lateralised and equivalent for old words attracting correct or
incorrect source judgments. These findings suggest that test format is not
a critical determinant of the conditions under which frontal old/new
effects predict source accuracy, and they also rule out the presence of
physically identical stimuli (copy) cues at study and at test as an important feature: copy cues were present in all previous studies where the
effect did not predict source accuracy. The functional significance of late
frontal ERP old/new effects remains to be established.
F103
MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE ACTIVATION DURING SOURCE
MEMORY
RETRIEVAL:
EFFECTS
OF
UNITIZED
VS.
NONUNITIZED ENCODING Rachel Diana1, Andrew Yonelinas1,
Charan Ranganath1; 1University of California, Davis — The hippocampus,
which is critical for episodic memory, receives inputs from perirhinal cortex (PRc) and parahippocampal cortex (PHc). The binding of item and
context model of memory (Diana et al., 2007) proposes that PRc encodes
item representations that can contribute to familiarity-based memory,
whereas PHc encodes context representations that typically contribute to
recollection-based memory. The hippocampus binds item and context
information as an episode. Source memory tasks require retrieval of specific contextual details and successful source retrieval is typically associated with hippocampal and PHc activation (Diana et al., 2007;
Eichenbaum et al., 2007). However, recent studies suggest that successful
source encoding may sometimes be associated with PRc activation (Staresina & Davachi, 2006). Diana et al. (in press) demonstrated that when participants unitize item and source information (i.e. encode source
information as a feature of the item), source memory can be based on
familiarity rather than recollection. Thus, we predict that retrieval of unitized source information is associated with PRc activation while retrieval
of non-unitized source information is associated PHc and hippocampal
activation. We used an encoding task that encouraged unitization and a
task that did not encourage unitization but was matched for imagery and
depth of encoding. Behavioral results indicated that source memory
ROCs are more curvilinear and familiarity estimates are higher for unitized stimuli, as compared with nonunitized stimuli. Preliminary fMRI
analyses suggest that medial temporal lobe activation during retrieval
was correlated with the accuracy of source memory decisions. Further
analyses will contrast activation between unitized and non-unitized trials.
F104
INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY IN BRAIN ACTIVITY DURING
EPISODIC ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL: HOW IT RELATES TO
ANATOMY,
STRATEGY,
VISUAL/VERBAL
TRAITS
AND
PERSONALITY. Christa-Lynn Donovan1, Rachel Segal1, Michael Miller1;
1
University of California Santa Barbara — We have previously shown
extensive individual variability in brain activity during episodic retrieval.
The purpose of this study was to identify factors that can account for the
observed variability in brain activity underlying episodic encoding and
retrieval. Fifty participants were scanned with functional MRI while they
intentionally encoded lists of highly and lowly imageable words and
completed subsequent recognition memory tests. After scanning, subjects
were asked to report their strategy for each study/test session and to
complete a Visualizer-Verbalizer test battery. They also completed a personality questionnaire. Our results replicated our previous work showing
extensive variability of individual brain activity during episodic memory.
Further, we show how this variability relates to anatomical differences

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

197

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

(as measured by DTI and high resolution MPRAGE anatomical scans),
reported strategy differences, visualizing/verbalizing trait differences
and personality differences. Our results demonstrate that individuals can
recruit widely dispersed brain regions during an episodic memory task,
that recruitment of any particular region can be related to a number of
factors including anatomical features of the individual’s brain, the individual’s unique mnemonic strategy as well as trait factors such as visualizing/verbalizing ability and personality. This demonstrates that a
wealth of information can be gained by the combined use of traditional
group analysis, analysis of individual variability in topography of whole
brain activity patterns as well as individual variability in modulations of
discrete brain regions.
F105
AGE- AND PERFORMANCE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN THE
NEURAL
CORRELATES
OF
SUCCESSFUL
MEMORY
ENCODING S. Duverne1,2, S. Motamedinia1,2, M.D. Rugg1,2; 1Center for
the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, UC Irvine, 2UC Irvine — Previous studies of age-related differences in the neural correlates of successful memory encoding have reported a more bilateral pattern encodingrelated activity in older adults than in the young. Such findings might
reflect a compensatory response to age-related decline in the functional
integrity of regions that are functionally lateralized in younger adults.
The present fMRI study characterized the relationship between agerelated differences in the lateralization of subsequent memory effects and
memory performance by comparing effects in young and older subjects
(Ns of 16 and 32 respectively). At study, participants made animacy decisions on a series of visual words. At test, they performed old/new recognition decisions with an associated confidence judgment. Older adults
were segregated into two groups according to a median split on a composite score of episodic memory subtests (Californian Verbal Learning
Test). Performance in the experimental task did not differ in the high- and
low-performing group from that of the young. A voxel-of-interest analysis was conducted on activity in left prefrontal voxels identified in
another study that used similar experimental design (Otten et al.; Brain
2001; 124: 399-412), and on activity in homotopic right prefrontal voxels.
Crucially, lateralization of prefrontal subsequent memory effects was
similar in the high-performing group and the young group. Only lowperforming older subjects had a more bilateral subsequent memory effect
than young adults. These findings suggest that relative preservation of
memory performance with increasing age does not depend upon right
prefrontal 'over-recruitment'.
F106
RULE-BASED CATEGORIZATION DEFICITS IN PATIENTS WITH
PARKINSON’S DISEASE ARE NOT DEPENDENT UPON
DOPAMINERGIC MEDICATION S. W. Ell1, A. Weinstein2, R. B. Ivry3;
1
University of Maine, 2San Francisco VA Medical Center - NCIRE, 3University
of California, Berkeley — The role of the basal ganglia in category learning
has been the subject of considerable study recently. In particular, patients
with basal ganglia pathology are impaired on rule-based category learning tasks – i.e., categorization tasks where learning is thought to depend
upon the use of an explicit, hypothesis-guided strategy. However, while
patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD) are impaired on rule-based tasks
with high selective attention demands, patients with focal basal ganglia
lesions are impaired on rule-based tasks with minimal selective attention
demands. The goal of the present study was to re-examine the specificity
of the rule-based categorization impairment in patients with PD and to
investigate the extent to which performance is dependent upon dopaminergic medication. Specifically, we compared a high selective-attention
condition in which participants learn to attend to the relevant stimulus
dimension while ignoring an irrelevant dimension, and a low selectiveattention condition in which participants learn to attend to both dimensions. In contrast to previous work, the PD patients were impaired on
both tasks. A subset of patients was also tested after abstaining from
dopaminergic medication. Accuracy rates did not differ between on- and

198

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

off-medication states. These results suggest that the PD-related impairment on rule-based categorization tasks is neither sensitive to dopaminergic medication nor restricted to tasks that require selective attention.
When considered in tandem with results from patients with focal basal
ganglia lesions, the results reinforce the importance of considering multiple models of basal ganglia dysfunction.
F107
HUMAN RELATIONAL MEMORY: GIVE IT TIME, AND SLEEP.
Jeffrey Ellenbogen1, Peter Hu2, Jessica Payne1, Matthew Walker2; 1Harvard
Medical School, 2University of California, Berkeley — Introduction:
Relational memory (e.g. inference) is a fundamental cognitive faculty. Yet little is known about how and when this knowledge emerges. Here we
explore whether human relational learning develops offline. Methods:
Fifty-six healthy participants initially learned five pairs of items, in random order, one pair at a time. Unknown to the subjects, these premise
pairs contained an embedded meta-structure. Following an offline delay
of either 20-min, 12-hr (wake or sleep), or 24-hr, knowledge of the hierarchy was tested, including inferential judgments. Results: All groups performed similarly on premise-pair retention (all > 85%), which are
considered the building blocks of the meta-structure. There was a striking
dissociation, however, in subjects’ ability to make inferential judgments:
the 20-min group showed no evidence of inferential ability (52%; chance),
while the 12-hr and 24-hr groups displayed highly significant inferential
ability (both >75%; p<0.001). And if the 12-hr period contained sleep,
relational memory for the most distant inferences received an additional
boost (Sleep=93%, Wake=69%, p=0.03). Conclusion: Here we demonstrate that human relational learning specifically develops during offline
time delays. Furthermore, sleep appears to preferentially facilitate this
process, enhancing and binding hierarchical memory, thereby allowing
superior performance (+35% advantage) for the most distant inferential
judgments.
F108
THE
INFLUENCE
OF
TASK
INSTRUCTIONS
ON
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES
OF
MEMORY
RETRIEVAL Lisa Evans1, Jane Herron1; 1School of Psychology, Cardiff
University — Event-related potentials (ERPs) were employed in three
retrieval tasks to examine the effect of task instructions on ERP old/new
effects. These effects are differences between the neural activity elicited
by old (studied) and new (unstudied) test words. Study phases were
identical (an equal number of words were encoded in one of two conditions), while retrieval instructions differed: i) Recognition - respond on
one key to old words, on another to new words; (ii) Exclusion – respond
on one key to words from one encoding condition, on another to unstudied words, as well as words from the other encoding condition; (iii)
Source - respond on three different keys to new words, and words from
the two encoding conditions. ERPs were acquired time-locked to the
onset of test words, and the old/new effects did not vary with task before
800 ms post-stimulus. From 800-1900 ms there was greater negativity for
old than for new words at right midline/posterior sites. This “late posterior negativity” (LPN) was largest in the exclusion task and smallest in
the recognition memory task, confirming that the LPN is sensitive to
more than requirements to bind item and source information. The novel
finding across tasks was greater negativity for old than for new words
from 1200-1900 ms at left anterior sites in the source task only. This new
effect likely reflects task-specific retrieval processing operations mediated by left-prefrontal cortex. The reasons for the greater prominence of
this effect here in comparison to previous ERP source memory studies
will be discussed.
F109
THE INFLUENCE OF EVENT PERCEPTION ON LONG-TERM
MEMORY FORMATION Youssef Ezzyat1, Lila Davachi1,2; 1New York
University, 2Center for Neural Science, New York University — Research has
shown that humans can easily and reliably partition continuous actions
into discrete units called “events.” Studies using video (Newtson &

Poster Session F

Engquist, 1976) and narrative (Speer & Zacks, 2005) suggest that this ability to segment spans domains; various studies have also examined the
perceptual and narrative features that correlate with event segmentation
(for a review, Zacks et al, 2007). Particularly for narratives, prior studies
have found that significant spatial, temporal and goal-based changes in
the story prompt segmentation of the narrative into discrete events.
While there are theories about why these narrative manipulations
prompt event segmentation (Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998), researchers
have only recently begun to explore the neural mechanisms underlying
narrative segmentation (Speer et al, 2007). Furthermore, less is known
about how event segmentation influences long-term memory for events.
The purpose of the present study was to examine long-term memory formation from the perspective of event perception. Using a paradigm from
the event perception literature, we examined the extent to which event
perception shapes the content and organization of long-term memory. To
do this, we conducted a fMRI study in which subjects read narratives in
which temporal cues signaled event boundaries. After scanning, we
tested subjects’ memory for various aspects of the narratives and used
those results to analyze the imaging data. We find that subjects exhibit
greater long-term recognition memory for information presented at event
boundaries than at non-boundaries. Imaging analyses will focus on the
brain regions involved in this mnemonic benefit.
F110
MAGNETO-ENCEPHALOGRAPHIC STUDIES OF RECOGNITION
MEMORY FOR WORDS AND FACES Carina
Fraser1,2,
Edward
Wilding1; 1Cardiff University, School of Psychology, 2Wales Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience — Event-related fields (ERFs) were acquired during the test phases of recognition memory tasks in order to investigate the
sensitivity of ERFs to processes supporting recognition memory for
words and for unfamiliar faces. Study-test cycles comprised words or
faces as stimuli. In study cycles, an equal number of items were shown on
the left/right of the screen. Test lists comprised studied (old) items and
an equal number of unstudied items. Old/new judgments were made for
each item, and discrimination was superior for words. Analysis of the
ERFs focused on old/new effects – differences between the neural activity associated with correct old and new recognition memory judgments.
ERFs at left central scalp sites were more positive-going for old than for
new items for both faces and words. This old/new effect had a spatiotemporal distribution similar to the left-parietal event-related potential
(ERP) old/new effect that is assumed to index recollection. For words
only, there was a greater relative left posterior positivity for new words
compared to old words from 300 to 1000 ms post-stimulus. This contentspecific ERF old/new effect remained when old/new analyses were
restricted to a subset of participants for whom old/new discrimination
for words and faces was most similar, suggesting that this effect is not
due to differences in task difficulty. These findings complement recent
findings using ERPs, where it has been shown that real-time measures of
neural activity index content-specific retrieval operations. A remaining
question is whether the retrieval processes indexed in the magnetic and
electrical records are functionally equivalent.
F111
EXAMINING THE INTERPLAY BETWEEN EPISODIC AND
SEMANTIC MEMORY DURING ASSOCIATIVE/RELATIONAL
ENCODING: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY. Andrea
Greve1,2, Mark C.W. van Rossum2, David I. Donaldson3; 1Wales Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, Cardiff University, 2Neuroinformatics, University of
Edinburgh, 3Stirling University — A fundamental feature of episodic
memory is the ability to encode relationships between stimuli; such associations can be based on a range of factors, including temporal and spatial connections, and shared meaning. Although evidence suggests that
retrieval of associations is distinct from memory for the items themselves,
relatively little is known about the processes that support associative
encoding. Here we investigate this issue by recording Event-Related
Potentials (ERPs) during the encoding phase of an associative recognition

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

task. At study, we manipulated the semantic coherence of word pairs in
relation to a preceding category name (to which two, one, or none of the
words were related). ERPs revealed an early frontal negativity that separated semantically coherent word pairs from un-related word pairs (i.e.,
two = one > none). This activity reflected an N400 modulation, due to the
presence/absence of a mismatch in meaning between the category cue
and subsequent stimuli. More importantly, a subsequent parietal effect
revealed a graded parametric modulation that was sensitive to the extent
of semantic coherence (i.e., two > one > none). This parietal effect
appeared to be specifically related to encoding; it was only present when
participants detected the semantic relationship, and a subsequent recognition test revealed an equivalent graded pattern (i.e., better memory for
two > one > none). The ERP data reveal two temporally and spatially dissociable modulations that support the processing of associations based
on shared semantic meaning, highlighting one mechanism by which
information from semantic memory is able to influence episodic memory.
F112
ICONIC MEMORY FOR FACES IN A PROSOPAGNOSIC
PATIENT Hans Grunert1, Rosaleen McCarthy2; 1University of Cambridge,
2Southampton General Hospital — PHD has a severe prosopagnosia due to
a focal lesion to the left fusiform gyrus. He was asked to match successive
pairs of faces displayed on a computer screen with random inter-stimulus-intervals (ISI's) between 20ms and 500ms. PHD was able to match
faces at an ISI of 20ms. However, he showed a sharp decline with increasing ISI's. At an ISI of 75ms his responses were already at chance and
remained at chance for longer ISIs. This sharp decline was not observed
in control Subjects. These results also appeared to be face-specific since
PHD performed well above chance on similar tasks with teapots, chairs
and greebles. We discuss these results in the light of current theories of
prosopagnosia and iconic memory.
F113
LATERALIZATION OF THE PARIETAL OLD/NEW EFFECT: AN
FMRI STUDY COMPARING RECOGNITION MEMORY FOR
WORDS AND FACES Scott Guerin1, Amy Frithsen1, Danielle King1, Meghan
Roarty1, Michael Miller1; 1University of California Santa Barbara — Numerous
fMRI studies of recognition memory have observed that successful recognition of old items elicits greater activation than successful rejection of
new items within the parietal cortex. The functional significance of this
effect is poorly understood. It is commonly observed that the effect is
heavily lateralized to the left. However, the vast majority of previous
studies have used verbal materials. It is known that processing of verbal
materials is lateralized to the left, while processing of other stimulus
types, such as faces, is lateralized to the right. Previous studies have not
directly compared verbal and non-verbal materials and have not
included direct quantitative tests of laterality. We directly compared recognition memory for words and faces. Preliminary analysis suggests that
that the old/new effect differs across distinct regions of the parietal cortex. Within medial parietal cortex, the old/new effect is left-lateralized
for words and is bilateral for faces. Within lateral parietal cortex, the old/
new effect is left lateralized for both words and faces, but the degree of
lateralization is larger for words. These results suggest that although the
lateralization of the parietal old/new effect is in part dependent on material type, the effect is quite complex and likely reflects the combined
influence of several distinct subprocesses.
F114
TESTING THE DOMAIN DICHOTOMY VIEW OF ASSOCIATIVE
RECOGNITION: HOW DOES THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
STIMULI AFFECT THE RELATIVE CONTRIBUTION OF
FAMILIARITY? Iain Harlow1, Graham MacKenzie2, David Donaldson2;
1University of Edinburgh, 2University of Stirling — Episodic
recognition
memory is mediated by functionally and neurally separable retrieval processes, notably familiarity (a general sense of prior exposure) and recollection (the retrieval of contextual details), whose relative engagement
depends in part on the nature of the stimuli being retrieved. Based on

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

199

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

neuroanatomical evidence, Mayes and colleagues (Mayes et al., 2007;
TICS) have recently proposed the Domain Dichotomy account. By this
view, the relative engagement of familiarity and recollection is critically
dependent on the amount of representational overlap that stimuli exhibit
within perirhinal cortex. Importantly, the Domain Dichotomy account
makes specific predictions about associative memory (where retrieval of
the relationships between pairs of stimuli is required). Namely, since
familiarity is thought to be supported by perirhinal cortex, it should contribute more to associative memory when stimuli are perceptually and
conceptually similar (i.e., within-domain) than when they are distinct
(i.e., between-domain), whereas recollection should remain unchanged.
Here we tested the Domain Dichotomy account during an associative recognition test, using confidence based Receiver Operator Characteristic
(ROC) curves to assess the contribution of recollection and familiarity.
Participants studied stimulus pairs, and at test, discriminated same
(intact) from rearranged (recombined) pairs. Stimuli were either withindomain (word-word or image-image pairs) or between-domain (wordimage pairs), allowing ROC curves to be formed separately for each condition. Contrary to the predictions of the Domain Dichotomy account, the
contribution of familiarity (and consequently recognition performance
overall) was in fact lower for each within-domain condition than for the
between-domain condition.
F115
DISSOCIATION OF THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF RETRIEVAL
SUCCESS AND POST-RETRIEVAL PROCESSING Hiroki Hayama1,
Michael Rugg1; 1Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory,
University of California, Irvine — Post-retrieval processes are engaged
when the outcome of an episodic retrieval attempt must be monitored or
evaluated. The present study used event-related fMRI to identify regions
responsive to retrieval success as opposed to post-retrieval processing.
During each of two study sessions, subjects were cued to make one of
two semantic judgments on serially presented pictures. In one test phase,
subjects were required to respond ‘new’ to unstudied pictures, but to
make a semantic judgment, different from that at study, on studied pictures. In the other test phase, subjects were required to make the semantic
judgment on pictures judged as unstudied. Retrieval success effects were
operationalized as regions where activity was greater for studied than
unstudied items regardless of which item was associated with the semantic judgment. Identified regions included left lateral and middle/inferior
temporal cortex, and anterior prefrontal cortex. Post-retrieval processing
effects were operationalized as regions where activity was greater for the
items that required the semantic judgment relative to those that did not,
regardless of study status. These regions included bilateral intra-parietal
sulcus and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, along with left lateral inferior
prefrontal cortex. These findings demonstrate clear dissociations between
regions that are frequently co-activated in studies of retrieval success. It
appears that activity in several of these regions is associated not with successful retrieval per se, but to more general processes that are contingent
upon, but do not support, retrieval success.
F116
PLACES INFLUENCING FACES: AN FMRI STUDY OF THE
EFFECTS OF VISUAL CONTEXT ON EPISODIC FACE
RECOGNITION MEMORY Scott M. Hayes1, Elsa Baena1, Roberto
Cabeza1; 1Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham — Previous research has suggested that medial temporal lobe (MTL) regions
may reinstate visual context information to facilitate episodic object recognition (Hayes et al., 2007). Given that MTL regions have also been associated with recollection and familiarity processing, we aimed to identify
whether these MTL regions were associated with scene reinstatement
effects after controlling for recollection and familiarity processing. Fourteen participants viewed faces that were presented on naturalistic scenes.
At test, the faces were presented on the same scene (Identical), a previously viewed scene that was not presented with that face (Recombined),
or a black background (Scene Deletion). There was also a control condi-

200

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

tion in which faces were presented on a black background at both study
and test (Face). Participants made old/new face recognition judgments
on a 4-point confidence scale. Importantly, instructions emphasized that
recognition judgments were to be based only on the face. Behavioral
results revealed a Context Shift Decrement (CSD): decreased memory
performance when context changed between study and test. The CSD
was substantial and was equivalent for the Recombined (16%) and Scene
Deletion (14%) conditions. Neuroimaging data indicated that, after controlling for recollection and familiarity, increased MTL activation was
observed in the Scene Deletion condition relative to the Face condition. A
comparison of correctly remembered Identical relative to Recombined trials revealed activation in the right hippocampus. These results suggest
that context information may be automatically reinstated at retrieval,
even when it is incidental to the memory task at hand, and may facilitate
item recognition in young adults.
F117
FRONTAL AND PARIETAL CORRELATES OF GRADED
RECOLLECTION DURING EPISODIC RETRIEVAL J.
Benjamin
Hutchinson1, Yudy Cristo1, Alison R. Preston2, Anthony D. Wagner1,3;
1Stanford University, 2Center for Learning and Memory, University of Texas at
Austin, 3Neurosciences Program, Stanford University — The
ability
to
remember past events depends on multiple component processes. Extant
functional imaging data implicate frontal and parietal neocortical regions
in episodic retrieval, with distinct subregions correlating with perceived
familiarity vs. contextual recollection. Leverage on understanding the
neurocognitive mechanisms subserving recollection may come from
assessing the relationship between the degree of recollection and frontoparietal neural responses. The current fMRI study used a source memory
paradigm to assess how frontoparietal retrieval processes support item
recognition and recognition accompanied by varying levels of contextual
recollection. During encoding, participants incidentally encoded visually-presented words in one of four ways: generated an associated mental
image of an indoor scene or outdoor scene, or generated an associated
name of a famous female person or male person. A scanned recognition
memory test probed for item recognition and source recollection using a
one-step procedure. Specifically, participants were tested for (1) item recognition (old/new), (2) recollection of general event details (scene/person), and (3) recollection of full event details (indoor/outdoor or male/
female). Whole-brain fMRI data revealed a predominantly left-lateralized
pattern of frontoparietal activation during recognized items (hits) vs. correctly rejected lures. Initial analyses revealed that lateral inferior parietal
and intraparietal subregions were differentially sensitive to gradations in
the level of event recollection. These findings further highlight the correlated relationship between remembering the past and engagement of
multiple frontoparietal networks.
F118
FUNCTIONAL NETWORK CONNECTIVITY IN SEMANTIC
MEMORY Kanchana Jagannathan1, Michal Assaf1,2, Vince Calhoun3,4,1,2,
Godfrey Pearlson1,2; 1Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center, Institute of
Living, Hartford Hospital Hartford, 2School of Medicine,Yale University,
NewHaven, 3The MIND Institute, Alburquerque, 4University of New Mexico,
Alburquerque — Introduction: Recalling an object based on its features is a
unique operation in semantic memory processing that is subserved by
several neuronal networks that include thalamus, pre-supplementary
motor area, left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, inferior parietal lobule,
middle temporal gyrus, rostral anterior cingulate and inferior frontal
gyri. Methods: Fifty-five right handed healthy individuals performed
fMRI object-recall task. Subjects were grouped as good or poor performers based on a discrimination index score. In an initial analysis, activations related to task performance score were not significant, we therefore
hypothesized that differences in connections between the spatially independent neural components (i.e. networks) as measured by independent
component analysis (ICA) would better reveal connectivity. Thus, component maps were generated for four major task-related regions that

Poster Session F

included a language network (A), a right hemisphere language network
(B), the thalamus(C) and the default mode network (D). The lag-shifted
maximal correlation between the component time courses for all the subjects were computed for all pair wise combinations. Results: Differences
in correlation values for good and poor performers were defined as statistically significant at p<0.05. Good performers showed higher correlations between components A and B (p=0.002) and A and C (p=0.03) while
poor performers showed correlations between component C and D
(p=0.005). Conclusion: These results support the hypothesis that different
temporal relationships between distributed brain networks underlie
poorer object recall from semantic memory. This work demonstrates a
new approach for understanding semantic processing in healthy individuals and could be applied to patients in whom these processes are
impaired.
F119
SURGICAL LESIONING OF THE BASAL GANGLIA DISRUPTS
IMPLICIT SEQUENCE LEARNING IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE
Marjan Jahanshahi1, Jose Obeso2, L Alvarez3, R Macias3, G Lopez3, Leonora
Wilkinson1, Brian Day1, Serge Pinto1, N Pavon3, MC Rodriguez-Oroz2, J
Tejeiro3, J Artieda2; 1Sobell Department of Motor Neuroscience and Movement
Disorders, UCL Institute of Neurology, The National Hospital for Neurology &
Neurosurgery, London, 2Clinica Universitaria and Medical School, University of
Navarra, Pamplona, Spain, 3Movement Disorders and Neurophysiology Units,
Centro Internacional de Restauracion Neurologica (CIREN), Havana — Surgical lesioning of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) significantly improves the
motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease (PD) but is often followed by
hemiballism which is treated with a subsequent unilateral pallidotomy.
We studied RP, a 53 year old right-handed man with a 12 years history of
PD, who had been treated with a thermolytic lesion of the left STN and a
left pallidotomy, which effectively led to interruption of the basal ganglia-cortical motor circuit in the left hemisphere. His PD was significantly
improved following surgery. We compared speed of movement initiation
and execution in simple, uncued and precued choice reaction time (RT)
tasks and implicit sequence learning on a probabilistic serial reaction
time task (SRTT) with the right (contralateral to the surgical lesions) and
the left hands. RTs were faster with the right hand. RP showed similar
warning signal, preprogramming and precueing effects with the right
and left hands. In contrast, on the SRTT, no evidence of learning with the
right hand was detected; whereas the left hand showed learning on a parallel sequence similar to previous data from patients with Parkinson’s
disease. These results suggest that learning on the SRTT is effector-specific. Most importantly, these data establish that the output of the basal
ganglia to the cortex are essential for implicit sequence learning.
F120
FOLLOWING THE MUSIC TO THE MEMORIES Petr Janata1; 1UC
Davis, Center for Mind and Brain — Music commonly evokes vivid autobiographical memories and emotions, and therefore serves as a useful cue
with which to study the retrieval, structure, and reliving of autobiographical memories. fMRI data were collected in a sample of UC Davis
undergraduates as they listened to 30s excerpts of songs randomly drawn
from the Billboard Pop and R&B charts for the years that they were
between 7 and 19 years of age. Two models were used to analyze the
data. The first used parametric regressors derived from the familiarity,
affective valence and autobiographical salience ratings obtained immediately following the presentation of each song. This epoch-level model
revealed a positive correlation between activity in both medial and lateral
prefrontal areas and the degree of familiarity, autobiographical salience
and positive affect. The second model represented the moment-tomoment movements of the musical excerpts through tonal space and
identified those parts of the brain that followed the tonal structure of the
music as a function of autobiographical salience. In individual subjects,
this model showed focal areas of tonality tracking distributed in networks of frontal, temporal, parietal, occipital, and limbic regions. At a
group level, the most common site of tonality tracking was in the medial

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

prefrontal cortex, overlapping with the activations observed with the
other model. Other prominent sites of tonality tracking were lateral
BA10, the extrastriate cortex and the posterior superior temporal cortex.
The results support a view in which autobiographical memories are constructed in the moment from diverse pieces of autobiographical knowledge (Conway & Pleydell-Pearce, 2000).
F121
IMAGINED PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE EPISODIC EVENT
CONSTRUCTION BY PATIENTS WITH HIPPOCAMPAL
AMNESIA Unni Jensen1, Melissa Duff1, Ralph Adolphs2, Dan Tranel1;
1University of Iowa, Iowa City, 2Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena — Hippocampal
amnesic
patients have been found to be impaired in the elaboration of newly
imagined events (Hassabis et al., 2007). However, whether amnesic
patients can construct (Schacter et al., 2007) imagined episodic events in
different time frames has not been well characterized. We hypothesized
that amnesic patients would be impaired when asked to construct imagined past, imagined present and imagined future episodic events in a
neutral word-cue task. Patients with hippocampal amnesia, non-amnesic
brain-damaged patients without medial temporal lobe damage, and
healthy comparison participants were given a neutral cue-word and then
instructed to first construct imagined episodic events in different time
frames (past, present, future) and then to elaborate on these events by
describing what happens during the event and then describing a specific
contextual setting from the event. Hippocampal amnesic patients were
impaired in constructing imagined episodic events in the three different
time frames as compared to the brain-damaged and healthy comparison
groups. Specifically, the amnesic patients were unable to construct all the
required episodic events, and for the ones they did construct they
required more prompts and their mental representations contained fewer
words and were less rich. These findings support our hypothesis, converge with fMRI data from normal healthy participants (Addis et al,
2007), and further support the idea that the construction of imagined episodic events in different time frames is linked to the medial temporal
lobe.
F122
DISTINCT PATTERNS OF RECOGNITION-RELATED ACTIVITY
IN MEDIAL TEMPORAL CORTEX: A HIGH-RESOLUTION FMRI
STUDY Jeffrey D. Johnson1, L. Tugan Muftuler1, Michael D. Rugg1;
1University of California, Irvine — Numerous electrophysiological, lesion,
and functional neuroimaging studies have established that medial temporal lobe (MTL) cortex plays a crucial role in recognition memory. The
roles of specific MTL regions in recognition, however, are not well characterized in humans. This is likely due, in part, to the spatial resolution of
typical functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data, which leaves
unclear the precise localization of recognition-related activity. Additionally, provided that activity can be adequately localized, it remains to be
determined whether MTL regions track the novelty/familiarity of items
in an ‘all-or-none’ or graded fashion. To address these methodological
and conceptual issues, the present study employed high-resolution fMRI
in an investigation of how MTL activity varies with successive item presentations. Subjects (N=16) completed a series of continuous recognition
tasks in which old/new judgments were made for either words or pictures. Items were presented between one and four times, with a mean of
23 trials (approx. 55 s) between repetitions. Consistent with the hypothesis of MTL involvement in novelty detection, regions in bilateral anterior
hippocampus and left parahippocampal cortex exhibited an all-or-none
response profile of greater activity to new compared to old items. By contrast, the activity of adjacent right hippocampal and left parahippocampal regions decreased linearly with successive presentations. These
results demonstrate that distinct MTL regions, and indeed distinct
regions within hippocampus, respond in a qualitatively different manner
during recognition memory. Further, the findings contribute to accumu-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

201

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

lating evidence that high-resolution fMRI can be used effectively to dissociate memory-related activity within MTL sub-structures.
F123
PUPILLARY RESPONSES DISCRIMINATE FAMILIARITY AND
NOVELTY DETECTION PROCESSES Alexandros Kafkas1, Daniela
Montaldi1; 1School of Psychological Sciences, The University of Manchester — Familiarity and novelty detection are often treated as mirror images of the
same process. However, there is evidence suggesting distinct contributions of these signals to familiarity-based recognition. The present study
explored pupillary responses as a potential indicator of differential processing during familiarity and novelty detection. Participants rated the
strength of their feelings of familiarity and novelty, in two blocks with
different proportions of novel and familiar items (novelty block: 70% new
items, familiarity block: 70% old items). Participants were trained to classify feelings of familiarity and novelty as strong, moderate or weak and
to discriminate familiarity from recollection-based recognition. The
results showed that pupil dilation was greater for familiarity compared
with novelty detection, despite novelty detection being more accurate.
Effortless recollection of items produced pupil dilation that was greater
than both novelty and familiarity detection. Finally, the comparison of
pupillary responses in the two target blocks suggested that the detection
of novelty elicited greater pupillary responses when it was unexpected
(i.e. novel items encountered in familiarity block), whereas familiar items
produced sustained processing across both blocks. Overall these results
underline three important points: a) pupillary responses differentiate the
processing underlying familiarity and novelty detection, a finding in
accordance with a potential distinct contribution of these two signals to
familiarity-based recognition; b) the more detailed the outcome of memory retrieval, the greater the pupil dilation and c) enhanced processing of
novel items is dictated by the expectedness or salience of the novel event,
rather than by its intrinsic novelty value.
F124
CHANGES IN HIPPOCAMPAL RESPONSE TO CUE AND
FEEDBACK DURING ASSOCIATION LEARNING. Eunjoo
Kang1,
Jinhee Kim1, Hyejin Kim1; 1Kangwon National University — In the current
study, we identified those brain regions whose activity changes with
repeated exposure to cue-response-feedback sequences across a learning
session. Twenty two healthy young individuals were scanned with fMRI
(1.5T, TR = 3 sec, 22 5m slices) while 16 cue-response associations were
learned across three consecutive 9-minute scans. Responses to visuallypresented letter cues were followed either by right/wrong or reward/
punishment (monetary) feedback. We identified brain regions whose
activity changed (FEW p <.05) over the three consecutive scans. VOI (volume of interest) analysis was performed for those clusters showing significant scan effects in voxel-wise analysis (SMP5). Repetition-associated
changes were examined both for cue-associated and feedback-associated
brain activations. The anterior hippocampus and amygdala showed
monotonic decreases bilaterally over consecutive scans for the cue-associated activations only. In contrast, the left parahippocampus showed
monotonic decreases for the feedback-associated activations only. Left
parahippocampal activity was greater in response to correct (right or
reward) than incorrect feedback (wrong or punishment). These findings
are consistent with the involvement of the hippocampal system in
explicit memory and novelty detection, both of which were probably
more prominent in the earlier scans of this paradigm. However, the dissociation between the hippocampus and parahippocampus in cue and
feedback processing was unexpected. We suggest that early phase of
learning require more explicit memory, whereas the later phase requires
less explicit memory as indicated by the different degree of involvement
of the hippocampal system.

202

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

F125
CORTICAL DYNAMICS IN AN EMOTIONAL `THINK-NO THINK`
TASK – AN MEG STUDY Johanna Kissler1, Hauswald Anne1, Tesarek
Katrin2; 1University of Konstanz, Germany, 2Technical University of Berlin,
Germany — We investigated the ability to intentionally control episodic
memory and the underlying neuromagnetic activity as subjects engaged
in mental rehearsal (‘think’) or active suppression (‘no think’) of previously learned neutral or unpleasant contents. Subjects first learned to
associate neutral faces with neutral or unpleasant pictures from the IAPS
set. Hereafter, only the faces were shown together with a cue that indicated that the subjects should either rehearse and think of the associated
picture or actively inhibit recollection. A final free recall followed. Across
all participants, a beneficial effect of rehearsal, but no detrimental effect
of suppression on final recall emerged and no effect of emotional content
was found. However, subsequent analysis showed that 9 of the 20 participants did show a significant suppression effect, while the other 11
showed the reverse pattern with a facilitation effect compared to baseline. The neural activities in the ‘no think’ phase revealed an early (100200 ms) group difference: Activation of left pre-frontal cortex in the ‘suppressors’ was enhanced. This effect was missing in the ‘non-suppressors’,
who instead showed sustained right temporal activation starting from
150 ms after cue onset. The results demonstrate that the ability to actively
suppress memory contents varies considerably even among students but
that subjects who are able to suppress memory contents are characterized
by an early on-set frontal activation, in line with the notion that frontal
structures may down-regulate medial-temporal brain structures during
‘no think’ trials. So far, we observed no impact of emotional content on
intentional memory control.
F126
RIGHT-SIDED PARIETAL ACTIVATION DURING SUCCESSFUL
RETRIEVAL OF AGRAMMATICAL MUSIC STIMULI Ellen
C.
Klostermann1, Arthur P. Shimamura1; 1University of California Berkeley — In
fMRI and ERP studies, successful recognition performance has been associated with left-lateralized activity in the posterior parietal cortex (PPC).
Schloerscheidt & Rugg (1997) have previously shown that the ERP successful retrieval effect occurs in the left hemisphere for both words and
pictures of objects, even though in the medial tempral lobe (MTL) these
two stimulus types seem to be lateralized (right MTL damage causes
greater impairment in picture than word memory and vice versa). However, the picture stimuli used in this experiment were of common objects,
and were, therefore, still verbalizable. Here, we investigated recognition
performance, and particularly the lateralization of PPC activity, for short,
agrammatical music stimuli (Blackwood, 2004), which are largely processed in the right hemisphere. For both study and test phases, participants closed their eyes and listened to music clips presented through
electrodynamic, noise-suppression headphones. During the study phase,
participants made pleasantness judgments. At test, participants made
old/new recognition judgments with high/low confidence ratings. Right
but not left PPC activity was observed during the successful retrieval of
these agrammatical music stimuli. This finding suggests that the PPC
activity in previous studies has been left-lateralized because they used
verbal or verbalizable stimuli. This data further suggests that both the
right and left PPC are involved in successful memory retrieval.
F127
THE LATERALIZATION OF SEMANTIC PROCESSES INVOLVED
IN NATURALISTIC ACTION PERFORMANCE IN STROKE
PATIENTS Sabrina Lombardi1, Norman Park1; 1York University — Naturalistic actions are multi-step actions in which tools are used to achieve
goals. Routine actions (NA) have been performed many times, whereas
novel actions (NNA) are unfamiliar prior to instruction. This study aimed
to investigate the cognitive processes underlying NA and NNA enactment, as well as explore their lateralization. Thirty-four stroke patients
with either left (LHD) or right (RHD) hemisphere damage and twelve
controls were instructed to enact as well as arrange a set of photos depict-

Poster Session F

ing the same NAs and NNAs in an order that would result in proper task
completion. Subjects were administered a neuropsychological battery
including measures of tool-action knowledge. LHD and RHD participants were similarly impaired on NAs and NNAs relative to controls.
High error producers with either LHD or RHD tended to make crux (central action) omission rather than commission errors in NAs. In NNAs
however, high error producers tended to make crux commission rather
than omission errors. Hemispheric differences were noted in NA and
NNA picture arrangement measures, where RHD participants were more
impaired than participants with LHD. Also, NA and NNA enactment
was correlated with performance on measures of tool-action knowledge
in participants with LHD but not RHD. These results suggest that overlapping yet distinct cognitive processes are present in NA and NNA
enactment. These findings show that tool-action knowledge, which is
associated with apraxia and left lateralized, is also linked to naturalistic
action performance. Our findings further suggest that the right hemisphere plays a critical role in the representation of multi-step actions.
F128
WHEN VISION MEETS MEMORY: EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS
REVEAL THE TIMING OF OBJECT CATEGORIZATION, IMPLICIT
MEMORY, AND RECOGNITION Lisa Lucia1, Haline Schendan1; 1Tufts
University — Objects seen from unusual relative to canonical views
require more time to categorize and recognize, and, by object model verification accounts, additionally recruit prefrontal-parietal networks for
top-down cognitive control, and, by the multiple views plus transformation variant, the parietal process is mental rotation. View effects will be
similar across tasks according to these vision frameworks, but differ
between memory tests according to memory systems frameworks
because distinct brain systems support generic memory for categorization and episodic memory for recognition. To test these vision and memory hypotheses, event-related potentials (ERPs) directly measured the
view-dependence of cortical activity during object categorization and recognition. Participants categorized objects in canonical or unusual views
during study and a later indirect memory test to assess priming of categorization. On a direct memory test, they recognized each object as
remembered with high or low confidence, or as a new object. On both
indirect and direct tests, objects were repeated in the same or different
view than studied, or were new. Performance results replicated known
view-atypicality effects and view-specific priming and recognition
effects. ERP results showed view-atypicality and view-specific repetition
effects on a frontopolar N350 that were larger on categorization than recognition. In contrast, these view effects on a later parietal positive complex (or P600) were similar across tasks. These findings and objectsensitive and mental rotation-related ERP effects in the same participants
support the Two-State Interactive account of visual object knowledge
activation (Schendan & Kutas, 2007; Schendan & Stern, 2007) that integrates vision and memory systems accounts.
F129
THE
EFFECT
OF
DIRECTED
FORGETTING
ON
MEDIOTEMPORAL LOBE ACTIVATION Eva Ludowig1, Christian G.
Bien1, Thomas Münte2, Jürn Möller2, Christian E. Elger1, Timm Rosburg1;
1
University of Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Psychologie II, University of
Magdeburg, Germany — It is a matter of debate whether forgetting is
merely the result of weak memory traces or whether it can also be
achieved by active inhibition of memory contents. In a single-item
directed forgetting paradigm, words were presented to subjects, either
followed by the instruction that this word had to be remembered (TBR)
or to be forgotten (TBF). We investigated the effects of the TBR/ TBF cues
on intracranial event-related potentials from 15 patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. All patients were implanted with multicontact depth
electrodes along the hippocampus or with frontal grid electrodes as part
of presurgical evaluation. As expected, subjects recognized significantly
more TBR than TBF words in a subsequent recognition test. During
encoding, both instruction cues elicited a P300 response of similar size in

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

the hippocampus. In the rhinal cortex, each cue first led to a steep negativity at ~300 ms, rapidly followed by a positivity at ~400 ms. For the TBR
instruction, this positivity returned to baseline level at ~600 ms, while the
TBF instruction caused an ongoing positivity lasting up to 2000 ms. In
several frontal grid electrodes, the TBF instruction led to more positive
responses, too. The rhinal cortex is regarded as an essential link between
neocortex and hippocampus that serves as a filter mechanism. The
observed prolonged rhinal positivity in response to TBF instructions
might reflect input from frontal cortices, resulting in active inhibition of
hippocampal encoding.
F130
DISSOCIATION OF RULE-BASED AND IMPLICIT CATEGORY
LEARNING: AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL APPROACH Robert
G. Morrison1, Paul R. Reber1, Ken A. Paller1; 1Northwestern University — Categories are central to mental lives and allow us to make sense of,
describe, and order our mental and physical worlds by virtue of detected
stimulus regularities. Behavioral, neuropsychological, and neuroimaging
evidence has suggested that categories can often be learned either via a
rule-based mechanism critically dependent on medial temporal and prefrontal brain regions, or via an implicit mechanism relying on the basal
ganglia. In this study we used a visual category-learning paradigm (Maddox, Ashby, & Bohill, 2003) in which subjects learn to categorize Gabor
patches based on either a rule-based strategy or an implicit strategy. In
either case subjects are not told how to categorize, but rather discover
how to categorize through feedback received on each trial. We measured
event-related potentials while subjects (1) passively observed Gabor
patches, (2) categorized patches according to one mechanism, and, one
week later, (3) categorized patches according to the other mechanism.
Performing either type of category learning engaged more negative
occipital potentials at approximately 150-200 ms and more positive frontocentral potentials at approximately 400-800 ms, compared to the passive condition. In the rule-based condition, the latter potentials were
greater for correct than incorrect trials, and amplitudes decreased when
learning began to asymptote—two effects not found in the implicit condition. These results provide additional evidence for distinct brain mechanisms supporting rule-based versus implicit category learning; new
insights into this distinction can thus be obtained by monitoring relevant
neurocognitive processes in real time using these methods.
F131
RELATIONAL STRATEGY BIAS IMPROVES TRANSITIVE
INFERENCE ACROSS AGE GROUPS Sandra
Moses1,
Melanie
Ostreicher1,2, Christina Villate1, Jennifer Ryan1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute,
2University of Toronto — Transitive inference is a complex task, conducive
to the use of multiple strategies. We investigated whether transitive inference accuracy can be improved by biasing strategy choice towards a
proposition-based approach that relies on the extraction of relations
among stimuli, as opposed to an associative learning approach that relies
on memory for previous reward history of individual stimuli. We biased
strategy choice in younger (18-29), middle-aged (30-59) and older adults
(60-80) by using familiar stimuli with known relations that tap prior
knowledge. The familiar stimuli and relations could provide a relational
hierarchical framework that may be applied to subsequent conditions
with arbitrary relations. We hypothesized that encouraging the use of
previously acquired semantic information would lead to the extraction of
relations among the stimuli in both the familiar and novel stimulus conditions and facilitate a proposition-based reasoning approach. Semantic
information led to increased accuracy for all ages, the use of a proposition-based approach rather than associative learning, and increased
awareness of stimulus relations. Awareness accounted for the variability
in performance accuracy to a greater extent than age. Increased age was
associated with reduced awareness. However, aware older, middle-aged
and younger adults showed similar accuracies on all conditions. Interestingly, unaware participants showed successful inference performance,
and performance patterns were indicative of a relational proposition-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

203

Monday, April 14, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

based approach. The current work indicates that age differences in performance can be minimized, by providing semantically meaningful stimuli that bias participants to use a relational proposition-based approach.
F132
THE EMERGENCE OF SEMANTIC TOPOGRAPHY AND
CATEGORY-SPECIFIC IMPAIRMENTS IN A NEURALLY-INSPIRED
COMPUTATIONAL MODEL Lee Newman1, Thad Polk1; 1University of
Michigan — Representations in sensory cortices are organized topographically and substantial progress has been made in understanding how
such topography develops at a neurocomputational level. We extend this
work by presenting a neural network model in which higher-level
semantic representations develop based on topographic input from
lower-level sensory maps. The receptive fields of cells in a higher-level
association map correspond to the loci of activity within the cortical
topography of lower-level sensory maps rather than to explicitly coded
sensory features. Representations in the association map develop using
the same self-organizing algorithms used for the sensory maps. Using
this model, we show that t semantic representations at increasing levels
of abstraction naturally emerge as a result of exposure to a set of visual
stimuli. For example, when presented with a set of simple visual features
(color, texture, size, and shape) the model develops semantic representations that distinguish basic level categories (dogs, tables, cars), superordinate categories (animals, furniture, vehicles), and living vs. non-living
things. Furthermore, random lesions to the model produce the kinds of
category-specific impairments reported in patients (e.g., selective impairments of living vs. non-living things). Our results demonstrate that
semantic representations can be learned based on the same principles of
neural computation known to be operating in early sensory cortex and
suggest a possible computational role for topography in semantic cognition.

204

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session F

Poster Session G
Higher level cognition: Other
G1
INFERRING MENTAL STATES TO JUSTIFY BLAME Dorit
Kliemann1,2, Liane Young2, Jonathan Scholz2, Rebecca Saxe2; 1University of
Bremen, 2Massachusetts Institute of Technology — Moral judgment depends
critically on “Theory of Mind” (ToM): when an agent’s beliefs and intentions are known, observers rely almost exclusively on those mental states
when attributing moral blame for an action. In everyday life, however, the
agent’s thoughts are rarely known to the observer and so must be inferred
from other available information, such as prior experience with the individual. We therefore investigated the cognitive and neural consequences
during moral reasoning of such experience. We hypothesized that prior
personal experience would modulate the utilization of mental state information in moral reasoning. Subjects first engaged in an economic game
with fair and unfair competitors and then read descriptions of their competitors’ actions that resulted in positive or negative outcomes. The
descriptions were designed to leave the competitors’ mental states ambiguous; the assignment of actions to fair or unfair competitors was counterbalanced. A behavioral study revealed that actions producing negative
outcomes were judged as more “intentional” when performed by previously unfair competitors. In the functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) experiment, subjects made blame/praise judgments of these
actions. Negative outcomes were judged more blameworthy when caused
by previously unfair competitors. Even though explicit mental state evaluation was not required, moral judgments in this case were accompanied by
increased activation in a brain region associated with ToM: the right temporo-parietal junction. The magnitude of this activation was correlated
with individual subjects’ response to unfair play in the economic game,
indicating a direct link between previous experience and current moral
judgment.
G2
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF FATIGUE IN TRAUMATIC BRAIN
INJURY Alex Kohl1,2,3, Glenn Wylie1,2, Helen Genova1,2, Frank Hillary4, John
DeLuca1,2; 1Kessler Medical Rehabilitation Research and Education Center,
2University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, 3Rutgers University,
4Pennsylvania State University — Cognitive fatigue is one of the most disabling symptoms following Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI). However, its
assessment remains challenging and controversial. Functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) offers a potential way to objectively measure
fatigue. Previous work using fMRI has shown that TBI patients, relative to
healthy controls (HCs), show a more diffuse pattern of brain activity when
engaged in a variety of tasks. This has been interpreted as compensation –
the injured brain must work harder to achieve the same level of performance. We hypothesized that this compensation is isomorphic with
fatigue, and that tracking it over time might be an effective way to objectively measure fatigue. We used fMRI to track brain activity across time
during a modified symbol digit modality task (mSDMT) in 13 TBI patients
with moderate to severe injury, and 13 age-matched HCs. We analyzed the
data with a 2 x 3 mixed ANOVA, with the factors of Group (HC vs. TBI)
and Time (3 repeated blocks of mSDMT). In a network of areas including
the middle superior frontal gyrus, anterior cingulate, and parietal/precuneus we found that persons with TBI showed increased activity (BOLD
signal) across time, while HCs showed decreases across time. The implications of these results for models of fatigue will be discussed.

G3
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN A GRAPHEME-COLOR SYNAESTHETE
LEARNS A NEW LANGUAGE? Donna Kwan1, Jonathan Carriere1, Daniel
Eaton1, Emma Guild1, Mike Dixon1, Daniel Smilek1; 1University of Waterloo,
Canada — Grapheme-color synaesthesia is a fascinating condition in which
individuals perceive ordinary black letters of the Latin alphabet in vivid,
specific, colors. In studies of adult synaesthetes, grapheme-color associations have been shown to remain highly consistent over time. In the
present study we sought to evaluate how grapheme-color pairings form
when a new writing system is learned. Specifically, we evaluated whether
(1) grapheme-color pairings become more consistent with increased familiarity with a new writing system, and (2) whether the synaesthetic colors
elicited by the Latin alphabet transfer to new writing systems as they are
learned. To address these issues we tested a synaesthete, DE, who, in addition to the Latin alphabet, had some degree of functional familiarity with a
number of other writing systems. We assessed the consistency of DE’s
grapheme-color associations for Latin, Hiragana, Katakana, Cyrillic (1918
version), and Korean (Hang&#365;l) writing systems. There was a strong
relation between familiarity and grapheme-color consistency for DE. DE’s
grapheme-color associations were also analyzed according to their similarity across graphemes, providing an assessment of the extent to which colors transferred between each writing system. DE was asked to explain
how each color transfer came about. Each writing system contained a
number of unique and shared colors, with colors transferring between systems on the basis of both visual and phonological similarity. Overall the
results indicate familiarity increases grapheme-color consistency and suggest both visual features and phonological information play an important
role in the development of synaesthetic grapheme-color associations.
G4
BENEFITS FROM PRIOR EXPERIENCE IN STATISTICAL
LEARNING: THE ROLE OF PERCEPTUAL VS. ABSTRACT
SIMILARITY Jill Lany1, Rebecca Gomez2; 1The University of WisconsinMadison, 2The University of Arizona — Sensitivity to statistical information
is critical to language acquisition. Statistical structure pertains to the particular items experienced (e.g., item-frequency or probability of co-occurrence with another item), but such learning can also result in
generalization to novel items. Moreover, statistical learning benefits from
prior experience with similar patterns. We tested whether perceptual (vs.
abstract) similarity between two patterns is required for such benefit. In a
previous experiment, learners were exposed to two artificial languages in
which words from the categories a, X, b, and Y were combined to form aX
and bY strings. Successful learning entails categorizing words based on
perceptual features, and acquiring permissible category combinations.
Although the two languages had different vocabulary, in both the perceptual markers of word-categories were word-endings. Thus the languages
contained similar perceptual features. Here, the features distinguishing
word categories differed in the two languages (in one Xs and Ys had different endings, and in the other they differed in syllable number). Learners
with prior experience performed significantly better than naïve learners,
and also generalized to novel instances respecting the language structure.
Thus, statistical learning is enhanced by prior experience with similar
abstract language structure (involving co-occurrence restrictions on wordcategories) despite differences in perceptual features.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

205

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

G5
“YOU” AND “I”: SHARED AND DISTINCT NEURAL SYSTEMS
FOR THE SELF AND OTHERS DURING MENTALIZING OR
PHYSICAL JUDGMENTS Michael Lombardo1, Bhismadev Chakrabarti1,
Susan Sadek1, Greg Pasco1, Sally Wheelwright1, Simon Baron-Cohen1;
1
University of Cambridge, Autism Research Centre — Various
lines
of
research show that representations of the self and others (e.g., touch,
pain, disgust, action) overlap within the brain (Keysers et al., 2004; Singer
et al., 2004; Wicker et al., 2003; Iacoboni et al., 1999). It is unclear however,
whether the brain handles reflective mentalistic and physical judgments
of the self and other in a similar way. In the context of mentalizing, ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) has been shown to be an area sensitive to thinking about the minds of oneself or a similar other (Mitchell et
al., 2006). We tested 23 healthy male volunteers in a 2x2 factoriallydesigned 3T fMRI experiment in order to test whether reflective mentalizing or physical judgments about the self or other would recruit shared
or distinct neural systems. Parametric group-level analyses in SPM5
showed that when asked to mentalize, overlapping regions in the
VMPFC, posterior cingulate cortex/precuneus (PCC), and right temporoparietal junction (RTPJ) were active for both self and other judgments.
During physical judgments, both self and other conditions recruited
shared regions within the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC) and
bilateral inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). Across mentalizing and physical
judgments, a greater bias for self over other-referential judgments was
found in VMPFC, while greater bias for others over self-referential judgments recruited DMPFC and PCC. Our results are discussed in relation to
simulation theory and its implications for informing investigations in
populations where self- and other-referential cognition are atypical, such
as autism (Lombardo et al., 2007).
G6
THE NEURAL BASIS OF BICONDITIONAL GRAMMAR
LEARNING Clarisse Longo dos Santos1, Virginia Penhune1, Maria
Dellerba1; 1Concordia University — Learning a set of abstract rules, or general principles, is an important process in everyday life. The underlying
brain structures associated with this process have been investigated by a
few neuroimaging studies. The present study used a modified version of
the Biconditional Grammar, to investigate the neural basis of different
stages in abstract rule learning. Ten right handed adults participated in
this study. Participants were exposed to 96 strings of consonants. In each
trial, they studied a string and had then to choose, among three options,
the one that followed the rules. Feedback was presented as “correct” or
“incorrect”. Between blocks, participants stated the strategies they used.
A 3T fMRI scanner was used (SIEMENS; 36 interleaved slices; Voxel size:
3.5×3.5×3.5 [mm]; TR=2.5 s). Statistical analyses were conducted using
fMRIstat. Voxels with |T| higher than 3.17 (uncorrected p<0.001) were
considered for the cluster analysis. There was a clear behavioural dissociation between performance of participants who reported to be guessing
and those who acquired explicit knowledge of the rules of the BG. This
pattern was also observed in the neuroimaging data. In early learning,
non-learners showed more activation in areas of visual association, suggesting perceptual based strategies, and learners showed in addition activation in frontal regions (9/46). In late learning, non-learners showed
activation in areas related to explicit retrieval and procedure processes,
and learners, areas related to explicit memory functions and control.
Interestingly, during early learning, both groups did not differ in performance.
G7
NEURAL CHANGES WITH LEARNING AND EXTENDED
PRACTICE: STIMULUS-SPECIFIC MAPPINGS VERSUS GLOBAL
TASK PARAMETERS Phan Luu1,2, Catherine Poulsen1, Don M.
Tucker1,2, Chelsea Mattson1,2, Anne Smith3; 1Electrical Geodesics, Inc.,
2University of Oregon, 3University of California, Davis — Cognitive
and
neurocognitive research indicates that learning is associated with a relative shift from controlled to automatic processing, and a corresponding

206

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

reduction in frontal lobe activity related to executive control. We
extended these findings to examine changes in human brain activity associated with two complementary corticolimbic learning circuits identified
in animal studies: the ventral-limbic circuit (anterior cingulate, amygdala,
medial thalamus) implicated in fast, early learning; and the dorsal-limbic
circuit (posterior cingulate, hippocampus, anterior ventral thalamus)
implicated in slower, late learning. Dense-array (256-channel) electroencephalography (EEG) was recorded as participants acquired, through
trial and error, 16 different arbitrary stimulus-response (S-R) mappings
(e.g., ‘27’ paired with left index finger button press) using a Go-NoGo
paradigm. Bayesian state-space analysis served to estimate the trial by
which a given S-R mapping had been learned. Changes in stimuluslocked neural response from pre- to postlearning, and with overlearning
(extended practice across three sessions), were assessed by scalp measures and distributed linear-inverse source analyses. Two early-learning
circuit indices, the frontopolar contingent negative variation (rostroventral anterior cingulate source) and lateral inferior anterior negativity
(temporal pole and ventrolateral prefrontal sources) decreased with
learning and practice, whereas late-learning circuit indices, the N170 (lateral posterior temporal) and P300 (medial temporal and posterior cingulate) increased. The medial frontal negativity (MFN), previously
attributed to performance monitoring, also increased from pre- to postlearning and throughout extended practice. A fourth session with new S-R
mappings served to separate activity associated with the acquisition of
specific S-R mappings versus learning of global task parameters.
G8
NEURAL
MECHANISMS
ASSOCIATED
WITH
REWARD
ANTICIPATION IN OBESITY Laura E Martin1, Rebecca Chambers1,
Joseph Donnelly2, Lisa Sanderson Cox1, Cary R Savage1; 1University of Kansas
Medical Center, 2University of Kansas — In obesity, the neural systems of
reward are disrupted and appear to increase the motivational value of
food. To our knowledge, no studies have yet directly compared brain
responses to non-food rewards in obese and healthy weight (HW) participants. The current study employed fMRI to examine the neural systems
of reward when monetary rewards and punishments were predicted and
delivered. The task consisted of the presentation of cues that predicted
the delivery of a reward or punishment with 75% probability. Participants then received feedback on how much money they won or lost on
the trial. To date, we have collected data in obese participants and HW
controls. Threshold adjustments were based on Monte Carlo simulations
to determine the cluster size for a cluster-wise probability p<.05. Preliminary results have identified a subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
region (xyz: HW = -7, 35, -4; Obese = -8, 25, -3) that responds differentially in HW compared to obese participants. During the prediction phase
of the trial, HW but not obese participants showed greater ACC activations when rewards were predicted, compared to when punishments
were predicted. However this pattern was reversed during the delivery
phase of the trial, with obese but not HW participants showing greater
ACC activations when rewards compared to punishments were delivered. These results are consistent with previous behavioral studies showing a preference for immediate over delayed rewards in obesity and
suggest that abnormal activation in the ACC may be associated with
impairments in learned associations of outcomes in obesity.
G9
DISEASE-RELEVANT FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN MILD
COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT Donald McLaren1,2, Michele Ries1,2, Guofan
Xu1,2, Barbara Bendlin1,2, Michele Fitzgerald1,2, Erik Kastman1,2, Gemma
Gliori1,2, Britta Jabbar1,2, Sterling Johnson1,2; 1Geriatric Research Education
and Clinical Center, William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital,
2Universisty of Wisconsin, Madison — Individuals with Mild Cognitive
Impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's Disease show functional and structural changes in the posterior cingulate and amygdala. Yet, very little is
known about the contribution of amygdala dysfunction in producing
clinical symptoms and modulating other brain areas. Here we investigate

Poster Session G

the functional connectivity of both the amygdala and posterior cingulate.
Functional MRI data were collected in 22 young controls to investigate
spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations correlations with the amygdala
and posterior cingulate. In a voxel-wise analysis of the PC and amygdala,
we found that there were two almost entirely discrete networks. Specifically, we replicated the traditional “default-mode” network showing connectivity with the posterior cingulate and a separate network involving
the amygdala, basal forebrain, anterior cingulate and parts of the right
frontal cortex. However, there were a few regions of overlap, including
the retrosplenium, which might act to integrate the two networks. In a
separate dataset from 16 MCI patients and 16 age-matched controls, we
regressed out the task effects to look at the spontaneous fluctuations. We
found differences in connectivity between MCI patients and controls that
included: (1) increased connectivity between the amygdala and anterior
cingulate/left frontal cortex; and (2) decreased connectivity between the
posterior cingulate and ventral medial prefrontal cortex. Additionally,
several frontal brain regions showed a correlation between connectivity
and self-awareness measures. Thus, connectivity changes provide a possible physiological basis for explaining the symptoms observed in MCI
patients. Further analyses will investigate how atrophy and and cognitive
abilities affect connectivity.
G10
PERCEPTUAL AND COGNITIVE BILATERAL REDUNDANCY
GAINS: EVIDENCE FOR HEMISPHERIC COOPERATION SPECIFIC
TO THE PROCESSING OF LEARNED MEANINGFUL STIMULI
Bettina Mohr1,2, Carmen Nielsen2, Christine Schmalz1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain
Sciences Unit, Cambridge, 2Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge — Investigation of hemispheric interaction processes showed that redundant stimulus presentation facilitates perceptual and cognitive processing of
elementary and complex stimuli. However, the magnitude of redundancy gains seems to vary with stimuli and tasks. In a series of visual
half-field studies, we investigated the effects of unilateral and bilateral
redundant presentation of verbal and nonverbal material across a range
of tasks tapping into basic perceptual and higher cognitive processes. In a
stimulus detection task, participants showed significantly better performance for all stimuli (words, pseudowords, objects, nonobjects) presented bilaterally, compared to unilateral stimulation, indicating
unspecific redundancy gains which are independent from stimulus material. This pattern was also obtained for both, words and pseudowords
involving elementary cognitive tasks, such as letter bigram detection.
Interestingly, in tasks involving lexical and memory processes, words
and objects as opposed to meaningless stimuli showed strikingly different signatures of hemispheric processing: In a delayed-matching-to-sample task, we found better performance for words and objects presented
bilaterally compared with unilateral stimulation, but no such effect for
pseudowords and nonobjects. This specific bilateral redundancy gain
(BRG) was also found in a lexical and object decision task, thus indicating
BRG effects specific to learned material. Further analyses revealed that
the magnitude of the BRG for learned stimuli significantly exceeded the
one obtained for unlearned material. These data suggest different mechanisms underlying BRG effects in perceptual and cognitive processing.
Access to long-term memory traces may invoke a specific process of
interhemispheric cooperation, possibly related to distributed transhemispheric cortical networks realising the traces.
G11
BRAIN
MECHANISMS
UNDERLYING
HUMAN
COMMUNICATION Matthijs Noordzij1, Sarah Newman-Norlund1, JanPeter De Ruiter2, Peter Hagoort1,2, Stephen Levinson2, Ivan Toni1,3; 1F.C.
Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Radboud University Nijmegen,
The Netherlands, 2Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands, 3Nijmegen Institute for Cognition and Information, The
Netherlands — Human communication involves more than language abilities or symbolic codes: it relies on an infrastructure involving the attribution of communicative intentions, which a successful communicator must

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

anticipate. In two fMRI studies we isolate this underlying ability by using
a task requiring communication without prior conventions. Planning
communicative actions and recognizing their communicative intention
relied on the same brain region, the right posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS). The response of this region was lateralized to the right hemisphere, modulated by the ambiguity in meaning of the communicative
acts, but not by their sensorimotor complexity. This finding supports the
notion that our communicative abilities are distinct from both sensorimotor processes and language abilities.
G12
ROLES
OF
THE
MEDIAL
FRONTAL
CORTEX
AND
HIPPOCAMPUS IN MEMORY-GUIDED FUTURE PLANNING Jiro
Okuda1,2, Masataka Watanabe3, Toshikatsu Fujii4, Maki Suzuki4,5, Nobuhito
Abe4, Minoru Tsukada1; 1Tamagawa University Brain Science Institute,
2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, 3Graduate
School of Engineering, University of Tokyo, 4Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine, 5Cyclotron and Radioisotope Center, Tohoku University — Converging evidence suggests that envisioning the future relies on a cerebral
network involved with remembering the past (the medial frontal-temporal-parietal network). It remains unknown, however, if this network is
responsible for planning specific future actions based on past experiences, not only for just imagining possible future events in mind. This
study aimed to elucidate the role of subregions within the memoryprospection network in memory-based future planning. Twenty-four
young volunteers participated in a functional MRI experiment during
which they repeatedly made specific action plans (joystick control toward
the right, left, up, or down) in association with specific visual stimuli (pictures of natural scenes and manmade objects). They were presented with
an “action cue” 4 seconds after each picture presentation, and were asked
to perform the action they planned in association with the picture.
Twenty-four pictures were presented three times each in a pseudo-random sequence. In a memory-guided planning condition, the action cue
was a question mark and the subjects had to make each plan based on
their memory (the same action they made in the previous trial of that picture), whereas in a control condition they simply followed a visual cue of
a unidirectional arrow to make an action. Event-related fMRI activation
at the picture presentation was found in the medial frontal and hippocampal areas, exclusively in the memory-guided condition. Moreover,
magnitude of the activation increased with the trial repetition. These
results suggest specific roles of the medial frontal and hippocampal
regions in planning for future actions according to past experiences.
G13
HIGH-DENSITY ELECTRICAL NEUROIMAGING IDENTIFIES
EARLY RECRUITMENT OF RIGHT FRONTO-PARIETAL MIRROR
NEURON SYSTEM FOR DECODING INTENTION OF ACTIONS.
Stephanie Ortigue1, Giacomo Rizzolatti2, Scott Grafton1; 1UCSB Brain Imaging
Center, Sage Center for the Study of the Mind, 2University of Parma, Italy — Brain
imaging studies of intention understanding suggest recruitment of areas
within the mirror neuron system (MNS), particularly in right inferior
parietal lobule (IPL) and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). However, the limited temporal resolution of this method precludes the ability to understand how this proposed intention understanding mechanism is
activated. To test the effective involvement of the right mirror neuron
system in intention understanding and to define the circuitry leading to
its activation we used both fMRI and high-density visual event-related
potentials (VEPs) in a total of 20 healthy human subjects while they were
performing an intention inference test. Subjects observed one frame from
video-clips displaying various types of objects followed by a second
frame with hand-on-object actions. Each pair of stimuli was performed
either with or without context. Participants received explicit instructions
to pay attention only to meaningful actions, and to try to decode “why”
an action was performed. Our fMRI results confirmed the specific recruitment of right MNS in understanding other’s intention’s, especially within
a context. High-density VEPs revealed that this distinction between

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

207

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

intentions performed within or without context occurs approximately
230ms after presentation of the hand-on-object frame. A distributed linear source estimation (LORETA) of this time progression established that
both actions embedded within a context, and actions without context,
recruited left followed by right IPL, and IFG. This multimodal approach
confirms the crucial and automatic role of MNS, notably the right-lateralized part of this network, in the early stages of understanding other’s
intentions.
G14
IS A SELF-FACE SPECIAL?: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF SELFFACE PROCESSING Alessia Pannese1, Joy Hirsch1; 1Columbia
University — The ability to recognise one’s own face is considered the signature of self-consciousness. In this study we hypothesized that the selfface, by virtue of its self-referential content, elicits unique patterns of neural activity representing privileged processing compared to other faces.
We tested this hypothesis by employing functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) in an event-related design. Subjects performed a genderidentification task on randomly presented face-photographs differing in
identity (self, very familiar, moderately familiar, little familiar, famous,
unknown) and length of display (200 ms (explicit condition); 17 ms or 33
ms, immediately followed by a second stimulus displayed respectively
for 183 ms or 167 ms (masked condition)). Based on our model of privileged processing, we predicted that the self face would be associated with
faster identification and distinct patterns of neural activity compared to
other faces. Our results showed that, in both explicit and masked conditions, target self faces were associated with shorter reaction times and
stronger engagement of subcortical structures (basal ganglia and thalamus) compared to famous and unknown faces. However, in the masked
condition, an interaction effect was found between face and masking
time, the self face being the strongest facilitator at 17 ms, but the strongest
interferer at 33 ms. These results, in addition to being in agreement with
our predictions, support a model whereby the self face undergoes privileged processing, and provide evidence for a complex interplay between
self-face recognition and visual awareness.
G15
PAINTING’S
INFORMATION
INCREASES
AESTHETIC
PREFERENCE FOR CONTEMPORARY PAINTINGS Seongmin
Park1, Kyongsik Yun1, Jaeseung Jeong1,2; 1Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Republic of Korea, 2Columbia College of
Physicians and Surgeons, NY — Aesthetic preference (AP), an important
motivation of art appreciation, toward contemporary paintings having
abstract expressions showed wide individual variability under influence
of personal traits and prior information, as well as visually discernible
beauty. Little is known about the determinants of AP. The aim of this
study was to investigate whether the information about paintings can
change AP or not. 8 contemporary paintings including Jackson Pollock
and Paul Klee were presented to 116 subjects with 5 kinds of painting
information in an art museum. AP, evaluated by questionnaires, significantly increased as the information increased, particularly in cases that
subjects highly agreed artist’s and critic’s comments. Furthermore, in
scanning event-related fMRI images from 16 subjects under the same
condition with 6 paintings, we found that subjects exhibited significant
activations in the frontal cortex, anterior cingulated, and cuneus of left
brain after the presentation of the artist and subject information and artist
comment. Bilateral parietal lobe and right temporal gyrus were significantly increased by critic’s comment, and the highest bid price induced
activation in right thalamus and right precentral gyrus. These findings
indicate that painting information elicited cortical activations on preference-related regions, not visual perception areas, resulting in the
enhancement of AP. We suggest that AP arises from integration of various cognitive processes affected by resonant information.

208

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

G16
INTERHEMISPHERIC COLLABORATION FOR SIMULTANEOUS
LETTER AND PICTURE MATCHING Urvi Patel1, Joseph Hellige1,2;
1University of Southern California, 2Loyola Marymount University — The
present research is an extension of previous work that examined whether
it is beneficial to divide processing between the hemispheres by introducing an independent task without changing the complexity of a primary
task per se. Hemispheric collaboration is advantageous when both tasks
present the same type of stimuli (i.e. letters) as similar cortical regions are
accessed. The current experiment was designed to test whether this
advantage is found to the extent that such tasks engage overlapping brain
areas by presenting stimuli that do no typically employ processing from
similar regions (i.e. letters and pictures). Participants were presented
with five items per trial in three conditions: (1) three-item letter comparison task (single primary), (2) two-item picture comparison task (single
secondary), and (3) three- or two-item comparison task (dual-task).
Observers were asked to indicate whether two letters projected to the
same/opposite hemisphere(s) matched or whether two pictures projected to both hemispheres matched. The critical comparison involved trials on which the two matching stimuli project to the same visual field
(within-hemisphere trials) versus trials on which the two matching stimuli project to opposite visual fields (between-hemisphere trials). Reaction
time showed no differences as a function of trial type for single primary
and dual primary conditions while error rate revealed a significant
across-hemisphere advantage for both conditions. In light of the previously reported across-hemisphere advantage found for the all letter
experiment, reaction time alone suggests that it is beneficial to divide
processing load under the condition that two tasks access overlapping
cortical regions.
G17
CHANGES IN NEURAL RESPONSE TO FEEDBACK GIVEN IN
EARLY VERSUS LATE STAGES OF LEARNING Catherine Poulsen1,
Phan Luu1,2, Don M. Tucker1,2, Chelsea Mattson1,2, Anne Smith3; 1Electrical
Geodesics, Inc., 2University of Oregon, 3University of California, Davis — Learning frequently progresses through trial and error, where knowledge of
action outcome through feedback guides subsequent performance. Based
on result patterns consistent with reward prediction studies in animals,
recent human brain imaging studies have postulated mediation by the
mesolimbic dopamine (DA) system. Dense-array (256-channel) electroencephalography (EEG) was recorded as participants acquired, solely
through trial and error guided by immediate feedback, 16 different arbitrary stimulus-response (S-R) mappings (e.g., ‘27’ paired with left index
finger button press) using a Go-NoGo paradigm. As assessed with Bayesian state-space analysis, mappings were typically acquired within the
first session. Extended practice was provided in a second and third session. In a fourth session new S-R mappings were introduced to distinguish activity associated with the acquisition of specific S-R mappings
versus learning of global task parameters. Hypotheses related to feedback processing were examined in scalp and distributed linear-inverse
source analyses. In line with the DA-mediation hypothesis, early in learning a second P2 peak (P2a) obtained to correct feedback (‘unexpected
reward’) that was coincident with the time of the feedback-related negativity to error feedback. This early correct-feedback effect disappeared
with extended practice sessions 2 and 3 (now an ‘expected reward’), but
returned in session 4 when new S-R mappings were introduced. In addition, in line with neurocognitive and animal research on early versus late
stages of learning, extended practice was associated with a progressive
decrease in frontal ventrolimbic activity (feedback-related negativity and
left lateral inferior anterior negativity), and a progressive increase in posterior dorsolimbic activity (P3).

Poster Session G

G18
AN INVESTIGATION OF THE NEURAL SUBSTRATES FOR
AGENTIC VERSUS CONCEPTUAL REPRESENTATIONS OF
SELF Lindsey J. Powell1, C. Neil Macrae2, Jasmin Cloutier3, Janet Metcalfe4,
Jason P. Mitchell1; 1Harvard University, 2University of Aberdeen, 3Dartmouth
College, 4Columbia University — One longstanding question regarding the
human experience of a coherent sense of self has been whether "the self"
is best considered as a unified cognitive system or as the result of multiple sets of mental processes, each subserving some distinct form of information processing. We used fMRI to address this question by examining
two tasks that draw on different aspects of the self, yet have a similar
influence on cognitive processing: enhanced explicit memory for stimuli
processed in relation to the self. The first was a standard self-referential
processing task during which participants judged how well trait adjectives described either themselves or a familiar other. Replicating previous
work, self-referential trials elicited greater medial prefrontal cortex
(MPFC) activity than trials that involved judging words in reference to
the other. In the second task, participants took turns with a computer
selecting cards out of a deck. Each selected card subsequently revealed a
trait adjective. Participants demonstrated better memory for selected
words (self-selected) than words randomly chosen by the computer
(computer-selected). More importantly, self-selected trials elicited greater
activity in a network of regions previously implicated in the representation of goals, including bilateral inferior parietal sulcus (IPS) and right
middle frontal gyrus. Interestingly, activity in the MPFC did not distinguish between self- and computer-selected trials. Together, these findings
suggest that the advantages of self-relevant processing are the product of
several distinct cognitive systems, thus supporting a distributed model of
the self.
G19
MEN CUT THE GRASS AND WOMEN SPREAD GOSSIP: THE
NEURAL CORRELATES OF GENDER STEREOTYPING Susanne
Quadflieg1, David J. Turk1, Gordon D. Waiter1, Jason P. Mitchell2, Adrianna
Jenkins2, C. Neil Macrae1; 1School of Psychology, University of Aberdeen, UK,
2Harvard University — Stereotypic beliefs profoundly shape human social
interactions because they offer alleged insights into the thoughts, beliefs
and actions of others. Given the pivotal status of stereotypical thinking in
everyday life, the current study explored the neural correlates of gender
stereotyping using fMRI. Twenty participants were asked to make either
a gender or location inference about a variety of activities (e.g., to cut the
grass, to bake a cake, to take photos). The dorsal medial prefrontal cortex
(MPFC) and the right temporo-parietal junction (RTPJ) showed stronger
activation during stereotypic judgments compared to location judgments.
Additionally, gender-stereotypic trials relative to gender-neutral trials
recruited a network including the ventral MPFC, the bilateral amygdala,
the right middle temporal gyrus (MTG), the right supramarginal gyrus,
the right putamen, the left precuneus, and the midbrain. Correlational
analyses revealed that activity in the MTG and the left amygdala was
modulated by a person’s implicit and explicit stereotypic beliefs. These
results reveal that stereotypic thinking recruits brain areas which have
previously been associated with both mentalizing about others (MPFC,
RTPJ, Precuneus) and evaluative processing (amygdala, putamen, midbrain), thereby suggesting that the cognitive and evaluative components
of stereotyping may be dissociable. These findings advance our current
understanding of the neural correlates of social-cognitive functioning.
G20
THE BRAIN RESPONSE TO THEORY OF MIND GENERALIZES
ACROSS ITEMS AND MODALITIES Andrea Quintero1,2, Jonathan
Scholz2, Marina Bedny3, Rebecca Saxe2; 1Northeastern University,
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 3Beth Isreal Deaconess Medical
Center — Humans possess the cognitive capacity to reason about the contents of other peoples’ minds (“theory of mind”, ToM). Thinking about
people’s beliefs, goals and desires engages a network of cortical regions
including: the temporo-parietal junction bilaterally, precuneus and the

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

medial prefrontal cortex. In this study, we sought to further characterize
the functional response in these regions. In experiment 1, we tested
whether brain regions involved in ToM generalize across stimulus
modality. We found that all ToM regions were recruited for both visually- and aurally- presented stories about a character's beliefs, suggesting
that it is the abstract meaning of the stimuli, rather than any low-level
stimulus feature, that is responsible for the observed activation. In experiment 2, we tested whether the brain response to false beliefs reflected the
initial encoding of the belief or the use of this information when answering a question about beliefs. In all ToM regions, the response was determined by the content of the initial story; there was no effect of whether
the question probed the belief or the reality. In experiment 3, we investigated whether the response in ToM regions generalizes from the specific
stimuli used in the experiment to the category of belief stories, using an
item analysis. Activity in all previously identified ToM regions was generalizable to the category. We conclude that the brain regions thought to
mediate the cognitive capacity for ToM are involved in the initial encoding of the abstract feature of belief content, generalized across stimulus
modalities and items.
G21
REWARD-INDUCED BIAS DURING PERCEPTUAL DECISIONMAKING Aurora Isabel Ramos1, Shruti Japee1, Sean Marrett1, Leslie G.
Ungerleider1; 1NIMH, NIH, Bethesda — Studies suggest that higher-level
cortical areas may compute perceptual decisions by comparing outputs
of different pools of selectively tuned lower-level sensory neurons. To
understand how reward may influence the computation of a decision, we
measured performance and fMRI responses while subjects performed a
face-house categorization task involving noise-degraded stimuli and
multiple levels of monetary reward. Nine subjects participated in a
behavioral study and eight in an fMRI study. Four noise levels: 46%, 54%,
56% and 58% and three reward levels: no reward, higher reward for face
than house, or higher reward for house than face were used. On each
trial, prior to stimulus presentation, subjects were cued to the level of
reward for a correct response on the upcoming trial. Behavioral data
showed that subjects shifted their decision criterion (as measured by signal detection theory) towards the more profitable response choice, especially at higher noise levels. Preliminary fMRI data showed that relative
to a no reward cue, a cue indicating higher reward for face elicited a
greater response in fusiform gyrus, while a cue indicating a higher
reward for house elicited a greater response in parahippocampal gyrus.
These results indicate that incentive in the form of a monetary reward
biases decision-making, and anticipation of this reward enhances activity
in category-specific brain areas during cue processing. Future studies will
focus on how reward affects stimulus processing and how decision-making areas combine sensory evidence and reward value to compute decisions.
G22
SOCIAL COGNITIVE NEURAL NETWORKS DURING IN-GROUP
AND OUT-GROUP INTERACTIONS James K. Rilling1,2, Julien E.
Dagenais1, David R. Goldsmith1, Andrea L. Glenn1, Giuseppe Pagnoni1;
1Emory University, 2Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory
University — Several functionally connected networks of activity have
now been identified in the resting human brain that may be amplified or
attenuated by specific goal-directed tasks. However, it is not known
whether there exists a particular network that becomes more active when
a person is engaged in a social interaction. fMRI was used to measure
brain activity in subjects as they completed a social interactive task and a
non-social control task sharing many of the same features. Comparison
across the two tasks revealed a network of functionally connected areas
that was consistently more active in the social task. This network
included default mode network areas, raising the possibility that activity
previously observed in default mode regions is related to social cognition. Within this network, information appears to flow from regions
involved in salience detection (e.g. anterior insula) to regions involved in

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

209

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

mentalizing (dorsomedial prefrontal cortex) to regions involved in executive control (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex). In a second experiment, subjects played the same social interactive task with alleged members of both
an experimentally induced in-group and out-group. The default mode
network was again active during the task, and several noteworthy differences distinguished interactions with in-group and out-group partners,
providing a potential neural substrate for the human tendency to more
readily identify with in-group members and more readily distrust, fear
and discriminate against out-group members. Supported by NSF grant
BCS-0446825.
G23
COGNITIVE
AND
AFFECTIVE
HUMOR
PROCESSING:
DIFFERENT
LOGICAL
MECHANISMS
IN
NONVERBAL
CARTOONS Andrea Samson1, Stefan Zysset2,3, Oswald Huber1;
1University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland, 2Max-Planck-Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, Leipzig, Germany, 3NordicNeuroLab, Bergen,
Norway — This study investigates cognitive and affective humor processing. In order to investigate pure incongruity resolution without precedent processing steps, such as incongruity detection, nonverbal cartoons
differing in their logical mechanisms were contrasted with unfunny pictures containing an irresolvable incongruity. Further, cartoons that differ
regarding their logical mechanisms, i.e. how to resolve the incongruity in
order to understand the punch line, shall be investigated. The three types
of cartoons are: (1) visual puns (based on visual resemblance, PUNs); (2)
semantic cartoons (based on pure semantic relationships, SEMs); and (3)
Theory of Mind cartoons (which require additionally mentalizing abilities, TOMs). Thirty cartoons from each condition were presented to 17
healthy subjects while acquiring fMR images. The results reveal a leftsided network involved in pure incongruity resolution: e.g., temporoparietal junction, inferior frontal gyrus and ventromedian prefrontal cortex. These areas are also involved in processing of SEMs, whereas PUNs
show more activation in the extrastriate cortex and TOMs show more
activation in so called mentalizing areas. We conclude that cognitive processing of different logical mechanisms depends on separate neural networks. Processing of pictures containing an irresolvable incongruity
evokes activation in the rostral cingulate zone, which might reflect error
processing.
G24
REASONING ABOUT BELIEFS IN BLIND AND SIGHTED: A
MODALITY-INDEPENDENT NEURAL SUBSTRATE OF THEORY
OF MIND. Rebecca Saxe1, Marina Bedny1,2, Jonathan Scholz1, Alvaro
Pascual-Leone2; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School — By age 4 children can reason
about beliefs. Are the cognitive and neural mechanisms that underlie this
ability influenced by early sensory experience? To address this question,
we compared belief reasoning in early blind (EB), late blind (LB) and
sighted adults, using fMRI. In Experiment 1 participants listened to stories about mental versus physical (e.g. photographic) representations of
reality. We found that the neural network involved in thinking about
beliefs is largely unaffected by early blindness, with two exceptions: (1)
the right-lateralization of this network was reduced in EB participants,
and (2) a region in the right fusiform gyrus was selective for belief reasoning in EB but not sighted or LB individuals. In Experiment 2, we compared the response of regions in this network, when the same
participants reasoned about a character’s experience of seeing versus
hearing. If we reason about mental states by simulating other people’s
specific experiences, early blindness should selectively affect reasoning
about others’ experiences of seeing. Alternatively, children may develop
a naïve theory of mind (ToM) that includes concepts of mental states they
have never directly experienced. When reasoning about seeing experiences, EB participants’ performance and neural responses were similar to
those of sighted participants. We conclude that people rely on a naïve
ToM to reason about the beliefs of others and that the neural network that
supports ToM is resilient to gross changes in sensory experience.

210

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

G25
THE EVOLUTION OF DELIBERATE COMMUNICATION Marleen
Schippers1, Valeria Gazzola1, Rainer Goebel2, Christian Keysers1; 1BCN
Neuroimaging Center, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, the Netherlands, 2Maastricht University, The Netherlands — In
the evolution of language, meaningful gestures probably played an
important role. To examine the neural basis of gestural communication
and the degree to which it involves the mirror neuron system (MNS), we
scanned 9 couples (18 subjects) not only while they gestured concepts to
each other through a video link (e.g. playing piano, hand cuffs), but also
while they were guessing the meaning of their partner’s gestures. An
additional 16 subjects were scanned during the observation and execution of goal-directed hand actions (e.g. grasping a glass) to determine the
location of the classical MNS for hand actions outside of the context of
communication. Gesturing and guessing concepts involved overlapping
fronto-parieto-temporal networks that seem virtually identical to the
MNS for goal directed hand actions. Interestingly, the classical Theory of
Mind areas were not recruited in these tasks. This supports the idea that
the mirror system may represent a pre-adaptation for deliberate communication. In order to discriminate deliberate communication from the
accidental observation of someone’s action, we compared runs in which
subjects had to guess the meaning of gestures with runs in which they
passively reviewed the same gestures. Contrary to our expectation, the
MNS was only marginally more involved in deliberate communication.
Regions of the default network however were substantially more deactivated during deliberate guessing. This sheds light on what makes communication intentional: it is more the shutting down of irrelevant
processes, than the boosting of activity in the MNS.
G26
DISTINCT REGIONS OF RIGHT TEMPORO-PARIETAL JUNCTION
ARE SELECTIVE FOR THEORY OF MIND AND EXOGENOUS
ATTENTION Jonathan Scholz1, Christina Triantafyllou1, Susan WhitfieldGabrieli1, Emery Brown1, Rebecca Saxe1; 1MIT — In functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) studies, a cortical region in the right temporoparietal junction (RTPJ) is recruited when participants read stories about
people’s thoughts (‘Theory of Mind’) (Saxe and Kanwisher 2003, Perner
et al 2006, Gobbini et al 2007) Both fMRI and lesion studies suggest that a
region near the RTPJ is associated with attentional reorienting in
response to an unexpected stimulus (Corbetta et al 2002, Downar et al
2001, Vallar and Perani 1987, Vallar 1993). Do Theory of Mind and attentional reorienting recruit a single population of neurons, or are there two
neighbouring but distinct neural populations in the RTPJ? A recent study
directly compared these activations (Mitchell 2007), and found evidence
consistent with a single common region. However, the apparent overlap
may have been due to partial voluming in low resolution data. A recent
meta-analysis suggested that the two regions are separated by approximately 10 mm (Decety and Lamm 2007). We sought to verify the result
using a high-resolution protocol, within-subjects analyses, and more
powerful statistical inferences. Strict conjunction analyses revealed that
the area of overlap was small and on the periphery of each activation. In
addition, a bootstrap analysis identified a reliable 6-10mm spatial displacement between the peak activations of the two tasks; the same magnitude and direction of displacement was observed in within-subjects
comparisons. In all, these results suggest that there are neighboring but
distinct regions within the RTPJ implicated in theory of mind and exogenous attentional reorienting.
G27
PROCEDURAL LEARNING AND SEQUENTIAL CONTROL OF
BEHAVIOR IN A NEURAL NETWORK MODEL OF THE BASAL
GANGLIA Andrea Stocco1, Christian Lebiere1, John Anderson1; 1Carnegie
Mellon University — The basal ganglia (BG) play a pivotal role in action
selection, reinforcement learning, and working memory. Here, we
present a connectionist model that explores the more general hypothesis
that the BG implements a conditional information re-routing circuit,

Poster Session G

where cortical signals are gated and subsequently relayed onto different
pathways projecting to the prefrontal cortex. In the model, distributed
representations in cortical areas are copied onto separate compartments
in the striatum. Striatal interneurons with continuous activation functions match patterns across the cortical inputs, and eventually gate a
selection of them to output matrisomes. Two branches of the direct pathway (projecting to the substantia nigra and the ventral pallidus) transfer
the gated representation and a topological representation of their destination, respectively. Projections from these nuclei to the thalamus determine how different patterns are switched to different loops. The indirect
pathway through the lateral pallidus provides a transient memory of the
previous action, and maintains tonic activity on the direct pathway. The
model accounts for the anatomy of the BG circuit and mimics signature
disorders when appropriately damaged, as well as the subsequent effects
of two common surgical interventions (pallidotomy and deep brain stimulation). Hebbian learning among striatal units, fostered by dopamine
projections, enables the model to develop internal representations of cortical inputs, eventually leading to the development of automatic procedures. Finally, it is shown that the model’s cycles correspond to variable
binding and action execution within production systems, providing a
biological basis for the robust execution of sequential behavior.
G28
ME, MYSELF AND I: THE EFFECTS OF SELF IN SOCIAL
COGNITION. Kim van Bussel1, Dave Turk1, Neil Macrae1; 1University of
Aberdeen — Numerous studies have shown that information encoded in
relation to self is better remembered than information encoded in relation
to others. This is referred to as the self-reference effect (SRE). To date, SRE
research has tended to focus on explicit encoding paradigms where participants are asked to judge whether a trait adjective describes self or a
familiar other person (e.g. Am I happy?). These findings have led to
claims that the self is a special cognitive entity (Rogers et al., 1977) supported by a distinct neural architecture (Kelley et al., 2002). However,
centuries of deliberation and theorizing about the self and its cognitive
function suggest that this construct guides cognition in a less explicit,
unobtrusive manner (James, 1890; Neisser, 1988). We therefore explored
the SRE in memory for items that were incidentally associated with self
and an other. In this fMRI-experiment, participants sorted pictures of
shopping items into baskets that were either their own or someone else’s.
Afterwards, memory was assessed in a surprise recognition test. The
results showed that items sorted into one’s own basket are better remembered than items assigned to someone else’s basket. This demonstrates
that even under less explicit encoding conditions the SRE persists. fMRIresults showed greater activation in the insular cortices and bilaterally in
the parietal cortex for owned items compared to not-owned items, suggesting an emotional and attentional component underlying the SRE.
G29
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF SELF- AND OTHER
PERSPECTIVES IN THE TRUST GAME Wouter van den Bos1,2, Eric
van Dijk1, Michiel Westenberg1,2, Serge Rombouts1,2,3, Eveline Crone1,2;
1
Leiden University - Institute for Psychological Research, the Netherlands,
2Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition (LIBC), the Netherlands, 3Leiden
University Medical Center, the Netherlands — Economic decision-making
research has suggested that decisions which require perspective taking
recruit both medial PFC, thought to be important for mentalizing, and
lateral PFC, thought to be important for future orientation. In this study
we used fMRI with 22 healthy adults to examine neural mechanism of
self and other perspective taking in the Trust Game (TG). Prior behavioral studies have shown that the risk taken by the trustor and the benefit
received by the trustee influence the decisions made in the TG (van den
Bos et al., 2007; Malhotra 2004), indicating that participants take their
own as well as the other player’s perspective into account. To examine
these factors in more detail, participants performed multiple one shot
Trust Games in the role of trustee. Risk was manipulated by comparing
trials in which the trustor could lose much versus little money by trust-

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

ing, and benefit was manipulated by comparing trials in which the
trustee benefited much versus little by being trusted. Behavioral results
revealed that high risk trials and high benefit trials resulted in more
cooperation. For our fMRI analyses, we expect increased activation in
cognitive control areas (DLPFC) as well as perspective taking areas
(MPFC) for reciprocate versus defect decisions (Gallagher et al. 2002; Rilling et al. 2007) and for high risk and high benefit trials relative to low risk
and low benefit trials. We also expect that these effects are modulated
individual differences as measured by social value orientation scale and
the sensation seeking questionnaire.
G30
INTEGRATING INFORMATION IN REASONING: AN EEG
STUDY Jean-Baptiste Van der Henst1, Mathilde Bonnefond1; 1Laboratoire
Langage Cerveau et Cognition CNRS Université de Lyon — How do people
reason? Cognitive scientists commonly address this question by analysing factors that affect reasoning performance. However, most of the literature overlooks the integration dimension inherent to reasoning. In an
EEG study, we describe what happens when people combine two pieces
of information (two premises) in order to draw a conclusion. We investigate the integration of the second premise in the context of the first
premise and the integration of a conclusion in the context of a previously
drawn inference. Our stimuli involved arguments based on a major conditional premise (If P then Q), a minor premise (P) and a conclusion (Q).
When the minor premise can be integrated in the context of the major
premise to produce an inference (i.e. If P then Q; P) we observe a P3b and
other parietal positive components as well as a late slow negative wave
linked to working-memory processes. This profile is absent when P cannot yet be integrated (P; If P then Q). The P3b, is also present when the
conclusion matches the conclusion participants drew (If P then Q; P, Q).
When the minor premise does not match the antecedent of the major
premise (If P then Q; R) or when the conclusion does not match the conclusion drawn from the premises (If P then Q; P, T) we observe a N2 component linked to conflict detection. In conclusion, this study reveals not
only a specific integration profile but also a specific profile when integration is impossible.
G31
THE NEURAL BASIS OF SELF-INHIBITION IN THEORY OF MIND:
AN FMRI STUDY Lisette van der Meer1, Willem Nolen1, André Aleman1;
1University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, The
Netherlands — Previous research regarding the functional and neural
basis of perspective taking has demonstrated that both the prefrontal cortex and the temporo- parietal junction play a role in this so called Theory
of Mind (TOM) capacity. Recently, it has been suggested that this TOM
capacity should be subdivided into two perspective taking components:
(1) self-perspective inhibition and (2) other-perspective taking (Samson et
al., 2005, Brain, 128, 1102-1111).). In this study, we tested this hypothesis
using functional MRI. The task consisted of short movie clips developed
by Samson et al. (2005) differing in demands regarding self-perspective
inhibition and other-perspective taking. Conditions with a similar
demand in other-perspective taking, but a differing demand in self-perspective inhibition were compared. The Results revealed activation of the
right inferior prefrontal cortex for self-perspective taking. This novel
finding is consistent with the evidence from the patient described by
Samson et al. (2005). In addition, activation of the temporo-parietal junction was found when conditions similar in other-perspective taking
demands were compared to a baseline condition. These results provide
neurobiological evidence for a subdivision of the TOM capacity into two
components. The self-perspective inhibition component is associated
with the right inferior prefrontal cortex, whereas the other-perspective
taking component is mediated by the temporo-parietal junction.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

211

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

G32
COGNITIVE DISSONANCE ENGAGES ANTERIOR CINGULATE
CONFLICT MONITORING Vincent van Veen1,2, Marie K. Krug2,
Jonathan W. Schooler3, Cameron S. Carter2; 1University of California, Berkeley,
2University of California, Davis, 3University of British Columbia,
Vancouver — When people’s actions conflict with their prior attitudes,
they adjust their attitudes to be more consistent with their actions, a phenomenon known as cognitive dissonance. In the present study, participants were scanned using functional MRI, while they “argued” that the
uncomfortable scanner environment was nevertheless a pleasant experience. This cognitive dissonance engaged the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC); ACC activation tightly predicted participants’ subsequent
attitude change. Neither of these effects were observed in a control group
who received payment for their “argument”, a manipultation thought
not to elicit dissonance. Our findings elucidate the neural representation
of cognitive dissonance, and support the ACC’s role in detecting cognitive conflict.
G33
IS THE BOOK OPEN OR CLOSED? HEMISPHERIC PROCESSING
OF IMPLIED PERCEPTUAL INFORMATION DURING TEXT
COMPREHENSION Sandra Virtue1, Brian Sundermeier2; 1DePaul
University, 2Williams College — Recent studies have found that people
imagine the perceptual characteristics of what they read during comprehension (Zwaan, Stanfield, & Yaxley, 2002). However, little is currently
known about how this information is processed in the left and right
hemispheres. In the current study, subjects read sentences describing an
animal or object in a certain shape (e.g., "There was a book on the shelf."
or "There was a book on the photocopier."). Each sentence was followed
by a picture of an object (e.g., a closed book) presented to either the left
visual field-right hemisphere (lvf-RH) or the right visual field- left hemisphere (rvf-LH). The object either matched the shape implied in the preceding sentence or did not match the shape implied by the preceding
sentence. Subjects then made a speeded response as to whether or not the
object was mentioned in the previous sentence. Results from our study
suggest that the right hemisphere, but not the left hemisphere, is sensitive
to a mismatch between the implied, perceptual property in the text and
the visual depiction of the object. Therefore, the right hemisphere may
take advantage of our action based knowledge in helping to construct
meaning from a text.
G34
IMPLICIT ACTIVATION OF THEORY OF MIND AMONG HIGH
EMPATHIZERS Dylan David Wagner1, William M. Kelley1, Todd F.
Heatherton1; 1Dartmouth College — High empathizers report being good at
understanding the emotional and mental states of others. Of interest is
the degree to which this social orientation translates into motivation to
engage in perspective taking, particularly in the absence of explicit mentalizing task demands. In the present study, fifty male participants (25
high and 25 low empathizers) were told that they would be performing a
simple categorization task. No reference to the social nature of the task,
nor to mentalizing were made. Participants were scanned using eventrelated fMRI while they categorized a series of natural scenes as either
animal, vegetable or mineral. Critically, the animal category comprised
both scenes of people and scenes of animals. Brain regions commonly
implicated in mentalizing tasks (mPFC, TPJ, precuneus, temporal poles,
STS) demonstrated greater activity to scenes of people, than to scenes of
animals, vegetables or minerals. Furthermore, a comparison between
high and low empathizers revealed greater activity in a small network of
regions including the dorsal MPFC and bilateral STS. These results reveal
that, in the absence of explicit task demands, those high in empathizing
ability exhibit greater activity in areas involved in theory of mind when
presented with stimuli rich in social content.

212

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

G35
NEUROANATOMY OF DECISION MAKING ABOUT EVERYDAY
OBJECTS John Wang1, Julie Hall1, Stephanie Preston1; 1University of
Michigan — People make countless decisions about objects, ranging from
mundane decisions on whether to keep plastic bags to major decisions
about which home to purchase. Despite the significant effects such
choices have on our lives, little is known about the cognitive and neural
processes involved. We investigated the neural bases of acquiring and
discarding everyday objects in a block-design fMRI study where subjects
chose between two everyday household objects on each trial. In a 2x2
design, subjects either selected the object they wanted to acquire or
removed the item they wanted to discard, and made each type of selection (acquire or discard) in the instructed frame of either maximizing
monetary profit or their own personal preference. There was great overlap in the neural substrates associated with acquiring and discarding
objects, but there were also regions particularly associated with each process. This suggests that acquiring and discarding are not equivalent, even
when they produce equivalent outcomes. Choices based on personal
preference differed from decisions to maximize profit as they were made
in less time, involved selection of inexpensive objects over costlier ones,
and activated different neural regions. These effects support more psychological models of decision making, which emphasize the effects of
framing and the subjective nature of utility, in contrast to neoclassical
economic models. This is the first neuroimaging study to investigate the
ubiquitous decision-making process about acquiring and discarding
everyday items, which informs our basic understanding of decision processes, clinical disorders of hoarding, and contemporary issues associated with consumerism.
G36
EMBODIED ACTION UNDERSTANDING IN THE MOTOR
SYSTEM: EVIDENCE FROM LEFT- AND RIGHT-HANDERS Roel
M. Willems1, Asl Özyürek1,2, Floris P. de Lange1, Peter Hagoort1,2; 1F. C.
Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Radboud University Nijmegen,
The Netherlands, 2Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands — What is the role of our own motor system in understanding the actions of others? Neural simulation theory states that an
observed action is implicitly simulated, using the observer’s own motor
system. Indeed, empirical findings show that the specific make-up of an
observer’s motor system influences neural correlates of action understanding. However, in the understanding of common everyday activities,
too strong a coupling between motor production and action understanding might be detrimental. Rather, in such cases action meaning may be
abstracted away from an individual’s motor practice. Here we used
handedness to critically test the nature of cortical motor activation in
understanding common actions. Neural networks involved in understanding pantomimic depictions of everyday activities were measured
(using fMRI) in left- and right-handers. Our results show that although
parts of the cortical motor system are involved in gleaning meaning from
actions, its activation is not influenced by the observer’s hand preference.
Put differently, observers did not map the observed activation onto their
own motor production preference. This is in contradiction to the strong
coupling between motor production and action understanding predicted
by a strong version of neural simulation theory. Embodied cognition - of
which neural simulation can be regarded an instantiation - does allow for
a flexible relationship between an individual’s motor system and the neural processing of action meaning. We conclude that action understanding
involves our own motor system, but not necessarily in the form of a oneto-one mapping between motor production repertoire and neural correlates of action observation.
G37
DISRUPTING
NEURAL
MECHANISMS
FOR
BELIEF
ATTRIBUTION IMPAIRS MORAL JUDGMENT Liane Young1,2, Joan
Camprodon3, Marc Hauser1, Alvaro Pascual-Leone3, Rebecca Saxe2; 1Harvard
University, 2Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 3Berenson-Allen Center for

Poster Session G

Noninvasive Brain Stimulation, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and
Harvard Medical School — In judging the moral permissibility of an action,
human observers try to read the actor’s mind, often weighing beliefs,
desires and intentions more than the action’s consequences. The standard
test for criminal liability, likewise, states “the act does not make the person guilty unless the mind is also guilty.” Reasoning about mental states
such as beliefs (“theory of mind”) is correlated with activity in the right
temporo-parietal junction (RTPJ). Here we show that disruption of RTPJ
function by image-guided transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) introduces a systematic bias in healthy adults’ moral judgments, reducing the
influence of beliefs, relative to TMS to a nearby control region. Accidental
harms were judged more forbidden, and failed attempts to harm were
judged more permissible; moral judgments of intentional harms and nonharms were unimpaired. These results reveal a causal role for the RTPJ in
theory of mind and for theory of mind in moral judgment.
G38
THE EFFECTS OF CONVERSATION DURATION AND
COMPLEXITY ON VISUAL DETECTION DURING SIMULATED
DRIVING Richard Young1, Li Hsieh2, Sean Seaman2; 1School of Medicine,
Wayne State University, 2Wayne State University — We present an investigation into the effects of cellular phone conversations on driving performance. Simulated cellular phone conversations took place between a
subject in a simulated driving environment and an experimenter located
outside of the testing booth. Conversations were initiated by the subject
using a voice-activated-like dialing system and the experimenter
“answered” the call. Several call durations were used, and two complexity levels were controlled by the experimenter: low complexity, which
consisted of simple personal or biographical questions and high complexity, which consisted of procedural questions. 17 subjects participated in
this study. RT results showed that conversations took slightly longer RT
in a validated event-detection paradigm, respectively, relative to no conversation control blocks during the simulated driving task. However, the
conversation effect on RT is less than the impact of a single button press
on RT. Notably, these events occurred during silent periods, and button
press timing was at the discretion of the subjects. For accuracy, low complexity conversations showed a similar event detection miss rate to the no
conversation condition. Interestingly, high complexity conversations
were associated with a significant increase in miss rate when compared to
the baseline block. Overall, our study found the effect of voice-activated
cellular conversation on visual event detection during driving. Furthermore, this study investigated factors that might moderate this effect –
conversation duration and content – and showed that content, not duration, may have a minor influence on the effect of conversation on driving
event detection accuracy. Implications for theories of attention and multitasking are discussed.
G39
THE STRUCTURE OF POLITICAL BELIEFS AND ITS NEURAL
CORRELATES Giovanna Zamboni1,2, Marta Gozzi1,3, Frank Krueger1,
Jean-Rene Duhamel4, Angela Sirigu4, Jordan Grafman1; 1Cognitive
Neuroscience Section, NINDS, NIH, Bethesda, 2Universita’ di Modena e Reggio
Emilia, Modena, Italy, 3Università di Milano Bicocca, Milano, Italy, 4Centre de
Neuroscience Cognitive, CNRS, Bron, France — Politics refers to the
uniquely human ability to cooperate and debate in order to make decision affecting large groups over long durations of time. Recent neuroimaging studies have investigated the neural correlates of faces, names or
declarations of well-known politicians. However, the one-dimensional
liberal-to-conservative interpretation of political attitudes has been criticized. Therefore, we used multidimensional scaling (MDS) to derive a
number of dimension structuring political beliefs, and parametric functional MRI to identify their neural correlates. In the behavioral pre-study,
MDS was applied to similarity judgments between pairs of political statements obtained by 24 participants. In the fMRI experiment, other 26 subjects were presented with the same political statements and asked
whether they agreed (experimental condition), or whether the statement

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

was written in a certain font (control condition). Three dimensions were
obtained in the MDS and labeled as conservatism, reflecting the ideological dimension, individualism, reflecting whether the statement was individual or society-centered, and radicalism, reflecting whether the
statement was moderate or radical (either liberal-radical or conservativeradical). Conservatism correlated with activation in the right dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex. Individualism positively correlated with activation in
the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and negatively correlated with activation in dorsomedial prefrontal cortex and left temporo-parietal junction.
Radicalism positively correlated with anteroventral striatum and negatively correlated with precuneus. These findings lend strong support for
the hypothesis of anatomically separable dimension-specific representations of the organizational structure of political beliefs.
G40
SELF-CONSTRUAL
PRIMING
MODULATES
FUSIFORM
RESPONSE DURING IMPLICIT SELF PROCESSING Li
Zhang1,
1
1
1
Harada Tokiko , Joan Chiao ; Northwestern University — Individualism
(IND) and collectivism (COL) refer to two main styles of self construal
across cultures (Markus & Kitayama, 1991). Prior behavioral research has
shown that priming self-construal style can temporarily orient bicultural
individuals more towards one kind of self-construal relative to another
(Oyserman & Lee, 2007). Activity within the right fusiform gyrus has
been previously shown to be modulated by perceptual priming (Slotnick
& Schacter, 2006). Here we examined whether self-construal priming
modulates right fusiform activity during implicit processing of self-relevant information using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) at
3T. During self-construal priming, outside of the scanner, Asian-American participants read essays containing either IND (i.e., “I”) or COL (i.e.,
“We”) pronouns. Participants were then scanned while judging the spatial location of autobiographical word phases (i.e., home address, telephone number) relevant to the self, their father or an unfamiliar person.
Preliminary behavioral results suggest that participants respond fastest
to self information after IND priming and slowest to self information
after COL priming. Whole-brain analyses demonstrate a network of brain
regions recruited during implicit processing of self-relevant information,
including the left posterior cingulate gyrus, left lingual gyrus, bilateral
parahippocampal gyrus and right fusiform gyrus. Furthermore, preliminary ROI analyses suggest modulation of activity within the right fusiform gyrus as a function of self-construal priming. Our results suggest
that implicit processing of self-relevant information activates a distinct
neural network within occipitotemporal cortex and that neural activity
particularly within the right fusiform gyrus may be modulated by selfconstrual priming in bicultural individuals.

Linguistic processes: Semantics
G41
WHEN THE TRUTH ISN’T TOO HARD TO HANDLE: AN EVENTRELATED POTENTIALS STUDY ON THE PRAGMATICS OF
NEGATION. Mante Nieuwland1,2,3, Gina Kuperberg1,2,3; 1Tufts
University, 2MGH/MIT/HMS Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical
Imaging, 3Massachusetts General Hospital — Our brains are capable of rapidly integrating incoming language with world knowledge to establish
whether what is stated is consistent with what we hold to be true. Yet
there are claims of exceptions in which such integration and verification
processes are supposedly delayed. In particular, it is often reported that
sentences are harder to verify if they contain negation words like ‘not’ or
‘never’. However, most experimental studies have confounded whether a
sentence is true and whether it is a natural thing to say (e.g., “A robin is
not a tree”). In an event-related brain potentials (ERP) experiment, we
aimed to disentangle the effects of truth-value and pragmatic licensing on
the comprehension of sentences conveying affirmation and negation
statements. Our results suggest that true negative sentences are not more

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

213

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

difficult to comprehend than true affirmative sentences, but only when
the use of negation is pragmatically licensed.
G42
EFFECTS OF TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION ON
DIFFERENT STAGES OF MOTOR AND NON-MOTOR VERB
PROCESSING IN THE PRIMARY MOTOR CORTEX Liuba Papeo1,
Antonino Vallesi1, Alessio Isaja1, Raffaella Ida Rumiati1; 1Cognitive
Neuroscience Sector, SISSA, Trieste, Italy — The action-related language
modulation of the left primary motor cortex (M1) activity has been documented in behavioural, psycophysiological, neuroimaging and transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) studies. The issue that we address in this
TMS study is whether M1-activity is necessary for understanding actionrelated language, or it rather follows the lexical-semantic encoding, as a
consequence of the access to the motor meaning of words. Thus, we
investigated whether different linguistic tasks differentially affected M1activity, by recording TMS-induced motor-evoked potentials (MEPs)
from right-hand muscles while subjects explicitly accessed the word
meaning (by judging whether a verb was action-related) or they decided
on the number of syllables in the verb. Furthermore, to identify when
M1-activity enhances during word recognition, we manipulated the timing of TMS delivery. In three experiments, TMS was applied during the
two tasks at 170, 350 and 500 ms post-stimulus, consistently with eventrelated potential findings that distinguish between early, late lexicalsemantic, and post-conceptual processes. No TMS-modulation of MEPs
specific for action verbs was found when lexical-semantic processes presumably occurred (170 and 350 ms post-stimulus). At 500 ms post-stimulus, we found a greater M1-activity for action-verb semantically
processed, relative to non-action verbs and action-verbs syllabically processed, and no TMS-effect on linguistic performance. These findings suggest that action-verb understanding does not necessarily recruit the
motor programs of the corresponding physical actions. In contrast, we
suggest that M1-activity may contribute to post-conceptual and presumably extra-linguistic processes triggered by the activation of representations involving motor content.
G43
FMRI REVEALS INTERACTIONS BETWEEN PHONOLOGY AND
SEMANTICS IN AUDITORY LEXICAL PROCESSING Jonathan
Peelle1, Jamie Reilly2, Vanessa Troiani1, Murray Grossman1; 1University of
Pennsylvania, 2University of Florida — Models of spoken word recognition
assume the relationship between word form and meaning is completely
arbitrary. However, recent distributional evidence suggests that the phonological form of a word is statistically related to several levels of its
meaning. For example, abstract nouns tend to be longer and have fewer
similar sounding neighbors (i.e., more sparse phonological neighborhood
density) compared to concrete nouns (Reilly & Kean, 2007). We hypothesize that listeners use phonological clues about word structure and phonology to help determine the meaning of a word. In the current study we
used BOLD fMRI to examine the neural basis for the interaction of phonology and semantics in lexical processing. We measured neural activity
in healthy adults while participants performed an auditory lexical decision task on a set of stimuli that included 120 real words. These nouns
varied orthogonally in concreteness and phonological neighborhood density, including both concrete and abstract words. We examined effects of
concreteness and phonological neighborhood density by correlating values for individual items with each participants fMRI data, analyzing only
words which were correctly identified during the lexical decision task.
Main effects of concreteness and phonological neighborhood density
were found in regions comparable to those seen in previous studies.
Additionally, we were able to identify regions whose response was differentially modulated by the interaction of the two factors. We hypothesize that this modulation reflects facilitative effects of phonology on
semantic knowledge that can aid lexical processing.

214

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

G44
REVERSING
EXPECTATIONS
–
MEG
EVIDENCE
FOR
PROCESSING SEMANTIC PRESUPPOSITIONS David
Poeppel1,
Ming Xiang2, Ellen Lau1; 1University of Maryland, 2Harvard University — The
ERP/MEG literature has shown a robust semantic anomaly effect, such
that incongruent words in a context induce larger N400/M400 responses
compared to congruent words. However, since the manipulation of contextual plausibility is often correlated with lower-level lexical associations, it is difficult to determine whether the semantic anomaly effect
demonstrates higher-level semantic processing or lower-level lexical processes like spreading activation. The current study uses MEG to investigate a specifically higher-level semantic operation: presupposition. We
compare the response to a typical contextual plausibility pair [(1) Comic
books are funny… (2) Greek tragedies are funny..] with the response to a
pair in which the word even is added [(3) Even comic books are funny…
vs (4) Even Greek tragedies are funny] Even presupposes that there exist
alternatives to the event being presented, and asserts that the least likely
event is true (Karttunen & Peters 1979). Therefore, adding even to the
canonically standard (1) makes (3) pragmatically odd because of presupposition failure, and should make the original semantic anomaly more
acceptable in (4). There is little prior evidence bearing on the time course
of these higher-level semantic operations. Preliminary results (n=17)
show the standard semantic anomaly effect in (1) vs (2), with (2) showing
increased left-hemisphere RMS amplitude between 400-500ms, and
between 500-600ms in the right. However, when even was added, differences were only seen in the right hemisphere [(3) > (4) between 200400ms (p<.1)]. These results suggest very rapid higher-level semantic
processing and potentially different roles of the two hemispheres.
G45
HEALTHY SUBJECTS MORE PRONE TO DELUSION DISPLAY
REDUCED N400S AFTER PARANOID-LIKE INDUCTION. Marie
Prévost1,2, Louis Renoult1,2, Mathieu Brodeur1,2, Claire Lionnet2, Suzanne
King11,2, J. Bruno Debruille1,2; 1McGill University, 2Douglas Mental Health
University Institute — Schizophrenia patients that are highly delusional
produce smaller N400 event-related potentials than less delusional
patients, suggesting a deficit in semantic processes (Debruille et al., 2007;
Kiang et al, 2007). In healthy subjects no reduction of the N400 potential
was found in those with a trend toward delusion relative to those without such trend, showing that these subjects do not share the same deficit
as delusional patients (Prévost et al., in preparation). In the present study,
we tested whether an attempt at inducing paranoid-like feeling in
healthy subjects would induce an N400 reduction similar to that found in
patients. Delusion proneness was assessed using the schizotypal personality questionnaire (Raine, 1991). The informed consent form was
adapted to induce paranoid feelings. After having filled a paranoid evaluation questionnaire, the 34 subjects completed the same semantic
matching task as that used in our previous study with healthy subjects.
Prime-target trials were used where the prime word, ‘ANIMAL?’ was followed either by an animal name (e. g., dog) or by a name of a ‘thing’ (e.
g., table). We found N400 amplitudes varied with proneness to delusion:
the greater this proneness the less negative the ERPs in the N400 time
window. Therefore, it seems that paranoid-like inductions may weaken
semantic integration processes in subjects more prone to delusions. If
repeatedly confronted to potentially threatening situations, these type of
subjects might thus develop a deficit at integrating information that contradicts their expectancies. Therefore, they could keep their delusional
ideas and, later, form a full-blown delusion.
G46
DOES CONCEPTUAL STRUCTURE MODULATE NEURAL
ACTIVITY DURING SPOKEN WORD PROCESSING? Billi Randall1,
Kirsten I. Taylor1, Michael Ford1, Barry Devereux1, Lorraine K. Tyler1;
1University of Cambridge — How are the meanings of concrete objects neurally represented and processed? The Conceptual Structure Account
claims that concepts are represented in a distributed system of concept

Poster Session G

features, and their statistical properties (e.g., the degree to which features
are distinctive or shared or co-occur with another feature) determine conceptual representation and processing. We tested the neural implications
of these claims by determining whether conceptual structure variables
modulate functional brain activity associated with spoken word comprehension. Volunteers underwent sparse event-related fMRI imaging while
making lexical decisions to concrete words and nonwords, and high/low
tone decisions in a baseline task. A principal components analysis of psycholinguistic variables and conceptual structure variables produced nine
orthogonalised principal components (duration, phonological, lexical,
cohort size, imageability, feature production frequency, co-occurrence,
distinctiveness, sharedness) modeled as parametric modulators of the
words. Lexical decisions to words compared to the baseline task generated activity in the language network (left-lateralised middle and superior temporal gyri, left inferior frontal gyrus). Critically, conceptual
structure variables significantly modulated functional activity: (a) concepts with fewer correlated features produced greater activity in left language and attentional (anterior cingulate)/middle frontal gyrus)
networks reflecting greater processing required to activate concepts with
few mutually co-activating features, (b) concepts with many distinctive
features produced greater bilateral frontal activity suggesting the
involvement of selectional mechanisms, (c) concepts with many shared
features produced greater attentional network activity reflecting a greater
difficulty differentiating between multiple activated concepts. These
findings demonstrate that conceptual structure determines the representation and processing of concepts in the brain.
G47
EFFECTS OF SEMANTIC PRIMING AND OF SEMANTIC
CATEGORY ON REACTION TIME AND N400 THAT RESIST TO
NUMEROUS REPETITIONS Louis Renoult1,2, Bruno Debruille1,2;
1Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Montréal, Québec, Canada,
2
McGill University, Montréal — The N400 event-related potential (ERP) is
a brain response to any potentially meaningful stimuli. Like the times
taken to respond to meaningful stimuli (RTs), the amplitude of the N400
is reduced by stimulus repetition. It seems to reach a floor after several
presentations. Meanwhile, RTs and N400 amplitudes are also lowered by
the prior presentation of a semantically related stimulus compared to an
unrelated stimulus. Results of a few studies suggest that this semantic
priming effect on N400 could be reduced by repetition and rapidly disappear with further presentations. On the other hand, the topography of the
N400 on the scalp depends on the semantic category of the stimulus and
this effect also seems to be smaller when stimuli are repeated. Taken
together, these data suggest that the semantic processes indexed by the
N400 could be absent in conditions of multiple repetitions. Here, we
show that this conclusion would be premature. ERPs were recorded from
27 subjects in two versions of a semantic categorization task. In the first
version, two category words were used as primes and numerous nonrepeated exemplars of these categories as targets. In the second version,
the primes were the numerous non-repeated category exemplars and the
target words, to which N400s were recorded, were simply the two category words, each presented 60 times in the experiment. Results showed
that effects of semantic priming and of semantic category on RTs and
N400s in high repetition conditions were significant and similar to those
obtained with only one presentation.
G48
CATEGORICAL PERCEPTION OF SPEECH: BEHAVIOURAL AND
NEURAL EVIDENCE. Jack Rogers1, Matthew Davis1; 1MRC Cognition
and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge — We explore the effect of within and
between category phonological variations on speech perception. Using
audio-morphing and “Straight” (Kawahara, 2004), we produced 320
high-quality phonetic continua varying in place, manner or voicing
across 4 conditions; word/word (blade/glade), word/pseudo (blouse/
glouse), pseudo/word (bown/gown) and pseudo/pseudo (blem/glem)
pairs. A 2AFC identification task confirmed the category boundary shift

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

for word/pseudo and pseudo/word pairs (Ganong, 1980), equivalent for
an onset (bench/gench) or offset (flad/flag) change. This suggests that
lexical influences on categorical perception are not produced on-line but
rather occur post-perceptually, consistent with top-down effects. Sensitivity to within- and between-category phonological variation was investigated using sparse fMRI in a paired auditory repetition priming
paradigm. Minimal pairs (48 across the 4 conditions) were presented to
participants in the context of a semantic monitoring task. Between-category pairs with a phonological change produced greater neural response
in left posterior middle temporal gyrus compared to within-category
pairs with the equivalent magnitude of acoustic change. This greater phonological response provides a neural correlate of categorical perception
of speech similar to previous studies (Jacquemot et al., 2003; Joanisse et
al., 2006). However, we also observe that left inferior frontal gyrus, precentral gyrus and supplementary motor area (SMA) respond to this phonological change. This may result from our use of a more natural-sounding and varied stimulus set that engages lexical and semantic processes.
Both inferior frontal and SMA clusters show an additional response to
phonological changes involving words, suggesting that these regions
might contribute to higher-level influences on categorical perception of
speech.
G49
HEMISPHERIC CHANGES IN THE FRONTO-TEMPORAL
LANGUAGE SYSTEM IN YOUNGER AND OLDER ADULTS
Meredith Shafto1, Billi Randall1, Phyllis Tam1, Lorraine Tyler1; 1University of
Cambridge — Although widespread neural atrophy is an inevitable consequence of normal aging, not all cognitive abilities decline as we age. Most
aspects of spoken language comprehension are well preserved, for example, despite atrophy in the neural regions known to be important for language function. In the present study we asked whether language
comprehension is preserved because of the functional recruitment of
other brain regions which successfully compensate for neural atrophy.
We addressed this issue by manipulating the presence/absence of
semantically ambiguous words in sentences. Previous research has
shown (Rodd et al, 2005) that the presence of semantic ambiguity generates increased activity in left frontal and middle temporal cortex, due to
the additional requirements of selecting between competing meanings. In
a similar study we found correlated activity in these left fronto-temporal
regions for young subjects. We also tested a younger-old group (aged 4968) and an older-old group (aged 70-85) in this study. Unlike younger
adults, younger-old participants showed activity in bilateral IFG and
right MTG, but were as fast as younger adults. The older-old group had a
left lateralised pattern of activity similar to younger adults, but were
slower than the younger-old participants. These findings may be
explained by differences between the older groups in the degree of correlation between active regions, suggesting age-related changes in modulatory processes that affect performance. Moreover, the extent to which
bilateral systems were involved was associated with performance differences across both older groups.
G50
SUSTAINED LOW FREQUENCY SUPPRESSION AND HIGH
FREQUENCY ENHANCEMENT OF BRAIN OSCILLATIONS
DURING SEMANTIC EVALUATION OF SPOKEN WORDS
Antoine J. Shahin1, Terence W. Picton2,3, Lee M. Miller1,4; 1Center for Mind and
Brain, University of California, Davis, 2Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest,
Toronto, 3University of Toronto, 4University of California, Davis — Oscillatory brain activity has been shown to correlate with specific perceptual
and cognitive processes. For example, suppression of alpha waves (8-12
Hz) and enhancement of gamma rhythms (30-100Hz) has been shown to
reflect enhanced selective attention and template matching in working
memory, respectively. We examined oscillatory brain activity in 10 participants during speech tasks while subjects identified targets (20%) that
represented semantic discrimination in one task and voice discrimination
in the other (control task). The speech stimuli were the same for both

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

215

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

tasks so stimulus effects are excluded. We hypothesized that suppression
of alpha rhythms accompanied by enhancement of gamma band activity
(GBA) should favor semantic processing compared to voice processing,
because semantic discrimination would require maintaining and matching of semantic templates in working memory. Using EEG, we show
enhanced left lateralized fronto-central sustained GBA in single-trial
analysis in semantic compared to voice task. Sustained low frequency
oscillations (< 30 Hz) were suppressed over frontal and parieto-occipital
sites in the semantic compared to voice tasks. Because there were no differences between targets and non-targets, it is unlikely the two processes
are associated with target detection. These results suggest the commencement of sustained processes during semantic evaluation likely due to
enhanced synchrony of neural activity in a fronto-temporo-parietal network reflecting enhanced communication among these brain regions.
G51
THE PRIMING OF PRIMING: A CROSS-LINGUISTIC ERP STUDY
Karsten Steinhauer1,2, Katherine Nadeau-Noel2, John E. Drury1,2, Phaedra
Royle1,3; 1Centre for Research on Language, Mind and Brain, McGill
University, Montreal, 2School of Communication Sciences and Disorders,
McGill University, Montreal, 3School of Speech Language Pathology &
Audiology, University of Montreal — The nature of mental processes eliciting the N400 component in event-related brain potentials (ERPs) is still
controversial. Most evidence points to post-lexical semantic integration
(Brown & Hagoort, 1993, Chwilla et al., 1995, 1998; Friederici et al., 1999),
but recent studies have again argued in favor of automatic intra-lexical
priming by means of spreading activation (e.g., Deacon et al., 2000). In
1995, Ratcliff and McKoon presented a behavioral priming study in
which prime-target pairs strongly related on one semantic dimension
(e.g., a member-category relation such as ‘hammer-tool’) were embedded
in lists of other strong prime-target pairs related on a different semantic
dimension (e.g., part/whole: ‘finger-hand’), and vice versa. They found
no priming for related word pairs that were inconsistent with the semantic dimension of the majority of list items. We replicated the experiment
with ERPs, both in English and in French. Word pairs were presented
with an SOA of 250 ms between prime and target. Word lists comprised
78% consistent related pairs, 11% inconsistent related pairs, and 11%
unrelated word pairs. Inconsistent related pairs showed reduced priming
(larger N400s) as compared to consistent related pairs. The results do not
support a primarily automatic priming account for N400 effects and suggest that priming itself can be primed by context, potentially pointing to
expectancy-based priming at SOAs of 250 ms.
G52
SEPARATION OF CONCEPT KNOWLEDGE INTO DISTINCT
MODALITY-SPECIFIC PERCEPTUAL SYSTEMS Benjamin Stengel1,
Jeffrey Binder1,2, David Medler2, Sara Berentsen2, Mark Seidenberg3; 1Medical
College of Wisconsin/Biophysics, 2Medical College of Wisconsin/Neurology,
3
University Wisconsin-Madison/Psychology — According to sensory-motor
accounts of semantic memory, concept knowledge is partly represented
in modality-specific perceptual systems through which the concepts are
acquired. Tests of this hypothesis have been hindered by the fact that
concept acquisition typically involves a complex mix of perceptual,
motor, and verbal experiences. In this study we trained participants on a
set of unknown bird names by exposing them selectively to bird pictures
(Visual condition) for one third of the set, bird calls (Auditory) for
another third, and verbal statements (Facts) for the remaining third. During training, participants studied each bird name along with its associated picture, sound, or facts. The stimuli were then presented alone while
participants attempted to retrieve the correct bird names, with corrective
feedback given. Participants underwent 24 hours of training spread over
3-4 weeks. During fMRI, participants performed a similarity-rating task
in which two bird names from the same training condition were visually
presented and participants rated how similar the two birds were on a
scale from 1 to 4. The left parahippocampal, fusiform and inferior temporal gyri showed greater activity for Visual over other conditions. The left

216

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

posterior superior temporal, supramarginal and inferior frontal gyri
showed greater activity for Auditory over other conditions. Bilateral
angular and posterior cingulate gyri showed greater activation for Facts
over other conditions. These results support the hypothesis that concept
knowledge is represented within distinct modality-specific perceptual
systems, and suggest that the angular gyrus plays a particular role in
supporting knowledge acquired through language.
G53
NEWLY-LEARNED STIMULI: THE EFFECTS ON LATERALIZED
LEXICAL DECISION Travellia Tjokro1, Christine Chiarello1; 1University
of California, Riverside — The current project considers whether the right
hemisphere plays a role in learning new word meanings. Lateralized lexical decision studies have found a strong left hemisphere advantage for
word, but not nonword, stimuli (e.g., Leiber, 1976; Chiarello, Senehi, &
Soulier, 1986). One difference between word and nonword stimuli is the
presence of semantics. We examined whether learning meanings for nonwords could alter lexical decision asymmetry. Exp. 1 examined the effects
of semantics by teaching subjects a newly-created language, and then
observed performance on lateralized lexical decision. A visual field difference in sensitivity was observed when responding to newly-learned
words as compared to other stimulus conditions. Exp. 2 extended the
amount of learning, and used a semantic priming paradigm. Newlylearned words were primed by related English words to examine any
shift in hemispheric asymmetry. We discuss how the results inform
views of right hemisphere language processing.
G54
ASSOCIATIVE PROCESSING OF VERBS AND NOUNS RECRUITS
DISTINCT NEURAL NETWORKS Vanessa Troiani1, Jonathan Peelle1,
Murray Grossman1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Nouns and verbs are
supported by distinct neural networks, reflecting differences in the organization of word classes. For example, certain nouns are more likely to
share overlapping features and are more hierarchically organized. These
differences in representation may necessitate differential patterns related
to semantic processing. Semantic access for nouns is frequently assessed
using the Pyramids and Palm Trees (PPT) test, but the neural underpinnings of a comparable verbal associativity task has not been explored. We
hypothesize that verbs rely on a more distributed processing network relative to nouns, in order to compensate for their less structured neural
organization. To test this hypothesis we examined the differences
between the PPT and a test of verbal associative knowledge using BOLD
fMRI. We measured the neural activity of healthy adults while subjects
performed the word version of the PPT and the 48-item Verb Similarity
Test (VST). Participants were equally accurate across the tasks and there
were no reaction time differences, reflecting comparable difficulty
between the two tasks. Both nouns and verbs recruited left posterior parietal regions, presumably related to task-specific support by multimodal
association cortex. A much larger scale neural network including bilateral
dorsolateral frontal and motor cortex was recruited for verb associations
as compared to nouns. There were no brain regions more active for nouns
than verbs. We believe this indicates that the organizational differences
between these word classes recruit distinct neural networks to support
associative processing.
G55
TWO IS NOT BETTER THAN ONE: BILATERAL PRESENTATION
FAILS TO ELICIT AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MARKER OF
SENTENTIAL CONSTRAINT Edward Wlotko1, Kara Federmeier1,2,3;
1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Neurosciences Program,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 3Beckman Institute for Advanced
Science and Technology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Several recent event-related potential studies have uncovered a late (600-900
ms) frontal positivity that has been linked to semantic revision processes:
unexpected words in strongly constraining sentence contexts elicit a
larger positivity compared to unexpected words in weakly constraining
contexts (and compared to expected words). In prior work we investi-

Poster Session G

gated this phenomenon as a function of visual field of presentation and
found no evidence that this effect was elicited by either hemisphere
alone, despite the fact that we previously observed the positivity for the
same sentence materials with central presentation. To explore the discrepancy between results with central and lateral presentation, we replicated our study by employing central and bilateral (both visual fields)
presentation in a within-subjects design. We again observed the frontal
positivity for unexpected words in strongly constraining contexts when
those words were presented centrally. However, we failed to observe the
positivity for the same participants when words were presented simultaneously to the left and right visual fields. Thus, even when both hemispheres received the initial input, the processes that generate the
positivity were not engaged to the same degree as when words were presented centrally. One possible explanation for this pattern is that bilateral
presentation does not force the two hemispheres to cooperate. Thus, normal semantic revision processes may require hemispheric cooperation.
G56
BRAIN POTENTIALS REFLECT THE SEMANTIC DISTINCTION
BETWEEN SINGULAR AND PLURALS Ming Xiang1, Taomei Guo2,
Jingjing Guo2; 1Harvard University, 2Beijing Normal University — Work on
numerical cognition has shown that pre-linguistic babies and non-human
primates distinguish between singular and plural objects, suggesting the
two domains are conceptually different. However, previous psycholinguistics/neurolinguistics work in this area has only focused on morphosyntactic number markings. The current study investigates the semantic
differences between the two in Mandarin Chinese, using ERP recordings.
Without number marking morphology, nouns in Mandarin are interpreted as singular or plural depending on the context or preceding
numeral information. The presence of numeral words requires obligatory
classifiers (cf. the ungrammatical (1) vs the grammatical (2)). Count
nouns (e.g. cow) and mass nouns (e.g. water) have distinct classifiers.
However, the classifier "xie" with the numeral "one" may be used with all
nouns, giving rise to plural interpretations for count ones (3). We tested
three conditions in sentence contexts: one singular (4) and two plural conditions((2)&(3)). At the noun position, we found a larger N400 over the
central-frontal area for the plural condition with "xie" (3), compared to
the singular condition (4), but there is no such difference between (2) and
(4). We discuss the N400 in terms of the individualization of the plural
domain into measurable units. The effect is absent in (2), as the plural
interpretation has been processed on the numeral prior to the noun. (1)
*san niu (three cow, ‘three cows) (2) san tou niu (three CL cow, ‘three
cows) (3) yi xie niu (one CL cow, ‘a few cows’) (4) yi tou niu (one CL cow,
‘one cow’)
G57
COMPARISON OF DISCOURSE LEVEL INTEGRATION DURING
COMPREHENSION OF PICTURE AND SPOKEN STORIES: AN ERP
STUDY Corey Ziemba1, Lara Polse2, Tamara Swaab1; 1University of
California Davis, 2School of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, San Diego
State University — In this study we used ERPs to directly compare discourse level processing during comprehension of non-verbal picture stories and verbal stories to examine whether semantic processing of nonverbal and verbal materials is supported by identical or non-identical
representational systems. In the verbal story experiment, participants
heard three-sentence stories, presented with naturally produced and connected speech, with the last word of each story either congruent or incongruent with the preceding discourse. In the picture story experiment,
participants were presented with a series of pictures (adapted from West
& Holcomb, 2002). The last picture of each series was congruent or incongruent with the preceding discourse. An N400 effect of discourse congruence was observed for the verbal story experiment, which is consistent
with previous findings (e.g., Camblin et al, 2007; van Berkum et al, 1999,
2003). In the picture story experiment, effects of final picture congruence
showed up as a centro-frontally distributed N300 effect and a non-canonical centro-frontally distributed N400 effect, which replicates the study of

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

West and Holcomb (2002). The direct comparison of non-verbal and verbal story processing in the present study showed separable ERP effects of
discourse congruency which suggest that non-verbal and verbal semantic
processing may access separable semantic systems in the human brain.

Linguistic processes: Syntax
G58
MULTIMODAL IMAGING OF LANGUAGE PROCESSING AND
SYNTACTIC COMPLEXITY IN A NATURALISTIC CONTEXT
Asaf Bachrach1, Meredith Brown1, Carlos Cardenas1, Olga Felsovalyi1, Alec
Marantz2, John Gabrieli1; 1Massachusettes Institute of Technology, 2New York
University — We use functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) and
Magnetoencephalography (MEG) to monitor brain activation while subjects listen to narratives followed by comprehension questions to verify
attention. The narratives were designed to appear quite naturalistic while
in fact containing high density of syntactically complex constructions
(relative clauses, embedded questions, clefts, Raising, passives, etc.) not
usually found, in such density, in naturally produced corpora. We calculate a number of processing complexity measures based on current linguistic (Chomsky 1994), psycholinguistic (Gibson 1998, Lewis & Vasishth
2005, Hale 2000) and computational linguistic (Roark 2001) theorizing.
We correlate these measures with the time course of the BOLD measure
(for fMRI) and of spectral coherence (for MEG). Since the main focus of
the manipulation are cases of long distance dependency, subjects complete outside the scanner a battery of working memory tests (Waters &
Caplan 2003). These measures are then used as regressors in the group
analysis. The analysis along these lines of pilot fMRI data from 3 subjects
allowed us to distinguish neural correlates of maintenance of the filler in
a long distance dependency from those of reactivation (or retrieval) at the
gap, supporting the view that syntactic working memory makes use of a
maintenance mechanism (Gibson 1998) and cannot be reduced to cue
based recall ( Lewis & Vasishth 2005). In addition, we were able to distinguish these working memory related activation patterns from activation
due to surprisal (Hale 2000), suggesting that both dimensions contribute
to processing complexity contrary to certain current psycholinguistic proposals (Levy 2006).
G59
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL MEASURES OF MORPHOSYNTACTIC PROCESSING IN ADULTS WITH TYPICAL
LANGUAGE ABILITY Stacy Betz1; 1University of Washington — This
study used event-related potentials (ERPs) to investigate the neural correlates of morpho-syntactic processing in adults with typical language.
Two ERP components are associated with morpho-syntactic processing:
the P600 and the left anterior negativity (LAN). The P600 reflects controlled aspects of processing and the LAN automatic processing. Both a
P600 and LAN have been found following morpho-syntactic errors; however, few studies have compared these components following different
types of morpho-syntactic errors. Also unknown is the relationship
between language ability and P600/LAN morphology. This project's
goals were to: 1) compare the morphology of the P600 and LAN components following different types of morpho-syntactic errors and 2) determine the relationship between P600 and LAN amplitude and latency and
behavioral measures of language ability. Participants included 20 adults
with typical language abilities. ERPs were collected while they listened to
and judged the grammaticality of sentences. Two types of morpho-syntactic errors were analyzed: sentences containing an omitted tense/agreement marker and sentences containing an overt use of an incorrect tense/
agreement marker. These conditions were compared to control conditions with correct tense/agreement marking. Results will be analyzed in
terms of differences in amplitude, scalp location, onset latency, and duration of the P600 and LAN between the two error conditions. Additionally,
correlations between the ERP measures and behavioral language mea-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

217

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

sures will be conducted. These analyses will determine whether ERPs are
sensitive to subtle differences in the type of morpho-syntactic error processed and whether differences within the normal range of adult language ability are reflected in ERP measures.
G60
BOLD SIGNAL CORRELATES OF SYNTACTIC PROCESSING IN
FONT CHANGE DETECTION David
Caplan1,
Gloria
Waters2;
1Neurology, M.G.H., 2Sargent College, Boston University — BOLD
signal
was measured while 16 participants made timed font change detection
judgments in sentences that varied in their syntactic form (subject- and
object-extracted sentences). Accuracy was above 85% for all sentence
types. RTs showed unimodal distributions for all sentence types, indicating that the participants processed all sentences similarly. There were
longer RTs to objectthan to subject-extracted sentences without font
changes and longer RTs for sentences in which the font change occurred
at the embedded noun or verb of object- compared to subject-extracted
sentences, indicating that sentences were processed to the level of syntactic structure. BOLD signal increased for object-extracted sentences without font changes in left supramarginal gyrus. The result provides
evidence that left supramarginal gyrus plays a role in implicit syntactic
and associated semantic processing of object-extracted relative clauses.
However, other results using a nonword detection task, in which syntactic processing is also implicit, showed left inferior frontal activation with
the same sentence type contrast. The entire set of results suggest that
tasks always interact with sentence comprehension, and raise the question of what parsing and interpretive operations are task-independent.
G61
NATIVE LANGUAGE SHAPED THE NEURAL MECHANISM OF
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PROCESSING:
EVIDENCE
FROM
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY Lang Chen1, Yuping Zhang1,
Qirui Zhang1, Youyi Liu1, Hua Shu1, Ping Li2; 1Beijing Normal University,
Beijing, 2University of Richmond, Richmond — Previous studies demonstrated that Chinese learners of English perennially suffer from syntactic
errors, especially those rules absent in Chinese language. In this group of
ERP studies, we aimed to investigate how the property of number information in Chinese (L1) influences the Chinese speakers’ neural mechanism of processing the number agreement in their second language (L2),
namely English. In experiment 1, twenty Chinese students read Chinese
sentences with/without number incongruence between subject and verb
[e.g., a.&#20960;&#20010;&#23398;&#29983;/&#35752;&#35770;…(several students are discussing…); b.&#19968;&#20010;&#23398;&#29983;/
&#35752;&#35770;…(one student is discussing…)]; and in experiment 2,
the same group of Chinese students were displayed with English sentences, containing number agreement errors or not (e.g., a. Some students
were…; b. One student were…). In experiment 3, twenty native English
speakers read the same English sentences as in experiment 2. All the participants were required to judge the acceptability of the sentences after
they ended. The results showed that Chinese participants employed similar neural mechanism to process the number information (revealed by
N400 effect, indicating the semantic processing) when reading both Chinese and English sentences. Contrarily, the native English speakers
showed ERP effects related to syntactic processing (represented by P600
or LAN) when processing the number agreement in English. All together,
the results reveal that although the Chinese learners of English have sufficient L2 proficiency, the neural mechanisms involved in their L2 processing are constrained by the properties of L1.
G62
SALIENCE DIRECTS THE LEARNER TO THE STRUCTURE: AN
ARTIFICIAL GRAMMAR LEARNING EXPERIMENT. Meinou
de
Vries1, Padraic Monaghan2, Stefan Knecht1, Pienie Zwitserlood1; 1University of
Münster, Germany, 2Lancaster University, UK — Acquiring syntactic structure depends on information available from the input. We have previously shown that learning of recursive structures are extremely difficult
to acquire in Artificial Grammar Learning (AGL) studies (De Vries et al.,

218

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

in press). Here, we investigated whether learning recursion could be
helped by adding cues that direct the learner to the structure using links
between vowels or consonants. Participants were significantly assisted in
accuracy and speed of learning by agreement cues that consisted of vowels, but not by consonant agreement cues (Experiment 1). This was the
case when the cues were in syllables of the form consonant-vowel as well
as vowel-consonant. However, the agreement cues were not helpful
when participants were not informed about the structure (Experiment 2),
so the learning success cannot be explained by a natural preference for
particular vowel sequences. This underlines the findings by Bonatti et al.
(2005), indicating that structural information is extracted from vowels
whereas lexical information is derived from consonants. Relating to natural language data, it has been suggested that grammatical development
of languages with highly salient agreement cues, like Italian, is faster
than in languages without such cues, like English. It seems that the
salience of particular cues indeed directs the learner to the structure to be
learnt. Such agreement cues embedded in the phonology may be critical
for language acquisition.
G63
SENTENCE PROCESSING AND GRAMMATICAL COMPLEXITY
Anne-Dominique Devauchelle1,2,3, Y-Lan Boureau1,2,3, Stanislas Dehaene1,2,3,4,
Christophe Pallier1,2,3; 1INSERM, U562, Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit,
France, 2CEA, DSV/I2BM, NeuroSpin Center, France, 3University Paris-Sud,
IFR49, France, 4Collège de France, Paris — The goal of this project is to
investigate areas involved in the building of the syntactic trees. The
approach consists in looking for areas that show higher activation more
the complexity of the sentence increase. We varied in a parametric way
the depth of the tree, the number of words and the number of constituents in sentences. Twenty volunteers were scanned at 3 Tesla while they
passively read phrases of 12 words (in a rapid serial visual presentation).
We used 8 different conditions. There were 6 conditions coming from
purely right-branching sentences. All of these conditions were constituted by different number of constituents: (1) 1-word constituent (a list of
12 words completely independent), (2) 2-words constituent, (3) 3-words
constituent, (4) 4-words constituent, (5) 6-words constituent and (6) 12words constituent (an entire sentence of 12 words). Moreover, there were
two other conditions coming from center-embedding sentences: (7) 3words non-constituent and (8) 4-words non-constituents. These conditions allow us to differentiate the processing of constituents and non-constituents. We were looking for areas showing a linear correlation with
complexity (positive or negative). We made a parametric comparison
between the different conditions and we found areas showing a positive
correlation with complexity: the left anterior and posterior temporal
gyrus and the left inferior frontal lobe. Some areas showing a negative
correlation with complexity were strangely symmetrical: the inferior and
superior frontal regions, the occipital gyrus and the parietal lobe. With
our design we can better detail the various steps of integration of syntax.
G64
ERP CORRELATES OF AUTOMATIC SYNTACTIC PROCESSING
IN HIGHLY PROFICIENT L1 CHINESE-L2 SPANISH LATE
LEARNERS. Margaret Gillon Dowens1,2, Horacio Barber1,2, Jingjing Guo3,
Taomei Guo3, Manuel Carreiras1,2; 1Universidad de La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain,
2
Instituto de Tecnologías Biomédicas, Tenerife, Spain, 3Beijing Normal
University, Beijing, P.R.China — Critical factors affecting second-language
processing are the age of acquisition (AoA), the level of proficiency
attained and the similarities/ differences between the syntactic structures
of the L1 and L2. Despite much research, the relative importance and
interaction of these factors is still unclear. Previous studies in our laboratory with highly proficient L1 English late learners of Spanish have indicated that proficiency, rather than AoA, is the key question in the
attainment of native-like patterns of processing of morpho-syntax. However, the question of whether the syntactic patterns of L1 constrain the
processing of L2 remains unanswered as English, although not as synthetic as Spanish, does compute some agreement features, notably num-

Poster Session G

ber agreement, which could mean that there is some L1-L2 transfer. To
clarify this question of the influence of language overlap, we conducted a
study with highly proficient L1 Chinese late learners of Spanish. Unlike
Spanish and English, Chinese is an isolating language with no grammatical agreement features. 22 Chinese learners of Spanish, and 22 Spanish
native participants read sentences containing gender and number violations and performed a syntactic judgement task while ERPs were
recorded using a 64 channel system. The results for the L2 group
included a pattern of LAN-P600 similar to the native Spanish readers,
although with differences in the topographical distribution of the LAN
similar to the L1 English readers previously studied. These results indicate that not only features of the L2 which are present in the L1 can be
processed in a native-like way.
G65
FMRI REVEALS THE ACTIVATION OF SYNTACTIC GENDER
INFORMATION IN BARE NOUN PRODUCTION Stefan
Heim1,2,
1
3
1,4
1
Simon Eickhoff , Angela Friederici , Katrin Amunts ; Research Centre
Juelich, Institute of Neurosciences and Biophysics, 2Brain Imaging Center West,
3
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 4RWTH
University Aachen, School of Medicine — We investigated whether syntactic gender information becomes activated during overt picture naming
with bare nouns for which gender information is not required. Pictures
were presented in gender homogeneous blocks (all German picture
names had the same gender), gender heterogeneous blocks (identical
stimuli but mixed genders in each block), phonologically homogeneous
blocks (all picture names start with the same phoneme), and phonologically heterogeneous blocks (identical stimuli but mixed phonemes in
each block). Gender homogeneous blocks elicited higher activation than
gender heterogeneous blocks in the left BA 44, BA 6, and pars orbitalis of
the left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG/orb). Phonologically homogeneous
blocks evoked higher activation than phonologically heterogeneous
blocks in the left IFG/orb, left inferior temporal sulcus, and left angular
gyrus. Subtracting the latter from the former contrast reflecting the gender-specific effect yielded gender-specific activation in the left BA 44 and
BA 6 known to support syntactic/gender processing. This gender-specific effect in the fMRI data indicates that gender information was available during bare noun production.
G66
IMPAIRED
“SET
SHIFTING”
IN
APHASIC
SENTENCE
COMPREHENSION Jesse Hochstadt1,2, Myrna Schwartz1; 1Moss
Rehabilitation Research Institute, Philadelphia, 2Hospital of the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia — Impaired comprehension of complex sentences in aphasia has often been ascribed to deficits in syntax-specific
“knowledge” or operations. Some researchers, however, have proposed
that these comprehension difficulties derive from deficits in executive
processes similar or identical to those operating in other domains. We
tested the hypothesis that the processing demands of different syntactic
structures may constitute different cognitive sets and that aphasic individuals may be “stuck” in more common or canonical sets. Seven aphasic
subjects and 20 controls performed a picture-matching test using two
sentence structures (e.g., "The queen was kicking the cook who was fat"
and "The queen who was kicking the cook was fat"), which occurred both
in separate blocks and intermixed within blocks. Different picture pairs
probed separate aspects of sentence meaning (thematic roles or adjective
attachment). We obtained two measures of syntactic set-shifting ability:
“mixing cost” (poorer comprehension in mixed than single-structure
blocks) and “switching cost” (poorer comprehension, for trials within
mixed blocks, when the preceding trial tested comprehension of a different structure or a different aspect of sentence meaning). All aphasic subjects showed greater mixing or switching costs than controls; we will
consider how these costs relate to comprehension accuracy on the different structures and picture probes. Impaired syntactic set-shifting showed
no clear relationship with performance on the Trail Making and Wisconsin Card Sorting tests of non-linguistic set-switching. Thus aphasia may

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

impair processes supporting the “syntactic flexibility” needed to comprehend complex sentences, but these processes may differ from those supporting cognitive flexibility in other domains.
G67
INFLUENCES OF GRAMMATICALITY ON THE N400 TO NOVEL
VERBS Mandy Maguire1,2, Mary Kathryn Reagor1,2, Raksha Anand1,
Samantha Sandgren2, Mark Elliot2; 1Center for BrainHealth, University of
Texas, Dallas, 2Callier Center for Communication Disorders, University of
Texas, Dallas — Traditionally the N400 is associated with semantic processing and the Early Left Anterior Negativity, or ELAN, and P600 are
associated with syntactic processing. Recent literature reveals more interaction between these processes than previously believed (Hahne &
Friederici, 1998; Kolk & Chwilla, 2007). In this study 24 right-handed,
native English speakers listened to grammatically correct and incorrect
sentences that contained either familiar verbs (The girl on the table
danced. vs. The girl on the danced*) or nonsense verbs (The boy in the
classroom ibbed. vs. The boy in the ibbed*). Regardless of verb familiarity
the ELAN and P600 were statistically identical, both showing traditional
grammatical violation effects. Additionally, there was a significant verb
familiarity by grammaticality interaction for the N400, F(1, 1485)=8.90,
p=.003. For novel verbs the N400 was significantly larger for grammatically correct than incorrect sentences, t(677)=2.39, p=.008. The opposite,
though not to a significant degree, was true for familiar verbs. This effect
is thought to be due to subjects’ attempts to uncover meanings for the
novel verbs, a hypothesis supported by our post-experiment debriefing.
Thus, for grammatically correct sentences semantic processing was
strong, as reflected by the N400 to novel verbs. However, similar to past
findings that no N400 effect is present when there are dual violations
(Hahne & Friederici, 1998), in the present study once the sentence was
deemed grammatically incorrect attempts to process semantic information were attenuated. This finding supports claims that syntactic processing may precede semantic processing in language comprehension.
G68
ERP EVIDENCE FOR CONCEPTUAL EVENT STRUCTURE
EFFECTS ON SYNTACTIC PROCESSING. Evguenia Malaia1, Ronnie
Wilbur1, Christine Weber-Fox1; 1Purdue University — Verbs contain multifaceted information about both the semantics of an action, and potential
argument structures. Linguistic theory classifies verbs according to
whether the denoted action has an inherent (telic) end-point (fall,
awaken), or whether it is considered homogenous, or atelic (read, worship). The aim of our study was to examine how this distinction influences on-line sentence processing. Event-related brain potentials (ERPs)
were recorded from 22 English speakers as they read sentences in which
the main verb was either telic or atelic, e.g., “The actress awakened/worshipped by the writer left in a hurry”. ERPs elicited by telic and atelic
verbs, the preposition “by” introducing Agent, and the second argument,
e.g., “writer”, were compared. Additionally, participants where grouped
according to receptive syntactic proficiency: normal (NP) or high (HP).
ERPs from the NP group first diverged at the second argument, with the
atelic condition eliciting larger amplitude negativity at the N100 (p=.009),
and continuing to the P200 (p=.045) interval. In contrast, ERPs from the
HP group first diverged earlier in the sentence, on the word “by”. ERPs
elicited by “by” in the atelic condition were also characterized by
increased negativity, in this case significant at P200 (p = .009) and N400
(p=.033). Our results support the postulated conceptual/semantic distinction underlying the two verb categories, and demonstrate that worldknowledge about actions designated by verbs and syntactic proficiency
are reflected in on-line processing of sentence structure.
G69
CAN METRIC CUES COMPENSATE SYNTACTIC DEFICITS ? AN
ERP-STUDY WITH FOCAL BASAL GANGLIA LESION
PATIENTS Schmidt-Kassow Maren1, Kotz Sonja A.1; 1Max Planck Institute
for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig — The P600, elicited by
various syntactic violations, has been linked to syntactic reanalysis/

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

219

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

repair (Friederici & Kotz, 2003) or syntactic integration (Kaan et al., 2000)
. This process is affected in patients with lesions of the basal ganglia (BG ;
Frisch et al., 2003 ; Kotz et al., 2003) or neurodegenerative disease (PD ;
Friederici et al., 2003) during auditory syntactic processing. However,
Kotz and colleagues (Kotz et al., 2005) demonstrated that external metric
stimulation re-elicits the P600 during auditory syntactic processing. If
external cues function this way are there also speech inherent cues (i.e.,
meter) that influence syntactic processing ? Previous ERP-studies have
revealed evidence that a) metric violations also elicit a P600 comparable
to syntactic violations, and b) meter and syntax interact during auditory
sentence processing (Schmidt-Kassow & Kotz, submitted) . Therefore,
the present experiment investigated whether BG-patients profit from
speech inherent metric cues (comparable to external metric stimulation)
when processing syntactic information. We constructed metrically regular sentences that were either grammatically, metrically, or doubly violated. If meter works as a 'taktgeber' during auditory syntactic
processing, the syntactic P600 should be re-elicited in BG-Patients. Our
results clearly show a P600 response to syntactic violations in BG patients
in metrically regular sentence context. Thus, meter can function as a ' taktgeber ' that enables BG-patients to initiate syntactic re-analysis. Furthermore, BG patients suffer from a metric processing deficit as the P600 in
response to metric violations missing. Consequently, not only external
but also speech inherent metric cues can compensate syntactic deficits.
Thus, data support the high relevance of metric competence during auditory syntactic processing.
G70
RETENTION AND CONSOLIDATION OF SECOND LANGUAGE
GRAMMAR: EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS
Kara Morgan-Short1, Stephanie Lukas2, Marco Piñeyro2, Cristina Sanz2,
Karsten Steinhauer3, Michael Ullman2; 1University of Illinois at Chicago,
2Georgetown University, 3McGill University — Research examining second
language (L2) grammatical processing in highly proficient speakers has
revealed a native-like LAN-P600 ERP pattern. In a recent study this pattern was found in subjects who were implicitly-trained to speak and comprehend an artificial language, but not in explicitly-trained subjects
(Morgan-Short et al., 2007). The current study compared behavioral and
ERP measures of syntactic and morphosyntactic processing at the end-oftraining of this study with those measures 3-6 months after training (i.e.,
within subjects). After this period, the implicitly-trained group retained
all behavioral gains on grammatical processing, as well as the LAN-P600
response for the syntactic condition and the P600 response for the morphosyntactic condition. The explicitly-trained group also retained all
behavioral gains on grammatical processing. Surprisingly, they also
showed a P600 for both syntactic and morphosyntactic structures, as well
as an N400 for morphosyntactic structures. These results suggest that
implicit training can not only lead to a native-like neurocognitive pattern
of grammatical processing, but that this pattern may be retained over the
course of months or longer. Interestingly, the data suggest that although
explicit training does not initially lead to native-like neurocognitive
grammatical processing, aspects of such processing can emerge over
time, even (or perhaps only) with no training, perhaps due to a process of
consolidation. The data are consistent with the view that L2-learners can
not only acquire but also retain aspects of grammar (evidenced by the
LAN) in procedural memory, and that this may depend on type of training or exposure to the language.
G71
IMPAIRED LANGUAGE MORPHOLOGY IN HUNTINGTON’S
DISEASE PATIENTS Dezso Nemeth1,2, Gabriella Gardian2, Peter
Klivenyi2, Tamas Sefcsik2, Geza Ambrus2, Agnes Lukacs2, Laszlo Vecsei2,
Michael Ullman1; 1Georgetown University, Washington DC, 2University of
Szeged, Hungary — The role of the basal ganglia in language and cognition is still unclear. The goal of this study was to explore language production in Hungarian patients with early Huntington’s disease (HD) or
pre-HD (that is, presymptomatic HD). HD is a progressive neurodegen-

220

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

erative disorder with macroscopic atrophy primarily of the caudate
nucleus at early stages. We tested the processing of two aspects of language production – rule-governed and idiosyncratic linguistic knowledge – using a Hungarian inflectional morphology production task.
Fluency tasks (letter and semantic) and working memory tasks (digit
span, non-word repetition, word-list recall, listening span) were also
administered. Compared to healthy controls, both the HD and pre-HD
groups demonstrated impaired performance on the production of morphologically complex words, producing significantly more over-suffixation errors. In addition, performance on the letter fluency task was
significantly lower in both patient groups than in controls. These findings
have implications for the role of the basal ganglia in language, and may
have diagnostic value for clinical practice.
G72
EFFECTS OF ATTENTION ON EARLY AND LATE SYNTACTIC
PROCESSES IN 3 TO 4 YEARS OLD CHILDREN Franziska
Nikolaizig1,2, Angela D. Friederici1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human
Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 2Graduate Program Function of
Attention in Cognition, Leipzig — In a recent study (Hahne, & Friederici,
1999) it was shown that the two-pass syntactic parsing process reflected
by an early left anterior negativity (ELAN) and a late positivity (P600) is
differentially affected by attentional aspects, in this case the probability of
syntactically correct and incorrect stimuli. The ELAN was stably elicited
irrespective of the attentional manipulation whereas the P600 was influenced. These findings were interpreted as the ELAN representing a
highly automatic sentence parsing process and the P600 reflecting a more
controlled one. In the present study we investigated the influence of
attentional factors on syntactic processes in 3 to 4 year-olds, i.e. in a sentence processing system which is still undergoing development. We varied the proportion of syntactically correct and incorrect sentences
respectively with incorrect sentences being either of a low (20%) or a high
(80%) proportion. Previous research on syntactic processing in 2;8 yearolds reported the presence of two ERP components which were interpreted as precursors to the ELAN and the P600 (Oberecker, & Friederici,
2005). Here attentional factors were expected to differently affect the ERP
pattern in children compared to those observed in adults. Finding an
ELAN and no P600 for both proportion conditions confirmed our predictions. In order to interpret the ERP data with respect to the general development of the children’s attention networks we correlated the EEG data
with the “Children’s Behavior Questionnaire”, were we found interactions between the children’s ability to shift their attention and the mean
amplitude differences of both sentence types.
G73
INTERFERENCE BETWEEN SYNTACTIC PROCESSING IN
LANGUAGE AND MUSIC Aniruddh Patel1, L. Robert Slevc2, Evelina
Fedorenko3, Daniel Casasanto4, Jonathan Winawer4, Jason Rosenberg5, Edward
Gibson3; 1The Neurosciences Institute, 2Rice University, 3MIT, 4Stanford
University, 5UCSD — Do linguistic and musical syntax rely on shared
processing mechanisms? One way to address this question is to examine
whether the processing of musical syntactic (harmonic) relations interferes with the processing of linguistic syntactic relations. Two studies are
presented which take this approach. In the first, sentences with syntactic
ambiguities (garden-path sentences) were paired with chord progressions in a self-paced reading task. On the critical disambiguating word,
the music was manipulated to have either a normal chord, a structurally
incongruous chord (out-of-key), or an acoustically incongruous chord
(different timbre). Reading times at the critical word were slower for the
syntactically ambiguous vs. unambiguous sentences, and this effect was
exaggerated when an out-of-key chord (but not an out-of-timbre chord)
occurred on the critical word. The second study used sung sentences
which were either syntactically simple or complex, based on the structure
of an embedded relative clause (subject vs. object-extracted). Within the
relative clause, the music was manipulated so that a critical note was
either in-key, out-of-key, or acoustically deviant (suddenly loud). Com-

Poster Session G

prehension accuracy for the sentences was lower for the more vs. less
complex linguistic structures, and this effect was exaggerated when an
out-of-key note occurred in the relative clause. This interaction did not
occur when a loud note was used. Together these studies show interference between linguistic and musical syntax in two distinct paradigms.
This points to shared processing of musical and linguistic syntax, in
accordance with a hypothesis of shared neural resources as outlined by
Patel (2003).
G74
LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT IN CHILDREN WITH SPASTIC
DIPLEGIA CEREBRAL PALSY Linda Phan1, Judy Reilly1, Natacha
Askshoomoff2, Tamara Harris2, Joan Stiles2, Wendy Ark2; 1San Diego State
University, 2University of California San Diego — Spastic Diplegia (SD), the
most common form of cerebral palsy results from early diffuse bilateral
white matter damage. Cognitively, studies have shown marked visual
spatial deficits in SD, but language has generally thought to be spared.
Here, we investigate spoken language development in high functioning
children with SD (N=9, ages 6-12) compared to three groups: Typically
Developing children (TD, N=72), children with Perinatal Stroke (PS,
N=34) and children with Language Impairment (LI, N=32). Children
were administered standardized language measures (Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test, (PPVT); Recalling Sentences from the Clinical Evaluation of Language Function, (CELF)) and a quasi-naturalistic narrative
task (Telling the picture story, Frog, where are you?). Consistent with
previous studies, performance of the SD group on standardized measures is generally comparable to TD children. In the narrative task, their
stories are of comparable length and complexity to the TD group. However, with respect to grammar, the SD group makes significantly more
morpho-syntactic errors than controls, PS or LI groups. Surprisingly, the
SD group uses complex syntax at a rate comparable to controls, and significantly more often than the other clinical groups. Finally, the types of
syntactic structures that the children with SD recruit are diverse and
unusual for school-age children. Comparing performance of the SD
group to that of controls and children with other neurodevelopmental
disorders suggests that the linguistic profile of children with SD is atypical.
G75
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES
OF
THEMATIC
INTEGRATION IN SENTENCES COMPREHENSION Fabrizio
Pizzioli1, Bruno Rossion1,2, Hiroko Nakano1; 1University of Louvain,
2
Laboratory of Neurology, 3Saint Mary's College of California — In this study
event related potentials (ERP) were used to investigate auditory thematic
integration processes in syntactically unambiguous sentences in French.
We monitored the N400 component, a marker of semantic integration
(e.g. Kutas & Hillyard, 1980) and the P600, associated with syntactic reanalysis (e.g. Kaan et al. 2003). Participants listened to sentences, where
the critical verbs were either: congruous, (e.g., the old man read the
newspaper); Incongruous, Semantically-Unrelated, (e.g., The tree read
the old man); Incongruous, Thematically-Reversible, (e.g., The newspaper read the old man); Passive (e.g., The newspaper was read…). In the
Semantically-Unrelated condition, the subject noun did not fit either the
“agent” or the “theme” role. In the Thematically-Reversible condition,
there was a highly plausible alternative interpretation, (i.e., the subject
noun fits to the “theme” role). The plausibility of the subject as a theme
was also manipulated. We observed that the incongruous and semantically unrelated condition elicited both P600 and N400 effects while the
thematically reversible condition elicited the P600 effect, but not the N400
effect. Additionally, the P600 effect in the Thematic-Reversible condition
was modulated by the degree of plausibility of the subject noun as
“theme.” The P600 without N400 in syntactically unambiguous sentences
with semantic anomalies is consistent with recent results in other languages (e.g., Kim & Osterhout, 2005; Kolk et al., 2003; Kuperberg et al.,
2003). The nature of P600 and N400 effects in sentence integration pro-

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

cesses are discussed in terms of thematic attraction, semantic association,
thematic structural violation, and animacy.
G76
AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF NEURAL ADAPTABILITY AS A
FUNCTION OF INDIVIDUAL WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY
AND TASK DEMANDS DURING SYNTACTIC PROCESSING
Chantel Prat1, Marcel Just1; 1Center for Cognitive Brain Imagin, Carnegie
Mellon University — Recent research suggests that skilled brain functioning is related to the ability to adapt neural responses in the face of changing demands. This experiment investigated the relation between working
memory and syntactic processes by comparing neural adaptability (as
indexed by the difference in neural activation elicited by syntactically
simple versus complex sentences) across individuals with varying working memory capacities, and across tasks with varying working memory
demands. In the low-load condition, participants read sentences and
answered comprehension questions. In the medium-load and high-load
conditions, participants were additionally given three concrete nouns
and three pronounceable non-words, respectively to hold in memory
before reading sentences. 26 Carnegie Mellon undergraduates with reading spans ranging from 2.0 to 5.0 read a total of 60 sentences, 10 per condition (2 syntactic complexity levels x 3 working memory loads).
Syntactic adaptability (the extra activation for object relatives compared
to conjoined active sentences) was positively correlated with working
memory capacity across memory loads (i.e., high-capacity individuals
had greatest adaptability) in distributed cortical areas including bilateral
middle and superior temporal and right inferior frontal gyri. Similarly,
adaptability was highest in the low-working-memory-load condition
across individuals, with the largest differences between high and lowworking memory load conditions in bilateral inferior frontal regions,
including Broca’s area and its RH homologue. The findings suggest that
the ability to modulate brain activation in the face of changing syntactic
demands is related to the mental resources available to an individual.
G77
INVESTIGATING SEMANTIC-SYNTACTIC INTEGRATION WITH
FMRI IN AN ISSS PARADIGM Tim Raettig1, Angela Friederici1, Sonja
Kotz1; 1Max-Planck-Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig,
Germany — The current study aimed at the differentiation of two distinct
aspects of syntactic processing, morphosyntax and phrase structure in
terms of their functional localization. In addition to this, we were interested in the integration of these two types of syntactic information with
semantics. We investigated the processing of spoken sentences which
either contained a subject-verb disagreement or an illegal word-category
sequence. We tested all sentences in a real word as well as in a pseudoword context. FMRI data were acquired on a 3T scanner for 15 healthy
subjects. We implemented an ISSS paradigm (Schwarzbauer et al. 2006),
presenting auditory stimuli during periods of scanner silence that were
followed by the rapid acquisition of 5 functional volumes. In the real
word condition, phrase structure violations elicited extensive brain activations in the left supramarginal, precentral and inferior frontal gyrus
when compared to correct sentences while in the pseudo-word condition,
analogous violations elicited activations in the bilateral anterior and middle superior temporal gyrus. Morphosyntactic violations induced a small
activation of the posterior left superior temporal gyrus in the real word
condition, but did not elicit a significant increase in brain activity in the
pseudo-word condition. Our study shows that phrase structure violations are processed by two distinct cognitive networks, depending on the
availability of semantic information for integration. The processing of
morphosyntactic violations compared to morphosyntactically correct
sentences apparently only poses very limited demands on specialized
processing systems, explaining the lack of a major difference to correct
sentences.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

221

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

G78
AN FMRI STUDY OF SYNTACTIC AND SEMANTIC AMBIGUITY
RESOLUTION IN SPOKEN LANGUAGE Jennifer
Rodd1,
Billi
2
2
1
Randall , Lorraine K. Tyler ; University College London, 2University of
Cambridge — Language is highly ambiguous. Not only can words refer to
more than one concept (e.g, the bark of the tree/dog), but their syntactic
roles within the sentence can also be ambiguous (e.g, landing planes is/
are). Here we investigate the time-course with which syntactic and
semantic ambiguity is processed and resolved by using a new semisparse fMRI protocol (Schwarzbauer et al. 2006) in which auditory stimuli are presented in the silent period between clusters of six scans. Sentences either contained semantically ambiguous phrases that were
disambiguated by the subsequent verbs meaning (e.g., brown hares/
hairs hop), or phrases whose syntactic role was ambiguous and was disambiguated by the subsequent verbs syntactic inflection (e.g., visiting relatives annoy(s)). These were compared with unambiguous control
sentences. Consistent with our previous study of semantic and syntactic
ambiguity (Rodd et al., CNS 2005), we found that both syntactic and
semantic ambiguities produced activation in the left inferior frontal gyrus
(BA 44/45). However, only syntactic ambiguity activated the left middle
temporal gyrus and this was sensitive to dominance such that activation
was only increased when there was a strong preference against the syntactic structure that was used. In addition, the left inferior temporal
gyrus/ fusiform gyrus (which shows no activation for syntactic ambiguities) was more active for the semantically ambiguous sentences. We use
information about the locations and timings of these responses to the two
types of ambiguity to constrain theories about the precise functional roles
of these different components within the fronto-temporal speech comprehension network.
G79
THE EFFECTS OF THE ANTECEDENT'S DEFINITENESS AND
SYNTACTIC FUNCTION ON REFERENTIAL PROCESSING
Dietmar Roehm1, Petra Burkhardt2; 1Max Planck Institute for Human
Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Junior Research Group Neurotypology, Leipzig,
2University of Marburg, Germany — Syntactic, semantic and discourse factors influence referential processing (when an expression refers to a discourse entity). In the present study, we examined how different aspects
of the accessibility of an antecedent expression (definiteness and syntactic
function) impact referential processing . In a reading experiment conducted in German, we assessed the processing of noun phrases in minidiscourses and manipulated the definiteness of the antecedent (indefinite
vs. definite) and its syntactic function (subject vs. object). Context sentences contained either [A] an indefinite subject antecedent (Recently, an
athlete observed a pianist.), [B] a definite subject antecedent (Recently,
the athlete observed the pianist), [C] an indefinite object antecedent
(Recently, a pianist observed an athlete), or [D] a definite object antecedent (Recently, the pianist observed the athlete). ERPs were measured to
the onset of the critical expression in a subsequent sentence (Soon the athlete…). ERPs revealed different N400-effects for definite vs. indefinite [B/
D>A/C] and subject vs. object [A/B>C/D] antecedents. This demonstrates first that definiteness affects the accessibility hierarchy of referential expression. Second, previous research has shown that referential
processing as in [A-D] is independent of the number of intervening discourse entities (Burkhardt & Roehm 2007), thus syntactic function - rather
than linear order – is here considered to influence the accessibility status
of the referent. These results support previous N400-findings for the integration of referential expressions that differ in their discourse saliency. In
addition, they indicate that definiteness and syntactic function interact to
yield a sophisticated accessibility hierarchy.

222

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

G80
AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF THE FUNCTIONAL SPECIFICITY
OF SENTENCE PROCESSING NETWORKS: A COMPARISON OF
SENTENCES AND MELODIES Corianne Rogalsky1, Gregory Hickok1;
1University of California, Irvine — A number of recent studies have identified portions of the anterior temporal lobe (ATL) that respond preferentially to structured sentence-level stimuli (versus word-lists, for
example). It is unclear, however, whether this response to sentences
reflects syntactic computations, semantic integration operations, or more
general hierarchical structure-building. The present study directly compares the neural systems associated with sentence and melodic structure
processing to investigate the specificity of this ATL activity. We implemented a mixed-design fMRI paradigm to compare activity in the ATL
whiles subjects listened to blocks of jabberwocky sentences, scrambled
jabberwocky sentences, simple novel melodies, and scrambled novel melodies. In order to separate activations associated with hierarchical structure processing from activations resulting from general temporal
processing, stimuli were presented at three different rates within each
block. Regions with a greater BOLD response to sentences than to scrambled sentences, and regions with a greater response to melodies than to
scrambled melodies were identified. In agreement with previous
research, inferior frontal areas and ATL sub-regions, bilaterally, were
found to prefer sentence-level structure. Similar regions were found to
prefer hierarchical structure in general: these areas were more active for
melodies than scrambled melodies. Further analysis indicates that inferior frontal, not anterior temporal regions are more active for sentences
than melodies, once the response to the corresponding scrambled condition is subtracted out. These preliminary analyses suggest that regions
that prefer sentence-structure in the ATL also are recruited during more
general hierarchical-structure building. Supported by NIH DC03681.
G81
LINGUISTIC APPROACH TO SYNTACTIC TROUBLES IN
STRIATAL DYSFUNCTION: THE MODEL OF HUNTINGTON'S
DISEASE AT EARLY STAGE Sara Sambin1, Marc Teichmann1,2,
Dominique Sportiche2,3, Philippe Schlenker2,3, Anne-Catherine BachoudLévi1,2,4; 1Equipe 1-NPI INSERM U841, Creteil, FRANCE, 2ENS, Paris,
France, 3UCLA, 4Henri Mondor Hospital, France — The nature of language
impairment in striatal damage is still unclear, since some authors explain
it by co-occurring deficits in non-linguistic functions such as working
memory (WM), whereas others propose the striatum to be involved in
linguistic rule processing. We investigated the role of WM and of rule
application in sentence comprehension deficits in Huntington's disease
(HD), by using two syntactic rules that allow to disentangle these two
components. WM demand is tested by manipulating surface distance
between the name and its determinant in sentences governed by gender
agreement, while syntactic operation is held constant (the girl watches
the dog that is green and the girl that watches the dog is green). To assess
rule application we varied conditions of coreference between a noun and
a pronoun (as determined by Principle C of the Binding Theory) while
holding WM constant. We contrasted sentences were principle C blocks
coreference (He smiled when Paul entered) and sentences that are ambiguous for coreference (When he smiled, Paul entered). Fifteen HD patients
at early stage of disease and 15 healthy controls were tested. Results
show that patients, like controls, have a preference for coreference in
ambiguous sentences; conversely, unlike controls, they accept coreference even when it is blocked by principle C. Increase of WM in gender
agreement sentences has no impact on controls' nor patients' performance. We show that WM does not affect patients’ ability to process syntax, suggesting sentence comprehension impairment in striatal
dysfunction is more likely to rely on linguistic rule deficits.

Poster Session G

G82
NEURAL AND TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF RETRIEVAL AND
UNIFICATION IN SENTENCE COMPREHENSION. Tineke
Snijders1, Theo Vosse1,2, Giovanni Piantoni1, Gerard Kempen2,3, Jos van
Berkum3,1, Karl Magnus Petersson3,1, Robert Oostenveld1, Peter Hagoort1,3;
1
F.C. Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Radboud University
Nijmegen, the Netherlands, 2University of Leiden, the Netherlands, 3Max
Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, the Netherlands — Sentence
comprehension requires the retrieval of single word information from
long term memory, and the integration of the individual word information into multi-word representations. Using fMRI, we explored the
hypothesis that the left posterior temporal gyrus supports the retrieval of
lexical-syntactic information, while the left inferior frontal gyrus contributes to syntactic unification operations (Hagoort, 2005). Twenty-eight
subjects read sentences and word sequences containing word-category
(noun-verb) ambiguous words at critical positions. Regions contributing
to the unification process were hypothesized to show enhanced activation for sentences compared to words, and to display a larger signal for
ambiguous than unambiguous items only within the sentence condition.
Left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) showed exactly this predicted pattern,
confirming our hypothesis that LIFG contributes to syntactic unification
processes. Left posterior middle temporal gyrus (LpMTG) was activated
more for ambiguous than unambiguous conditions (main effect over both
sentences and word sequences), as predicted for regions subserving the
retrieval of lexical-syntactic information from memory. We conclude that
understanding language involves the dynamic interplay between left
inferior frontal and left posterior temporal regions. Additionally, to
explore the temporal dynamics of the unification process, we ran an MEG
study (32 subjects) using the same design as the fMRI experiment. Stronger event-related-fields were elicited for the ambiguous sentence condition 400-700 ms after onset of the disambiguating word (the word
following the ambiguous word) over left-frontotemporal regions. This
might reflect the selection/unification of the context-relevant interpretation of the ambiguous word. Finally, oscillatory brain responses to the
word-category ambiguity will be discussed.
G83
EFFECTS OF PRIOR SYNTACTIC INFORMATION ON THEMATIC
ROLE PROCESSING: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS STUDY
IN SPANISH Clare Stroud1, Colin Phillips1; 1University of Maryland
College Park — It has been widely assumed that compositional semantics
is built on top of syntactic structures. This view has been challenged by
recent electrophysiological findings from various labs (Kim & Osterhout,
2005; Kuperberg, 2007; van Herten et al., 2006) that appear to show that
semantic composition can proceed independently of syntactic structure.
For example, a semantically anomalous but grammatical sentence such as
“The meal was devouring…” elicited a P600 (K&O, 2005). Because the
P600 is classically elicited by syntactic anomalies, this result has been
interpreted as if the processor first analyzed “the meal” as a good theme
for “devour”, and subsequently determined that the syntax is wrong (“–
ing” not “-ed”). It remains unclear, however, whether semantic composition really is substantially independent or whether in this case the syntactic cue arrived later than the relevant semantic information. We present
results from a Spanish ERP study that exploits the contrasting distribution of the auxiliary verbs “ser” and “estar” to show that knowledge
about upcoming syntactic structures restricts semantic representations to
those compatible with that expected structure. Specifically, if semantic
composition conforms to syntactic structure, when the auxiliary is “estar”
(which is unlikely to be followed by a passive verb) the processor should
not consider analyzing the NP as the theme of a passive verb. Results
show a P600 when the auxiliary was likely to be followed by a passive
verb, but not when a progressive was likely. This suggests that semantic
composition does not proceed completely independently of syntactic
structure.

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

G84
GRAMMATICAL DIFFICULTIES IN AUTISM AS REVEALED BY A
SENTENCE-PICTURE MATCHING TASK. Matthew
Walenski1,
2,3
2
4
1
Stewart Mostofsky , Jennifer Gidley-Larson , Michael Ullman ; University of
California San Diego, 2Kennedy Krieger Institute, 3Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, 4Georgetown University — Although deficits of language and communication are diagnostic of autism, not all aspects of language appear to be equally affected in the disorder. Here we examine
syntactic processing in autism with a sentence-picture matching task –
the Test of Active and Passive Sentences (TAPS; van der Lely 1996). On
this task subjects listen to a sentence and choose the picture (one of four)
that is most consistent with the meaning of the sentence. The sentences
are either active (“The boy cuts the elephant”), passive (“The elephant is
cut by the boy”), a shortened passive sentence (“The elephant is being
cut”), or an ambiguous shortened passive sentence (“The elephant is
cut”, which is ambiguous between a verbal interpretation, “The elephant
is being cut” and a grammatically simpler adjectival interpretation, “The
elephant is in a state of having-been-cut”). We tested native-Englishspeaking high functioning children with autism (n=9) and typicallydeveloping control children (n=12). Preliminary results indicate that for
the three unambiguous sentence types the children with autism performed worse than the control children (79% vs 92%), consistent with
prior claims of syntactic and other grammatical difficulties in autism
(e.g., Ullman, 2004; Walenski et al., 2006). For the ambiguous sentences,
the controls were split roughly evenly between the verbal interpretation
and the adjectival interpretation, while the children with autism
appeared to show a stronger preference for the adjectival interpretation.
This apparent preference for the less complex structure is also consistent
with grammatical difficulties in autism. Additional implications will be
discussed.

Perceptual processes: Auditory processing
G85
IMPAIRED
TEMPORAL
AND
PRESERVED
SPECTRAL
PROCESSING OF SPEECH SOUNDS IN NOISE IN PATIENTS
WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA R. Alison Adcock1, Heather Warm3, Arul
Thangavel2, Addie Hearst3, Melissa Fisher2,3, Sophia Vinogradov2,3; 1Duke
University, 2University of California, San Francisco, 3Veterans Affairs Medical
Center San Francisco — Chronic ear disease sometimes causes auditory
hallucinations like those of schizophrenia. How much does early sensory
processing contribute to development of symptoms? We used psychophysical assessments of spectral and temporal auditory processing to
investigate the hypothesis that schizophrenic patients resolve temporal
acoustic information poorly. We studied patients with schizophrenia,
along with age-matched healthy controls, all with 20dB or less hearing
loss. Participants listened to pairs of syllables presented at constant volume over speech-spectrum noise, and then reported what they heard.
Noise volume increased or decreased in a three up-one down method.
We tested Spectral and Temporal discriminations (respectively: “ba” and
“da”, or “ba” and “pa”) under two conditions. In the High Constraint
condition, participants could use predictive rules to improve performance, whereas in Low Constraint they could not. Both groups performed comparably on High and Low Constraint conditions of the
Spectral discrimination task, and on the Low Constraint condition of the
Temporal discrimination task. However, controls performed significantly
better than patients at the High Constraint Temporal discrimination task
(Multivariate ANOVA, F=5.71, p = .026). As performance on Spectral discrimination pairs in the High Constraint condition was not impaired,
patients’ failure to maintain context cannot alone explain this deficit.
These data suggest a failure to use predictive contextual processing to
resolve temporal information among individuals with schizophrenia.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

223

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

G86
THE FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION OF HUMAN AUDITORY
CORTEX: A META-ANALYSIS OF FMRI STUDIES Kimmo
Alho1,
1
2
2,3,4
1
Teemu Rinne , Timothy J. Herron , David L. Woods
; University of
Helsinki, 2Human Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, VANCHCS,
Martinez, CA, 3UC Davis, 4Center for Mind and Brain, UC Davis — We
reviewed 277 functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies of
human audition and found 81 studies reporting the MNI or Talairach
coordinates for auditory-cortex activations related to the processing of
pitch (28 studies reporting 124 auditory-cortex loci), timbre (6 studies, 17
loci), spatial location (12 studies, 46 loci), speech (26 studies, 140 loci),
human voice (9 studies, 42 loci) or to selective attention (11 studies, 32
loci). We transformed these activation loci into 2D cortical surface coordinates and evaluated the statistical significance of the differences in
median 2D and MNI coordinates using permutation testing. We found
evidence for separate auditory “what” and “where” pathways, as in each
hemisphere, pitch processing was associated with activations near the
crossing of Heschl’s gyrus (HG) and the superior temporal gyrus (STG),
while location processing produced significantly posterior activations in
the planum temporale. Speech processing, in turn, elicited activations
similar to those produced by voice processing, with both foci located in
STG lateral to HG and significantly lateral to activations related to processing of spectral features (pitch or timbre) of non-human sounds. Differences were also found in median locations of attention-related
modulations (ARMs) of auditory-cortex activity between studies using
speech as attended and unattended stimuli and studies using other
sounds, ARMs for speech being located in STG anterior to ARMs for nonspeech. Our results indicate that the meta-analysis methods applied here
are powerful tools for elucidating the functional organization of human
auditory cortex.
G87
SELF-TRIGGERED TONES ELICIT ATTENUATED EARLY
AUDITORY EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS IN HUMANS Pamela
Baess1, Andreas Widmann1, Anja Roye1, Erich Schroeger1, Thomas Jacobsen1;
1Institute of Psychology I, University of Leipzig, Germany — Several theoretical concepts address the question how the central nervous system is able
to anticipate the sensory consequences of self-generated actions, and thus
enables the discrimination between the origin of these consequences as
either self-generated or externally-generated. In accordance with these
notions, the representations of these sensory consequences of self-generated actions were assumed to be attenuated compared to those of externally-generated actions in different modalities. Previous studies in the
auditory domain yielded evidence for attenuated responses of self-generated sounds in contrast to externally generated sounds in the human
auditory cortex. The aim of the present study was to examine the time
course of processing differences between self-generated sounds and
externally generated ones using human electroencephalography recordings. In our paradigm, the subjects were asked to press a button in a selfpaced rate of about 1.25 /s which triggered the presentation of a click
sound (self-generated motor-auditory condition). In an externally generated auditory-only condition, the click sound sequence of the motorauditory condition was replayed. To rule out motor activity, an additional motor-only condition was conducted without any sound presentation. Results showed attenuations in early auditory components of the
event-related potentials in response to the self-generated sounds starting
around 20 ms after stimulus presentation. Thus, the sensory consequences of different origins as either self-generated or externally generated are distinguished at subcortical and initial cortical levels of auditory
processing stages. This indicates the far-reaching applications of a forward mechanism to anticipate the consequences of self-generated actions
in the human central nervous system.

224

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

G88
LOW-SCORING
PARTICIPANTS
EXHIBITED
HIGHERAMPLITUDE EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS DURING A SPEECH
DISCRIMINATION TASK FOLLOWING ALTERATION OF SLEEPWAKE CYCLES. Maria Barnes1,2, Rachel Waford2, Natalie Armstrong1,
David Gozal1, Dennis Molfese2; 1University of Louisville, 2University of
Louisville, Birth Defects Center — We investigated the effect of sleep
restriction on brain activation in adults identified as high-scoring or lowscoring on the Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS). Studies investigating performance in space show
that sleep deprivation impacts cognition (Flynn, 2006). Following overnight polysomnography, 30 individuals’ (15 females; aged 30-45 years)
sleep cycles were monitored for one week. We studied baseline performance on the RBANS and event-related potentials (ERPs) recorded using
a 256-electrode net during a speech discrimination task. Individuals were
randomly assigned to one of three sleep groups, and ERPs were recorded
at the end of each week for four weeks. We examined differences in their
performance on the RBANS and ERPs following experimental sleep alteration. ERP data were analyzed using principal components analysis with
subsequent factor loading scores from the 4 factors serving as the dependent variable in a repeated measures analysis of variance. Results indicated
Week*Vowel*Electrode*Group
(F=2.363,
p=0.036)
and
Week*Consonant*Vowel*Electrode*RBANS (F=2.631, p=0.029) interactions at 152ms. At 204 ms, Week*RBANS (F=4.973, p=0.037) and Electrode*RBANS (F=3.471, p=0.041) interactions were found. Post-hoc
analyses showed significantly higher-amplitude activation in the lowscoring group in left temporal and parietal areas at baseline, reflecting
more effortful processing. After alteration of sleep cycles, low-scorers
showed increased activation in not only left temporal and parietal areas
but also right inferior occipital and prefrontal areas. This indicates more
diffuse—less effective—resource recruitment consistent with our previous report of lower-scorers being at increased risk for impairment after
alteration in sleep cycles due to lack of cognitive reserve.
G89
MODULATION OF STEADY-STATE RESPONSES DURING
CONCURRENT SOUND PERCEPTION: DIRECT RECORDING
FROM HUMAN AUDITORY CORTEX Aurélie
Bidet-Caulet1,2,
Catherine Fischer1,3, Françoise Bauchet1,4, Julien Besle1,5, Pierre-Emmanuel
Aguera1, Marie-Hélène Giard1, Olivier Bertrand1; 1INSERM U821, Lyon,
Institut Fédératif des Neurosciences, Lyon, University Lyon 1, Lyon, 2Helen
Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 3Neurological
Hospital, Lyon, 4MEG Department, Lyon, 5Cognitive Neuroscience and
Schizophrenia Program Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research,
Neurological Institute, Columbia University — In ecological situations, we
are often confronted with a mixture of sounds produced by several
simultaneously active sources and it is crucial to parse and identify these
multiple sources. This acoustic segregation relies on both bottom-up
(detection of a clearly isolated sound) and top-down (selection of the relevant information mechanisms). The aim of the present study is to characterize the neural mechanisms underlying the implicit grouping/
segregation of two simultaneous streams and the active selection of one
stream. Electrophysiological recordings were carried out in epileptic
patients with pharmacologically resistant partial epilepsy, implanted
with depth electrodes. We manipulated sound onset asynchrony to
induce the segregation/grouping of two concurrent streams. To dissociate the neural activity specifically corresponding to either stream, we
used long-duration sounds at different amplitude modulation frequencies. Thus, each stream elicited an evoked steady-state response (SSR) at
the same frequency as the amplitude modulation of the sound. First, to
study implicit segregation/grouping, patients were presented with the
stimuli while they were performing an auditory distracting task. Second,
to test the influence of top-down processes on concurrent sound processing, patients had to focus their attention on one of the two streams in
order to perform a difficult spatial task. We found that SSR, generated

Poster Session G

along Heschl’s gyri, were enhanced when the two concurrent streams
were implicitly grouped into one complex stream and were modulated
according to the attention orientation. These results suggest that the representation of concurrent sounds, in the primary auditory cortices, can be
modulated by both acoustic and attentional contexts.
G90
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SPEECH-IN-NOISE LEARNING IN
THE AUDITORY BRAINSTEM. Jessica de Boer1,2, Roger Thornton1,2;
1MRC Institute of Hearing Research, 2School of Medicine, University of
Southampton — Neural correlates of speech-in-noise learning in the auditory brainstem. Auditory training has been shown to enhance brainstem
representations of speech-sounds in noise in children with learning problems, concomitant with improved speech-in-noise performance (Russo et
al 2005). In this study, we investigated whether training-induced
improvement in speech-in-noise performance involves changes in the
activity of the medial olivocochlear bundle (MOCB), which is thought to
enhance pre-neural responses to transient signals in background noise.
MOCB activity was monitored in normal-hearing adult listeners (n = 16)
during a 5-day training regime on a phoneme-in-noise discrimination
task. The sounds were taken from a 96-step linear continuum between /
bee/ and /dee/, and were delivered monaurally to the right ear in continuous broadband noise (40 dB SL) at a signal to-noise ratio of 10 dB. The
results show significant group learning, with great inter-individual variability in initial performance and improvement. Strikingly, MOCB activity measured on the first training day strongly predicted the subsequent
amount of learning. Moreover, in listeners that improved significantly, an
increase in MOCB activity was observed after training. Correlation analysis showed that MOCB activity did not explain variation in performance
between listeners on any training day, but rather reflected an individual
listeners’ performance relative to a personal optimum. The results indicate an MOCB-mediated listening strategy that facilitates speech-in-noise
perception. This listening strategy appears to be flexible and susceptible
to training, presumably through changes in descending control of MOCB
activity. The findings suggest the possibility of MOCB involvement in
impairment and remediation of speech-in-noise processing in the central
auditory pathway.
G91
THE BIRTH OF MUSICAL EMOTION : A DEPTH ELECTRODE ERP
STUDY IN HUMAN Delphine Dellacherie1,2, Micha Pfeuty3, Dominique
Hasboun4,5,6, Julien Lefèvre4, Claude Adam2,4,6, Laurent Hugueville4, Denis P
Schwartz7, Michel Baulac2,8, Séverine Samson1,2; 1Neuropsychologie et
Cognition Auditive, JE 2497, Université Lille 3, 2Unité d’Epilepsie, Hôpital de
la Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, 3CNRS (UMR 5231), 4Laboratoire de Neurosciences
Cognitives et d’Imagerie Cérébrale, LENA, 5Hôpital de la Pitié Salpêtrière,
Paris, 6Pierre et Marie Curie University, Paris, 7MEEG Center, PitiéSalpêtrière Hospital Paris, France, 8Cortex et Epilepsie, INSERM U739, Faculté
de Médecine Pitié — The role of musical harmony in inducing emotions is
very well known. More specifically, major and minor chords lead to
happy and sad feelings whereas consonant and dissonant chords produce pleasant and unpleasant experiences. Although several lines of evidence suggest that auditory areas and mesial temporal lobe structures are
involved in perceptual and emotional processing of music, the time
course of this processing remains largely unknown. To explore the cerebral signature of musical harmony and its relation to emotion, we
recorded intracranial event-related potentials to musical chords in epileptic patients during a presurgical evaluation. The stimuli were composed
of musical chords in which the mode (major-minor) and the dissonance
(consonant-dissonant) were systematically manipulated. The chords
were played on two different timbre (organ and piano) and the task consisted of detecting chords presented on a specific timbre. Our results
revealed (1) different evoked potentials in response to dissonant as compared to consonant chords in auditory areas : the latency of the N100
being delayed for dissonant chords and (2) different evoked potentials in
response to minor as opposed to major chords in the auditory areas as

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

well as in the amygdala. These findings suggest that musical chords associated to different emotional experiences can trigger distinct eventrelated responses. The time course of the involvement of lateral and
medial temporal lobe structures and the role of the amygdala in processing negative emotions will be discussed in relation to the theoretical context of emotion.
G92
AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION OF CONTEXT
USE IN INTACT AND DISTORTED SPEECH Kate Dupuis1, Natalie
Phillips2, Kathy Pichora-Fuller1; 1University of Toronto at Mississauga,
2Concordia University — Kate Dupuis1, Natalie Phillips2, & Kathy
Pichora-Fuller1 1Human Communication Laboratory, Department of
Psychology, University of Toronto at Mississauga, Mississauga, Ontario 2
Department of Psychology, Center for Research in Human Development,
Concordia University, Montréal, Québec Supportive context, such as a
highly predictable sentence structure, has been shown to improve spoken
language understanding. The use of context has been studied both behaviourally and through use of event-related potentials (ERPs). The N400
component is a negative-going waveform that is related to aspects of contextual/semantic processing. Unpredictable sentence-final words (e.g.,
She was talking about the stripes) typically elicit a larger N400 than do
predictable sentence-final words (e.g., The zebra has black and white
stripes). Aydelott and colleagues (2006) showed that degradation of auditory stimuli through low-pass filtering attenuated the N400 response. We
used multi-band noise-vocoding, a different form of degradation, to
investigate the effect of context and acoustic distortion on sentence intelligibility in eleven young adults. Identification was greater for high context (HC) compared to low context (LC) terminal words in all conditions
and was negatively correlated with the level of degradation. N400 amplitude was larger for LC compared to HC sentences across all listening conditions. The N400 response differed between the high and low context
conditions in the intact and the most degraded condition but not in the
moderately degraded condition. This partially supports Aydelott et al.
and suggests that N400 amplitude can be influenced by different types of
acoustic distortion.
G93
INTENSITY
DISCRIMINATION
FOLLOWING
BILATERAL
LESIONS OF AUDITORY CORTEX Andrew R. Dykstra4,1,2,3, Louis D.
Braida3,1,4, Christine K. Koh2,1,3, Mark Jude Tramo2,1,3; 1Institute for Music
and Brain Science, Boston, 2Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 3Sensory
Communication Group, Research Laboratory of Electronics, MIT, Cambridge,
4Speech and Hearing Bioscience and Technology Program, Harvard-MIT
Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Cambridge — The ability to discriminate small changes in sound intensity, especially evident for normal-hearing listeners under optimal listening conditions, is important for
both speech and music perception. Loudness conveys important source
properties such as strength, size, location, and, for animate objects, intentionality. The effects of various types of hearing loss on loudness discrimination are well documented, but the effects of cortical lesions on
loudness perception remain unclear. We measured pure-tone (1 kHz)
intensity discrimination thresholds in a young stroke patient with
chronic bilateral infarctions of auditory cortex, clinically normal puretone detection thresholds, and markedly elevated frequency discrimination thresholds (Tramo et al., 2002). We hypothesized (1) elevated intensity discrimination thresholds for both monaural and binaural stimulus
presentation, (2) a larger deficit when presenting stimuli to the ear (left)
contralateral to the larger lesion (right) and (3) larger deficits for quantitative (louder/softer) vs. qualitative (same/different) judgments given
analogous results for frequency discrimination reported previously
(Tramo et al., 2002). Case A1+’s ability to detect small changes in intensity were significantly impaired relative to age-matched normal controls
for both monaural and binaural stimulus presentation as well as for both
qualitative and quantitative judgments. There was no effect of ear for
monaural stimuli, possibly suggestive of compensatory mechanisms in

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

225

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

the left hemisphere. Case A1+ was relatively worse for qualitative judgments, contrasting with the previous study on frequency discrimination.
Our results highlight the necessity of in tact cortical stimulus processing
in intensity discrimination specifically, as well as perceptual acuity in the
auditory domain more generally.
G94
CROSS-MODAL PERCEPTUAL LEARNING OF SPECTRALLY
DEGRADED SPEECH Frank Eisner1, Carolyn McGettigan1, Stuart
Rosen2, Andrew Faulkner2, Sophie K. Scott1; 1Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, University College London, 2University College London — We
investigated normal-hearing listeners' ability to learn to understand a
speech signal that simulates some aspects of the stimulation received
from a cochlear implant. Participants were trained with syntactically simple, spoken sentences that were spectrally degraded by noiseband-vocoding. The sentences were also shifted upwards in frequency in order to
simulate a shallow insertion of the electrode array in cochlear implantation, and the ensuing misalignment with cochlear tonotopicity. A control
condition consisted of unintelligible stimuli in which the order of bands
was inverted in the spectral domain during noiseband-vocoding. During
training, participants listened passively to these sentences, and on each
trial received visual feedback which could be either a written version of
the sentence or a video of the talker who originally produced it. Learning
under both feedback conditions was relatively fast: Subjects improved on
average by 25% on keyword recognition scores after 100 trials. The control condition produced no significant learning effect with either type of
feedback. We further used functional magnetic resonance imaging to
investigate which cortical areas may be recruited for learning this type of
speech signal. A comparison of degraded and learnable sentences with
the unlearnable control stimuli showed activity in the left superior temporal sulcus both during passive listening and receiving feedback. In contrast, the left inferior frontal gyrus was activated only when subjects were
receiving feedback in the learnable condition. These results suggest that
the inferior frontal gyrus plays an important role in integrating acousticphonetic processing with externally provided feedback.
G95
TEMPORAL COUPLING OF THE LEFT AND RIGHT M100: PURE
TONE
PROCESSING
IN
CHILDREN
WITH
AUTISM,
UNAFFECTED SIBLINGS AND TYPICALLY DEVELOPING
CHILDREN. Paul T. Fillmore1, A. Lisette Isenberg1, M. Anne Spence1,
Nicole M. Gage1; 1University of California, Irvine — In
healthy
adults,
latency of the auditory-evoked M100 is closely coupled in time (<20ms)
in left (LH) and right hemispheres (RH), with LH latency typically
slightly later than RH. Though the neural bases of this effect are as yet
unclear, it is present for both speech and non-speech sounds. To investigate this temporal coupling in development (both typically and in the
presence language disorders, such as autism) we measured hemispheric
asymmetries of M100 latency in typically developing children (TD,
N=10), children with autism disorder (AD, N=16), and their unaffected
siblings (SIB, N=9) in response to sinusoidal tones of varying frequency
(250, 500, 1000, 2000Hz). We compared LH and RH M100 latency offset
by calculating a laterality index (LI), [2(L-R)/(L+R)], where positive LI
values indicate LH>RH, and computing absolute left-right M100 latency
differences. Results: All groups (TD, AD, SIB) had RH>LH asymmetries
in M100 latency, unlike the typical LH>RH effect seen in adults. TD: LI=0.0030. Mean absolute LH-RH M100 offset = 10.6ms (SD=7.5, |Range|=029ms). SIB: LI=-0.0120. Mean absolute LH-RH offset = 17.1ms (SD=14.7,
|Range|=1-62ms). AD: LI=-0.0480. Mean absolute LH-RH offset =
23.9ms (SD=21.3, |Range|=1-95ms). Findings provide evidence that TD
children show a relatively tight temporal coupling of LH and RH M100,
similar to findings for adults, however with a reversed hemisphere direction. Both AD children and their siblings have a greater LH-RH offset
than TD children, with siblings showing a laterality index that is 4-fold
that of TD children and AD laterality at 16-fold that of TD children.

226

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

G96
THE BENEFICIAL EFFECTS OF NEUROPLASTICITY-BASED
COGNITIVE TRAINING IN SCHIZOPHRENIA PERSIST 6 MONTHS
BEYOND TRAINING Melissa Fisher1,2, Christine Holland1,2, Karuna
Subramaniam1,2, Michael Merzenich3, Sophia Vinogradov1,2; 1University of
California, San Francisco, 2San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
3Posit Science Corporation, San Francisco — We examined the persistence
of neurocognitive gains provided by a novel neuroplasticity-based cognitive training program that targets the deficits in schizophrenia. In this
randomized controlled trial, schizophrenia subjects are stratified by age,
IQ, and symptom severity and randomly assigned to either the active targeted cognitive training (TCT) condition or a computer games (CG) control condition. The TCT condition consists of computerized exercises that
first adaptively increase the fidelity of early representations of auditory
information, followed by exercises that require the immediate recall and
increasingly complex manipulation of this information. Subjects are
driven to make progressively more accurate distinctions about the spectro-temporal fine-structure of verbal stimuli, and to incorporate and generalize these improvements in signal salience. We find that, after 40-60
hours of this form of training, and relative to the CG group (N=20), TCT
subjects (N=22) show significant improvements on neuropsychological
measures of processing speed (p=.04) and verbal working memory
(p=.05) (moderate to large effect sizes, d = 0.73 and 0.63), with generalization of improvement into verbal learning (p < .01), memory (p < .01), and
problem-solving (p = .02) (large effect sizes, d = 1.05 to 1.27). Preliminary
data suggest that these significant neurocognitive gains persist 6 months
after cessation of training: notably, the TCT group shows better performance on measures of global and verbal neurocognitive functioning relative to the CG group (moderate to large effect sizes, d = .60 and .81).
G97
A NEURAL NETWORK SENSITIVE TO SPECTRAL ORDER
DETERMINES HOW MUCH MUSICAL SOUND ENGAGES THE
AUDITORY CORTEX. Thomas Fritz1, Derek Ott1, Karsten Mueller1,
Stefan Koelsch1,2; 1Max Planck Institut for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, 2University of Sussex — Whether the percept of consonance and
dissonance is hardwired in the auditory perceptual pathway, or an effect
of late cognitive processing is still an unresolved issue. Here we demonstrate the existence of a perceptual gating mechanism in the auditory
domain that is dependent on the degree of dissonance in musical signals
and is governed by a neural circuit involving several levels of the auditory pathway and the amygdala. Our findings contribute to the understanding of how the perceptual system in Western adults deals with
auditory signal of variable spectral order. They imply a neural mechanism that responds selectively to the degree of dissonance in music, illustrating how several levels of the auditory pathway interact with each
other and the amygdala to regulate the engagement of the auditory cortex.
G98
REDUCED FRONTAL LOBE CORTICAL THICKNESS AND P50
SENSORY GATING RATIO Stephanie Gorman1,2, Lauren Parks1,2, Faith
Hanlon1,2, Mollie Monnig1,2, Robert Thoma1,2, Gregory Miller4, Jose Cañive1;
1
The University of New Mexico, 2Mental Illness and Neuroscience Discovery
(MIND) Research Network, 3The University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign — Title: Reduced Frontal Lobe Cortical Thickness and P50
Sensory Gating Ratio Authors: Stephanie Gorman, Lauren Parks, Faith
M. Hanlon, Mollie Monnig, Robert J. Thoma, Gregory A. Miller, & Jose
M. Cañive A deficit in information processing is characteristic of schizophrenia. One means of assessing that deficit is via auditory sensory gating with an event-related brain potential (ERP) paired-click paradigm. As
a group, patients with schizophrenia reliably show impaired sensory gating. The neural network supporting successful gating is slowly being
identified and is known to include frontal cortex, but the particular feature(s) or region(s) are unclear. It was hypothesized that thinner cortex
would reflect disease-related abnormality in schizophrenia and that this

Poster Session G

frontal lobe abnormality would affect network function and result in
more impaired sensory gating. Electroencephalography (EEG) and structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) were used to examine the relationship between sensory gating ratio and frontal-lobe cortical thickness.
Ten schizophrenia and five healthy control subjects underwent EEG procedures and received 3D sMRI scans. The ERP P50 for each click in the
pair (S1, S2) was identified and ERP latency and amplitude information
were recorded for each subject. Gating ratio was computed as the ratio
S2/S1. Patients with schizophrenia had thinner left frontal-lobe cortical
thickness and higher (more impaired) sensory gating ratio. Using multiple regression, gating ratio was shown to have a significant negative
association with both left- and right-hemisphere frontal-lobe thickness,
regardless of group membership. These results are broadly consistent
with the hypothesis that reduced frontal-lobe cortical thickness would
result in impaired sensory gating ratio. That this extended to healthy controls was unexpected. Further research using neuropsychological measures of prefrontal function and a larger sample is warranted.
G99
DIFFERENT TYPES OF CUES TO THE 'BEAT' IN RHYTHM
MODULATE MOTOR AREA ACTIVITY Jessica Grahn1, James Rowe1;
1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit — Rhythm perception activates
areas typically associated with movement (premotor cortex (PMC), supplementary motor area (SMA), cerebellum, and basal ganglia). Here we
examine how these areas are influenced by different types of cues to the
beat in rhythm. Musicians and non-musicians underwent fMRI scanning
during perception of rhythms with and without a beat. For half the beat
rhythms, the beat was explicitly emphasized with volume accents, and
for the other half the beat had to be internally generated in accordance
with duration accents in the rhythm. Nonbeat control rhythms were also
generated for each condition. Beat rhythms minus nonbeat rhythms activated the putamen. Duration beat (minus duration nonbeat) rhythms
compared to volume beat (minus volume nonbeat) rhythms activated
bilateral PMC, SMA, STG, cerebellum, and inferior frontal gyri. Functional connectivity analyses showed increased coupling between the
putamen and bilateral SMA, PMC, and superior temporal gyri (STG) during beat rhythms. Moreover, the coupling of motor (SMA and left PMC)
and auditory (STG) areas was greater during the duration-based beat
condition than the volume accented beat condition. Increased connectivity was observed with greater musical experience. A second study compared the volume-accented rhythms with unaccented versions, to test the
hypothesis that the interaction between duration and volume beat
rhythms in the first experiment was due to internal generation of the
beat, not greater temporal complexity in the duration-accented rhythms.
Interactions in the same areas were observed between unaccented beat
(minus unaccented nonbeat) rhythms compared to volume beat (minus
volume nonbeat) rhythms, confirming the hypothesis.
G100
THE CEREBELLAR SUBSYSTEM FOR THE ABSOLUTE
PERCEPTION OF TIME Manon Grube1, Freya Cooper1, Jessica Foxton2,
Patrick Chinnery1, Timothy Griffiths1; 1The Auditory Group, Medical School
Newcastle University, UK, 2INSERM U280, Mental Processes and Brain
Activation Laboratory, Lyon — This study tested the hypotheses that the
cerebellum is a necessary substrate for auditory timing analysis, and
examined the relative importance of the cerebellum to single interval and
higher-order pattern analysis [1-5]. Seven subtests of auditory timing
analysis were administered in 34 patients with the genetic disorder
spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 and a matched control group. Cerebellar
patients exhibited significant impairments for single subsecond intervals
of variable and fixed durations as well as within neutral simple pattern
context, and a trend for suprasecond durations. Relative interval timing
in beneficial context of a simple isochronous pattern, metrical pattern
processing and pulse detection in contrast were not significantly different
from controls. Correlations between subtests suggest the reliance on one
timing mechanism in patients but two in controls. The data support the

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

existence of a cerebellar subsystem that critically subserves absolute but
not relative analysis of time and are consistent with recent results from
our laboratory based on repetitive transcranial stimulation of the cerebellum. References: 1 Harrington DL et al. 2004. Brain 127(3): 561-74. 2 Ivry
RB & Keele SW 1989. Journal Cog Neurosci 1: 136-52. 3 Malapani et al.
1998. NeuroReport 9: 3907-12. 4 Mangels JA et al. 1998. Brain Res Cog
Brain Res 7: 15-39. 5 Nichelli P et al. 1996. Neuropsychologia, 34, 863-71.
G101
DEVELOPMENT OF ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES TO
CHANGES IN PITCH PATTERN BETWEEN 2 AND 4 MONTHS OF
AGE Chao He1, Laurel Trainor1; 1McMaster University — Infants
are
attracted to the pitch patterns of music and to the large intonation contours of infant-directed speech. Our goal was to examine the development of cortical processing of pitch patterns between 2 and 4 months.
Previous studies indicate that in response to occasional simple changes in
pitch, 2-month-olds show an increase in a frontally-positive slow wave
whereas 4-month-olds show a negative response similar to adult mismatch negativity (MMN) at about 200 ms after onset of the deviant notes.
In the present study, we tested responses to a change in a pitch pattern
(standard: piano tones C5 - F#5; deviant: piano tones F#5 - C5). Adults
and 4-month-olds showed an MMN response, but 2-month-olds did not
show either a significant MMN response or a positive slow wave
response. The MMN in 4-month-olds was smaller and later than that of
adults. These results suggests (1) that the slow wave seen to change at 2
months may reflect processing of simple sound features such as pitch, but
not complex sound features such as pitch patterning, and (2) that the
auditory cortex of 2-month-olds is too immature to support pitch pattern
processing. Most models of pitch pattern perception in adults suggest
that regions beyond the primary auditory cortex are involved. Our
results suggest, however, that 2-month-old infants may processes pitch
patterns differently, perhaps making substantial use of subcortical areas.
G102
ATTENTIONAL MODULATION OF THE PERCEPTION OF
ILLUSORY VOWELS AND SOUND ONSETS: TWO FMRI
STUDIES Antje Heinrich1,2, Matthew H. Davis2, Robert P. Carlyon2, Ingrid
S. Johnsrude1; 1Queen’s University, Kingston, Canada, 2MRC-CBU,
Cambridge, UK — Our first study presented the two formants of a vowel
in an alternating pattern, and showed that filling the gaps in each formant with bursts of noise caused the formants to be heard as continuous
and the resulting sound as more more vowel-like. When this “Illusion”
condition was modified by increasing the Formant-to-Noise Ratio (FNR),
the formants were heard as interrupted (“Illusion Break” condition) and
less vowel-like. We showed, using fMRI, that activation in Middle Temporal Gyrus (MTG) was greater for Illusion than for Illusion Break stimuli, reflecting the difference in speechlikeness. Conversely, the opposite
occurred in primary auditory areas (PAC), a finding attributed to the Illusion Break stimuli containing more perceived sound onsets than the Illusion stimuli. In the follow-up study we investigated whether the neural
activation to illusory vowels and sound onsets was modulated by attention. We presented Illusion, Illusion Break, and two types of intact vowels with a differing number of sound onsets to listeners while asking
them to direct their attention either to the vowel stimuli or to one of two
types of distractors (auditory or visual). Using a sparse-imaging design
(Hall et al., 1999) we collected whole-brain echo-planar images from 24
listeners. The data show that activation to intact and illusory vowels in
MTG, and to sound onset in PAC, is indeed modulated by attention. Preliminary analyses also indicate that the activation profiles do not differ
for intact and illusory vowels in MTG.
G103
CORTICAL PROCESSING OF SPOKEN VOWEL-CONSONANT
AND CONSONANT-VOWEL SYLLABLES Alexis Hervais-Adelman1,
David Ives1, Roy Patterson1; 1Centre For the Neural Basis of Hearing,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge — Uppenkamp, Johnsrude, Norris,
Marslen-Wilson, & Patterson (2006) used fMRI to localize the initial

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

227

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

stages of speech specific processing in the auditory system. They contrasted synthetic vowel sounds with acoustically matched nonspeech
sounds and demonstrated that regions of the superior temporal gyrus
(STG) and the superior temporal sulcus (STS) were more active in the
presence of the vowel sounds. The present study uses fMRI to investigate
the processing of consonant-vowel (CV) and vowel-consonant (VC) syllables to determine the locus of consonant-processing in the human brain.
We used 3 classes of consonant (fricatives, sonorants and stops) combined with 5 canonical English vowels (/a/, /e/, /i/, /o/, /u/), to create
CVs and VCs. Vowels, a spectrally matched nonspeech condition, and
silent intervals were included as controls. Stimuli were 6.8s strings of 10
pseudo-randomly assorted tokens from one condition. We used a sparse
imaging design. Stimuli were presented during a 6.9s silent inter-scan
interval (TA: 2.1s, TR: 9s). 14 normally-hearing, right-handed, native
English speakers heard 8 stimuli from each condition in a randomised
order, in 3 blocks of 72 scans. Similarly to Uppenkamp et al (2006), we
found significantly enhanced activity in left STS for vowels over nonspeech. We observed a significant main effect of consonant class on activity along posterior to mid left STG, and a significant interaction between
consonant class and syllable type (CV vs VC) in left posterior STS. These
results suggest that initial speech-specific processing of auditory signals
occurs beyond primary auditory areas, in the left STG and left STS.
G104
MEG
EVIDENCE
FOR
AUDITORY
RESTORATION
OF
FUNDAMENTAL PITCH William Idsardi1, Philip Monahan1, Kevin de
Souza1; 1University of Maryland, Linguistics, CNL — Although pitch has
been extensively investigated, many details of the neuro-physiology of
pitch perception remain unknown [1]. One striking phenomenon is the
restoration of fundamental pitch from a partial series of harmonic overtones. Previous magnetoencephalographic (MEG) studies have shown
that M100 (an early, automatic evoked auditory component) latencies for
inferred fundamental pitch [2] follow the same response curve as those
obtained for pure sinusoidal and sawtooth tones at equivalent pitches [3].
However, this previous research has not held gross spectral properties
constant across stimulus materials. The present study corrects these deficiencies, and examines inferred fundamental pitches from 100Hz to
600Hz. The spectral center of gravity was held constant by maintaining
two outer harmonics at 1200Hz and 2400Hz. Additional harmonics were
added in pairs at 100Hz intervals from 1300 and 2300Hz in to 1800Hz.
Because the perceived pitch is equal to the GCD of the series of harmonics, this design generates inferred fundamental pitches of 100, 200, 300,
400 and 600 Hz. The latencies of subjects’ M100 responses to pure tones
and tone complexes were compared and found to pattern similarly, both
following the previously established response curve. This evidence suggests that the auditory system rapidly extracts abstract properties of
acoustic signals, such as computing the inferred fundamental pitch from
the signal spectrum, within 100ms of stimulus onset. [1] Plack CJ et al.
2005. Pitch: Neural Coding and Perception. [2] Matsuwaki Y et al. 2004.
Auris Nasus Larynx 31: 208–211. [3] Roberts TP et al. 2000. J Clinical Neurophys. 17: 114-129.
G105
TEMPORAL COUPLING OF THE LEFT AND RIGHT M100:
SPEECH SOUND PROCESSING IN CHILDREN WITH AUTISM
DISORDER, THEIR UNAFFECTED SIBLINGS, AND TYPICALLY
DEVELOPING CONTROLS A. Lisette Isenberg1, Paul Fillmore1, M.
Anne Spence1, Nicole Gage1; 1University of California, Irvine — In
healthy
adults, M100 latency is closely coupled in time (<20ms) in left (LH) and
right hemispheres (RH), with LH latency typically peaking slightly later
than RH. Although the neural bases remain unknown, it is observed in
response to both speech and non-speech sounds. Far less is known about
the temporal coupling of M100 in LH and RH in typical development and
language disorders, such as autism. We measured M100 latency hemisphere asymmetries in typically developing children (TD, N=9), children
with autism disorder (AD, N=15), and their unaffected siblings (SIB,

228

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

N=8) in response to natural speech tokens: consonant-vowel syllables
(CVs) that differed in distinctive features: place of articulation (POA, e.g.
/ba/ vs. /da/), voice onset time (VOT, e.g. /ba/ vs. /pa/) or both (e.g. /
ba/ vs. /ta/) We compared LH and RH M100 latency offset by calculating a laterality index (LI) ([2(L-R)/(L+R)], thus positive LI values indicate
LH>RH, and computing absolute left-right M100 latency differences.
Results: TD and SIB had hemisphere asymmetries that differed by VOT
cue, with LH>RH LI for +VOT and RH>LH for –VOT. AD asymmetries
were all LH>RH. TD mean absolute LH-RH M100 offsets ranged 0-46ms.
AD absolute mean offsets ranged 0-98ms. SIB: mean absolute offsets
ranged 0-53ms. Findings of hemisphere differences are discussed with
respect to neural synchrony in cortical processes underlying speech perception in development.
G106
PERCEPTION OF WITHIN LANGUAGE PHONOLOGICAL
CONTRASTS McNeel Jantzen1, Amanda Hahn1; 1Western Washington
University, Bellingham, WA — Adult monolingual and bilingual listeners
find it difficult to perceive speech sounds not present in their native or
first language. Previous work on the perception of non-native phonemic
contrasts has shown that speech perception depends upon the phonemic
categories of the native or first language (Pallier et al. 2001). More
recently, the impact on speech perception of within-language phonological variation has found that speakers’ perception of phonemic contrasts
in non-native dialects are sensitive to priming effects when discriminating minimal pairs of words (Dufour et al. 2007; Conrey et al. 2005). This
study examined the perception of the low back vowel contrast (open back
unrounded vowel and the open-mid back rounded vowel) and the high/
low front vowel contrast (near-close near-front unrounded vowel and the
open front unrounded vowel) by American English native speakers from
the Pacific Northwest and portions of the Midwest and Northeast. The
low back vowels have undergone a merger in the Pacific Northwest dialect, but not in areas of the Midwest and Northeastern regions of the US
(no merger exists for the high/low front contrast in either population).
We employed a long lag repetition priming paradigm consisting of both
contrasts and a lexical decision task that required subjects to discriminate
between words and nonwords. Response times were measured from the
onset of each word. Results indicate that subjects where the low back
vowel merger exists assimilate contrasting sounds into an existing phonological category; perceiving two distinct words as the same.
G107
THAI LEXICAL TONE PERCEPTION IN NATIVE SPEAKERS OF
THAI, CHINESE AND ENGLISH: AN ERP TRAINING STUDY
Edith Kaan1, Christopher Barkley2, Mingzhen Bao1, Ratree Wayland1;
1
University of Florida, 2University of California San Diego — Tone languages
such as Thai and Mandarin Chinese use pitch differences to distinguish
lexical meaning. The aim of the present study was to investigate the
effects of language background and training on the pre-attentive perception and speaker normalization of lexical tones. Eleven native speakers of
Thai, twelve of Mandarin Chinese and twelve of American English (a
non-tone language) participated in a behavioral discrimination task and
an EEG oddball task, before and after a two-day perceptual categorization training. Multiple tokens of the Thai syllable [kha:] pronounced with
a mid-level, high-rising or low-falling tone were employed. Discrimination performance improved after training, especially for the English and
Chinese speakers. Low-falling deviants elicited a mismatch negativity
(MMN) in all groups. Although the English speakers showed the poorest
behavioral performance, their MMN was largest before training, but
became smaller and equal to that of the tone language speakers after
training. This pattern of results suggests that speakers of a non-tone language are more sensitive to early different in pitch onset — which were
more prominent in the low-falling versus mid-level contrast — but that
this can be suppressed by training. In addition, all groups showed a late
negativity to both the low-falling and high-rising deviants. The negativity
to the high-rising deviants was left-lateralized in the English and Chinese

Poster Session G

speakers, but not in the Thai, suggesting that native speakers differ from
non-native speakers with respect to the processing of Thai late pitch contours.
G108
NEURAL ACTIVATION TO ONE’S OWN, FRIEND’S AND
STRANGER’S VOICES: AN FMRI STUDY Sachiko Koyama1,2, Akira
Toyomura2,1, Tamaki Miyamoto3, Atsushi Terao4, Takashi Omori5, Harumitsu
Murohashi6, Shinya Kuriki1; 1Res. Institute Elect Science Hokkaido University,
2RISTEX, JST, 3Graduate School of Med. Hokkaido University, 4Information
Sci. Res. Ctr., Aoyama Gakuin University, 5Tamagawa University Res.
Institute, 6Graduate School of Education ido University — Under
delayed
auditory feedback (DAF) conditions where speech is fedback with a short
time delay (ca. 200 ms), speech production is often severely deteriorated
in healthy subjects (e.g., stuttering). However when the pitch of the feedback voice is transformed (either upward or downward), the effect is
suppressed (e.g., Toyomura and Omori, 2005). This finding suggests neural mechanisms specific to one’s own speech sound. To examine this
hypothesis, we conducted an fMRI experiment. We morphed digitally
recorded voices between (1) subject A and a stranger B, (2) subject’s
friend C and a stranger D and (3) strangers E and F step by step using
speech analysis, modification synthesis system STRAIGHT (Kawahara
1998). Due to bone conduction, the perception of recorded voices is different from “live” voice. Each sound above 1 kHz were decreased by 3 dB
and those below 1 kHz were increased by 3 dB (Shuster and Durant,
2003) to make the voice more real to the subjects. Subjects (n=19) listened
the morphed voices and were asked to judge a speaker of voices (self, a
friend or a stranger) by pushing button during MRI scanning. We classified the imaging data according to subjects’ decisions and analyzed as an
event-related design using SPM2. As a result broad areas activated
including the bilateral prefrontal areas and the right inferior parietal lobule when the subjects judged the voice as their own compared to stranger
voices. This result suggests that the neural system works selectively for
perception for one’s own voice.
G109
NEURAL BASIS OF INTELLIGIBLE SPEECH Jeong-Sug
Kyong1,
Sophie K. Scott2, Richard J. S. Wise3, Stuart Rosen1; 1University College
London, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London,
3
MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Hammersmith Hospital, London — In order
to look at the neural basis of speech perception, we contrasted intelligible
with unintelligible speech using sparsely sampled fMRI. Spectrally
rotated speech was used for the unintelligible speech stimuli (Scott et al.,
2000). Intelligible speech activated the left temporal areas anterior and
posterior to the primary auditory cortices. The posterior activation might
be related to sensitivity to complex sounds, a pre-requisite to hear sound
as speech. Intelligible speech was coupled with frontal activation, which
could explain the information projection of meaningful complex sound
from the superior temporal gyrus to the higher cognitive area of the inferior frontal lobe and support the idea that the left inferior frontal gyrus
and the superior temporal gyrus mediate normal sentence comprehension. These findings support a parallel, hierarchical model of dual
streams in speech processing suggested by Wise et al. (2001), Scott &
Johnsrude (2003) and Hickok & Poeppel (2007) in which the ventral
stream is assumed to be involved more with sentence-level comprehension tied to the frontal lobe in order to compute the meaning of a sentence.
G110
CHANGES IN FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION FOLLOWING
NATURALISTIC
TRAINING
ON
COMPLEX
AUDITORY
CATEGORIES Robert Leech1, Lori Holt2, Joe Devlin1, Fred Dick1,3;
1Birkbeck, UCL Centre for NeuroImaging, London, 2Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, 3Center for Research in Language, University of
California, San Diego — A cardinal challenge to the auditory system is
acquiring complex, context-dependent auditory categories, such as the
phonetic categories underlying speech perception. Recent behavioral

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

work (Wade & Holt, 2005) showed that listeners could acquire complex
artificial perceptual categories implicitly while playing a video game
where characters' identities were toggled to multiple exemplars of linearly or non-linearly separably sound categories. In the current study, we
adapted the Wade & Holt (2005) task to fMRI, using rapid sparse sampling to investigate changes in the brain's response to complex categorizable sounds. Scanning took place before and after 5 hours of playing a
custom video game, where participants had to either shoot or capture different alien characters.In both pre- and post-training scanning sessions,
participants were presented with pictures of different alien characters;
one of the sounds associated with that character was presented at the
same time. In order to maintain and monitor performance without drawing attention to the auditory stimuli, participants pressed a button whenever they saw an upside-down alien. Half of the trials in each run were
category mismatches between sound and picture. We observed trainingrelated changes in temporal, parietal, and frontal regions, with individuals varying considerably in their responses to all classes of auditory stimuli.
G111
SPECIFICITY
WITHIN
AUDITORY
CORTICES
FOR
NONLINGUISTIC AUDITORY TIMING PATTERNS RELATED TO
SPEECH PROCESSING Daniel A. Lieberman1, Heesoo Kim2, Kala
Lakshminarayanan3, Gary H. Glover4, Paula Tallal3, John D. E. Gabrieli1,
Nadine Gaab1,5; 1MIT, 2Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of
California at Berkeley, 3Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience,
Rutgers University, Newark, 4Stanford University, 5Children’s Hospital
Boston, Developmental Medicine Center, Harvard Medical School — The integration of rapid spectrotemporal auditory cues is essential for speech
processing. Accurate perception of certain English syllables requires efficient processing of cues occurring between 20-40ms. We aimed to examine how the auditory cortex responds to rapid timing patterns using nonlinguistic pitch sequences. Twenty subjects listened to a series of threetone-sequences comprised of two complex tones (100Hz/300Hz) that
either varied in pitch (e.g:100Hz-300Hz-100Hz) or did not (e.g:100Hz100Hz-100Hz). Within each sequence, the ISI between tones was fixed at
5, 20, 50, or 300ms. Participants reproduced sequences manually. Imaging
was performed on a 3.0T scanner using a sparse-imaging technique, and
conditions were contrasted with a silent baseline. Random-effects analyses revealed bilateral recruitment of heschl’s gyrus (HG), planum temporale (PT), and superior temporal gyrus (STG; left>right) in all conditions
as compared to baseline. Analyses were performed using anatomically
defined regions of interest (ROI) of HG, PT and STG. Significant decrease
in activation for the 20ms ISI compared to all other ISIs (5, 50, 300ms) was
observed in bilateral HG and left PT. Non-significant differences between
5 and 20ms ISIs were observed in right PT and bilateral STG. These
results suggest that HG and left PT may have a more efficient mechanism
for processing non-linguistic auditory stimuli within the 20ms timeframe, which is crucial for perception of certain speech syllables. Future
studies will examine the neural correlates of this task in dyslexics, as
developmental dyslexia has been linked to deficits in processing rapid
acoustic cues in linguistic as well as nonlinguistic stimuli.
G112
PRODUCTION WITHOUT PERCEPTION IN TONE-DEAFNESS: A
COMBINED PSYCHOPHYSICAL AND DTI STUDY Psyche Loui1,
Gottfried Schlaug1; 1Harvard Medical School, BIDMC — People affected by
tone-deafness, also known as congenital amusia, have normal speech and
hearing, but are impaired in their ability to sing in tune. We tested the
hypothesis that tone-deaf individuals might have rudimentary pitch production abilities despite profoundly impaired pitch perception. Tonedeaf listeners were identified based on a psychophysical pitch-discrimination task showing abnormally large thresholds of above one semitone
at a center frequency of 500Hz. Pairs of pure tones, forming different
small intervals, were presented to tone-deaf and normal control listeners,
who reproduced the tones by humming (production task), and then indi-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

229

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

cated whether the second tone was higher or lower than the first (perception task). Tone-deaf listeners performed at chance for the perception
task, and were significantly worse than controls. However, in the production task, tone-deaf individuals were above chance at reproducing pitch
directions, with performance being indistinguishable from controls.
Spectral analysis showed that while directions of interval production
were intact, variability in produced pitches was significantly higher in
tone-deaf listeners than in controls. This leads to the common observation that tone-deaf individuals cannot sing in tune. Results implicate dissociated brain mechanisms underlying sound perception and production,
suggesting a multiplicity of auditory pathways where pitch information
sufficient for intact speech can be obtained separately from pathways
necessary for conscious perception. Preliminary Diffusion Tensor Imaging data show abnormalities in white matter tracts connecting superior
temporal and inferior frontal gyri (arcuate fasciculus) in tone-deaf individuals, suggesting that abnormal pruning in auditory perception-to-production pathways may be characteristic of this developmental condition.
G113
TWO PRIVILEGED TEMPORAL WINDOWS IN HUMAN
AUDITORY CORTEX Huan Luo1,2,3, David Poeppel2,3; 1Institute of
Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Science, 2Neuroscience and Cognitive Science
Program, University of Maryland College Park, 3University of Maryland
College Park — Critical information in natural sounds, including vocal
communication sounds, occurs at multiple time scales. The two main
temporal modulations rates in speech sounds have been found to be at
~20-50 ms and at ~150-300 ms, corresponding to segmental and syllabic
rate processing respectively. The neural correlates of such privileged
temporal windows in human auditory cortex remain unclear. We
recorded MEG responses from 12 subjects listening to nonspeech auditory stimuli with different temporal structures, crafted by concatenating
frequency-modulated temporal segments of varied segment duration.
We find that listening to non-speech stimuli with matching temporal
structure to the speech-relevant rates (~25 ms and ~200 ms) reliably
engages phase tracking in the corresponding oscillatory frequencies
(gamma band and theta band). In contrast, stimuli with nonmatching
temporal structures do not elicit phase tracking in their corresponding
oscillatory frequencies. Furthermore, the topology of theta band phase
tracking shows rightward lateralization and the gamma band phase
tracking occurs bilaterally. The results support the view that there are
privileged temporal scales that form the basis for perceptual analysis in
hearing, specifically the Asymmetrical Temporal Sampling (AST) model,
and reveal a macroscopic-level neural mechanism underlying multi-time
resolution processing – the gliding and resetting of intrinsic temporal
windows.
G114
NEURAL BASES OF ILLUSORY CONTINUITY IN SPEECH
PERCEPTION Lee M. Miller1, Christopher W. Bishop1, Antoine J. Shahin1;
1Center for Mind & Brain, University of California, Davis — Background
noises often completely obscure brief portions of speech, but a listener
will hear the speech continuing uninterrupted through the noise. This
powerful filling-in illusion, called phonemic restoration or auditory
induction, helps maintain robust comprehension in adverse environments. This study identifies the neural networks supporting both the
phenomenology of phonemic restoration as well as the unconscious template-matching that supports it. In a rapid event-related fMRI design,
subjects with healthy hearing evaluated words with brief noise bursts
centered about fricatives. The words were either actually interrupted by
the noise or continued through the noise. Subjects indicated whether they
perceived each word as being continuous or interrupted. Therefore, each
word could be i) actually (acoustically) continuous or interrupted, and
independently ii) perceptually continuous or interrupted. We evaluated
the BOLD (blood oxygenation level dependent) signal based on whether
subjects experienced the illusion (actually interrupted but perceived continuous), correctly perceived interrupted speech, or correctly perceived

230

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

continuous speech. Regions showing sensitivity to the continuity illusion
include left posterior angular gyrus and bilateral superior frontal sulcus.
Areas reflecting unconscious repair of signal degradations, with greater
activity for interrupted speech, include Broca’s area, anterior insula, and
pre-supplementary motor area. A control task using phonotactically legal
nonwords showed that part of the restoration illusion uses lexical constraints in addition to local phonetic and spectrotemporal cues. This demonstrates how the brain actively repairs degraded sensory inputs to
improve intelligibility. Supported by the NIH/NIDCD.
G115
SPEECH PERCEPTION AND THE EFFICIENCY OF INTEGRATING
LOW-LEVEL CUES Mor Nahum1, Israel Nelken1,2, Merav Ahissar1,2;
1
Interdisciplinary Center for Neural Computation (ICNC), Hebrew University,
2Hebrew University — Perceptual discriminations require the use of lowlevel sensory cues, but low-level cues may not always be optimally used.
Different theories diverge in their predictions of whether and when optimality should fail. Ideal Observer models assume that low-level cues are
always optimally integrated. In contrast, attention models suggest that
optimality fails when discrimination is attentionally demanding. We now
tested these predictions by measuring the use of low-level binaural cues
for identification and comprehension of speech in noise. Behavioral
results were compared to those calculated using an “Ideal Listener” computer simulation. Surprisingly, we found that neither of these predictions
fitted the observed pattern of results. When discriminating between phonologically-different words, binaural cues were always used optimally,
regardless of task demands. In contrast to this robustness, when discriminating between phonologically-similar words, binaural cues were generally used sub-optimally. Optimal use of binaural cues was achieved only
with consistent repetitions of the same binaural configuration and when
comprehension was not required. Thus, optimal use of low-level sensory
cues is determined by the nature of high-level representations of the stimulus set and not by task demands. We propose that perception optimally
uses low-level cues only when these cues are integrated into well-segregated phonemic level representations of the stimuli, as in the case of phonologically-different
words.
However,
when
phonological
representations of words largely overlap, optimal performance requires
direct access to segregated lower-level representations. Our results further suggest that when access to low-level representations is required, it
is gradual and at the cost of concurrent comprehension.
G116
RAPID RECOVERY OF BINAURAL LOCALIZATION IN A
BILATERAL COCHLEAR IMPLANT RECIPIENT Elena
Nava1,
Davide Bottari2, Francesca Bonfioli3, Chiara Abbadessa3, Millo Achille
Beltrame3, Giovanna Portioli4, Patrizia Formigoni4, Giovanni Bianchin4,
Francesco Pavani1,2; 1Centre for Mind/Brain Sciences, University of Trento,
Italy, 2University of Trento, Italy, 3Rovereto Group for Cochlear Implants,
Hospital Santa Maria del Carmine, Rovereto, Italy, 4Hospital Santa Maria
Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy — Cochlear implants represent a unique example for the study of functional plasticity, in which they allow observing
the consequences of reafferentation after long-term auditory deprivation.
Here we report on changes in auditory localization in two bilateral
cochlear implant recipients tested 15 minutes after bilateral activation
and in the one-month follow-up. The two patients differed in their deafness onset: P.A. became deaf at the age of 3, S.P. at the age of 39. Their
task was to localize sounds presented at 8 different spatial locations
around them. They performed the task monaurally (with the first
implanted device only) and binaurally (with the two implants). 15 minutes after bilateral activation both patients were better at localizing
sounds monaurally (S.P., overall mean error = 57 deg.; P.A., overall mean
error = 57 deg.) than binaurally (S.P., overall mean error = 90 deg.; P.A.,
overall mean error = 65 deg.). After one month, the two patients showed
different performances: S.P. (late deafness) decreased his localizing abilities in the monaural hearing condition (overall mean error = 78 deg.), but
substantially improved his localizing abilities when performing with two

Poster Session G

implants, reducing his overall mean error by 70%. On the contrary, P.A.
(early deafness) remained stable in his monaural hearing localizing abilities, but did not improve significantly in his binaural hearing condition.
These results suggest that recovery of binaural abilities can start shortly
after bilateral cochlear implantation, but also suggest a critical role of
deafness onset and duration in modulating this recovery phenomenon.
G117
SEMANTIC CONSTRAINTS ON DEGRADED SPEECH: FINETUNING THE SPEECH COMPREHENSION NETWORK Jonas
Obleser1, Sonja A. Kotz1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and
Brain Sciences, Leipzig — In speech comprehension auditory decoding
and contextual inference are mutually dependent processes, especially in
noisy environments. The current study sought to scrutinise how minimal
variations in a constraining semantic context [cloze probability, p(cloze)]
interact with comprehension of degraded [1-, 4- and 16-band noisevocoded] German sentences and their respective brain activity (fMRI,
N=16). Behaviourally, high p(cloze) (e.g., [he captures the ship] vs. [he
awaits the ship]) induced the expected significant improvement in comprehension at intermediate signal quality. The expected increase of activity in the anterolateral STG and STS to increasingly intelligible speech
was almost entirely driven by low-p(cloze) sentences. It appeared more
constraint and with a peak in mid-STS under high-p(cloze) conditions.
Notably, a bilateral fronto-temporal array of posteromedial STG/STS and
bilateral inferior frontal gyrus (BA 44) was more activated by lowp(cloze) sentences. Left BA 44 showed more pronounced p(cloze)-differentiation with improving signal quality: The specific involvement in processing low-p(cloze) constructions was observed only under fair
intelligibility conditions. Furthermore, individual comprehension scores
predicted the bilateral activation along the STS (positive correlation) as
well as in bilateral posteromedial STG, and left dorsolateral prefontal
activations (BA 9,10; negative correlations, possibly reflecting unsuccessful search and matching). Our results show (i) how successful signal
decoding is a necessary precursor to processing steps attributed to
semantic computation (IFG), and (ii) in return also how semantic computation offers constraints on processing steps attributed to signal decoding
(STS).
G118
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN SPEECH PERCEPTION ARE
PREDICTED BY THE DISTINCTNESS OF UNDERLYING NEURAL
REPRESENTATIONS Rajeev Raizada1, Feng-Ming Tsao2, Huei-Mei Liu3,
Patricia Kuhl1; 1Institute for Learning & Brain Sciences, University of
Washington, 2National Taiwan University, Taipei, 3National Taiwan Normal
University, Taipei — This study tested the hypothesis that the more distinct a person's neural representations of two stimuli are, the better their
behavioural ability to discriminate those stimuli will be. We tested this by
presenting the /r/-/l/ phonetic contrast to English and Japanese speakers. These phonemes differ primarily in their third formant, F3, which
English speakers can discriminate well, but which Japanese speakers cannot. The F2 dimension does not differentiate /r/ from /l/ in either language. The distinctness of neural representations was quantified by
measuring the statistical separability of their spatial fMRI patterns, thus
leading to the following prediction: in English speakers, phonemes that
differ along the F3 dimension will evoke fMRI patterns that are more separable from each other than do phonemes that differ in F2, whereas in
Japanese speakers the fMRI pattern separability of F3 and F2 differences
will not differ. We used the information-based fMRI approach of Kriegeskorte et al., PNAS, 2006: the local spatial patterns evoked by the stimulus conditions to be compared, e.g. high-F3 vs. low-F3, were passed as
input into a linear SVM, and the SVM's ability to separate the two conditions' fMRI patterns from each other was determined. We found that in
right primary auditory cortex the statistical separability of the evoked
fMRI patterns strongly predicted the pattern of perceptual discriminability across the English and Japanese subjects. These findings reveal a new
link between perception and spatial fMRI patterns, and also a hitherto
unknown role played by right auditory cortex in processing speech.

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

G119
INDEPENDENT COMPONENT ANALYSIS OF THE ODDBALL
PARADIGM Mari-Anne Rosario1, Hiroko Nakano2, Chris Ray1; 1Saint
Mary's College of California — We report results on EEG measurements in
the visual and auditory oddball paradigm. Independent component analysis (ICA) and standard event related potential (ERP) methods were used
to analyze the data. As expected, the ERPs showed a P300 response for
both infrequent 'targets' and ‘novel’ objects/sounds in both modalities.
ICA revealed two components that contributed to the P300 responses in
the auditory modality: one component distributed in the central parietal
region for both targets and novel sounds; and distributed mainly in the
right hemisphere region only for the novel sounds. The results suggest an
independent process is associated with the hemispheric difference.
G120
AUDITORY ADAPTATION IN THE PERCEPTION OF VOICE
GENDER Stefan R. Schweinberger1, Christoph Casper1, Nadine Hautha1,
Jürgen M. Kaufmann1, Hideki Kawahara2, Nadine Kloth1, David Robertson1,
Adrian P. Simpson3, Romi Zäske1; 1Friedrich-Schiller University, Jena,
Germany, 2Faculty of Systems Engineering, Wakayama University, Japan,
3Friedrich-Schiller University, Jena, Germany — Visual after-effects following adaptation to simple stimulus attributes (e.g. motion, colour) have
been studied for literally hundreds of years. A striking discovery in the
last few years has been that adaptation, a mechanism by which specific
neural responses decrease after prolonged stimulation, is also of central
importance for human perception of complex visual stimuli, and particularly faces. Utilizing a novel technique of voice morphing, we show (Exp.
1) that adaptation to the gender of voices elicits strong auditory aftereffects, such that adaptation to male voices causes subsequent voices to
be perceived as more female (and vice versa). At least one minute after
adaptation, these auditory adaptation effects in perception of voice gender were still significant, albeit reduced in magnitude. By contrast, crossmodal adaptation effects were completely absent, both when prototypical
male or female first names were used as adaptors (Exp. 2), and when
adaptors were silent videos of articulating male or female speakers (Exp.
3). Our findings exclude an explanation of the effect in terms of post-perceptual adaptation to gender concepts, and suggest instead that adaptation to voice quality may routinely influence voice perception. This
demonstration of a role of adaptation in calibrating properties of highlevel representations for auditory stimuli suggests that adaptation is not
confined to vision, but is a ubiquitous mechanism in the perception of
social information from faces and voices.
G121
ADAPTATION
REVEALS
MULTIPLE
LEVELS
OF
REPRESENTATION IN AUDITORY STREAM SEGREGATION Joel
Snyder1, Olivia Carter2, Erin Hannon1, Claude Alain3; 1University of Nevada,
Las Vegas, 2Harvard University, 3Rotman Research Institute — Listeners perceive 2 streams of tones (“streaming”) in alternating patterns of low and
high tones with a large frequency separation (&#916;ƒ), a percept that is
further enhanced by more pattern repetitions (“buildup”). However, the
same large-&#916;ƒ sequences reduce streaming for subsequent patterns.
Buildup occurs at a level of neural representation with sharp frequency
tuning, supporting the theory that streaming is a peripheral phenomenon. Here, we used adaptation to demonstrate that the contextual effect
of prior &#916;ƒ arose from a representation with broad frequency tuning, unlike buildup. Separate adaptation did not occur in a representation
of &#916;ƒ independent of frequency range, suggesting that any frequency-shift detectors undergoing adaptation are also frequency specific.
A separate effect of prior perception was observed, dissociating stimulusrelated (i.e., &#916;ƒ) and perception-related (i.e., 1 stream vs. 2 streams)
adaptation. Viewing a visual analogue to auditory streaming had no
effect on subsequent perception of streaming, suggesting adaptation in
auditory-specific brain circuits. These results, along with previous findings on buildup, suggest that processing in at least three levels of auditory neural representation underlies streaming.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

231

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

G122
ADVANTAGE OF TONAL LANGUAGE SPEAKING ON PITCH
PERCEPTION Emily M. Stanley1,2, Shalini Narayana2, Peter Q.
Pfordresher3, Nicole Y. Y. Wicha1,2; 1University of Texas at San Antonio,
2University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, Research Imaging
Center, 3SUNY Buffalo — The use of lexical tone in one’s native language
alters how speakers produce and perceive pitch in language. Moreover,
the brains of tone (T) language speakers respond differently than nontonal (NT) language speakers to perceived lexical tone (Gandour, Wong
and Hutchins, 1998). It is unclear, however, whether such differences correlate with differences in pitch perception in non-linguistic contexts, such
as music. The current research explores how experience with tone language affects discrimination of non-linguistic pitch and pitch intervals.
We analyzed both discrimination accuracy and the timing of corresponding neural processes using event related brain potentials (ERP) comparing Ts and NTs on two tasks – pitch discrimination (PD) and pitchinterval (ID) discrimination. Twenty-five native speakers of Mandarin
Chinese or Vietnamese and 25 non-tonal-language speakers, matched by
age, musical ability and gender, judged pairs of tones (PD) and pairs of
pitch intervals (ID) that either differed or not in pitch while a scalp electroencephalogram was recorded. Overall, Ts were significantly more
accurate on both tasks than NTs. Ts were significantly more accurate than
NTs in discriminating all pitch differences (PD), ranging from as small as
7 to as large as 200 cents. Interval discrimination was a more difficult task
for both groups, Ts were significantly more accurate than NTs at discerning a difference between two pitch intervals when the difference was at
least 100 cents or larger. We present parallel ERP data comparing amplitude and latency differences on the P300 and earlier negative potentials
between the two groups on each task.
G123
FINE SPATIAL REPRESENTATION OF AUDITORY LOCATION
BY AN OCCIPITO-PARIETAL NETWORK Santani Teng1, Kevin Hill1,
Lee Miller1, David Whitney1; 1UC Davis Center for Mind and Brain — Although
the spatial localization of sounds is essential for the navigation and representation of our environment, the cortical representation of auditory
space in humans has only recently begun to be described in detail. Various prior neuroimaging experiments have implicated posterior superior
temporal gyrus in sound localization. Here, we tested whether occipital
regions, traditionally involved in unimodal visual tasks, also carry spatial
information about auditory stimuli. In an event-related fMRI study, we
presented normal healthy subjects and an early-blind participant with
spatial auditory stimuli separated horizontally by up to 20 deg in virtual
space. The task (5AFC) was to report via button press the perceived position of each stimulus. Results indicated that regions in the posterior superior temporal gyrus as well as along the occipito-parietal junction were
sensitive to the spatial location of the stimuli. Spatially selective activation was also found in occipital cortical areas for both the blind and
sighted subjects. These results suggest that occipital cortex may carry a
representation of perceived space independent of unimodal processes,
such as spatial visual attention.
G124
HEMISPHERIC DIFFERENCES IN MEG RESPONSES TO SHORT
TEMPORAL GAPS IN A CONTINUOUS SOUND Atsuhiko
Toyomaki1, Sachiko Koyama2,3, Yuko Toyosawa3, Fumiya Takeuchi1, Hiroshige
Takeichi4, Shinya Kuriki2; 1Graduate School of Medicine Hokkaido University,
2Res. Institute Elect Sci. Hokkaido University, 3RISTEX, JST, 4RIKEN — Short
temporal gaps in continuous speech sounds play important roles for
speech perception: perception of voiceless consonants, (/k/, /p/, /t/),
pauses and segments in spoken sentences. Our previous ERP study
showed that ERPs for onsets of short temporal gaps differ greatly for different temporal gap durations (8, 16, 32, 64, 128 and 256 ms) (Koyama et
al.,2006, a poster presentation at the annual CNS meeting). In order to
investigate neural sources for the gap responses, we measured EEG (Cz,
T5, T6, the nose-tip reference) and MEG &#65288;a 306-channel whole-

232

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

head MEG system, Elekta Neuromag Oy, Finland) simultaneously using
tones (500 Hz) and short temporal gaps (16, 64, 256 ms) embedded in a
continuous tone (500 Hz) from nine right-handed adults. The stimuli
were presented binaurally (Inter-stimulus interval 2.8-3.2s). Subjects passively heard the sounds. N100/N100m like responses to the gaps was
largely reduced compared with N100/N100m to the tones. Clear hemispheric differences were observed for the MEG responses to the gaps. For
64-ms gaps, a single peak was observed in the left hemisphere while a
double peak was observed for the right hemisphere. The peak latency for
256ms-gap were shorter than that for 64-ms gap in the left hemisphere
while that for 256ms-gap was very similar to that for 64-ms gap (an earlier peak) in the right hemisphere. For the 256-gap, onset N100/N100m
was observed for the gap-end (tone onset). The present findings thus suggest that left and right hemispheres process short temporal gaps in a different way.
G125
FINDING THE PITCH OF THE MISSING FUNDAMENTAL IN
INFANTS USING EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Laurel Trainor1,2,
Chao He1; 1McMaster University, 2Rotman Research Institute — The frequency
components of complex sounds are separated on the basilar membrane
and processed in tonotopic maps throughout subcortical nuclei and primary auditory cortex. They are eventually integrated, probably in secondary auditory cortex, such that a single tone with a particular timbre is
perceived. This integration can be examined with sounds that are missing
their fundamental (lowest) component, as this elimination does not
change the perceived pitch. Our goal was to examine the development of
the ability to hear the pitch of the missing fundamental in infants
between 2 and 7 months using EEG recordings. Six standard trials were
presented 86% of the time, each consisting of two tones where the fundamental frequency was always present and each frequency component
rose from the first to second note (starting note and degree of pitch
change differed across the 6 standards). The deviant trial was the same
except that the components were chosen so that adults perceived a missing fundamental and a downward pitch change, even though all of the
components rose between the two tones of the deviant. Adults, 7-montholds and 4-month-olds all produced a significant mismatch (MMN)
response on the second note of the deviant trials, indicating that the missing fundamental was perceived. This response diminished in amplitude
and increased in latency with decreasing age. No discriminative response
was seen at 3 months, suggesting that infants may not perceive the pitch
of the missing fundamental at a cortical level until 4 months of age.
G126
SPEECH
TARGET
MODULATES
SPEAKING
INDUCED
SUPPRESSION IN AUDITORY CORTEX Maria
Ventura1,
John
Houde1, Srikantan Nagarajan1; 1University of California, San Francisco — Previous Magnetic Source Imaging (MSI) studies have demonstrated speaking-induced suppression (SIS) in the auditory cortex during vocalization
tasks wherein the M100 response to a subject’s own speaking is reduced
compared to the response when they hear playback of their speech. The
present MSI study investigated the effects of utterance rapidity and complexity on SIS: The greatest difference between speak and listen M100
amplitudes (i.e., most SIS) was found in the simple speech task. As the
utterances became more rapid and complex, the difference in SIS was
reduced. These findings are consistent with a feedback prediction model
of how speech feedback is processed.
G127
SPEECH PROCESSING IN THE ABSENCE OF CATEGORICAL
PERCEPTION Michael Wolmetz1, David Poeppel2, Brenda Rapp1; 1Johns
Hopkins University, 2University of Maryland, MD — We investigated the
speech perception of an aphasic individual, DMN, with damage to the
posterior aspect of the left temporal lobe. Studying this lesion site
allowed us to examine the language functions of a right hemisphere
largely acting alone in terms of early acoustic and pre-lexical processes.
By examining DMN’s identification and discrimination of speech sounds,

Poster Session G

we sought to determine the extent to which the right hemisphere is able
to organize gradient acoustic stimuli into phonemic categories - a process
thought to be critical for speech comprehension. We assessed DMN’s
ability to categorically identify and discriminate members of six CVC
word and six matched pseudoword continua. Each continuum consisted
of at least eight tokens and varied from a voiced endpoint (e.g. “beach”)
to an unvoiced endpoint (e.g. “peach”). Our results indicated that DMN
did not categorically process segmental information in the context of
these tasks, but rather drew on a gradient representation for speech perception, and the degree of gradient structure present was lexically dependent. We further assessed the neural correlates of this gradient
representation by collecting functional imaging data of DMN during a
phonemic dishabituation paradigm. The implications of non-categorical
speech perception for language processing will be discussed.
G128
THE EFFECTS OF RECORDING ENVIRONMENT AND PERCEIVED
ALERTNESS ON P50 SENSORY GATING Carly Yadon1, Michael
Kisley2, Deana Davalos1; 1Colorado State University, 2University of Colorado at
Colorado Springs — P50 sensory gating is conceptualized as the brain’s
ability to prevent sensory overload by filtering out repetitive auditory
stimuli. The conditions under which P50 gating is recorded are somewhat varied in published literature and this has been suggested to contribute to the disparity of sensory gating measurements reported
between studies. The present study investigated two aspects of P50
recording conditions: watching a muted movie versus a static fixation
cross, and fluctuations in participants’ level of alertness. Both of these factors may impact sensory gating measures, yet are not central to the task
itself (thus they are not usually systematically investigated). Introductory
psychology students were assigned to either the movie (n=25) or fixation
(n=28) group; both groups completed four blocks of scalp-derived electrophysiological recordings and indicated their arousal/fatigue levels
before and after each block. P50 sensory gating was significantly better
for the movie group, but neither group showed a change in gating over
the four recording blocks. Self-reported fatigue ratings increased significantly over time, but did not differ between groups. Results suggest that
P50 sensory gating was fairly impervious to mild to moderate fluctuations in alertness. Similarly, the gating advantage for the movie group
did not appear to be due to differences in alertness, but could be attributed to visual distraction. Additional results and interpretations will be
presented. Understanding how the P50 complex is affected by environmental conditions is especially important given its frequent application
as a clinical index.
G129
ORTHOGRAPHIC AND PHONOLOGICAL CORTICAL PRIMING
EFFECTS IN CHILDREN DURING SPOKEN LANGUAGE
PROCESSING Rishi Zaveri1, Fan Cao1, Donald Bolger1, James Booth1,2;
1
Northwestern University, Evanston, 2Evanston Northwestern Healthcare,
Evanston — Priming (repetition suppression) effects were examined in 39
children (9 - 15 years old) during a spelling task in the auditory modality
using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). An orthographic
task required participants to determine if two sequentially presented spoken words had the same spelling rime. The prime-target pairs in conflicting trials either had similar orthography but different phonology (O+P-,
pint-mint) or similar phonology but different orthography (O-P+, jazzhas). The prime-target pairs in non-conflicting trials had similar orthography and phonology (O+P+, gate-hate) or different orthography and phonology (O-P-, press-list). O+P+ pairs showed greater priming effects
(prime-target) than O-P- pairs in bilateral superior temporal gyri and left
inferior/middle frontal gyrus presumably reflecting repetition of phonology, and in left fusiform gyrus and right middle occipital gyrus presumably reflecting repeated access of similar orthographic representations.
O+P+ pairs also showed greater priming effects than O+P- pairs in left
fusiform gyrus due to greater activation for O+P- targets than for O+P+
targets, suggesting that greater orthographic computation is needed

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

when different phonology corresponds to similar spellings. O+P+ pairs
also showed greater priming effects than O-P+ pairs in left inferior parietal lobule due to greater activation for O-P+ targets than for O+P+ targets, suggesting that there are greater demands on conversion from
phonology to orthography when similar phonology corresponds to different spellings. These results show priming effects in brain regions
thought to be involved in phonological processing, orthographic processing and mapping between orthographic and phonological representations for a task that requires spelling judgments to spoken words.
G130
CONCURRENT SOUND SEGREGATION AND RELATED
AUDITORY EVOKED POTENTIALS ARE ENHANCED IN
MUSICIANS Benjamin Zendel1,2, Claude Alain1,2; 1University of Toronto,
2Rotman Research Institute — Concurrent sound segregation is thought to
involve low level processes that are independent of listeners’ attention
and experience. The present study examined whether musical training
modulates the ability to segregate concurrent auditory objects using scalp
recorded auditory evoked potentials (AEPs). Musicians and non-musicians were presented with a harmonic complex. The second harmonic
was either tuned or mistuned by 1-16% of its original value. During the
active listening condition, participants indicated whether they heard one
sound or two sounds. The same stimuli were also presented passively (no
response). Both musicians and non-musicians perceived a second auditory object at similar levels of mistuning (2-4%), however musicians were
more consistent at identifying concurrent stimuli. The amplitude and
latencies of the sensory evoked responses (i.e., N1, N1c, and P2) elicited
by sound onset were comparable in both groups. The perception of concurrent auditory objects was paralleled by an object-related negativity
(ORN) that was larger and peaked earlier in musician compared to nonmusicians. This group difference in ORN was comparable in both active
and passive listening, suggesting that it reflects neuro-plastic changes in
brain areas related to concurrent sound segregation. The perception of
concurrent auditory object was also associated with a P400, which was
present only in active trials. The P400 was marginally larger and earlier in
musicians compared to non-musicians. Together, behavioral and electrophysiological results suggest that musical training improves concurrent
sound segregation, which is paralleled by neuro-plastic changes in the
auditory cortex.
G131
EFFECTS OF VOWEL FORMANT EXAGGERATION ON EVENTRELATED POTENTIAL MEASURES OF SPEECH PERCEPTION
Yang Zhang1,2, Sharon Miller1; 1University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
2Center for Neurobehavioral Development, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis — Previous behavioral studies have shown that exaggerating
the formant structure of speech sounds can facilitate rapid and robust
learning of phonetic categories in infants as well as in adults. The present
study used event-related potential recordings (64-channel ASA-Lab system, Advanced Neuro Technology, the Netherlands) to investigate the
effects of vowel formant exaggeration on neurophysiological measures of
speech perception. Twenty adult native English speakers participated in
the study. The speech stimuli consisted of three point vowels, /i/, /a/,
and /u/, created by using a Klatt formant synthesizer. The formant values were based on infant-directed speech data for the exaggerated form
and adult-directed speech data for the non-exaggerated form. For each
vowel condition, the exaggerated stimuli and non-exaggerated stimuli
were binaurally presented in alternating blocks using EEVOKE software
program in a sound-treated booth. Each block had 20 identical sounds
presented at 60 dB SL with an interstimulus interval that varied randomly between 900 ms and 1100 ms. Repeated measures ANOVA results
showed significant effects in P1, N1 and P2 responses for vowel category
and formant exaggeration. In particular, the exaggerated vowels elicited
uniformly stronger N1 responses across the subjects and vowel conditions. S-LORETA and MUSIC algorithms were applied for source localization on the grand average data, showing superior temporal activation

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

233

Monday, April 14, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

patterns consistent with the waveform analysis. These results confirmed
the significant effects of enriched linguistic exposure in affecting the neural responses, which may facilitate the language learning process.
G132
OBJECT-RELATED NEGATIVITY INDEXES PERCEPTION OF
SOUNDS BEYOND THE ECHO THRESHOLD Benjamin Zobel1, Lisa
D. Sanders1, Amy S. Joh2, Rachel E. Keen2, Richard L. Freyman1; 1University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, 2University of Virginia — The ability to isolate a
single sound source among concurrent sources and reverberant energy is
crucial for understanding the auditory world. The precedence effect
describes an experimental finding that when listeners are presented with
identical sounds from two locations with a short onset asynchrony, they
report hearing a single source with a location dominated by the lead
sound. Single cell recordings in multiple animal models indicate that
low-level mechanisms contribute to the precedence effect, yet psychophysical studies in humans provide evidence that top-down cognitive
processes influence the perception of simulated echoes. The current
study examined the levels of processing and cortical organization
involved in the perception of echoes. ERPs were recorded while subjects
responded to click pairs of varying onset asynchrony. On trials for which
listeners reported hearing the lag sound as a separate source, click pairs
elicited a negativity between 100 and 250 ms, previously termed the
object-related negativity (ORN). These results indicate that the precedence effect reflects top-down cognitive influence over early neurosensory processing. Additionally, the study provides support for the claim
that the ORN, initially reported for sounds perceived as two concurrent
pitches, indexes auditory object perception. The effects on the ORN of
repeating identical click pairs, a condition that has previously been
shown to increase echo thresholds, will also be discussed in the context of
listeners forming complex models of room acoustics based on what they
hear in a specific setting. This study was supported by NIH DC01625
(REK and RLF) and NIH MH16745 (for ASJ).

234

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session G

Poster Session H
Higher level cognition: Executive functions
H1
ADJUSTMENTS IN ATTENTIONAL CONTROL BY CONGRUENT
INFORMATION IN ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX Esther
Aarts1,2, Ardi Roelofs1,2; 1F.C. Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging at
Radboud University Nijmegen, 2Nijmegen Institute for Cognition and
Information at Radboud University Nijmegen — According to a dominant
theory of attentional control (Miller & Cohen, 2001), adjustments in control
are made upon detection of response conflict by the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). In line with this view, previous research has demonstrated
reduced conflict effects in response times and ACC activity to targets after
incongruent as compared to congruent trials. It is unclear, however,
whether this sequential effect is induced by expected incongruency (Miller
& Cohen, 2001), congruency (Gratton et al., 1992), or both. To investigate
this, we ran an fMRI study using a Stroop-like task with incongruent and
congruent targets following cues predicting with 75% certainty the incongruent or congruent targets or predicting the target condition with 50%
certainty. We observed that conflict effects in response times and ACC
activity were largest for targets following the 75%-congruent cues. Moreover, there were no conflict effects in the ACC after the 75%-incongruent
or uninformative cues. However, in contrast to the conflict-detection view,
the sequential effect was not due to low control induced by the 75%-congruent cues because, if anything, ACC activity was largest for these cues.
Invalidly cued incongruent targets elicited more activity in the ACC than
uninformed incongruent targets, whereas there was no such validity effect
for the congruent targets. Taken together, these results suggest that the
cues induced specific processing strategies mediated by the ACC. These
strategies included a widening of attention following expected congruency
and a narrowing following expected incongruency.
H2
ERROR LIKELIHOOD EFFECTS IN ANTERIOR CINGULATE
CORTEX
MODULATED
BY
AVERAGE
REWARD
AND
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING William Alexander1, Joshua Brown1;
1
Indiana University, Bloomington IN — The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
is implicated in cognitive control and conflict detection. The error likelihood hypothesis suggests that activity in ACC increases proportionally to
the likelihood of error, and has been recently extended to show that ACC
is sensitive to the magnitude of the consequence of the predicted error
(Brown & Braver, 2007). Nonetheless, previous work suggested that error
likelihood effects reach a ceiling as the potential consequences of an error
increase, possibly due to reductions in the average reward. We explored
this issue by independently manipulating expected value of task responses
and error likelihood while controlling for potential error consequences in
an incentive change signal task. FMRI results replicate previous findings
related to the error likelihood hypothesis and show an interaction between
error likelihood effects and expected value. The results show that average
reward rates modulate error likelihood effects. These findings agree with
interpretations of ACC activity as signaling perception of risk. Further evidence was found to support the hypothesis that dopaminergic reinforcement signals train error likelihood effects in ACC. Specifically, the error
effect in substantia nigra was found to correlate negatively with the error
likelihood effect in ACC across subjects, and gambling risk taking likelihood correlated negatively with error likelihood effects in substantia
nigra. These results are consistent with the assumptions of the error likelihood model, namely that pauses in dopamine cell firing due to errors may
train error likelihood representations in ACC. Supported by AFOSR
FA9550-07-1-0454, A NARSAD Young Investigator Award to JWB, and
R03 DA023462-01.

H3
THE EFFICACY OF EXTENDED NEUROFEEDBACK TRAINING ON
ENDURING STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL CHANGES IN THE
MIRROR NEURON PATHWAYS OF CHILDREN WITH AUTISM
SPECTRUM DISORDER Oriana Aragon1,2, Alicia Trigeiro1, D. Brang1, E.
Hecht1, L. Edwards1, S. Carey1, M. Bacon1, C. Futagaki1, D. Suk1, J Tom1, C.
Birnbaum1, Jaime Pineda1; 1University of California San Diego, 2Cal State
University San Marcos — Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorders
(ASD) are characterized by social isolation, lack of eye contact, poor language capacity, trouble imitating others, absence of empathy, and difficulty interpreting intentions. Recent research has shown that the Mirror
Neuron System (MNS) plays an active role in these behaviors. Therefore
when people with ASD have difficulty with these tasks it is argued to be at
least in part due to a deficiency in their MNS. Neural structural and electrophysiological differences are further evidence of a deficient MNS in
people with ASD. There are claims as to the efficacy of long term Neurofeedback Training (NFT) in treating symptoms of ASD by reengaging the
MNS and its related behaviors; however there are no rigorous empirical
studies to support these claims. We conducted a 10 week pilot study to test
the efficacy of NFT. In this double blind study, 19 participants with high
functioning autism were randomly assigned to receive NFT or to receive a
placebo NFT. Post training the experimental group successfully learned to
control the power of their Mu rhythms, and showed Mu Suppression Indices that resembled those of typically developed children, whereas they
were clearly deficient before the training. The Test of Variable Attention
showed a 70% improvement in the ability to maintain attention in the
experimental group. Scores on a parental questionnaire showed encouraging changes in the experimental group’s speech and language dimension;
however the scores showed negative changes in their sensory and cognitive dimension. No trends emerged concerning participants’ ability to imitate.
H4
OVERCOMING
CONFLICT:
IS
GOAL
ACTIVATION
SUFFICIENT? Mary Askren1, Cindy Lustig1; 1University of Michigan — Conflict may arise either from incompatible abstract goals (e.g., review this
paper or prepare for my class?) or from stimuli that provoke strong incorrect responses (e.g., writing the date on January 1). By some accounts of
conflict resolution (Miller & Cohen, 2001), activating the correct goal obviates stimulus-driven conflict. To test this hypothesis, we compared performance across task-switching procedures that varied in the degree to which
their stimuli engendered Stroop-like conflict. The effects of goal incompatibility were measured by comparing trials on which both task rules would
lead to the same response (compatible) versus those in which the two rules
led to opposite responses (incompatible). Our first experiment (n = 48)
showed that goal incompatibility increased error rates across all stimulus
types, reflecting failures to maintain the goal. For correct trials, goal
incompatibility only led to slow reaction times when confounded with
stimulus-driven conflict. A second experiment compared the performance
of young (n = 32, mean age = 18.88) and old (n = 32, mean age = 71.03)
adults. Increased age did not increase the rate of errors (goal lapses)
regardless of the degree of stimulus-driven conflict. In contrast, age differences in reaction time were substantially increased when goal incompatibility was paired with stimulus-driven conflict. Taken together, these
results suggest that inhibition of incorrect stimulus information plays an
important role in conflict resolution, over and above that which can be
ascribed to activation of the correct goal. Older age is associated with more
pronounced declines in this inhibitory process.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

235

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

H5
ARCHITECTURE OF COGNITIVE CONTROL IN THE HUMAN
PREFRONTAL CORTEX: A VOXEL-BASED LESION MAPPING
STUDY IN PATIENTS WITH PREFRONTAL LESIONS. Carole
Azuar1,2, Emmanuelle Volle, E1, Serge Kinkingnehun1,3, Bruno Dubois1,4,
Etienne Koechlin5, Richard Levy1,2; 1INSERM U610, Paris, 2Service de
Neurologie, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, 3IFR 49, SHFJ, Orsay, 4Fédération de
Neurologie, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, 5INSERM U742,
Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris — The prefrontal cortex is essential
for cognitive control, the ability to coordinate thoughts or actions in relation with internal goals. Its functional architecture, however, remains
debated. Using brain imaging in humans, E. Koechlin and colleagues
(Science, 2003) showed that the lateral prefrontal cortex is organized in a
cascade of executive processes, from premotor to anterior prefrontal
regions, that control behavior (“the cascade model of cognitive control”).
The cognitive control involves three nested levels of processing: sensory,
contextual and episodic controls. The aim of this study is to validate this
cascade model in brain damaged patients, using a novel clinical-radiological correlation method (AnaCOM) based on the principles of the voxelbased lesion mapping. The AnaCOM method allows to build cluster-bycluster statistical maps of anatomo-clinical correlations, showing areas
that are significantly associated with a given deficit in the chosen behavioral tasks. This novel approach to clinical-radiological correlation is
complementary to functional imaging techniques, showing the functional
weight of a given prefrontal region for a specific control function. This
method has been applied in 30 patients with focal prefrontal lesions performing the three behavioral conditions described in Koechlin et al.
(2003). According to the cascade model of cognitive control, the statistical
maps showed that sensory control is subserved by lateral premotor
regions, and that contextual and episodic controls are subserved by rostral prefrontal regions. By providing data that converge with those of
functional imaging studies, these preliminary results support the cascade
model of cognitive control.
H6
THE EFFECT OF BILINGUALISM ON COGNITIVE CONTROL IN
THE STROOP COLOUR-WORD TASK IN LATE PROFICIENT
BILINGUALS: ERP STUDY Gjurgjica Badzakova-Trajkov1, Karen E.
Waldie1, Ian J. Kirk1, Branka Milivojevic1; 1Centre for Cognitive Neuroscience,
The University of Auckland, Auckland — High-density
electroencephalogram (EEG) was used to record visual-evoked potentials from 12 Macedonian-English (M-E) bilinguals, 12 German-English (G-E) bilinguals and
16 English monolinguals while performing a manual version of the traditional Stroop colour-word task in order to investigate the effects of bilingualism on the time course and properties of the neural activation
underlying the Stroop effect. Bilinguals performed the task in both their
first (L1) and second (L2) language. No differences were observed in
reaction time or accuracy data between the groups or languages. The
Stroop interference effect was investigated at the event-related potential
(ERP) level using the incongruent-congruent condition comparison. A
temporal shift around the N400 time window was observed in the difference waveform for this comparison between the groups, with bilinguals
displaying delayed latencies for both languages. An amplitude difference
between the incongruent and congruent condition for monolinguals and
G-E bilinguals in L1 was observed across a significant number of electrodes over frontal and central sites. In contrast, this amplitude difference
was observed in fewer electrodes over frontal and central sites for M-E
bilinguals in both their languages and for G-E bilinguals in L2. This may
be taken to reflect a reduced interference effect for M-E bilinguals in both
their languages and for G-E bilinguals in L2. Overall, the results show
that bilingualism may cause subtle yet measurable changes in the way we
process attentional tasks, such as the Stroop task. However, these
changes may be restricted to one language or both, depending on the
bilinguals’ language background.

236

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

H7
DISSOCIATIONS AMONG VERBAL INTERFERENCE TASKS:
UNDERDETERMINED VS. PREPOTENT COMPETITION Laura
H.F. Barde1,2, Myrna F. Schwartz1, Sharon L. Thompson-Schill2; 1Moss
Rehabilitation Research Institute, 2University of Pennsylvania — Data from
neuropsychological case studies suggest a link between semantic shortterm memory (sSTM) impairment and deficits in resolving certain forms
of competitive interference (Hamilton & Martin, 2007). A possible unifying framework for findings in such patients is the dissociability of two
types of interference resolution: sSTM patients may be capable of resolving interference from several weakly activated yet competing representations (“underdetermined” conflict) but unable to resolve interference
when an inappropriate representation is “prepotent” (cf., Botvinick et al.,
2001). We tested this idea in a case-series study with three patients, each
with history of left hemisphere stroke and known STM impairment.
Patients BAC, CN, and DU performed four tests that putatively tap resolution of Underdetermined (Category Fluency; Verb Generation; and a
variant of the Hayling Sentence Completion task) or Prepotent (a variant
of the Monsell Recent Probes task) conflict. sSTM patient CN replicated
the pattern described by Hamilton and Martin, showing better resolution
of Underdetermined relative to Prepotent conflict. Moreover, this pattern
was not specific to sSTM deficit, as phonological STM patient BAC performed similarly to patient CN. In contrast, patient DU showed the opposite dissociation (better resolution of Prepotent conflict than
Underdetermined). Lesion overlap analyses revealed both CN and BAC
to have similar fronto-parietal lesions, including the superior aspect of
BA44, while patient DU had a frontal lesion that extended deep into
white matter and also involved anterior temporal regions. These data
have implications for characterizations of STM deficit, interference resolution mechanisms, and the functional organization of left prefrontal cortex.
H8
PREFRONTAL CORTEX CUE-RELATED ACTIVITY WHEN
PREPARING TO OVERCOME A PREPOTENT RESPONSE Theresa
Becker1, David Cicero1, John Kerns1; 1University of Missouri-Columbia — Both
prefrontal cortex (PFC) and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) activity have
been exhibited during cognitive control tasks. However, there has been
debate in the literature regarding the specific roles of the PFC and ACC in
these tasks. One view is that the PFC exerts control while the ACC monitors response conflict. In contrast, some research has found ACC activity
for cues signaling upcoming difficult trials, suggesting that the ACC
might also play a role in boosting attention. However, it is possible that
ACC cue-related activity might be due to the preparation of multiple
responses and therefore the occurrence of response conflict. In the
present fast event-related fMRI study, we used a task that does not
involve cue-related response conflict, the Preparing to Overcome a Prepotent Response (POP) task, to examine cue and probe-related neural
activity in 26 healthy controls. On the POP task, participants exhibited
significantly slower performance during the suppression of a prepotent
response. At the same time, in fMRI data, participants exhibited PFC but
not ACC cue-related activity, with ACC exhibiting activity for high
response conflict probes. These results are consistent with previous
research suggesting PFC activity when needing to prepare to overcome a
prepotent response and ACC activity only during the occurrence of
response conflict.
H9
GENERATING AND PREPARING FOR ONE’S OWN TASK
GOALS Sara L Bengtsson1, John-Dylan Haynes2, Katsuyuki Sakai3, Richard
E Passingham4; 1Wellcome Trust Center for Neuroimaging, Institute of
Neurology, London, 2Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Berlin,
3
Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Japan, 4University of
Oxford — In the laboratory the experimenter determines the nature of the
task, but in everyday life people set their own task goals. We examined
the neural mechanisms, using fMRI, involved in task preparation based

Poster Session H

on free selection. On each trial we presented a word. Participants had to
decide either whether the word had an abstract or concrete meaning
(semantic condition), or whether it had two syllables or not (phonological
condition). On some trials the participants decided in advance which
condition they would perform; on others, they were instructed which
condition to perform. We analysed the delay period between the task
decision and word presentation. Comparing the free selection task with
the instructed task, there was task set activity in the paracingulate cortex
and prefrontal area 46. Common to both conditions was activity in the
polar cortex, which peaked later than activity in area 46 and the paracingulate cortex. Additionally there was more activity in ventral premotor
cortex (PMv) when the participants prepared for the phonological task,
and in Broca’s area when they prepared for the semantic task. We next
examined the correlation of activity between area 46 and PMv, and area
46 and Broca’s area. On the free selection task, the correlation was higher
between area 46 and PMv when the participants prepared for the phonological task, and between area 46 and Broca’s area when they prepared
for the semantic task. In conclusion, when people generate their own task
goals, activity in area 46 reflects preparation to perform a specific task.
H10
PROSPECTIVE MEMORY AND ROSTRAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX:
INVOLVEMENT OF A SYSTEM MEDIATING STIMULUSORIENTED AND STIMULUS-INDEPENDENT ATTENDING?
Roland G. Benoit1, Sam J. Gilbert1, Chris D. Frith2,3, Paul W. Burgess1;
1
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, 2Wellcome
Department of Imaging Neuroscience & Institute of Neurology, University
College London, UK, 3Niels Bohr project "interacting minds", CFIN, University
of Aarhus, Århus, Denmark — Using fMRI, we investigated whether the
oft-reported rostral prefrontal cortex (PFC) activations during prospective memory paradigms (i.e., realization of delayed intentions that are
not directly cued by the environment) might reflect the demands that
such tasks make for selection between stimulus-oriented (i.e., environmentally prompted) and stimulus-independent (i.e., environmentally
decoupled) attending. Using a 2x2 factorial design, we crossed (i) prospective memory vs. ongoing task only, with (ii) stimulus-oriented vs.
stimulus-independent attending, across two tasks that differed in stimulus form and background processing requirements. In support of the
hypothesis, common regions of activation within rostromedial PFC were
revealed by comparing the ongoing task only with the prospective memory condition, and the stimulus-oriented with the stimulus-independent
condition. However, activation related to the former contrast extended
more superiorly, suggesting a functional gradient along a dorsal-ventral
axis within this region. Moreover, the prospective memory compared
with the ongoing task only condition recruited left rostrolateral PFC,
reflecting the requirement to maintain delayed intentions. Distinct
aspects of this region were also transiently activated at transitions
between stimulus-oriented and stimulus-independent conditions. These
results suggest that some of the rostral prefrontal signal changes previously noted during prospective memory tasks may reflect alterations in
demands made upon an attentional system that mediates competition
between stimulus-oriented and stimulus-independent processing. However, this is unlikely to provide a complete explanation.
H11
TRAINING AND TRANSFER EFFECTS OF EXECUTIVE
FUNCTIONS IN PRESCHOOL CHILDREN Sissela Bergman1, Sofia
Lindqvist2, Lisa Thorell1,2, Gunilla Bohlin2, Torkel Klingberg1; 1Stockholm
Brain Institute, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden, 2Uppsala University,
Sweden — Executive functions such as working memory and inhibition
are central aspects in neurodevelopmental disorders such as ADHD and
research on early interventions are greatly needed. This study investigated the possibility of improving working memory capacity or inhibitory function in preschool children with a controlled intervention. A
sample of 64 pre-school children aged 4-5 received either computerized
training of working memory (n=17), inhibitory functions (n=18), or train-

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

ing on a commercially available game (active control group, n=13). There
was also a passive control group (n=16) that only took part in the neuropsychological assessment before and after the training. The training was
performed at the pre-school, individually on a daily basis during 5 weeks
with a researcher present. The results show that compared to controls,
the children receiving working memory training improved significantly
on non-trained tests of spatial working memory, verbal memory and
attention. The children receiving training of inhibitory functions showed
no significant improvements relative to the control groups on any of the
tests. In conclusion, this study suggests that working memory training
can have significant effects also in children below school age and that this
type of cognitive training has the potential to serve an important role in
early intervention efforts. The lack of effects in the inhibition group indicate that executive functions differ in how easily that can be trained,
alternatively show a need for a different type of intervention for improvement of these functions.
H12
COGNITIVE CONTROL: ITEM SPECIFIC AND RAPID Chris Blais1,
Evan Risko2, Silvia Bunge1; 1University of California, Berkeley, 2University of
Waterloo — A popular index of cognitive control is the proportion congruent effect in the Stroop task where the magnitude of the Stroop effect
increases as the proportion of congruent trials increases. Botvinick and
colleagues offered an account of this phenomenon in the context of a neurologically inspired computational model. They argued that as the proportion of congruent trials increases the amount of conflict detected by
the ACC decreases leading to a reduction in PFC mediated control. Control in this model is global such that conflict leads to an increase in attention to the relevant dimension of the stimulus. This type of account is
pervasive in theories of cognitive control. Alternatively, Blais and colleagues have argued that cognitive control operates locally, on individual
items. The present investigation assesses these two types of control in the
context of the proportion congruent effect. We provide strong neurological and behavioral evidence showing that there is no global control mechanism that operates independently from a local control mechanism acting
on specific stimuli. This has important ramifications for the field which
has long assumed that a global control mechanism was responsible for
the proportion congruent effect. This demonstration that control can
operate item-by-item converges well with recent work showing that control can also operate trial-by-trial. We anticipate that the present results
will mark the beginning of an important shift in how cognitive control is
conceived thus necessitating behavioral, neural, and computational
explorations of this more dynamic view of cognitive control.
H13
NOW OR LATER? AN FMRI STUDY OF THE EFFECTS OF
ENDOGENOUS OPIOID BLOCKADE ON A DECISION-MAKING
NETWORK Charlotte A. Boettiger1, Elizabeth A. Kelley2, Lee J.
Altamirano2, Jennifer M. Mitchell2, Mark D'Esposito3, Howard L. Fields2,4;
1Biomedical Research Imaging Center, and Curriculum in Neurobiology,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 2Ernest Gallo Clinic and Research
Center, Emeryville, CA, 3Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, and Henry J.
Wheeler Brain Imaging Center, University of California, Berkeley, 4University
of California, San Francisco — We have previously found that distinct
brain areas predict individual selection bias in decisions between small
immediate (“Now”) and larger delayed rewards (“Later”). In addition,
we have found that such selection bias can be manipulated by endogenous opioid blockade. To test the hypothesis that blocking endogenous
opioid signaling with Naltrexone (NTX) would alter brain activity during
decision-making in areas that predict individual choice, we compared
fMRI BOLD signal correlated with Now versus Later decision-making
after acute administration of NTX (50 mg) or placebo. We tested both
abstinent alcoholics (AA) and control subjects (CS) with no history of
substance abuse in a randomized two-session crossover design. We
defined regions of interest (ROI) as 10mm spheres centered on activation
peaks that predict Now vs. Later selection bias (Boettiger et al, 2006). We

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

237

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

found that NTX administration was associated with a significant increase
in BOLD signal during decision-making in the right lateral orbital gyrus
ROI (p<0.05), an area in which enhanced activity during decision-making
predicts Later bias. An exploratory mapwise analysis identified additional loci in which BOLD signal during decision-making was enhanced
(left orbitofrontal cortex, and left inferior temporal gyrus) or reduced
(right superior temporal pole) by NTX. Additional analyses identified a
rich constellation of cortical sites, including the right lateral orbital gyrus,
in which NTX effects on BOLD signal predicted NTX effects on selection
bias. Our data are consistent with the dense opioid receptor expression
found in frontal and temporal cortices of humans, and indicate possible
mechanisms of NTX’s therapeutic effects.
H14
NEURAL CORRELATES OF OVERCOMING INTERFERENCE
FROM INSTRUCTED AND APPLIED STIMULUS-RESPONSE
ASSOCIATIONS Marcel Brass1,2, Dorit Wenke3, Florian Waszak4; 1Ghent
University, Belgium, 2Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, Leipzig, 3Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College
London, 4CNRS and René Descartes University, Paris, France — One of the
major evolutionary progressions of human primates in the motor domain
is their ability to use verbal instructions to guide their behaviour. Despite
this fundamental role of verbal information for our behavioural regulation, the functional and neural mechanisms underlying the transformation of verbal instructions into efficient behaviour are still poorly
understood. To gain deeper insights into the implementation of verbal
instructions, we investigated the neural circuits involved in overcoming
interference from merely instructed stimulus-response (S-R) mappings
and applied S-R mappings. The functional MRI data indicate that overcoming interference from an instructed S-R mapping involves the presupplementary motor area (pre-SMA), whereas overcoming interference
from an applied S-R mapping involves the ACC, over and above the preSMA. These data suggest a functional dissociation between instructed
and applied S-R associations. At the same time, they also demonstrate
that verbal instructions lead to a sublinguistic representation that shares
some functional properties with applied S-R associations.
H15
PRE-STIMULUS ACTIVATION OF THE COGNITIVE CONTROL
NETWORK IS ASSOCIATED WITH CORRECT PERFORMANCE IN
A STROOP TASK Juliane Britz1,2, Christoph Michel1,2,3; 1University of
Geneva, Switzerland, 2Biomedical Imaging Center, University of Geneva,
Switzerland, 3Neurology Clinic, University of Geneva Medical School,
Switzerland — Cognitive control refers to the ability to flexibly coordinate
thoughts and actions in order to correctly perform tasks. Especially under
conditions of conflict, heightened control is required to perform tasks correctly. Nevertheless, irrespective of conflict, the same physical stimuli can
be processed either correctly or erroneously. In the current study, we
hypothesized that heightened levels of cognitive control before an event
will be associated with correct performance in that trial. Subjects performed a color-word Stroop task while their EEG was recorded from 256
electrodes. Evoked potentials were computed for correct and incorrect
trials for a period of -300 to 800 ms; no pre-stimulus baseline correction
was performed. At around 100 ms prior to stimulus onset, we found significant differences in both scalp topography and amplitude of the averaged response. Distributed inverse solutions were computed for each
time point, and statistical tests revealed significant differences the same
period of the scalp potential differences. Significantly increased activation for subsequently correct vs incorrect responses was found in areas of
the cognitive control network. It encompassed superior and middle frontal gyrus, anterior, rostral and caudate cingulate cortex and superior parietal cortex bilaterally. The activity was stronger left-lateralized in frontal
than parietal areas. The present results indicate that pre-stimulus activity
in the cognitive control network leads to correct performance in a high
conflict task.

238

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

H16
CONFLICT EFFECTS WITHOUT CONFLICT IN MEDIAL
1
PREFRONTAL CORTEX Joshua
Brown1;
Indiana
University,
Bloomington, IN — The error likelihood computational model of anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC) (Brown & Braver, 2005) has successfully predicted
error likelihood effects, risk prediction effects, and how individual differences in conflict and error likelihood effects vary with trait differences in
risk aversion. The same model makes a further prediction that apparent
conflict effects in ACC may result in part from an increasing number of
response cues, even when the cued responses are not mutually incompatible. The model prediction was tested with a modification of our changesignal task, in which some task conditions required two otherwise mutually incompatible responses to be generated simultaneously. In that case,
the two response processes were no longer in conflict with each other.
The fMRI results show that simultaneous preparation of multiple
responses can lead to the increased ACC activation previously observed
as conflict effects, even when no state of response conflict exists in the
context of the task instructions. A second control task performed by the
same subjects suggests that the increased ACC activation is due to an
increasing number of external response cues rather than to an increasing
number of internal response processes. The results are consistent with the
predictions of the error likelihood computational model as published.
Supported by: A NARSAD Young Investigator Award and R03
DA023462-01
H17
ASYMMETRIC TASK SWITCHING COSTS GENERATED BY TASK
PRACTICE Matthew S. Cain1, Arthur P. Shimamura1; 1University of
California, Berkeley — One common experimental design is to intermix trials of different types using different stimuli or instruction sets. Some
tasks, such as the antisaccade task, have large, asymmetric carryover
effects from one trial to the next. That is, performance on the current trial
is influenced by the task demands of the previous trial. Other paradigms,
such as those using arbitrary manual stimulus-response (S-R) mappings,
have not shown such carryover effects. While task history and task
switching effects generally have been investigated, the differences
between tasks that do and do not show carryover effects have been
largely unexplored. In this study, we employed two arbitrary S-R mapping tasks of equal difficulty, one in which the color of the stimulus
required a button-press response and the other in which the shape of the
stimulus was the relevant dimension. Participants were first trained
extensively on one of the tasks. Later, they were tested with a mixed task
session containing bivalent stimuli where they had to act upon either the
practiced rule or the novel rule, based on an auditory cue. In the mixed
block, participants were slower overall on the practiced than the novel
trials. Asymmetric reaction time task switching costs also emerged, with
a greater cost for switching from the novel to the practices task than from
the practiced to the novel task, demonstrating that relative levels of practice are a determining factor for the presence or absence of asymmetric
switch costs.
H18
DISSOCIATION BETWEEN ORBITO AND DORSOLATERAL/
HIGH MESIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN EXPERIENCE OF
REGRET AND ITS INFLUENCE ON DECISION MAKING Nathalie
Camille1,4, Jerome Sallet2,4, Pascale Pradat-Diehl3, Angela Sirigu4; 1McGill
University, Montreal Neurological Institute, Montreal, 2INSERM U846,
Center for Stem Cell and Brain Research, Bron, France, 3Service de Medecine
Physique et Readaptation, Hopital de la Salpetriere, Paris, 4Institut des sciences
cognitives, Bron, France — Adaptive goal-directed behaviour involves
detection of the rewards, assessment of what we obtained in this present
context and learning to predict future rewards from past experiences in
order to prepare and execute goal-directed behaviour. The prefrontal cortex plays a critical role in the processing, but the specific contribution of
the different brain regions still is unclear. To answer this crucial question,
we tested normal subjects and both patients suffering from orbitofrontal

Poster Session H

lesion (OFC) and dorsolateral/high mesial (DL/M) lesions in a gambling
task. We analyzed the emotional evaluation of what they obtained, their
physiological responses and their strategic choice. Our results showed
that normal subjects were able to compare what they obtained with what
they might have obtained if they had chosen differently and therefore
elicited regret. From their emotional experiences of their previous
choices, they learned to choose wisely. OFC patients turned out to be
unable to compare their gains with the gains of the non-obtained outcome. Therefore, they were unable to elicit regret, stressing the fundamental role of the orbitofrontal region in mediating the experience of
regret. From their regret experience, they did not learn and continued to
choose incorrectly (Camille et al., Science, 2004). DL/M patients
expressed regret but however were unable to take into account the future
regret in order to change their decisions on strategies, failing to choose
advantageously. This last result provided evidence of the role of the DL/
M in the integration of emotion in cognition processes, underling decision making mechanisms and adaptive goal-directed behaviour.
H19
LOSING CONTROL: ANARCHIC HAND SYNDROME AND MIND
WANDERING Jonathan Carriere1, J. Allan Cheyne1, Daniel Smilek1;
1University of Waterloo — We report a method for inducing anarchic
hand-like experiences in normal individuals. Anarchic Hand Syndrome
(AHS) patients describe the affected hand as “having a mind of its own”
when it engages in instrumental activities independently of the intentions
of its owner. Patients express feelings of transfer of control to the hand, as
well as annoyance directed toward the errant hand. We draw attention to
parallels between these experiences and action slips associated with mind
wandering. For both AHS and everyday action slips, inappropriate
instrumental acts lead to annoyance and are frequently disowned as
“unintended.” We designed an intermanual conflict task (ICT) with test
trials (the presentation of a rare target stimulus) requiring the withholding of a frequent response for one hand and the production of an infrequent response for the other. This sort of task produces errors on test
trials that have been related to everyday mind wandering and action
slips. Probes immediately following test trials revealed that, following
errors, individuals reported feelings of transfer of control and annoyance
specific to the errant hand that had failed to withhold a response. Such
action slips have been associated with functional activation of ACC,
SMA, and lateral PFC. Lesions in these same areas are associated with
AHS. We propose that inattention during mind wandering creates a transient dissociation syndrome, divorcing executive control from ongoing
action, leading to stimulus-bound behavior similar to that of the more
protracted AHS.
H20
THE FEEDBACK-RELATED NEGATIVITY IS SENSITIVE TO THE
DELAYED OUTCOME Yin-Fang Chang1, Nai-Shing Yen1,2; 1National
Chengchi University, Taipei, 2Research Center for Mind, Brain, and Learning,
National Chengchi University, Taipei — Feedback-related negativity (FRN)
is a brain potential peak at 250~300ms after feedback. In particular, FRN
has been shown to reflect the evaluation of monetary loss and negative
feedback. The present study is to examine whether FRN is sensitive to
“delayed outcome” or to “immediate loss”. The immediate feedback (to
win 10 or lose 10 NT dollars) and the delayed outcome (to get 50 at positive-outcome or to lose 50 at negative-outcome condition) were manipulated in this present task. In positive-outcome condition, participants
might get delayed-gain only after immediate-loss. In specific, they could
get delayed-gain twice in every five immediate-loss. Thus, the outcomes
of win and loss trials were 50 dollars. In negative-outcome condition, participants might get delayed-loss only after immediate-gain. In specific,
they could get delayed-loss twice in every five immediate-gain. Thus, the
outcomes of win and loss trials were -50 dollars. If FRN is sensitive to
immediate-loss, FRN will be greater at lose-10-dollar trials in both conditions. However, if the delayed outcome is considered, FRN will be
greater at win-10-dollar trials in both conditions. Win-10-dollar is worse

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

than lose-10-dollar is because win-10-dollar cannot provide an opportunity to get extra 50 dollars at positive-outcome condition and might cause
extra 50 dollar loss at negative-outcome condition. The main effect of
win-loss indicates that FRN is greater at win-10-dollar trials, which suggests that FRN is more sensitive to delayed outcome. Besides, the main
effect of condition reveals that FRN is greater at negative-outcome condition than at positive-outcome condition. It might be the influence of framing effect, that is, participants were more sensitive to negative outcomes.
H21
FACIAL EMG REVEALS TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP
EMOTIONAL INTERFERENCE IN AN ADAPTED CONTEXT
PROCESSING TASK Kimberly S. Chiew1, Timothy Heaven1, Todd S.
Braver1; 1Washington University in St. Louis — Affective conflict and control may have important parallels to cognitive conflict and control, but
these processes have been difficult to quantitatively study with emotionally naturalistic laboratory paradigms. We developed a new paradigm
that measures emotional conflict in terms of facial expression latency to
and intensity emotional picture probes. The task is an analog of the AX
Continuous Performance Task (AX-CPT) that has been widely used to
investigate context processing in the service of controlled cognition, in
typical and atypical populations. Participants were biased to automatize
a high-frequency, emotionally congruent target response (e.g., frown to
negative pictures). In two types of interference trials, the automatic facial
expression response to the picture valence conflicted with a prior contextual cue (“SMILE” or “FROWN”). A within-subjects manipulation of
delay between cue and probe allowed us to examine the impact of preparatory time on controlled emotional processing. In interference trials,
expressions were slower to peak and lower in amplitude than in target
and control trials. Besides providing a greater characterization of automatic and controlled emotional facial expressions, this study demonstrates that emotional interference effects may occur via emotional
incongruency between probe and response (“bottom up” interference), or
by context expectancy even when the probe and response are emotionally
congruent (“top down” interference). These parallels to observations of
facilitation and interference in the cognitive AX-CPT suggest that the
present adapted paradigm may be effectively used to characterize affective conflict and control.
H22
DORSAL ANTERIOR CINGULATE ACTIVITY FOR CUES
SIGNALING NEED FOR RESPONSE PREPARATION David Cicero1,
Theresa Becker1, John Kerns1; 1University of Missouri-Columbia — The Anterior Cingulate Cortex (ACC) is thought to play a role in cognitive control.
However, the specific role of the ACC in cognitive control is still unclear.
One hypothesis is that the ACC monitors for response conflict. Consistent
with this, some studies with a long cue-probe interval have found that
cues signaling a need for greater control do not activate the ACC, with
ACC activity occurring only with high conflict probes. However, another
hypothesis is that the ACC is involved in boosting attention to task-relevant stimuli. Consistent with this, some research with a short cue-probe
interval have found ACC activity for cues signaling a greater need for
control. However, it is possible that ACC cue-related activity might
reflect ACC response conflict if participants simultaneously prepare multiple responses. The current study examined whether response conflict
cue processing would engage the ACC. Participants completed an fMRI
task in which they saw a cue (red or green square) that indicated whether
they would have to respond quickly (<350 ms) or at normal speed (<2s).
Then participants saw an arrow and had to press a response key in the
direction of the arrow. fMRI analysis showed that the dorsal ACC was
activated as participants saw the cue and responded to the probe. Conversely, the Prefrontal Cortex (PFC) was not activated during either part
of the task. These results are consistent with other research (e.g., CavinaPretasi et al., 2006) suggesting that ACC cue related activity might be
related to preparatory response conflict.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

239

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

H23
NEGATIVE PRIMING EFFECTS ON VISUAL INFORMATION:
PHENOTYPIC
LEVEL
OF
PROCESSING
DIFFERENCES
DEPENDENT UPON VARYING BRAND IDENTITY Kimberly Rose
Clark1, Jody Johnson2, Jared Rossi2, Christopher Mark Wessinger2; 1Retail
Forensics Institute, Lebanon, NH, 2Cognitive and Brain Sceinces, University of
Nevada, Reno, NV — In many priming studies, information processing is
enhanced by presentation of related information just prior to presentation response stimuli. This is known as positive priming. This processing
facilitation has been linked to the initial stages of information processing.
Negative priming can also occur such that processing of response stimuli
is slowed by prior presentation of related material. This slowing of processing has been linked to processing of higher-order, categorical information associated with the task. Utilizing positive and negative priming
we investigated categorical processing of brand logos. Since brand logos
are often enhanced with a variety of episodic memories as visual stimuli
they are effective stimuli that are emotionally charged and require complex processing. Such emotionally enhanced information can act to slow
identification, as more cognitive processing is required to generate a categorical comparison. To investigate the effects of multiple presentations of
brand logo presentations we employed a modified priming paradigm
using forward and backward masking. The stimuli consisted of brand
logos for different restaurants and clothing manufacturers. The data indicate that categorization type significantly influences the ability to efficiently process multiple presentations of brand logos. This effect is
demonstrated by consistent facilitation or degradation in reaction time
depending on the brand logo category. Increased reaction times (slower)
were found for well known brand logos, while less known brands
resulted in decreased (faster) reaction times. The additional time needed
to properly process well known logos suggests that such logos require
the involvement of higher order frontal processing regions.
H24
PATTERN CLASSIFICATION OF FMRI DATA TO PREDICT
VALUATION FOR PROBABILISTIC AND INTERTEMPORAL
OUTCOMES John A. Clithero1,2,3, R. McKell Carter2,3, Scott A.
Huettel2,3,4; 1Duke University, Economics, 2Duke University, Center for
Cognitive Neuroscience, 3Duke University, Brain Imaging and Analysis Center,
4Duke University — Economic preferences, or the relative values assigned
to different decision options, can be identified, albeit imperfectly, from
behavioral data. One core goal of neuroeconomics is to improve the accuracy of preference measures, and thus predictions of choices, by incorporating neural data. Here, we combine functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) with a pattern classification technique (support vector
machines, SVM) to predict the character of decisions made by subjects in
an economic valuation task. SVM provides access to local patterns of activation, which allows identification of candidate regions that may be
involved directly in differences in computation. Our task consisted of
two types of trials: decisions about probabilistic gambles and decisions
about delayed rewards. These two forms of choice under uncertainty
both share common phenomena and evince potential differences in computational requirements. Subjects evaluated a succession of delayed or
risky prizes by indicating their current and certainty equivalent, as elicited by an incentive-compatible auction structure. Using SVM, we analyzed data from thirteen different regions of interest that have previously
been implicated in decision making. Preliminary results identified a subset of regions whose local pattern of activity, even after main effects of the
entire region were excluded, predicted whether a subject was making a
decision under risk or under delay. These included posterior parietal cortex, posterior cingulate, and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, all of which
provided significantly above-chance predictions. Additional analyses
investigated covert representations of value across both forms of decisions.

240

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

H25
AN FMRI STUDY OF HYPNOTIC MOTOR PARALYSIS Yann
Cojan1, Lakshmi Waber1, Alain Forster2, Laurent Rossier3, Patrik Vuilleumier1;
1LabNic, University of Geneva, 2Anaesthesiology, HUG, 3University of
Fribourg — Gruzelier (1998) proposed that the neural bases of hypnotic
phenomena involved an unconscious and constant inhibition of motor
pathways by fronto-limbic inhibitory processes, as hysteric conversion.
Recent brain imaging studies have provided inconclusive data in support
of this idea (Halligan 2000, Ward 2003). To investigate motor inhibition
during hypnosis, we designed a go/nogo task that distinguished brain
activity during both preparation and execution (or inhibition) of simple
motor actions, while volunteers were in three possible conditions in a 3T
scanner: (i) normal state, (ii) hypnotic paralysis of the left arm, and (iii)
simulation of left paralysis. Premotor areas showed equivalent activity
during preparation of movements in all the conditions, but hypnosis
increased the bold signal in two networks: (i) somatosensory and medial
parietal regions for left/paralysed hand and (ii) in visual areas whatever
the hand prepared. Hypnotic suggestion also modified activity in two
networks normally involved in behavioural inhibition: (i) a right sided
network including inferior parietal and inferior frontal cortices was
always active under hypnosis and (ii) a left sided network including middle temporal gyrus, inferior parietal and inferior prefrontal areas
switched from an inhibitory function to a left hand response under hypnosis. We conclude that hypnosis changes the neural activity in executive
frontal networks: hyperactivity of the right prefrontal cortex is responsible for a greater selective attentional and modifies monitoring process.
Furthermore, hypnosis changes the task setting and rules are related to
the left hand instead of inhibition.
H26
MEDIAL FRONTAL CORTEX DIRECTS ATTENTION ALONG
MULTIPLE PATHWAYS TO RESOLVE PERCEPTUAL DECISION
DIFFICULTY Michael W. Cole1,2,3, Sudhir Pathak1,2, Walter Schneider1,3,2;
1Center for Neuroscience, University of Pittsburgh, 2University of Pittsburgh,
3
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition — Attention increases both discrimination accuracy of incoming information (Cameron et al., 2002) and
the influence of goal-relevant information (Desimone, 1998). However, it
remains unclear how these two mechanisms of attention are coordinated
in response to the need for cognitive control in humans. We found that
both mechanisms originate in a single source via different pathways.
Using Granger causality and controlling for motor processing in a perceptual decision-making task, we demonstrate that posterior medial frontal cortex (PMFC; including anterior cingulate and pre-supplementary
motor area) directs attention to enhance incoming information (via reticular formation and V1) and amplify goal-relevant information (via dorsolateral prefrontal and visual association cortex). These two pathways are
also verified anatomically using diffusion spectrum imaging (DSI), generalizing their innate connectivity beyond our study’s particular behavioral context. We conclude that PMFC plays a pivotal role in directing
attention via subcortical and cortical pathways modulating early and late
perceptual processing.
H27
COCAINE AND EXECUTIVE CONTROL: EVIDENCE FOR A ROLE
OF DOPAMINE IN INHIBITING THOUGHTS AND ACTIONS
Lorenza Colzato1,2, Wery van den Wildenberg3, Bernhard Hommel1,2; 1Leiden
University, Institute for Psychological Research, 2Leiden Institute for Brain &
Cognition, 3University of Amsterdam — Chronic use of cocaine is known to
impair the functioning of dopaminergic D2 receptors in prefrontal cortex,
with negative consequences for cognitive control processes. Increasing
evidence suggests that cognitive control is also affected in recreational
cocaine consumers. In a set of three studies that were strictly controlled
for age, race, gender, level of intelligence, and alcohol consumption, we
were able to link recreational use to striatal dopaminergic functioning
and deficits in the inhibition of stimulus representations and action plans.
First, we found that the spontaneous eyeblink rate, a marker of striatal

Poster Session H

dopaminergic functioning, is significantly higher in recreational users
than in cocaine-free controls. Second, we observed that inhibition of
return, a reflexive inhibitory mechanism that delays attention from
returning to a previously attended location, is eliminated in recreational
users. Third, we found that users and non users are comparable in terms
of response execution but users need significantly more time to inhibit
responses to stop-signals. Taken together, these observations point to a
crucial role of dopaminergic D2-related pathways in the inhibitory control of perception and action.
H28
THE INFLUENCE OF MONOAMINE OXIDASE A GENE
PROMOTER VARIATION AND NEGATIVE LIFE EVENTS ON
NEURAL ACTIVITY UNDERLYING INHIBITORY CONTROL IN
HEALTHY ADULTS Eliza Congdon1, Klaus-Peter Lesch2, R. Todd
Constable3, Turhan Canli1,4; 1Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY,
2
Molecular and Clinical Psychobiology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg,
3Yale MRRC, Yale University, New Haven, 4Graduate Program in Genetics,
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY — There is evidence that a functional polymorphism in the promoter of the monoamine oxidase A gene
(MAOA-uVNTR) interacts with early life stressors to influence an aggressive, antisocial phenotype. Inhibitory control is a major component of
aggression, and indeed, recent studies combining genetic and imaging
data have provided support for the influence of MAOA-uVNTR on neural circuits underlying not only inhibitory control, but also emotional
arousal. However, these studies have used tasks that do not allow for the
clear separation of inhibitory control processes, nor have they considered
the role of negative life experiences. The present study was therefore
undertaken in healthy adults to investigate the influence of MAOAuVNTR and life stressors, and the interaction between them, on neural
activity underlying inhibitory control. Using an event-related fMRI
design, we scanned thirty-six healthy adults while performing a Stop-signal task, which allows for the separation of successful from failed inhibition, while controlling for difficulty level. Focusing our analyses on trials
of failed inhibition, we found significant differences in activation
between MAOA-uVNTR genotype groups in regions involved in inhibitory control and error processing. Examination of the relationship
between negative life experiences and activation during inhibitory control between MAOA-uVNTR groups also revealed group differences.
These results are in line with previous reports, which suggest that the risk
group fails to engage regions necessary for successful task performance
and instead engage additional regions as a compensatory response,
thereby resulting in increased activation. These results may also aid in
understanding the mechanisms of gene by environment interactions.
H29
NEURAL CORRELATES OF DECEPTION DETECTION: A BOLD
IMAGING STUDY Adam Craig1, Yuliya Komarova1, Jennifer Vendemia1,
Stacy L. Wood1; 1University of South Carolina — While deceptive advertising has been shown to engender distrust, negative affect, and engage
defensive stereotyping of subsequent advertisements from both the same
source and second-party sources (Darke and Ritchie 2007; Schul et al.
2004), little is known about the cognitive system by which deceptive persuasive claims are processed. In the present research, these mechanisms
were examined in an advertisement viewing task. College students
(N=25) viewed 15 advertisements for new products that varied in their
level of believability (as determined by pretesting). Each advertisement
was assigned to one of three categories (based on pretesting with N=180
college students from the same population as the subsequent imaging
study): “high believability,” “moderate believability,” and “low believability” in regards to the advertising claims. Low believability claims
might include “guaranteed to increase your energy and mental performance throughout the day” as compared to high believability, “wool
socks will keep your feet warm.” Interspersed between the advertisements were 5 blank screens to prevent carryover effects from one ad to
another. Participants were asked to merely focus on the screen during

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

these presentations. The advertisements consisted of a product description and descriptive paragraphs similar to a catalog format. During the
session the participants’ BOLD activations were recorded for the 4-level
block design. Evidence for the processing of deceptive persuasive
attempts (particularly in relation to insula and BA 9 activity) will be provided and discussed in relation to traditional consumer behavior literature on the effects of deceptive claims (Darke and Ritchie 2007; Barone et
al. 1999, 2004).
H30
DISSOCIABLE EFFECTS OF ACUTE TRYPTOPHAN DEPLETION
ON DIFFERENT VARIETIES OF IMPULSIVITY Molly Crockett1,2, Luke
Clark1,2, Oliver Robinson1,2, Trevor Robbins1,2; 1Behavioural and Clinical
Neuroscience Institute, University of Cambridge, 2University of Cambridge — Serotonin (5-HT) has long been implicated in a range of emotional and behavioural control processes, and impaired 5-HT function has been associated
with impulsive behaviour in both animals and clinical populations. However, recent work investigating the role of 5-HT in impulsivity in healthy
volunteers has produced conflicting results. In this study, we induced
central 5-HT depletion using an acute tryptophan depletion (ATD) procedure in healthy volunteers to investigate the relationship between 5-HT
function and "reflection impulsivity," or the tendency to gather information before making a decision. In the reflection impulsivity task (Clark et
al., 2006), participants were instructed to gather as much information as
they wished before making a decision; gathering more information led to
an increased likelihood of a correct decision. Participants gained points
for correct decisions and lost points for incorrect decisions. We also
assessed the effects of ATD on a separate measure of impulsivity, delaydiscounting. Following ATD, participants gathered more information
before making a decision, compared to the placebo control drink. The
more cautious decision-making style observed following ATD may result
from an over-weighting of potential losses compared to potential gains,
which would be consistent with recent findings demonstrating that ATD
enhances punishment but not reward prediction (Cools et al., 2007), as
well as with previous theorizing that central 5-HT carries a prediction
error for future punishment but not future reward (Daw et al., 2002). By
contrast, ATD did not affect delay discounting, suggesting that manipulations of 5-HT affect only certain forms of impulsivity.
H31
ACTIVATION OF SUPPLEMENTARY MOTOR AREA DURING
TASK
SWITCHING:
AN
EVENT
RELATED
FNIRS
INVESTIGATION Simone Cutini1, Pietro Scatturin1, Enrica Menon1,
Patrizia Bisiacchi1, Luciano Gamberini1, Marco Zorzi1, Roberto Dell'Acqua1;
1University of Padova, Padova, Italy — Introduction: In task switching subjects switch between two tasks that are typically performed on a set of
stimuli. Switching between tasks is usually associated with a decrement
in performance. It is often assumed that lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC) is
important for switching between rules. However, activation associated
with rule switching is less reliably observed in LPFC than in the supplementary motor area (SMA). The LPFC seems to be involved in rule
retrieval and maintenance. In contrast to LPFC, the SMA has been consistently engaged during task switching. Aim and hypotheses: The purpose
of this study was to investigate task switching performance with functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) in healthy subjects. We
expected to find a stronger activation of SMA in switch compared to repetition trials, while no difference was expected in LPFC. Method: Ten volunteers participated at the experiment. An event related task switching
paradigm was used. The ISI was 13 s, and the number of trials was 120.
Switch and repetition trials were balanced to prevent frequency effects.
The fNIRS instrument was an ISS Imagent, with 20 pairs of channels.
Sources and detectors were positioned to record hemodynamic response
in LPFC and SMA. Results: Compared to baseline the left motor cortex,
bilateral LPFC, SMA and PMd were active. Comparing Switch Vs Repetition trials, only the left SMA and PMd were active. Conclusion: Our

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

241

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

results confirm that SMA is tightly involved in task set reconfiguration,
while the LPFC seems to be involved in rule retrieval and maintenance.
H32
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND BDNF POLYMORPHISMS INTERACT
TO MODULATE COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE IN A TASKJohn
Fossella2;
SWITCHING PARADIGM Matthew
Davidson1,
1
2
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mt. Sinai School of Medicine, New
York — There is a growing body of evidence that shows an active lifestyle
can lead to numerous health benefits, including improvements in both
physiological and psychological health. Cognitive benefits have been
found in various domains but appear to be strongest for higher-order
cognitive functions, including task-switching abilities (e.g., Kramer et al.,
2006). Mechanisms shown to underlie these improvements include
changes in brain plasticity as a result of increased neurotrophin synthesis
and release. Of particular interest in the current study was Brain Derived
Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF), which was identified in animal models
(Neeper et al., 1997) and has been shown to increase following physical
activity in human adults (Ferris et al., 2007). We predicted that physical
activity would improve cognitive abilities and, further, that the extent of
this improvement would be modulated by the presence of specific BDNF
polymorphisms (val/val vs. val/met or met/met of the val66met polymorphism). Preliminary results with 65 young adults show reductions in
task-switching costs as a function of physical activity, with a significantly
greater reduction for the participants possessing at least one met polymorphism (val/met and met/met combined). In the control condition
these participants show significantly greater switch costs, in-line with
other results suggesting relative inefficiencies for these polymorphisms
(e.g., Hariri et al., 2003). However, the greater improvement in performance for the met group suggests that physical activity may provide a
means for overcoming these inefficiencies, and could serve as an intervention to improve cognitive abilities in people with these polymorphisms.
H33
FLEXIBLE CONTROL OVER INSTRUMENTAL ACTION ASSOCIATIVE AND NEURAL MECHANISMS Sanne de Wit1, Roshan
Cools2, Anthony Dickinson1, Phil Corlett1, Paul Fletcher1; 1University of
Cambridge, 2F.C. Donders Centre, The Netherlands — There are two types of
instrumental action: Goal-directed action has the advantage that it is
immediately sensitive to our current needs and desires, while habitual
action is far less flexible but requires little cognitive effort. To study goaldirected and habitual actions, we developed a task that can be solved
using either strategy. We found that a goal-directed strategy is adopted
unless the encoding of the goals of one’s actions causes response conflict.
In the latter case, healthy volunteers were able to switch to a habitual
strategy (de Wit et al., 2007). In recent research, we used the discrimination task to investigate the neural systems underlying goal-directed and
habitual action. We investigated the role of dopamine in these two types
of instrumental behaviour by testing patients with Parkinson’s disease
whilst either ON or OFF dopaminergic medication. Preliminary analyses
suggest that dopaminergic dopaminergic medication promoted habitual
control at the expense of goal-directed control over behaviour. In another
line of research, we investigated the neural substrates of goal-directed
action in healthy volunteers using magnetic resonance imaging, and
identified a critical region in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex.
H34
INVOLVEMENT OF PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN LEARNING AND
EXECUTING MULTIPLE TASK RULES Iroise Dumontheil1,2, Russell
Thompson2, John Duncan2; 1Institute of Cognitive Neurosciences, University
College London, 2Medical Research Council, Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit,
Cambridge — Learning the multiple rules of a new task is closely related
to general intelligence (Duncan et al. in press). Both monkey and fMRI
studies suggest that new task rules may be coded in part in the prefrontal
cortex (PFC) (e.g. Freedman et al Science 2001; Braver et al. 2003). An
fMRI study was designed to investigate learning and execution of multi-

242

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

rule tasks. In the scanner, subjects learned and carried out 12 tasks in turn
(involving different stimuli, rules and response keys). Between tasks we
manipulated the number of rules specified in task instructions, and
within tasks we manipulated the number of rules operative in each trial
block. Data were analyzed both during presentation of instructions (new
task learning) and during later task execution. A sustained increase in
BOLD signal for blocks with more operative rules was found in lateral
rostral PFC (similarly to Braver et al. 2003), along with dorsolateral PFC,
the intraparietal sulci, premotor cortex and pre-supplementary motor
area. Except for anterior PFC, these same regions showed event-related
activity for trials within blocks. During the instructions, BOLD signal
changes were consistent with those observed during task execution. A
sustained component increased gradually as additional task rules were
learnt. The results show that new learning of task rules recruits frontal
and parietal regions similar to those found during subsequent task execution.
H35
INCREASING RELIANCE ON COGNITIVE CONTROL SYSTEMS
FOR WORD RECOGNITION WITH DECLINING STRUCTURAL
INTEGRITY OF SPEECH SYSTEMS Mark Eckert1, Adam Walczak1,
Jayne Ahlstrom1, Stewart Denslow1, Amy Horwitz1, Judy Dubno1; 1Medical
University of South Carolina — Speech recognition can be demanding for
older adults, even those with normal hearing. Age-related declines in
speech-related temporal lobe and attention-related frontal lobe systems
have been hypothesized to underlie declines in speech recognition, particularly in challenging listening conditions. This study examined agerelated BOLD activation changes in 15 normal hearing adults (21-75
years) when they performed a word recognition task that was made challenging by decreasing word intelligibility. Although there were no agerelated changes in word recognition, there were age-related changes in
middle frontal gyrus (MFG) and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) activation. Older adults engaged MFG and ACC when words were more intelligible, while younger adults engaged the same regions when words
were less intelligible. Across subjects, anterior temporal lobe regions
were increasingly responsive with increasing word intelligibility. Declining gray matter volume within these regions significantly predicted left
MFG activity, even after controlling for total gray matter volume. These
results suggest that age-related structural declines in speech systems lead
to the recruitment of frontal regions in relatively easy listening conditions.
H36
CONFLICT AND EXPECTANCY RECRUIT INDEPENDENT
COGNITIVE CONTROL RESOURCES Tobias Egner1, Caitlyn Lia2,
Christopher Summerfield3,4; 1Cognitive Neurology & Alzheimer's Disease
Center, Northwestern University, 2Ossining Highschool, 3INSERM, Université
Pierre et Marie Currie, 4Ecole Normale Supérieure — ‘Cognitive
control’
describes the ability to flexibly adjust one’s behavior in the pursuit of
internal goals. One well-documented instance of cognitive control is
reflected in enhanced attentional performance following a difficult
(incongruent) trial in conflict tasks, such as the Stroop protocol (‘conflict
adaptation effects’). Another well-known example of cognitive control
consists of the use of probabilistic information to improve attentional task
performance (‘expectancy effects’). An important question concerns
whether cognitive control constitutes a single ’general resource’ for flexible performance adjustment that can be triggered in different ways (that
is, by conflict or by expectancy), or whether there exist independent, context-specific cognitive control resources. We adjudicated between these
two hypotheses by devising a Stroop task where the task-irrelevant stimulus information (word-meaning) was predictive (with 80% validity) of
whether the subsequent stimulus was congruent or incongruent. This
allowed us to cross the factors of previous trial congruency (congruent
versus incongruent) × previous trial expectancy (expected versus unexpected) × current trial congruency × current trial expectancy, in order to
assess whether conflict-driven and expectancy-driven adjustments in

Poster Session H

performance were interactive or additive in nature. The results revealed
that the conflict adaptation effect did not depend on whether the congruency of a current stimulus was expected, and that the expectancy effect
did not vary as a function of conflict (congruency) on the previous trial.
Instead, previous trial conflict and current trial expectancy produced
additive performance benefits, suggesting that conflict- and expectancydriven effects are mediated by independent cognitive control resources.
H37
IS PERFORMANCE-MONITORING IN OCD MODULATED BY THE
SIGNIFICANCE OF AN ERROR? Tanja Endrass1, Beate Schürmann1,
Norbert Kathmann1; 1Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany — Studies in
patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) revealed evidence
for overactive performance monitoring in these patients. In neuroimaging studies OCD patients show hyperactivity of fronto-medial and striatal brain regions; in ERP studies incorrect responses elicit increased
error-related negativity (ERN) amplitudes. Previous research indicated
that the ERN amplitude is enhanced by the error significance, e.g. when
accuracy is emphasized over speed, or when correct reactions are
rewarded. Accordingly, larger ERN amplitudes in OCD patients might
express their attempt to respond correctly. The present study aimed to
investigate whether performance monitoring in OCD is modulated by the
significance of an error. 22 OCD patients and 22 healthy controls performed a modified flanker task in two conditions: one standard condition
and a second condition in which committing an error caused a monetary
loss. In healthy controls ERN amplitudes were significantly increased in
the monetary loss condition compared with the standard condition. OCD
patients had significantly larger ERN amplitudes than controls in the
standard condition. Furthermore, ERN amplitudes of OCD patients were
not modulated by the expectation of a monetary loss. Our results support
the view that increased ERN amplitudes in OCD patients are due to a
trait-like overactive performance-monitoring system. Importantly, the
ERN could not be enhanced with experimentally induced higher error
significance. Thus, this over-activity might actually reflect their increased
effort to avoid errors.
H38
THE ROLE OF EXECUTIVE AND DEFAULT NETWORKS IN THE
RESTING STATE Jonathan Erez1, Kalina Christoff2,3,4; 1Cognitive Systems
Program, 2Department of Psychology, 3Neuroscience Program, 4Brain Research
Centre — It has been proposed that during rest a “default mode” of mental functioning may emerge, involving loose monitoring of one’s internal
emotional and physiological states (Raichle, 2001). A prominent part of
the default mode network is the medial prefrontal cortex, also known to
become involved when subjects experience anxiety (Simpson et al., 2001)
or attend to their internal emotional states (Lane et al., 1997; Ochsner et
al. 2004). On the other hand, it has been proposed that complex thought
and memory retrieval processes occur spontaneously during rest in the
form of mind-wandering - something which is supported by findings of
lateral prefrontal, as well medial and lateral temporal activations (e.g.,
Andreasen et al., 1995; Christoff et al., 2004; Stark et al., 2001). The purpose of the present study was to investigate what determines the extent
to which these two types of resting mental state occurs during scanning
and to determine whether acclimation to the scanner has an effect on resting thought processes. Subjects were scanned while performing a verb
generation task on practiced and unpracticed set of words, as well as
while resting. Heart rate was measured as an indicator of acclimatization.
Results show a shift in activation from medial PFC during the initial
scanning sessions to lateral PFC during the later periods of the experiment. This suggests that resting thought processes are not limited to the
“default mode” of brain function and that acclimation to the scanning
environment may have an important influence upon the conscious resting state.

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

H39
SOCIAL CONTEXT AND PREFRONTAL FUNCTION IN
PRESCHOOLERS Kimberly Andrews Espy1, Sandra Wiebe1, Tiffany
Sheffield1, Matthew Moehr1; 1University of Nebraska-Lincoln — There
is
renewed interest in the impacts of social contexts on neural function. In
young school-age children, executive task performance differs in lower
SES children (Noble et al., 2005), where the home literacy orientation and
preschool attendance amount were related to better working memory.
Given the protracted prefrontal development in preschoolers, the impact
of the child’s social context might differ. Drawing our measurement work
(Wiebe et al., in press) where a single latent factor best modeled lexecutive control (EC) performance, the impact of the social context (Relationship Support, Adverse Stressors, Home Quality) on laboratory-measured
EC task performance and on parent-rated, everyday effortful behavior
(Interference Control, Impulsive Reactivity, Information Maintenance,
Emotional Control) was investigated in a large (N=242), socio-economically diverse sample of children of 3- to 6-year-olds using structural equation modeling. The latent laboratory-measured EC factor was related to
the first three dimensions of everyday effortful behavior (&#955;=.43.50). Contextual factors were not related directly to laboratory-measured
EC (&#955;=.03-.10), but were to everyday effortful behavior, where Relationship Support was related to Interference Control (&#955;=.39), Information Maintenance (&#955;=.39), and Emotional Control (&#955;=.33);
and Adverse Stressors to Information Maintenance (&#955;=.29). At least
in preschool children whose prefrontal systems are rapidly developing,
laboratory-measured EC is not isomorphic with everyday effortful
behavior in the real world. In fact, effortfully-regulated everyday behavior appears to be the expression of variation in laboratory-measured EC,
where this expression depends on the support provided by salient relationships in the child’s social context.
H40
THE HIERARCHICAL ORGANIZATION OF SCRIPTS- EVIDENCE
FROM FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA AND ALZHEIMER ’S
DISEASE Christine Farag1, Vanessa Troiani1, Peachie Moore1, Murray
Grossman1; 1University of Pennsylvania — While often thought to be organized linearly, recent work suggests that scripts are instead organized
hierarchically. We assessed the organizational structure of scripts by
examining the differential ability of patients with FTD and AD to perceive the hierarchically-organized nature of a script. Pilot work quantified the associative strength of 6 events within each of 22 scripts, allowing
us to develop hierarchical tree structures for each script. We identified
consecutive pairs of events from the same hierarchical-cluster (WithinHierarchy) and consecutive pairs from two different hierarchical-clusters
within the script (DifferentHierarchy). FTD patients (N=26), AD patients
(N=8), and elderly controls were presented a script title and two written
events, and asked to judge the correctness of ordered events within the
script. Relative to elderly controls (93%correct), FTD patients were significantly less accurate (83%correct) and slower in response for all judgments (p<.05) while AD patients were merely slower in response (p<.05).
Within FTD, patients were significantly less accurate when presented
with DifferentHierarchy pairs (80%correct) than when presented with
WithinHierarchy pairs (86%correct) (p<.05). FTD patients demonstrated
overall difficulty identifying appropriately sequenced events within
scripts, reflecting compromised action sequence processing and impaired
executive functioning. Moreover, they displayed differential difficulty
with consecutive pairs of events distinguished only by their hierarchical
relationship within a script; such results are consistent with a deficit
appreciating hierarchically organized material such as scripts. Conversely, AD patients displayed similar performance among various hierarchically organized scripts, reflecting preserved recognition of
hierarchically organized material which corresponds to their relatively
preserved script processing abilities.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

243

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

H41
MINDFULNESS MEDITATION IS ASSOCIATED WITH ALTERED
RECRUITMENT OF CORTICAL REPRESENTATIONS OF BODY
STATE Norman Farb1, Zindel Segal2, Helen Mayberg3, Jim Bean4, Deborah
McKeon4, Zainab Fatima5, Adam Anderson1; 1University of Toronto,
2
University of Toronto and Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 3Emory
University, 4St Joseph’s Health Centre, University of Toronto, 5Institute of
Medical Science, University of Toronto — Mindfulness
meditation
has
shown promising effects in reducing the risk of relapse in major depression. In a preliminary fMRI study of self-referential processing, Farb et al.
(2007) demonstrated that mindfulness training (MT) improves participants' ability to maintain awareness of the present moment supported by
a right lateralized network centered around the viscerosomatic cortices.
However, the precise cognitive-affective mechanisms altered by MT are
unknown. The present study used fMRI to examine neural changes associated with processing in distinct domains thought to be developed in
MT: keeping information out of mind, holding information in mind, and
increased body awareness. Tasks tapping these abilities were compared
between two groups, one of which had just completed an 8-week course
in MT and a wait-listed control group (Novices). The MT group showed
task-related differences from Novices in BOLD response. First, MT participants showed increased bilateral insula activity during a breath monitoring task, suggesting altered viscerosomatic recruitment. Second, MT
participants showed increased right lateral orbitofrontal activation in a
cognitive suppression task, suggesting altered inhibitory control. Third,
MT participants showed increased dorsolateral prefrontal cortical activation in a 1-back working memory task, suggesting altered attentional control. These results suggest MT may increase voluntary deployment of
attention to enhance access to viscero-somatic representations of the self.
H42
THE N2B AS AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MARKER OF
MONITORING FOR PERCEIVED ERRORS IN A SEQUENCE
LEARNING TASK Nicola K. Ferdinand1, Axel Mecklinger1, Jutta Kray1;
1
Saarland University — An important electrophysiological marker of error
monitoring is the error-related negativity (ERN/Ne), a component in the
response-locked event-related potential, visible after subjects commit an
error. In a recent model, Holroyd and Coles (2002) suggested that the
ERN/Ne is caused by a phasic drop in dopamine when an event is evaluated as “worse than expected” and plays an important role during reinforcement learning. In a former sequence learning study (Ferdinand,
Mecklinger, & Kray, in press), we found a negativity (the N2b) in
response to perceived errors (i.e. deviants inserted into a repeating
sequence) showing similar characteristics as the ERN/Ne in reinforcement learning tasks. In two further sequence learning studies, we wanted
to explore the functional characteristics of the N2b in more detail. We
examined a) whether expectancy changes, induced by successful learning
modulate the N2b and b) what kinds of expectancy violations cause an
N2b. We found that changes in expectancies are directly reflected in N2b
amplitude. When a stimulus appears unexpectedly, an N2b is elicited;
when it gets predictable through learning, the N2b is absent and a P3b is
elicited instead. Moreover, we found that only those expectancy violations that are relevant for sequence learning elicit an N2b, while other
task-relevant violations do not. These results suggest that violations of
expectancies that are formed by learning are detected by the error monitoring system as events that are “worse than expected”. These perceived
errors are reflected in an enhanced N2b and are used to adapt behaviour
to current task demands.
H43
AN FMRI STUDY OF COGNITIVE DEMAND AND CONTROL
DURING SKILL ACQUISITION Jon Fincham1, Qin Yulin1, Anderson
John1; 1Carnegie Mellon University — The current work explores changes
that occur in neural activity as a function of practice during a simple cognitive skill acquisition task that had differential within-subject control
demands. Particular focus was given to brain areas involved in cognitive

244

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

control (anterior cingulate cortex, BA 32/24), problem representation
(parietal cortex, BA 40/7), declarative memory retrieval (prefrontal cortex, BA 9/46), visual encoding (fusiform area) and manual execution (primary motor cortex, BA 4). Participants performed two portions of their
training within an fMRI scanner, where functional images were acquired
using a slow event-related methodology. The first imaging session
occurred early in training. The second imaging session occurred after
completion of two additional days of behavioral practice. Control was
manipulated by presenting either Pure blocks where all rules were computed in a consistent direction, or Mixed blocks where rules were practiced in both directions. Retrieval, representational, visual and manual
areas all showed significantly decreased activity after practice, reflecting
decreased demands for each of those resources with practice. Anterior
cingulate showed a more complex pattern of activity change with a significant Day by Control interaction. Activity in the Mixed condition was
greatest early in training and decreased late in training while activity in
the Pure condition increased slightly after training. Implications of these
results with respect to learning and cognitive control are discussed.
H44
GAMMA OSCILLATORY ACTIVITY AS A MARKER OF
CONTEXTUAL PROCESSING OF AUDITORY AND VISUAL
PREDICTIVE STIMULI. Noa Fogelson1, Frederique Bonnet-Brilhault1,2,
Jeffrey Lewis1, Mark Kishiyama1, Robert Knight1; 1The Helen Wills Neuroscience
Institute, University California, Berkeley, 2Inserm, U619, Universite FrancoisRabelais de Tours, CHRU, Hopital Bretonneau, Tours — We investigated how
changes in local context influenced the ability to detect target stimuli.
Local context was defined as the occurrence of a short predictive series of
stimuli before a delivery of a target event. EEG was recorded in 12 subjects during auditory and visual sessions. Stimuli were presented centrally and consisted of 15% targets (downward facing triangle or 1000 Hz
tone) and 85% of equal amounts of three types of standards (triangles facing left, upwards and right or 1500 Hz, 2000 Hz and 2500 Hz tones).
Recording blocks consisted of targets preceded by either randomized
sequences of standards or by sequences including a predictive sequence.
Subjects pressed a button in response to the targets. Event-related time
frequency analysis was used to study oscillatory activity in 4 conditions:
targets after predictive (predicted target) and non predictive sequences
(random target), random preceding standards (standards) and the last
most-informative standard of the predicting sequence (predictive
sequence). We observed a significant increase in gamma activation (5080Hz) over posterior sites, in the predictive sequence condition compared
to standards, 300-400ms and 600-700ms post-stimulus presentation in the
auditory and visual modalities, respectively. A significant gamma
increase was also observed in predicted targets compared to random targets, 300-400ms and 700-800ms post-stimulus presentation in the auditory modality. These findings suggest that gamma activation may reflect
processes associated with the contextual processing of informative stimuli in both the auditory and visual modalities.
Supported by NINDS Grant NS21135.
H45
EFFECTS
OF
COGNITIVE
CHANGE
TRAINING
ON
PERFORMANCE AND EMOTIONS OF MILITARY AVIATION
TRAINEES Marie-Pierre Fornette1,2, Camille LeFrancois2,3, Jacques
Fradin2,3, Rene Amlberti1, Farid El Massioui2,3; 1Institut de Médecine
Aérospatiale du Service de Santé des Armées, Brétigny, 2"Cognition & Use"
Laboratory, Paris 8 University, Saint-Denis, 3Cognitive Neuroscience
Department, Institute of Environmental Medicine, Paris — Cognitive, behavioural and emotional adaptation mechanisms are based on executive
functions. We hypothesized that military aviation trainees (cadets) will
benefit from a training program teaching them how to develop their executive functions (cognitive flexibility, hypothesis-generation, cognitive
change for emotion regulation, etc.) to cope with highly dynamic, complex and potentially dangerous situations and with stress.

Poster Session H

Participants included 22 pilot trainees: 11 took part in the cognitive training program (Experimental Group EG) and 11 formed the Control Group
(CG). During 16 weeks, in-flight performances, anxiety and mood scores
(Spielberger’s STAI-Y and McNair's Profile of Mood States questionnaires) and modes of stress management change were compared between
experimental and control groups. A significant improvement of in-flight
performance of EG's lowest ranking trainees (2nd half of the class) was
observed from the beginning to the end of the training course. Compared
to the CG, EG's trainees mentioned having significantly changed their
mode of stress management. 64% of them stated that the training program had been useful to gain a better understanding of events and
reduce stress. However, the anxiety and mood scores showed no difference between the two groups throughout the study. The EG's trainees
have most likely enhanced their awareness of stress-signals, which
would explain why, despite equivalent testscores between the two
groups, the experimental group has in fact become less stressed. Future
studies, that include physiological measurements of stress and additional
indicators of performance, are expected to help specifying the effects of
this cognitive training program.
H46
PERSUASIVE MESSAGES AGAINST RISKY BEHAVIOR INCREASE
RISK AVERSION-RELATED ACTIVITY IN THE ANTERIOR
CINGULATE CORTEX AND INSULA Rena
Fukunaga1,
Adam
Krawitz1, Joshua W. Brown1; 1Indiana University, Bloomington, IN — A previous functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study of the Iowa
Gambling Task (IGT) revealed significant activation in the medial prefrontal cortex when making risky decisions (Fukui et al., NeuroImage,
2004). In the present study, we investigated the neural basis of risk perception and how neural activity representing risk can be modulated by
persuasive messages. Here the IGT was modified to include conditions
with positively or negatively framed messages aimed at helping subjects
maximize their net scores by providing guidance about the long-term
value of specific decks. We addressed potential confounds between decision-related and outcome-related signals by including a variable delay
between the choice and the display of resulting reward or loss, allowing
independent analysis of choice and outcome-related brain activity. We
found greater activity in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the anterior insular regions during the decision-making period when participants
made disadvantageous choices. We also found that providing messages
aimed at helping subjects maximize their average score led to greater
ACC and insula activation during the decision-making period for disadvantageous but not advantageous deck choices. Additionally, an individual difference measure of risk taking was found to correlate negatively
with ACC activity when making disadvantageous decisions. Taken
together, these results suggest that medial prefrontal and insula regions
are involved in risk perception and aversion during decision-making,
and that persuasive messages may enhance risk aversion in choice behavior by modulating ACC and insula activity. Supported by a NARSAD
Young Investigator Award to JWB, T32 MH019879, R03 DA023462-01
H47
STRATEGIC LEARNING IN CHILDREN WITH ATTENTION
DEFICIT DISORDER Jacquelyn Gamino1, Sandra Chapman1, John Hart1,
Lori Cook1, Sandra Vanegas1, Molly Burkhalter1; 1The University of Texas at
Dallas Center for BrainHealth — The ability to strategically select and integrate important information while disregarding or inhibiting irrelevant
information is believed to be a fundamental process underlying successful learning and comprehension. Thus, adept strategic learning ability is
postulated to be a contributor to academic success. Children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) often struggle academically
despite having normal intelligence. There is no known evidence regarding strategic learning in children with ADHD. This study investigated the
ability of 40 children with ADHD to strategically learn important information from a text compared to 40 typically developing control children.
We hypothesized that children with ADHD would demonstrate strategic

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

learning deficits. The children read narrative texts and then produced
summaries of the information. Trained raters scored the summaries
according to selection of important information. Our findings suggest
that while children with ADHD remember a comparable amount of facts
overall, they demonstrate a significantly reduced ability to strategically
select important facts over unimportant details. The results suggest that
children with ADHD show a pattern of decreased selectivity in learning
new information. Implications of these findings are: 1) the potential for
developing therapeutic intervention to train children with strategic learning deficits, 2) modification of educational curriculum to enhance strategic learning, and 3) enhancement of detection of strategic learning
deficits in impaired populations
H48
FEEDING AN INDIVIDUAL AFFECTS THE KINEMATICS OF A
SEQUENCE OF ACTIONS Maurizio Gentilucci1, Francesca Ferri1,
Filippo Barbieri1, Riccardo Dalla Volta1, Claudia Gianelli1; 1Università di
Parma, Parma — Does the intention to interact with an individual affect
the kinematics of a sequence of actions? We compared the kinematics
between sequences directed to animate and unanimated targets. Participants in experiment 1 reached-grasped and placed a piece of food into
the mouth of (i.e. fed) an individual and executed the same sequence
directed to the “mouth” of a human body shape. In experiment 2 the final
target of the sequence was a mouth shape placed on the individual’s
shoulder or on the “shoulder” of the body shape. In experiment 3 the
apparatus and procedure were the same as in experiment 2 except that
the position of the reaching-grasping target was closer to the individual
and body’s shape. The intention to interact with an individual modified
the kinematics of the sequence. Placing was slowed down by moving in
the peripersonal space of the individual as compared to moving close to
the human body shape. However, temporal parameters were lengthened
when feeding and kinematics landmark decreased when placing an
object on the individual’s shoulder. The latter effects decreased when
moving closer to the individual’s body this discarding the possibility that
the human body was an obstacle during the movement. Feeding the individual affected also the reaching-grasping action by lengthening temporal parameters and decreasing maximal finger aperture. Summing up,
interacting with an individual induced an increase in the accuracy
requirement during the movement by affecting either the final chunk or
both the chunks of the sequence according to the degree of interaction.
H49
IQ AND BOLD FMRI ACTIVATION – IMPLICATIONS FOR
RESEARCH IN PATIENT POPULATIONS Steven Graham1, Ayna
Baladi Nejad1, Yeh Ing Berne2; 1National University of Singapore, 2National
University Hospital, Singapore — INTRODUCTION Many fMRI studies
that examine functional differences in clinical populations are potentially
complicated by the oftentimes lower intelligence scores (IQ) found in
patients compared to their healthy controls. We therefore investigated
executive function related brain activity in two groups of healthy subjects
that differed only in their average IQ scores. METHOD 28 healthy volunteers (15 females; mean age 25) were divided into two groups based on
their Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence score (IQ). Other factors
such as age and years of education were matched between groups. All
subjects performed a cognitive set shifting task (similar to the Wisconsin
Card Sort Test) to examine executive function during BOLD fMRI
(TR=3s; FOV=192x192; 780 volumes; 32x3mm slices acquired parallel to
AC-PC). Using BrainVoyagerQX (v1.99), functional images were processed (slice scan time, motion correction, spatial smoothing) and transformed into Talairach space prior to computation of random effects GLM
and group-wise analyses. RESULTS_&_DISCUSSION BOLD signal differed significantly (p<0.0001) between the groups in several regions
including caudate nuclei, superior frontal gyrus and precuneus in which
hypoactivation was observed for the lower IQ subjects. Further analysis
indicated that the pattern of caudate activation differed radically between
groups – perhaps reflecting early response planning in High IQ but not

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

245

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Low IQ participants. CONCLUSION In clinical populations with lower
IQ than their healthy controls, it is possible that fMRI differences may be
due to IQ differences rather than the clinical disorder per se. Caution is
therefore needed when interpreting studies of patients in whom IQ may
be affected.
H50
DIFFERENT INHIBITORY PROCESSES IN PARKINSON’S
DISEASE Alessia Granà1,2, Nadia Gamboz3, Emanuele Biasutti2, Carlo
Semenza1; 1University of Trieste, Italy, 2Institute of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, Gervasutta Hospital, Udine, Italy, 3Suor Orsola Benincasa
University, Napoli, Italy — Inhibition is the ability to suppress irrelevant
stimuli and impulses. It is a fundamental executive function, essential for
normal thinking and for successful living. Recent studies have proposed
that inhibitory processes reflect a family of independent functions rather
than a single unitary construct (Miyake et al., 2000). The necessity to be
more specific when discussing and measuring inhibition-related functions has been therefore advocated. The present study aimed at distinguishing these processes in a population of patients diagnosed with
Parkinson’s disease (PD), a neurological disorder that involves, among
other problems, a decline in inhibitory abilities. To this purpose we systematically assessed whether PD, triggering executive deficits, causes a
generalized inhibitory breakdown or whether it selectively affects only
specific inhibitory processes. Twenty-five non-demented PD patients
were compared to twenty-five healthy controls on different experimental
tasks assumed to measure different inhibitory-related functions. Results
revealed that PD selectively affected prepotent response inhibition, as
indicated by patients’ longer times to inhibit an ongoing response compared to controls. This deficit was independent of general slowing and
cognitive impairment. In contrast, the other two inhibitory-related functions, the resistance to distractor interference and resistence to proactive
interference was equivalent in the two groups. These results complement
earlier evidences of the non unitary nature of inhibitory functions and
suggest that PD mainly affects the inhibition processes subserved, at least
in part, by basal ganglia.

Linguistic processes: Semantics
H51
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INSIGHTS INTO THE PROCESSING
OF NOMINAL METAPHORS Abigail Swain1,2, Sophie De Grauwe1,3,
Tali Ditman-Brunye1,2, Phillip Holcomb1, Gina Kuperberg1,2; 1Tufts
University, 2Massachusetts General Hospital, 3University of Groningen — We
used event-related potentials (ERPs) to examine the time courses of processing metaphorical and literal sentences in the brain. In two experiments, ERPs were measured to the same critical words (CWs),
counterbalanced across nominal metaphorical sentences (“A is a B”),
cloze-matched literal sentences and semantically anomalous sentences,
each of the same syntactic form. Participants judged the plausibility of all
sentences. In Experiment 1, the CW fell at the sentence-final position,
cuing participants to ‘wrap-up’ the sentence’s final meaning. A Late Positivity effect was seen to the metaphorical (relative to the literal) CWs.
Anomalous (relative to the literal) CWs, however, evoked a prolonged
negativity effect commonly seen to sentence-final anomalies. In Experiment 2, the CWs were followed by 2-3 additional words. These mid-sentence metaphorical (relative to the literal) CWs failed to evoke an N400
effect, but evoked a delayed Late Positivity effect that extended over subsequent words. By the sentence-final word of these metaphorical sentences, however, no ERP effect was evoked (relative to the sentence-final
words of literal sentences). Anomalous (relative to literal) mid-sentence
CWs evoked an anteriorly-distributed N400 effect and an extended Late
Positivity effect. However, as in Experiment 1, the sentence-final word of
these anomalous sentences evoked a prolonged negativity (relative to the
sentence-final words of the literal sentences). Taken together, these find-

246

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

ings suggest that, although there may be some immediate access to both
literal and metaphorical meanings of a CW, the successful interpretation
of a sentence’s metaphorical meaning involves a reanalysis of its context.
H52
THE NEURAL UNDERPINNINGS OF SPATIAL SCHEMATIC
REPRESENTATIONS Prin Amorapanth1, Page Widick1, Anjan
Chatterjee1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Little about the interface
between spatial and linguistic representations is known, despite compelling arguments for their interaction. The hypothesis that relatively
abstract cognitive structures, or spatial schemas, intervene between visuospatial perceptions and language is well-developed within cognitive science. However, neural bases for such schemas have not been
investigated. We developed schematic stimuli based on relevant parameters and obtained agreement data on these images with a group of normal controls. We then probed for the recognition of schemas in a
population of patients with either left (n=17) or right (n=17) hemisphere
damage (LHD, RHD), as well as in a patient with bilateral occipital/parietal damage (EE555) employing picture-schema and word-schema
matching tasks. We hypothesized that left hemisphere damage that
impairs the linguistic representation of spatial relations might similarly
compromise their schematic representation. Behaviorally, LHD patients
were more impaired than both RHD and control groups at both tasks,
while RHD patients were only mildly impaired. EE555 performed at or
above the level of normal controls. Voxel based lesion symptom mapping
using permutation analyses found that the ability to recognize schemas
from pictures and words dissociates in the left hemisphere, with frontoparietal networks involved with pictures and perisylvian cortices with
words. In the right hemisphere, common areas within the temporal lobe
seem involved and may in part represent the schemas themselves. Posterior superior occipital and parietal areas do not seem necessary for this
processing, supporting theoretical accounts of spatial schemas as representations that abstract away details of perceptual information.
H53
THE ROLE OF SEMANTIC VISUAL FEATURES IN WORD
MEANING COMPUTATION: AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
INVESTIGATION Ben Amsel1, George Cree1; 1University of Toronto,
Scarborough — Current neurocognitive theories of object concept representation fall under three main theoretical classes: modality-specificity,
correlational structure, and domain-specificity. Previous event related
potential (ERP) studies have shown that living thing and non-living thing
representations are associated with partially separable neural signals,
both in terms of latency and scalp topography. These results have been
interpreted as supporting both domain and modality-specific theories. To
discriminate between these possibilities, we systematically manipulated
the number of visual features (e.g., form, color, and motion) associated
with 50 living and 50 non-living thing word concepts, as derived from a
large normative data set, creating equal high and low visual feature conditions for both living and non-living categories. Relevant lexical and
conceptual variables were equated across conditions (11 variables), and
across 100 abstract word concepts (6 variables). Participants performed a
speeded concrete-abstract decision task while the electroencephalogram
(EEG) was recorded across 64 scalp electrodes. Mean area measures,
scalp topographies, and spectral power analyses were analyzed in two
time windows (250-500, 500-750 ms), corresponding to previously suggested phases of word meaning computation. Electrophysiological and
behavioral results suggest a complex spatiotemporal pattern of representation and computation, in which semantic feature type and domain
interact dynamically during concrete word meaning computation.
H54
GRASPING MEANING FROM ACTION OBSERVATION Michael
Andric1, Ana Solodkin1, Giovanni Buccino2, Giacomo Rizzolatti2, Susan
Goldin-Meadow1, Steven Small1; 1The University of Chicago, 2Universita degli
Studi di Parma — Emblems are a unique class of intended manual gestures that carry symbolic meaning independent of accompanying lan-

Poster Session H

guage (e.g. “thumbs up” to indicate “It’s Good”). Interpretation of an
emblematic gesture may require both observation of the directed action
and understanding its corresponding (linguistic) semantic meaning.
Another type of directed action, grasping, does not have a direct linguistic association, and may rely more on visual and spatial information of
the scene to understand. In an event-related fMRI experiment using spiral BOLD acquisition at 3T we investigated the differential neural
response to (a) hand observation when used for symbolic representation
(emblems) versus transitive goal-directed action (grasping actions); and
(b) expression of symbolic meaning with manual gestures (emblems)
compared to oral speech (language). Participants were presented with
video clips of an actor performing emblematic gestures, grasping of common objects, and audiovisual speech corresponding to an emblem.
Whole-brain group analyses suggest both shared and differential
responses across conditions. Although observing both emblems and
grasping activated visual motion areas and dorsal premotor cortex more
than speech, observing emblems but not grasping activated right intraparietal sulcus and right supramarginal gyrus. Importantly, activation of
the right posterior superior temporal sulcus and gyrus was common
across conditions, while the right anterior superior temporal gyrus was
active uniquely for emblems and speech. These results suggest that
unlike grasping movements, emblematic gestures carry unique semantic
meaning and activate shared cortical language areas involved in interpreting these same meanings when they are presented as audiovisual
speech.
H55
LESIONS TO MOTOR CORTEX AFFECT WORD-PICTURE
MATCHING WHEN BODY PARTS ARE INVOLVED Analia
Arevalo1, Nina Dronkers1,2; 1Center for Aphasia and Related Disorders, VA
Northern California Health Care System, Martinez, CA, 2University of
California, Davis, and University of California, San Diego — Embodiment
theory has suggested that mental imagery and observations of actions
may recruit motor and pre-motor regions of cortex normally associated
with action execution. To our knowledge, only one study (Arévalo et al.,
2007) has evaluated the effect of motor and pre-motor lesions on the processing of linguistic stimuli involving body parts. In this study, we asked
whether word-picture matching would be affected by motor/pre-motor
lesions when body parts were involved. A group of twenty-one patients
with left-hemisphere strokes and a group of ten controls were asked to
match pictures and words of objects and actions involving the use of
either the hand, mouth, foot, or neutral items. Relative to control participants, the patient group made significantly more errors on items involving body parts relative to neutral items, particularly involving the hand
and foot. The control group, while at ceiling for both types of stimuli,
showed a reaction time advantage for body part items. Results suggest
that motor associations to body parts may facilitate lexical semantic processing in neurologically-intact individuals while introducing a dimension of difficulty in patients with brain injuries. Furthermore, voxel-based
lesion symptom analyses revealed that motor/pre-motor patients had
more difficulty with hand and foot items than did patients without such
lesions. Together, these findings support the notion that motor and premotor areas do play a role in the processing of semantic information.
H56
HEMISPHERIC ASYMMETRIES IN FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE
PROCESSING AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY STUDY USING
DIVIDED VISUAL FIELD PARADIGM. Yossi
Arzouan1,
Abraham
Goldstein1,2, Miriam Faust1,2; 1Gonda Brain Research Center, Bar-Ilan
University, Israel, 2Bar-Ilan University, Israel — To investigate the distinct
roles of the left (LH) and right (RH) hemispheres in processing metaphoric expressions, we selectively controlled the order of hemisphere
processing through the application of the divided visual field paradigm
(DVF). In the current study, electrophysiology signals were recorded
from twenty nine right handed native Hebrew speakers, while the
semantically judges 240 two-words Hebrew expressions that consisted of

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

four categories: Unrelated: “window joke”, Literal: “new day”, conventional metaphors (CM): “bright student”, and novel (NM) metaphors
expressions drawn from poetry texts: “crystal river”. The analyses of
behavioral measures and Language related ERP (event related potentials)
components showed that the hemispheres are differently engaged during
the comprehension of NM. The behavioral findings indicate that direct
projection of NM to the RH resulted in more accurate and faster
responses as compared to those projected to the LH. The N400 amplitude
elicited by NM presented to the RH was larger than that for LH. And the
latency-to-peak of the P600 component was modulated by visual filed of
presentations only for figurative (CM and NM) stimuli. A faster semantic
encoding time was obtained in the RH for CM pairs that were familiar
but semantically unrelated than for NM pairs that were both unfamiliar
and semantically unrelated. For LH presentation, latency-to-peak of the
P600 component for CM and NM did not differ. This implies that as compared with CM, the RH role in NM processing required extended processing time that could reflect expression -level integration and memory
retrieval.
H57
COMPUTING AND RECOMPUTING DISCOURSE MODELS: AN
ERP STUDY. Giosuè Baggio1, Michiel van Lambalgen3, Peter Hagoort1,2;
1
F.C. Donders Center for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Radboud University
Nijmegen, 2Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, 3Institute for
Logic, Language and Computation, University of Amsterdam — While syntactic reanalysis has been extensively investigated in psycholinguistics, little
is known about reanalysis in the discourse-semantic domain. We used
event-related brain potentials (ERPs) to keep track of semantic processes
involved in understanding short narratives such as "The girl was writing
a letter when her friend spilled coffee on the paper". We hypothesize that
these sentences are interpreted in two steps: (1) when the progressive
clause is processed, a discourse model in which the goal state will be
attained (a complete letter) is computed; (2) when the subordinate clause
is processed, the initial representation is recomputed to the effect that, in
the final discourse structure, the goal state cannot be satisfied. Critical
sentences elicited larger sustained anterior negativities (SANs) compared
to controls, starting around 400 ms after the onset of the sentence-final
word and lasting for approximately 400 ms. The amplitude of the SAN is
correlated with the frequency with which participants, in an off-line button-press task, responded that the goal state was not attained. Our findings suggest that the human brain supports some form of non-monotonic
computation in order to integrate information which invalidates previously held assumptions.
H58
VOXEL-BASED LESION ANALYSIS OF CATEGORY-SPECIFIC
NAMING DEFICITS Juliana Baldo1, Analia Arevalo1, David Wilkins1,
Nina Dronkers1,2,3; 1VA Northern California Health Care System, 2University
of California, Davis, 3University of California, San Diego — Case
studies
have reported individual patients who show striking dissociations in
their ability to name items from distinct categories (e.g., living versus
non-living things). Functional neuroimaging studies have attempted to
delineate the brain basis of such category dissociations. Some of these
studies have reported specific brain regions associated with discrete categories, while other studies have reported largely overlapping networks.
In the current study, we analyzed naming performance in a large group
of left hemisphere patients (n=92), using voxel-based lesion symptom
mapping (VLSM) to identify brain regions associated with specific categories of items (animals vs. tools, natural kinds vs. artifacts, manipulable
vs. non-manipulable items). The VLSM maps were largely overlapping
for the six categories, with significant regions in left anterior temporal,
inferior temporal, middle temporal, and superior temporal cortex. A few
dissociations were apparent, however, such as larger regions of significance in the posterior middle temporal gyrus for artifacts and tools. We
also examined our dataset for individuals demonstrating a dissociation,
defined as a 40% difference in naming across two categories. Out of 92

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

247

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

patients, there were four individuals who met this criterion: One patient
who was relatively impaired at naming animals and natural kinds, two
patients who were impaired at naming artifacts, and one who was
impaired at naming tools. These findings suggest that a network of
regions within the left temporal lobe is critical for naming across different
semantic and feature-based categories but that individual patients can be
shown to exhibit both behavioral and neural dissociations across item
categories.
H59
ARE
WORD
MEANINGS
“WEBS
OF
SENSATIONS”?
COUNTEREVIDENCE FROM AN FMRI STUDY OF MOTION AND
NON-MOTION WORDS. Marina Bedny1,2, Alfonso Caramazza3, Emily
Grossman4, Alvaro Pascual-Leone1, Rebecca Saxe2; 1Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, 2Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 3Harvard University, 4University of California, Irvine — How
are the meanings of words organized in the mind and brain? According
to the sensory-motor hypothesis word meanings are distributed throughout the sensory-motor cortices through which they were acquired. For
example, the meaning of the word “kick” is partially represented in the
visual motion regions activated during the observation of kicking. An
alternative proposal suggests that word meanings are abstracted away
from specific sensory-motor experiences. To distinguish between these
hypotheses we used functional magnetic resonance imaging to localize
brain regions involved in perception of motion and body movement, and
investigated the response of these regions during word comprehension.
Participants made relatedness judgments on word-pairs from six categories (action, thought, change-of-state, and bodily-function verbs; nouns
referring to animals, tools and inanimate natural kinds) that varied in
their association with motion and body movements, as previously determined in a behavioral study. Critically, none of the visual motion areas
responded more to high-motion than low-motion words. We replicated
previous findings showing greater activity in posterior-lateral-temporal
cortices for action-verbs than for animal names. However, regions that
responded to action verbs did not overlap with motion perception
regions, and did not respond more to-high-motion than-low-motion
words. We conclude that word meanings are abstracted away from their
associated sensory experiences.
H60
CROSS-MODAL PRIMING BETWEEN THE GESTURE AND THE
LANGUAGE MEANING SYSTEMS Paolo Bernardis1, Elena Salillas2,
Nicoletta Caramelli3; 1Scuola Superiore di Studi Umanistici, University of
Bologna, Italy, 2University of Trieste, Italy, 3University of Bologna, Italy — Aim
of the present study was to assess the relationship between the gesture
and the language meaning systems at both the behavioural and the
neuro-physiological levels. By means of a priming paradigm, two groups
of fifteen participants each were presented with forty video-clips of different types of iconic gestures followed by the target words (nouns or
verbs), which could be related or unrelated in meaning to the priming
gestures. The meaning of half of the forty gestures referred to objects
(nouns), while the other half referred to actions (verbs). In the first group
of participants RTs were recorded. In the second group ERPs time-locked
to the presentation of the target word were recorded. Behavioral results
showed an interference effect between the meaning of iconic gestures and
that of words when their meanings mismatched. The analysis of ERPs
showed two main results: a modulation produced by the type of word
(noun vs verb) and an effect of meaning. Compared with the data
reported in the literature, nouns and verbs revealed a reversed pattern of
results. Nouns generated a stronger P200 than verbs in the frontal electrodes of the right hemisphere, and verbs generated a stronger N400-like
component in the frontal, central, and parietal electrodes of the right
hemisphere. The N400-like component generated by the meaning factor,
highlighted the interaction between the meanings of the gesture and language systems with the scalp distribution showing a localization of the

248

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

generators different from that producing the classical N400 with only
verbal stimuli
H61
DISCOURSE
AND
SENTENCE
CONTEXTS
MODULATE
SEMANTIC
PRIMING
DURING
SPOKEN
LANGUAGE
COMPREHENSION: AN ERP STUDY Megan A. Boudewyn1,2, C.
Christine Camblin3, Peter C. Gordon4, Tamara Y. Swaab1,2; 1University of
California, Davis, 2Center for Mind and Brain, University of California, Davis,
3Division of Social, Behavioral and Global Studies, CSU, Monteray Bay, 4UNC
Chapel Hill — This study examined the effects of associative priming in
discourse and sentence contexts when participants listened to naturally
produced connected speech. In the discourse context experiment, we
aurally presented short, three-sentence passages that were created from
associative word pairs culled from existing norms. The terminal word in
the third sentence varied in terms of overall discourse congruence and
lexical association with a preceding prime word (e.g., “Luckily Ben had
picked up some salt and pepper/basil”), preceded either by a context in
which Ben was preparing marinara sauce (congruent discourse) or dealing with an icy walkway (incongruent discourse). Within a stimulus set,
final sentences were identical up until the critical word, and were locally
congruent when read in isolation. The preceding discourse context, however, made the critical final word congruous or incongruous at the discourse level. In the sentence context study participants were presented
with only the final sentences of the previously described stimuli. In this
experiment, all the sentence-final words were congruent, but associated
or not with a preceding word in the sentential context. In the discourse
context experiment ERP results show early main effects of discourse congruence, and delayed effects of association. In the sentence context study
the effects of association were also strongly modulated, this time by the
sentential context. These results are consistent with the idea that both discourse and sentence contexts have robust effects on lexical association
during normal spoken language comprehension.
H62
“GRASPING AN IDEA”: PATTERN OF CORTICAL ACTIVATION
DURING PROCESSING OF IDIOMS COMPOSED OF ACTION
WORDS Véronique Boulenger1,2, Olaf Hauk1, Friedemann Pulvermüller1;
1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, 2L2C2 - Institut des
Sciences Cognitives CNRS/UCBL, Bron, France — The cortical language
system has been recently proposed to be intimately interwoven with the
sensory-motor system. Neuroimaging studies have indeed shown activation of motor and premotor cortex during processing of action-related
words and sentences. However, the crucial question regarding how
action-related language is processed at a more abstract level has not been
addressed. In the present study, we used event-related functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to examine the pattern of activation during the reading of IDIOMATIC and LITERAL sentences that include
ARM- and LEG-related action words. A common fronto-temporal network was involved in processing both sentence types, with IDIOMS eliciting greater activity than LITERAL sentences, especially in the left
inferior frontal and middle temporal cortex and in the right cerebellum.
Importantly, and crucial for this study, regions along the motor strip
were somatotopically activated during IDIOMATIC as well as LITERAL
reading, depending on which body part the embedded action words
referred to. While ARM-related sentences recruited lateral motor/premotor areas, activity in more dorsal areas was observed for LEG-related sentences. Interestingly, this semantic somatotopy was shown for both
IDIOMATIC and LITERAL sentences in the premotor cortex, while it
emerged only for LITERAL sentences in the motor cortex along the central sulcus. Overall, these results demonstrate that the motor system is
involved in the understanding of action words even at an abstract IDIOMATIC level, possibly reflecting its involvement in representing
aspects of word and sentence meaning.

Poster Session H

H63
INTEGRATING NOVEL VS. FAMILIAR MEANINGS: N400
SUPPORT FOR AN EMBODIED VIEW OF LANGUAGE
COMPREHENSION Dorothee J. Chwilla1; 1NICI Radboud University
Nijmegen — We demonstrated (Chwilla et al. 2007) that novel meanings
not stored in long-term memory are immediately integrated into sentential context and that N400 is sensitive to these novel meanings. The N400
effect to novel meanings that are not associatively and/or semantically
related and were matched to novel senseless contexts in terms of familiarty and semantic relatedness by LSA, support embodied theories and
challenge abstract symbol theories of meaning that can only discover
meaningfulness by consulting stored symbolic knowledge. The N400
effect reveals that there is also knowledge not stored in semantic memory
but that nevertheless affects the ease with which the meaning of a sentence is captured. This information is stored in the knowledge that we
have about our body. To access and retrieve embodied knowledge, we
have to project ourselves into a situation and simulate the perceptual and
action details required by a situation. In the present experiment I used
N400 to directly compare the integration of novel sensible meanings with
the integration of familiar meanings in the same subjects. Context-setting
sentences were followed by a test sentence to which ERPs were recorded
that described a familiar situation, a novel sensible situation or a novel
senseless situation (e.g., “After wading barefoot in the lake, Erik used his
towel/shirt/glasses to dry his feet.”). The main result was that next to the
standard N400 effect to familiar meanings again an N400 effect to novel
sensible meanings was obtained. The ERP data are discussed within the
embodied framework of language comprehension.
H64
EMOTIONAL VALENCE AND SEMANTIC NEIGHBORHOOD
Hila Cohen1, Avishai Henik1; 1Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev — Research has shown that the emotional valence
of words affects their processing. For example, in a lexical decision task it
was found that emotional words are processed faster than neutral ones.
However, the negative information which arises from the negative words
draws more attention and is processed more thoroughly. This raises the
question whether a word's valence influences its spreading of activation
in the semantic network. In the current study, participants were asked to
memorize positive or negative words, with a large or small number of
associative neighbors (N), for a subsequent recognition test (did this
word appear in the previous list or not). The types of miss and false alarm
(FA) errors for words with large and small N were tested, with N as an
indication for spreading of activation in the semantic network. It was
found that there was no influence of N on negative words. However, for
positive words with large N there were more misses and less FA mistakes
(i.e., more “No” responses) than for words with small N. It seems that for
positive words there was an automatic spreading of activation in the
semantic network, which wasn’t controlled or filtered. This activation
disturbed the participants' certainty that the word was previously presented to them. For negative words the automatic spreading of activation
in the semantic network was controlled and filtered. This leads to the
conclusion that the emotional valence of words influences their processing in the semantic network.
H65
IS ACCESS TO WORD MEANING OBLIGATORY? AN FMRI
STUDY OF TASK EFFECTS ON SEMANTIC ACTIVATION AND
REPETITION PRIMING OF SPOKEN WORDS Matthew H. Davis1,
Beth Parkin1, Jack C. Rogers1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Scienecs Unit,
Cambridge — Neuropsychological deficits following stroke suggest a role
for posterior inferior temporal regions in comprehension of spoken language. However, though these regions activate for written words, fMRI
evidence for their role in spoken word recognition is mixed. Here we test
the hypothesis that infero-temporal contributions to word meaning processing are task dependent. Eighteen participants were scanned using
sparse imaging on a 3T Siemens MRI system while making phonological

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

(one/two syllables), semantic (living/non-living) or auditory (normal/
attenuated presentation) decisions on spoken concrete nouns. These three
language tasks were separated into different scanning runs alternating
with a non-linguistic baseline task matched for stimulus-response characteristics (speech-envelope, speech-spectrum buzz/noise discrimination).
Presentation of words compared to non-speech baseline elicited
increased activity in bilateral regions along the middle/superior temporal gyri, equivalent for all three tasks. Although, weak inferior frontal and
fusiform activation was observed during acoustic decisions, this activation was significantly elevated during both semantic and phonological
decisions confirming the task-dependence of inferior temporal responses
to spoken words. In a second scanning phase, the same language tasks
were performed with words heard previously and novel words. Semantic
judgements showed significant repetition priming for words on which
semantic or phonological decisions had been made previously, though
not for words presented for auditory decisions. This behavioral pattern is
reminiscent of neural activity during the initial scanning phase, suggesting a link between inferior temporal activity, access to meaning and subsequent repetition priming. This hypothesis will be tested using
univariate and multivariate analysis of fMRI data from the second scanning phase.
H66
THE HUMAN MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM AND ACTION WORD
MEANING REPRESENTATIONS: AN FMRI STUDY Greig
de
Zubicaray1, Natasha Postle1, Katie McMahon1, Matthew Meredith1, Roderick
Ashton1; 1University of Queensland, Australia — In monkeys, a class of
visuomotor neurons called mirror neurons fire when actions are both
executed and observed. They are proposed to provide a neural mechanism for understanding the actions of others. A homologous mirror neuron system (MNS) is also thought to exist in humans. Neuroimaging
evidence to date indicates this MNS comprises two important nodes for
hand/finger actions: Brodmann area (BA) 44 in the inferior frontal gyrus
(IFG) - considered a homologue of monkey area F5, and the anterior inferior parietal lobule (aIPL). Recently, it has been proposed that the MNS
might play a key role in the processing of action word meanings. We
tested this hypothesis using fMRI. Participants first silently read words
associated with hand actions or actions associated with other effectors,
concrete words unrelated to body parts, and phonologically regular nonwords. A baseline condition involving viewing visual characters (hashes)
was also included. Next, participants viewed then imitated simple intransitive hand movements to locate the aforementioned nodes of the MNS.
Our results indicate that the left hemisphere BA44 and aIPL regions
involved in executing and observing hand movements do not show differential activation during perception of words associated with hand
actions compared to other classes of lexical stimuli. However, effectorrelated words, unrelated words and non-words all showed increased
activation compared to hashes in BA44, consistent with prior research on
lexical processing in this region. We conclude that the human MNS is
unlikely to be a key neural mechanism responsible for processing of
action word meanings.
H67
LOGICAL SEMANTICS IN LANGUAGE PROCESSING: AN ERP
STUDY John Drury1, Veena Dwivedi2, Karsten Steinhauer1; 1McGill
University, 2Brock University — Event-related potentials have been used
(Shao & Neville 1998/Drenhaus et al. 2006) to study the processing of
negative polarity items (NPIs) – i.e., words like "ever" or "any" which
must be licensed by the occurrence of certain logical-operators (e.g., negation: John hadn't/*had EVER arrived). However, these first studies confounded [+/--violation] with lexical/contextual variables and yielded
inconsistent results (LAN-P600/N400-P600, respectively). Our previous
work (Steinhauer et al. 2007) controlled for both factors and showed unlicensed NPIs elicit P600s followed by late LANs ("L-LANs"), a pattern that
Shao & Neville also report for cases of logical contradiction, and which
we have found for another case of logical-semantic anomaly (i.e., the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

249

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

"Definiteness-Effect": There was A/*THE man in the room; Drury et al.
2006). However, we also found an N400-effect for the complex NPI "atall", but not for simplex NPIs "ever/any" (note: Drenhaus et al's N400
findings were for the morphologically complex German NPI "jemals" =
"ever-time"). Here we focus on complex NPI/non-NPI contrasts (e.g.,
"John thought there was SOMEBODY/*ANYBODY in the room"). Also,
we examine three theoretically distinct kinds of NPI-licensing operators,
(negation/yes-no-questions/"only", e.g., John didn't think.../Did John
think.../Only John thought...there was SOMBODY/ANYBODY...) as well
as cases of the DE (e.g., "...there was SOMEBODY/*EVERYBODY in the
room") to replicate the P600/L-LAN pattern for both the DE and unlicensed-NPIs within-subjects. The results of past studies and the present
(ongoing) experiment will be discussed in terms of what we may hope to
learn about the neurocognitive bases of sentence-level logical-semantic
processing from ERP studies.
H68
THE PROCESSING OF PICTURES AND WORDS DURING A
SEMANTIC GENERATION TASK: EVIDENCE FOR A GRADED
SEMANTIC STORE Carrie Esopenko1, Ron Borowsky1,2, Jacqueline
Cummine1, Gordon Sarty1; 1Cognitive Neuroimaging Lab, University of
Saskatchewan, 2Division of Neurosurgery, College of Medicine, University of
Saskatchewan — We examined semantic processing of objects presented in
picture and word format, both behaviourally and neuroanatomically.
Neuroanatomical research has shown that semantic processing of actionrelated language activates the premotor, motor, and sensory cortices
somatotopically during a variety of tasks (e.g. Tettamanti et al., 2005;
Hauk et al., 2004). Behavioural research has shown a response advantage
in lexical decision for words with complex semantic representations (i.e.,
multiple definitions) that diminishes with decreased semantic complexity
(e.g., Borowsky & Masson, 1996; Pexman, et a., 2002). Experiment 1 used
fMRI to examine somatotopically organized activation in the premotor
cortex for an overt semantic generation task (“describe how would you
interact with this”) using picture or word stimuli that naturally involve
either arm or leg interactions. Experiment 2 evaluated whether the
semantic generation response times for pictures and words produce a
semantic complexity advantage (i.e., faster reaction times for more complex objects). Results for Experiment 1 are in keeping with previous
research in showing that semantic processing related to object interaction
involves the motor, premotor and sensory cortices in a somatotopic fashion, and are novel in that there are unique and shared regions of activation for pictures and words that differ across arm and leg stimuli.
Experiment 2 demonstrated that objects presented in word format produce a complexity advantage, whereas there was no complexity relationship for objects presented in picture format. These results support the
notion of graded semantics (e.g.,Plaut, 2002), as opposed to strictly
amodal (Caramazza et al., 1990) or modular (Shallice, 1988) semantic representations.
H69
INCREMENTAL LEARNING OF WORDS IN CONTEXT:EFFECTS
ON MFN, N3 & N400 EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Gwen
Frishkoff1, Charles Perfetti1; 1University of Pittsburgh — Word knowledge is
acquired gradually, over many exposures. Thus, at any time, a learner
may have graded and incomplete knowledge of meanings for some
words. To examine incremental learning of word meanings, we presented rare words (such as “kippage”) in several sentence contexts. Each
word was assigned to contexts that were either highly semantically constraining, providing strong cues to the target word meaning, or low constraint, that is, relatively uninformative with respect to the target word
meaning. After each sentence, the target word appeared with a cue to
respond: subjects were asked to generate a synonym for the target at the
cue. To probe immediate and delayed effects of learning, ERPs recorded
during learning and were time-locked to words presented just before
each sentence, immediately after the sentence, and in isolation, after a 30minute delay. Individual knowledge of words meanings was tested

250

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

before and after training, using a multiple choice synonym-judgment
task. Pre- and post-test assessments showed a ceiling effect for familiar
words, as expected. Rare words that appeared in high-constraint contexts
showed greater gains than words that appeared in low-constraint contexts. During the training task, words that appeared in high vs. low constraint contexts evoked an enhanced left anterior N3 and a reduced MFN.
In the delayed post-task, there was N400 reduction for trained words that
occurred in high-constraint contexts. We suggest that frontal MFN effects
may index early stages of learning, while N400 effects may indicate
robust learning of new words.
H70
REPLICATING THE RECOGNITION POTENTIAL IN A SENTENCE
PARADIGM Linzi Gibson1, Lindsay Daniels1, Joseph Dien1; 1University of
Kansas — There has been increasing interest in the Recognition Potential.
The effect was originally thought to reflect only orthographic-level processing, but more recent evidence has suggested that it can reflect semantic-level processing as well (Dien, Frishkoff, Cerbone, and Tucker, 2003;
Martin-Loeches, Hinojasa, Casado, Munoz, Fernandez-Frias, 2004). However, with only two studies the effect could be due to confounds. The current study replicated this effect with entirely new stimuli using a 128channel high-density array.
H71
CAN MUSICAL SOUNDS PRIME SEMANTIC ASSOCIATIONS?
Julia Grieser Painter1, Petr Janata2, Stefan Koelsch1; 1Max-Planck-Institute for
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 2Center for Mind and Brain,
University of California, Davis — The purpose of our study was to investigate whether musical sounds (timbres) presented outside of a musical
context can prime semantic associations. In Experiment 1 subjects had to
perform a lexical decision task in which the prime stimulus could be a
sound (selected from a wide array of natural and unnatural musical timbres) or a word. The target was either a word or non-word. Relatedness
between sounds and words was determined via a rating in which subjects had to compare sounds and words. As expected, the sound-word
condition revealed a significant effect of relatedness in reaction times. A
second experiment was conducted using EEG in which subjects were presented with related and unrelated word-word, sound-word, word-sound
and sound-sound pairs and had to perform a memory task. There was a
weak effect of target relatedness on ERP amplitude in the time window
from 400 ms to 600 ms after stimulus onset, mainly at frontal electrodes.
The results suggest that semantic associations are primed not only by
musical pieces with a certain structure (rhythm, melody etc.), but also by
discrete musical sounds. However, the exact nature of this priming effect,
i.e. the way in which sounds elicit meaningful associations and under
which circumstances remains to be investigated more closely.
H72
A COMMON INDEPENDENT COMPONENT OF THE P3B, N400,
AND P600 ERP COMPONENTS David Groppe1, Scott Makeig2, Marta
Kutas1; 1University of California, San Diego, 2Swartz Center for Computational
Neuroscience, University of California, San Diego — Two of the most reliable
and most studied neural correlates of language comprehension are the
N400 and P600 ERP components, canonically elicited by semantically and
grammatically anomalous words (respectively). While these phenomena
have provided valuable information about the nature and time course of
language comprehension, their utility has been limited by the fact that
they are most likely composed of multiple, functionally and anatomically
distinct subcomponents whose contributions to the N400 and P600 overlap in time and space. For example, interpretation of the N400 and P600 is
complicated by their uncertain relationship to the P300 ERP component
elicited by a wide range of deviant stimuli. In order to identify a possible
P300-like subcomponent common to the N400 and P600, all three ERP
components were elicited from the same experimental participants in the
same recording session using their canonical paradigms. Independent
component analysis (ICA) was then applied separately to the N400/P600
data and P300 data to define subcomponents of these effects. ICA found

Poster Session H

what appears to be a midline central subcomponent (MCe) that is common to all three ERP components (it accounts for around 50% of the variance of each component). This MCe subcomponent is characterized by a
late positivity that is enhanced to rare/anomalous stimuli, habituates
over the course of the experiment, and tends to peak later for stimuli that
presumably take longer to evaluate. In light of these characteristics, we
tentatively link the MCe subcomponent to the allocation of attentional
resources.
H73
N400
PRIMING
STUDY
OF
CATEGORY
EXEMPLAR
TYPICALITY Jill Grose-Fifer1, Diana Deacon2; 1John Jay College of
Criminal Justice, CUNY, 2City College, CUNY — An initial N400 study
demonstrated that non-associated, categorically related stimuli produced
priming when presented to the right hemisphere (RH) but not to the left
(LH). Furthermore, significant priming only occurred when the prime
and target shared considerable semantic feature overlap (e.g., MOSQUITO-FLEA). This finding supports our hypothesis that concepts are
represented in RH networks on the basis of their semantic features. However, the necessity of generating many stimulus pairs resulted in the use
of low typicality exemplars from any given category. This may have limited the contribution of LH in the task since mediated priming could
potentially occur through spreading activation from the prime to the target via the category label, provided that there were strong enough associative links between them. A second N400 study investigated the effects
of exemplar typicality in categorical priming within the cerebral hemispheres. A divided field paradigm was used to present both prime and
target to one visual field or the other, on a random basis. Prime-target
pairs were either unrelated or categorically related with low semantic
feature overlap (e.g., LION-PIG). Related primes and targets were chosen
from the Battig and Montague category norms for their high response frequency (typicality). Our results showed that increasing prime and target
typicality did not increase the incidence of priming in the left or right
hemisphere. Thus, we surmise that typicality of category exemplar does
not provide a strong enough associative link to elicit mediated LH priming and RH priming is based on semantic feature overlap.
H74
NOUN AND VERB GENERATION IN A MINIMAL SENTENCE
CONTEXT: TESTING THE SENSORY-MOTOR HYPOTHESIS OF
SEMANTIC REPRESENTATIONS Patrick Khader1, Kerstin Jost1,
Michelle Mertens1, Frank Rösler1; 1Experimental and Biological Psychology,
Philipps-University Marburg — Are nouns represented in visually and
verbs in motor-related brain areas, as predicted by the “sensory-motor
hypothesis” of semantic representations? In an event-related fMRI study,
seventeen participants generated nouns with strong visual associations
and verbs with strong motor associations. In contrast to previous studies,
the to-be-generated target words were highly constrained by a preceding
minimal sentence context, (e.g., “carpenter cuts ?…wood” or “carpenter
wood ?…cuts”). Consistent with the sensory-motor hypothesis, noun
generation activated occipital-temporal areas more than verb generation,
indicating stronger recruitment of visual representations. However,
when compared to a non-semantic control task, in which a rhyme had to
be generated, also verb generation elicited activation in occipital-temporal areas, indicating that semantic generation of both nouns and verbs
triggered visual associations or visual imagery. Furthermore, stronger
activation for verbs was not found, as expected, in the motor cortex, but
in the left prefrontal cortex. This presumably reflects processing differences due to the grammatical status of the two word categories. Therefore, the results provide only partial support for the sensory-motor
hypothesis of word representations.

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

H75
THE SOUND OF CONCEPTS: THE LINK BETWEEN AUDITORY
AND CONCEPTUAL BRAIN SYSTEMS Markus Kiefer1, Eun-Jin Sim1,
Baerbel Herrnberger1, Jo Grothe1, Klaus Hoenig1; 1University of Ulm,
Germany — The organization of the conceptual system is a matter of a
debate. Classical models assume that conceptual knowledge is represented in a unitary system in an amodal format distinct from the sensory
and motor systems. More recent models, however, propose that concepts
are embodied in the sense that interactions with objects form their conceptual memory traces in distributed modality-specific brain areas,
which typically process sensory or action-related object information. In
support of modality-specific models, previous neurophysiological studies showed that conceptual tasks activate brain areas involved in the processing of visual and action-related information. Here, we investigated
the neural representation of acoustic conceptual features (to ring) using
fMRI and ERPs. Participants performed a lexical decision task on visually
presented object names that referred to objects with (“telephone”) or
without acoustic conceptual associations (“book”) as well as on
pseudowords as distracters. Words with acoustic conceptual associations
elicited in comparison to words without acoustic associations stronger
activity in the left middle and superior temporal gyrus (BA 21, 22). This
area in auditory association cortex was also activated during an auditory
localizer task when participants listened to natural sounds in comparison
to acoustic noise. ERP analysis revealed differences between words with
and without acoustic associations as early as 150 ms suggesting that these
effects reflect rapid access to acoustic conceptual features rather than
post-conceptual processing. In line with models of embodied conceptual
representations, our results suggest that acoustic conceptual features are
coded in a modality-specific fashion in the corresponding sensory cortex.
H76
ERP CORRELATES OF VERB-ACTION AND SENTENCE-SCENE
ROLE RELATIONS INCONGRUENCE IN A SENTENCE-PICTURE
VERIFICATION TASK Pia Knoeferle1, Thomas P. Urbach2, Marta Kutas2;
1
Center for Research in Language, University of California San Diego,
2Cognitive Science, University of California San Diego — Previous
behavioural and ERP studies have shown that scene events can rapidly inform
sentence comprehension in real time. In contrast, little is known about the
potential cost (e.g., when aspects of language and scene are incongruent)
associated with their use, a key element in predicting their rapid use in
online sentence comprehension. In two experiments, event-related brain
potentials (ERPs) were recorded during sentence word by word reading
of NP1-VERB-NP2 sentences after participants had inspected a scene that
either matched or mismatched aspects (e.g., a verb or thematic relations)
of the sentence. Participants' task was to verify whether or not the sentence matched the prior visual scene. Verification response latencies, as
well as mean amplitude of ERPs were more negative from 300 to 500 ms
after verb onset when the verb did not match versus matched the
depicted action event. Reliable correlations between response latencies
and mean N400 amplitude were consistent with an interpretation in
terms of processing cost. Direct comparison of verb-action mismatches
with scene-sentence role relations mismatches revealed earlier ERP
effects of the role relations mismatch. Together our findings show a clear
cost for integrating scene and language that varies with which aspects of
scene and sentence are incongruent. Theories of comprehension that postulate rapid use of visual context must incorporate a cost function to
more accurately predict the time course and importance of visual context
for online language comprehension.
H77
AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY OF COMPLEMENT
COERCION Gina Kuperberg1,2, Neil Cohn1, Arim Choi1, Martin
Paczynski1, Tali Ditman1, Phillip Holcomb1, Ray Jackendoff1; 1Tufts
University, 2Massachusettes General Hospital — Traditional linguistic theories and processing models hold that the build-up of sentence meaning
derives primarily from syntactic relationships that combine the meanings

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

251

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

of lexically-stored items. Syntactic composition, however, does not
always dictate sentence meaning. For example, to comprehend “The
author began the book”, the meaning of “book” must be semantically
‘coerced’ so that it is interpreted as an event, e.g. “writing the book”. Psycholinguistic studies using reading times, speed-accuracy tradeoff, eyemovements and MEG suggest that this type of coercion incurs an immediate online processing cost. We used event-related potentials (ERPs) to
further examine the neural nature of this cost. ERPs were recorded to critical nouns (CNs) that, depending on their preceding verbs, were noncoerced (“The author wrote the book…”), semantically (animacy) violated (“The author disgusted the book…”), or coerced (“The author
began the book…”). The non-coerced and coerced sentences were
matched in terms of their plausibility (using prior ratings) and lexicosemantic association between the CN and its preceding content words
(using a Latent Semantic Analysis). Animacy violated, relative to noncoerced, nouns evoked an N400 effect and, consistent with previous
observations on animacy violated verbs, also a P600 effect. The coerced
(relative to the non-coerced) nouns evoked an N400 effect that was equal
in magnitude to that evoked by the anomalous nouns. These findings
support the theory that the neural cost of such complement coercion is
semantically-driven. They also underscore the sensitivity of the N400 to
multiple types of semantic representation and processes, including
semantic composition.
H78
ALL FOR ONE AND ONE FOR ALL: HOMOGENEITY OF
SEMANTIC ACCESS FOR ALL WRITTEN INPUTS Sarah Laszlo1,
Kara D. Federmeier1; 1University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign — Models of
single word reading based on neuropsychological data implicate two
functionally and neurally separable processes in the recognition of written inputs, depending on whether those inputs adhere to common spelling-to-sound translation rules (i.e., are orthographically regular).
Competing models, based on behavioral data, instead allow all written
inputs to undergo functionally identical computations regardless of their
spelling-to-sound regularity. In this study, we followed up on growing
event-related potential (ERP) evidence supporting single-process models
by determining whether familiar, but orthographically illegal acronyms
(e.g., VCR) could elicit classic N400 congruity effects similar to those elicited by words, despite their irregular spelling-to-sound correspondences.
The electroencephalogram (EEG) was acquired while participants read
sentence frames ending with expected or unexpected words, expected or
unexpected acronyms, or meaningless (and, hence, unexpected) illegal
strings of letters. Characteristic N400 effects of congruency (smaller
amplitude responses to expected as compared with unexpected items)
were observed in response to both words and familiar acronyms, supporting single-process models of visual word recognition. Interestingly,
clear N400 potentials were also observed in response to meaningless illegal strings for what is, to our knowledge, the first time in the literature.
That unfamiliar and illegal letter strings elicit electrophysiological
responses linked to semantic access is interpreted as evidence that
attempts at semantic access can be obligatory and not gated by stimulus
properties such as orthographic regularity or familiarity.
H79
EFFECTS OF IMAGEABILITY WITHOUT AWARENESS IN THE
ATTENTIONAL BLINK: AN ERP STUDY James Loomis1, Tamara
Swaab2; 1UCSD, 2UC Davis, Center for Mind and Brain — High imageable
words (cigar) are easier to understand than low imageable words (belief).
This imageability effect has been attributed to the possibility that high
imageable words draw on both image and verbal codes, whereas low
imageable words activate only verbal codes. However, it is not known
whether image codes are accessed without awareness of the semantics of
words. In two experiments we recorded Event-Related Potentials to
words inside and outside of the attentional blink, a period during which
participants cannot attend to a stimulus. There were two key manipulations: 1) the semantic relationship of the prime and target (related or

252

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

unrelated); and 2) the imageability of the words (high or low). The task of
the participants was to detect whether a string of digits was odd or even
and whether a probe word was related or not to the prime (experiment 1),
or whether a probe word was high or low imageable (experiment 2).
Whereas behavior was impaired in the attentional blink, ERP data show
dissociable effects of priming and imageability in both experiments, both
inside and outside of the attentional blink. These results are consistent
with the idea that effects of imageabilility can be obtained even when
participants are not aware of the target words.
H80
THE
ROLE
OF
THE
TEMPORAL
LOBES
IN
THE
COMPREHENSION OF METAPHORIC AND NON-METAPHORIC
TEXTS Nira Mashal1, Miriam Faust2, Mark Jung-beeman3; 1The University
of Chicago, 2Bar-Ilan University, Israel, 3Northwestern University,
Evanston — Much evidence from neuroimaging studies indicates that the
processing of text is subserved by both left and right temporal lobes. Yet,
few studies have compared brain activation of metaphoric and non-metaphoric texts, beyond simple word pairs. We used fMRI to examine brain
activation patterns in the bilateral superior temporal gyri while 15
healthy participants read either four-line metaphoric texts or non-metaphoric texts. The metaphoric texts were rated as more difficult to understand than the matching non-metaphoric texts allowing us to test the
hypothesis that right hemisphere involvement is associated with
increased difficulty level. Surprisingly, metaphoric texts resulted in significantly lower activation than non-metaphoric texts in the left and right
anterior superior temporal gyri. However, item analysis revealed that
difficult metaphoric texts elicited stronger activation than easy metaphoric texts in right anterior superior temporal gyri. The results are interpreted as indicating that bilateral anterior superior temporal gyri
contribute to the integration of text elements into a coherent message.
H81
SARCASM
COMPREHENSION:
AN
EVENT
RELATED
POTENTIALS INVESTIGATION Marguerite McQuire1, Stephanie
Fisher1, Christopher Lovett1, Seana Coulson1; 1University of California, San
Diego — Sarcasm is a form of figurative language where the non-literal
meaning opposes its literal meaning. Sarcasm typically consists of a positive statement that expresses negative intent, as in exclaiming, “Perfect
day for a picnic!” during a torrential rainstorm. To examine how the
brain processes this non-literal form of language, we recorded eventrelated potentials (ERPs) of sixteen healthy, native English speakers as
they listened to stories that ended with a visually presented phrase. The
final word in each utterance determined the condition of each phrase as
being sarcastic or literal and was balanced for valence. For example, a
story describing an encounter with a hostile indigenous tribe would be
completed with “All the people we met there were so KIND” (sarcastic
criticism) or “All the people we met there were so WARLIKE” (literal criticism). Alternatively, the story described an encounter with friendly villagers which was completed with “All the people we met there were so
KIND” (literal compliment) or “WARLIKE” (sarcastic compliment).
Results from this study suggest a greater cognitive load for processing
sarcasm, as shown by a late positive complex (LPC) for sarcasm relative
to literal endings. The data also suggest an interaction between valence
and sarcasm. Individual differences such as gender, working memory
and self-reported use of sarcasm will be discussed as predictors of sarcasm comprehension.
H82
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN INFERENCE GENERATION
Heather Mirous1, Mark Jung-Beeman1; 1Northwestern University — When
people comprehending stories hear a premise state (John was wearing
jeans) and later a changed state (John is wearing a tuxedo), they bridge
this gap by inferring a causal connection (John changed). People draw
such inferences when they are necessary to maintain story coherence, but
the component processes and brain bases of these inferences are not well
established. Prior work in cognitive neuroscience has shown differential

Poster Session H

semantic activation in the right and left hemisphere during inference generation, with the right hemisphere showing more activation at an early or
predictive time point in the text, and the left hemisphere showing more
activation at a later or bridging time point. Individual differences in
working memory, background knowledge, and motivation also can affect
inference processing, though the mechanisms are not fully explicated.
This study examines the influence of individual differences, namely trait
anxiety, mood, and working memory capacity on inference processes in
both hemispheres, by contrasting priming of inference-related target
words presented to each visual hemifield. Current results show stronger
inference-related priming in the RH early in the course of drawing inferences. Working memory as well as trait and state affect modulation of
inference-related priming across time points in both hemispheres will
also be discussed.
H83
THE EFFECT OF RHYME ON SEMANTIC EXPECTANCY
Fereshteh Modarresi1; 1University of Ottawa — This paper investigates the
range of linguistic situations in which the N400 component is observed.
Although the main characteristic of N400 is its high sensitivity to semantic processes (Kutas & Hillyard, 1980), there is evidence that it is also
modulated by phonological variables. This paper examines the interaction between auditory rhyme and semantic information during sentence
processing and their overall effect on ERP indices, notably the N400. The
experiment uses both behavioural reaction times (RT) and Electrophysiological (ERP) measures. The participants listen to sentences in the Persian
language that consist of both rhyme and semantic primes. Participants
must judge the congruency of the target item. This will allow us to determine how the rhyme can affect “lexical expectancy” and “lexical activation” in memory. The experiment design is inspired by a Persian
language game, in which the presence of a non-word prime (presented
before the question) interferes with access to the semantically appropriate
word (in the answer). The sentence stimuli were presented auditorily and
consisted of questions and answers (targets) in a 2 by 2 design. The target
item either rhymes or does not rhyme with the non-word prime preceding the question, and is semantically related or not related to the highly
expected true responses. The highly expected correct answer has been
used as the base line with which other sentences will be compared.
Behavioural results suggest a speed-accuracy trade-off while preliminary
ERP results suggest that the N400 is much affected by sentential phonological congruency.
H84
UNDERSTANDING
PHYSICAL
EFFORT
THROUGH
LANGUAGE Claire Moody1, Veronika Chuang1, Silvia Gennari1;
1
University of York - United Kingdom — This study investigates how we
understand actions as described by language. It presented participants
with sentences describing actions that were more or less effortful or
involved no physical effort, for example, “The delivery man is pushing
the piano”, “The delivery man is pushing the chair”, “The delivery man
has forgotten the piano”. It was hypothesized that sensory-motor brain
regions encoding properties of actions such as supplementary motor cortex (middle frontal gyrus - MFG) would be sensitive to the effort manipulation. Moreover, because to understand the difference in implied effort
the same verb (“push”) must be semantically integrated with different
objects (chair vs. piano), areas responsible for such semantic integrations
such as left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) may also be sensitive to the effort
manipulation. It was found that MFG and LIFG showed activation consistent with a positive linear trend as a function of physical effort. The
same trend was also found in the posterior middle temporal gyrus, an
area often associated with verbs and actions. Results indicate that understanding actions through language requires interactions between sensory-motor regions and LIFG with all these areas being sensitive to the
degree of semantic information (effort) implied by the sentence.

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

H85
CORRELATES OF FRONTAL LOBE FUNCTION: VERBAL
FLUENCY, PHONOLOGICAL LOAD, AND ABSTRACT WORD
PROCESSING Gail Moroschan1, Chris Westbury1, Constance M. ClarkeDavidson1; 1University of Alberta — Neuroimaging studies and lesion evidence have implicated frontal lobe function during an array of phonological and semantic language processing tasks. Binder, Westbury,
McKiernan, Possing, and Medler (2005) showed that in particular,
abstract words were more reliant than concrete words on inferior frontal
lobe regions that have been strongly implicated in phonological processing and verbal short-term memory. A well known measure of frontal lobe
function is verbal fluency – how many words one can produce in a
minute when given the first letter. If phonological and concreteness information are mediated through the frontal lobes, then we would expect to
see a.) evidence of an interaction between phonological load and concreteness in aphasic subjects, especially in the auditory modality that
stresses phonology, and b.) verbal fluency scores that correlate highly
with measures of phonological load and abstract word processing. We
tested these hypotheses by using data from the Alberta Language Function Assessment Battery (Westbury, 2006) for 38 mixed aphasics. We
found an interaction effect between phonological neighborhood size and
concreteness in auditory, but not visual, lexical decision. Correlations of
verbal fluency with lexical decision scores were reliable and higher for
words with many neighbors than words with few neighbors, but only in
the auditory modality. Correlations of verbal fluency scores with synonym judgment scores were reliable and higher for abstract than concrete
words in both the auditory and visual versions of the task. These results
provide behavioral evidence of convergent processing of abstract words
and phonological load in frontal regions.

Memory: Working memory
H86
BRAIN ACTIVITY RELATED TO UPDATING OF VERBAL
Hirokazu
WORKING MEMORY: AN ERP STUDY Satoshi
Abe1,
Bokura1, Shuhei Yamaguchi1; 1Shimane University School of Medicine — The
central executive function in working memory involves mental process,
which performs ongoing revision of working memory stores. This memory updating is understood as a type of switching between the activity
for maintaining the current string of a fixed number of items, and the
activity for changing this list. Converging evidence indicates that dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is involved in this executive process. In this study
we recorded ERPs during a running memory task, in which subjects
dynamically revised memory store, to clarify the spatial-temporal pattern
of brain activity for memory updating. Subjects were presented with lists
of a varying length from four to eight words composed of two syllables.
After each list, a recall of the four most recent list words was required.
We compared ERPs elicited by first four words (control trials) and those
by words after the fifth in the list (update trials). The difference wave
between control and update trials showed potential shift over the frontal
scalp site with left hemisphere dominance, beginning at the latency of
about 200 ms. The shift increased after about 1000 ms, and lasted after
that. Another potential shift started to show up over the temporal-parietal site at the latency of 800ms. The present study suggests that updating
of verbal working memory is triggered by prefrontal cortex and involves
the distributed network including prefrontal and posterior association
cortices.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

253

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

H87
HUMAN RECREATIONAL (MDMA) USE AFFECTS FMRI BRAIN
ACTIVATION DURING WORKING MEMORY. Jane Allendorfer1,2,
Martine Lamy1,2, James Eliassen2,3; 1University of Cincinnati Neuroscience
Graduate Program, 2University of Cincinnati Center for Imaging Research,
3
University of Cincinnati — Recreational ecstasy (MDMA) use is associated with memory impairments. Animal studies have shown MDMA to
have neurotoxic effects on serotonergic neurons and to impair memory
performance. Due to the variability of drug exposure, the functional consequences of human recreational ecstasy use remains unclear. To demonstrate the effects of ecstasy use, we studied 7 current ecstasy users and 7
non-ecstasy drug users as comparison subjects matched to the ecstasy
users by age, education and cannabis use. Since neurotoxic effects of
MDMA are thought to underlie memory impairments in ecstasy users,
we hypothesized that ecstasy users will exhibit abnormal activation during a working memory task in brain regions that receive dense serotonergic innervation. During fMRI, participants performed an N-back task (0back, 1-back and 2-back) in which they pressed the button corresponding
to the number either on the screen (0-back), one screen prior (1-back), or
two screens prior (2-back). We found no differences in accuracy or reaction time between groups. However, during working memory conditions
(1-back and 2-back), ecstasy users showed increased activation in the
right parahippocampal gyrus and the anterior cingulate but decreased
activation in the right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) compared to comparison subjects. The right IFG becomes more active during working memory, but this level of activation is diminished in ecstasy users. The
increased activation observed in ecstasy users during working memory
may indicate compensatory activation to deal with increasing task
demands and may account for the lack of observed differences in behavioral performance between groups.
H88
MEASURING AGE-BOUND CHANGES IN MENTAL CAPACITY:
THE ROLE OF MISLEADING CUES Marie Arsalidou1, Juan PascualLeone1, Janice Johnson1; 1York University, Toronto — The n-back paradigm
is commonly used in neuropsychological research on working memory
(WM). This task is not well scaled in terms of complexity, however, limiting its usefulness in developmental research. We adapted the 1-back paradigm to create two versions of a task designed to measure mentalattentional (M-) capacity. M-capacity corresponds to the maximal number of schemes one can effortfully attend to simultaneously. This number
grows with age in childhood and is a causal component of WM. The
Color Matching Task (CMT) was designed to be suitable for use with
fMRI. Mental demand is increased gradually by manipulating the number of stimulus features participants must consider in order to determine
whether the current stimulus matches the previous one. The CMT-Balloon task contains segregated cues, whereas CMT-Clown contains integral cues making the latter more misleading. Behavioural data were
collected from 7-8, 9-10, 11-12, 13-14 year olds and adults (N=149). We
found significant model-predicted differences in performance between
the CMT versions. Both versions correlated highly with a well established
measure of M-capacity (i.e., Figural Intersection Task; FIT). Overall,
CMT-Clown behaved better as a measure of M-capacity; it yielded the
theory-predicted M-capacity scores for all age groups and these scores
were very close to those predicted and obtained with the FIT. Results
support the theoretical prediction that misleading tasks provide better
measures of capacity. In future work we plan to implement the CMTClown in fMRI. We expect in this way to delineate brain areas responsible for age-appropriate performance as developmental stages are
assessed cross-sectionally.

254

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

H89
THE LIMITS OF VISUAL MEMORY AND ITS ALLOCATION
ACROSS EYE MOVEMENTS Paul Bays1,2, Masud Husain1,2; 1Institute
of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, UK, 2Institute of
Neurology, University College London — Visual working memory is a limited resource. Previous attempts to characterise this limit have sought to
identify a fixed number of items that can be held simultaneously in memory. Here we investigate the precision with which visual information
from multiple items is maintained, both within a single fixation and
across eye movements. Testing memory for item locations and orientations, we find no evidence for a fixed item limit, but rather a dynamic
allocation of visual memory resources, whereby increasing numbers of
items are encoded with decreasing precision. Memory for item locations
is not disrupted by an intervening saccade, implying that the entire contents of visual memory are predictively updated to account for the
change in gaze position. Although a saccade did not affect overall performance, the item that was the target of the eye movement was recalled
with greater precision than non-target items, demonstrating preferential
allocation of resources to the saccade target. Crucially, in a sequence of
eye movements, this privileged memory was observed only for the most
recent saccade target, and not for targets of previous saccades. Thus
visual memory resources appear to be reallocated prior to each new eye
movement, effectively wiping out information stored in earlier fixations.
H90
THE IMPACT OF ATTENDING TO DISTRACTORS: A STUDY OF
LOW-LEVEL VISUAL WORKING MEMORY Anne Berry1, Aaron
Rutman1, Wesley Clapp1, Theodore Zanto1, Adam Gazzaley1; 1University of
California, San Francisco — Top-down modulation is characterized by differential enhancement or suppression of neural activity in sensory cortical regions. One’s ability to attend to pertinent sensory information and
ignore irrelevant stimuli is often correlated with this neural modulation.
In a previous study, electroencephalography (EEG) was recorded as subjects participated in a single face delayed-recognition task in which face
distractors were introduced during the delay period. The degree to which
the distractors were attended impacted their performance as reflected in
the modulation of the P100 and N170 components for the distractors. The
present study used the same paradigm, but utilized coherent motion
stimuli to test whether early neural modulation exists for lower-level
visual stimuli, and what impact distraction has on performance. In a
delayed-recognition paradigm, subjects were asked to maintain their
memory for motion direction over a delay period in which there either
was an attended visual distractor (swirling dots), an unattended visual
distractor, or no distractor. A passive viewing condition served as a baseline to measure relative enhancement and suppression. Working memory
accuracy when the distractor was attended to correlated with measures
of enhancement in N170 latency and amplitude for the distractor. Also,
the impact of distraction on response time correlated with enhancement
in N170 latency to distracting stimuli, such that subjects who showed the
greatest enhancement for the attended distractors demonstrated the
poorest working memory performance. This study suggests top-down
modulation of early visual processing correlates with the impact distraction has on working memory performance for lower-level visual stimuli.
H91
IMPROVED WORKING MEMORY WHEN INDIVIDUALS WITH
ALZHEIMER’S USE A BROAD ATTENTIONAL FOCUS Giselle
Braganza1, P.M. Greenwood2, J.A. Levy3, R. Parasuraman2; 1The Catholic
University of America, 2George Mason University, 3University of Utah — Although there is increasing evidence of a processing overlap between visuospatial attention and working memory (WM), it is not known whether
that overlap is affected in Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). Individuals with
AD are impaired in WM, but also experience some reduction in their ability to change the scale of the attentional focus in visual search (Greenwood et al., 1997). This raises the question of whether WM in AD benefits
from a narrower attentional focus as has been seen in healthy individuals.

Poster Session H

Based on our observation that APOE-e4 homozygotes benefit from an
expanded rather than a constricted attentional focus in a WM task
(Greenwood et al., 2005), we hypothesized that AD individuals would
show a similar pattern. Spatial precues to location varied in size in a spatial WM task in Young, healthy Older, and AD groups. To examine
effects at different levels of processing, precue size also was varied in
detection and discrimination tasks. In the WM task, with a 3-second
delay between precued target and test, small cues provided the greatest
benefit in Young and Old. AD individuals showed the opposite effect,
with better memory performance following the largest precue (p<.05).
These results indicate that the influence of the spatial scale of attention on
WM takes a different form in AD. A constricted attentional focus
improves memory in healthy Old but a broad attentional focus improves
memory in AD. If confirmed, these results indicate that WM in AD
patients might benefit from training to expand the attentional focus.
H92
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WORKING MEMORY ABILITY AND
ATTENTIONAL CONTROL IN NORMAL CONTROLS AND
YOUNG ADULTS WITH ADHD Gregory C. Burgess1, Marie T.
Banich1,2,3, Erik Willcutt1,4; 1University of Colorado, Boulder, 2University of
Colorado, Health Sciences Center, 3Institute of Cognitive Science, University of
Colorado, Boulder, 4Institute for Behavioral Genetics, University of Colorado,
Boulder — Working memory (WM) ability has been associated with
higher levels of attentional control in neurologically normal individuals
(e.g., Kane & Engle, 2003) and has been suggested to contribute to attention problems in attention deficit / hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (Barkley 1997). This study investigated the relationship between WM and
neural activity during the attentionally-demanding Stroop color-word
task in adults with ADHD (N=23) and normal controls (N=23). WM ability was indexed using forward and backward digit and spatial span
tasks. Neural activity was indexed using fMRI during performance of a
hybrid blocked / event-related Stroop task. Task blocks were incongruent, congruent, or neutral, and contained an equal proportion of blockspecific trials (e.g. incongruent) and neutral trials that were constant
across all blocks. Regarding behavior, greater WM ability in ADHD was
associated with increased behavioral facilitation, an association not
observed in controls. This finding suggests that greater WM ability in
ADHD led to more word reading, which is counterproductive to task
demands. With regard to neural activity, a greater increase in bilateral
DLPFC for the contrast of incongruent vs. congruent blocks was associated with higher WM scores in the ADHD group but lower WM scores in
the control group. Furthermore, during individual task blocks, the control group deactivated default mode regions (i.e., posterior cingulate) less
as WM ability increased. These results suggest that greater WM ability in
the control group is associated with increasing neural efficiency, but with
ineffective activation of attentional control regions in the ADHD group.
H93
INABILITY TO EFFECTIVELY SUPPRESS ANTICIPATED
IRRELEVANT INFORMATION IN HEALTHY OLDER ADULTS.
Wesley Clapp1, Rachel Litke1, Nikhil Murthy1, Adam Gazzaley1; 1University of
California San Francisco (UCSF) — Previously we showed that when relevant and irrelevant information were presented quickly and randomly to
older adults, they have a deficit in suppressing irrelevant information.
The present experiment tested the ability of older adults to suppress
anticipated irrelevant information. EEG was recorded from 16 healthy
older subjects (age: 60-82) as they participated in a single face delayedrecognition task, comprised of four conditions; No Distractor, Ignore-Distractor (ID), Attend-Distractor (AD), and Passive View. In the distractor
conditions, the degree to which one must attend to distracting information (a face in the delay period) was manipulated. In the ID condition,
subjects were cued to anticipate the irrelevant distractor, while in the AD
condition they were directed to attend to the distractor (i.e. make a simple decision about it). Behaviorally, subjects’ working memory performance declined in the presence of distraction. Recently, we found that

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

young subjects participating in the same experiment exhibited a N170
latency earliest for relevant stimuli (attended distractors), followed by
passive view, and latest for irrelevant stimuli (ignored distractors). In
older subjects, the N170 peaks earliest for attended stimuli, but responses
to irrelevant stimuli peak at a similar latency as passively viewed stimuli,
suggesting a selective inability to suppress irrelevant information even
when the distractor could be anticipated. Supportive behavioral evidence
of an inability to suppress distractors was obtained. Similar to younger
subjects, this neural measure of suppression correlated with working
memory accuracy, revealing that older subjects that exhibit N170 latency
suppression of irrelevant information perform better at the task.
H94
THE MAINTENANCE OF SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY,
COVERT ATTENTION, AND MOTOR INTENTION IN THE
HUMAN FRONTAL EYE FIELD Clayton Curtis1,2, Akiko Ikkai1, Riju
Srimal2; 1New York University, 2New York University, Center for Neural
Science — Frontal eye field (FEF) neurons are traditionally thought to
transform visual signals into oculomotor commands. However, it is
becoming increasingly apparent that the FEF is critically involved in
higher-level visuomotor cognition. FEF activity has been reported during
a variety of working memory, attention, and saccade preparation experiments. Here, we present fMRI data from three scan sessions of the same
humans performing psychophysically demanding spatial working memory, covert attention, and motor attention tasks. These tasks were as similar as possible in terms of difficulty and design (e.g., stimulus
eccentricity, perceptual and response modality, and timing). When subjects either a) maintained a location in working memory, b) covertly
attended to a cued location, or c) prepared a saccade to a visually-cued
location, FEF activity persisted throughout the entire long and variable
delay periods. These signals persisted regardless of whether the task
required memory, attention, or intention and they persisted regardless of
whether a saccade was ever made. These data argue that the FEF do not
simply code for the metrics of saccades, but may more generally represent the most salient locations in the visual field. Moreover, the FEF may
utilize a common mechanism to support memory, attention, and intention. An important implication of this model is that functional role of the
FEF generalizes to support each of these diverse processes not through a
different mechanism but through its different interactions with other
brain areas.
H95
RELATIONAL ‘MATCH’ AND ‘MISMATCH’ SIGNALS IN THE
HUMAN HIPPOCAMPUS ARE DIFFERENTIALLY MODULATED
BY ACTIVE MAINTENANCE AND PERCEPTUAL NOVELTY.
Katherine D Duncan1, Lila Davachi1,2; 1New York University, 2Center for
Neural Science, New York University — Determining whether an incoming
event ‘matches’ or ‘mismatches’ a stored representation is proposed to lie
at the core of the hippocampus' ability to switch between memory
retrieval and encoding. Previous work has shown that ‘match’ enhancement for item information found in the perirhinal cortex depends on
matches to actively maintained information. On the other hand, the corresponding ‘mismatch’ signals occurred irrespective of active maintenance (Miller, 1995). To investigate whether the theoretically important
relational ‘match’ and ‘mismatch’ signals in the hippocampus are modulated by active maintenance, we fully crossed whether a probe stimulus
‘matches’ or relationally ‘mismatches’ a perceived or actively maintained
image. Subjects performed two working memory tasks where they either
responded ‘yes’ to probes that were identical to the previous sample
scene, or performed a relational manipulated the scene and responded
‘yes’ only to a probe that is identical to this perceptually novel image.
Using conventional fMRI (3x3x3 voxel size) we found evidence for relational ‘match enhancement’ within the hippocampus that was selective
for matches between the probe and the actively maintained stimulus, but
not influenced by perceptual novelty. We also found evidence for a complementary ‘mismatch enhancement’ signal in the MTL that was selective

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

255

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

for mismatches between the probe and what was seen before, but was not
modulated by active maintenance. We will also present preliminary findings using high-resolution imaging from a similar paradigm to investigate how these memory signals map onto the subfields of the
hippocampus.
H96
HORMONAL AND GENETIC INFLUENCES ON PREFRONTAL
CORTICAL FUNCTION. Jacobs Emily1, Cools Roshan2, D'Esposito
Mark1; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, UC Berkeley, 2Cambridge
University — Dopamine transmission within the prefrontal cortex is critical for tasks dependent on working memory. The PFC is extremely sensitive to fluctuations in DA—both insufficient and excessive dopaminergic
activity impairs PFC function. Taking into account an individual’s basal
level of PFC DA is essential for predicting DA’s effect on cognitive processes. Individual differences in PFC DA stem in part from genetic polymorphisms that alter the efficiency of DA’s metabolic pathway. A
polymorphism within the COMT gene produces an enzyme with four
times greater activity. Individuals with the less active enzyme (met/met)
have increased PFC DA relative to individuals with the more active
enzyme (val/val). Estrogen also impacts the DA system by amplifying
DA transmission. Thus, performance on tasks that depend on precise levels of PFC DA may vary throughout the cycle as estrogen levels rise and
fall. Importantly, these effects may not be measurable unless individual
variation in baseline DA levels is accounted for. This study investigates
the effects of estrogen on the performance of DA-dependent tasks as a
function of COMT genotype. Female subjects were pre-selected for
COMT genotype and tested on two occasions, when estrogen levels are at
their peak and trough. Subjects completed two WM tasks during an fMRI
scan. For both genotypic groups, estrogen had a negative affect on performance when the task had no demand on WM. However when WM
demands were high estrogen had a beneficial effect specifically for met/
met subjects. Preliminary analyses suggest hormone by genotype interactions at the behavioural and neurobiological level.
H97
MULTIVARIATE ANALYSES OF SINGLE-SUBJECT VS. GROUP
FMRI DATA FROM A VERBAL WORKING MEMORY TASK Eva
Feredoes1,2, Todd S. Woodward2,3, Bradley R. Postle1; 1University of WisconsinMadison, 2University of British Columbia, 3Riverview Hospital — Univariate
analyses of single subject (SS) data sets indicate considerable intersubject
anatomical variability of brain regions involved in verbal working memory storage (Feredoes & Postle, 2007). These analyses also implicate multiple brain regions in storage, although they do not permit us to infer
which of these regions act in concert as part of a functional network.
Additionally, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) indicates that, among these regions, those located in left posterior perisylvian
cortex and sensorimotor cortex make necessary contributions to storage,
whereas a left PFC region identified via spatially normalized group-averaged (SNGA) analysis of the same data does not (Feredoes et al., 2007). In
the present study we investigated functional connectivity in these data
sets with a method based on constrained principal components analysis
(cPCA), which could be applied specifically to the delay period from
these delayed letter-recognition data. We tested three predictions. First,
SS data sets analyzed with cPCA would reveal that many of the anatomically distinct brain regions identified with SS analyses would be functionally connected in a network supporting verbal short term storage.
Second, in each subject, the region we targeted with rTMS in our previous study would comprise a node of this network. Third, cPCA of the
SNGA data from this sample would not identify any regions in PFC as
nodes in a verbal storage network. Preliminary results indicate that
within individuals, there are multiple, separate brain regions located primarily in posterior regions, some of which include regions identified by
our previous univariate SS analyses.

256

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

H98
ESTROGEN-MODULATED
PERFORMANCE
ON
SEXADVANTAGED COGNITIVE TASKS Lena
Ficco1,
Matthew
C.
Davidson1; 1University of Massachusetts, Amherst — Differences in spatial
and language abilities have been observed across the estrus cycle in
healthy young females (Broverman et. al, 1981; Hampson, 1990). Estrogen
(i.e., 17 &#946;-estradiol) is hypothesized to be the primary gonadal hormone involved in these differences; however, few studies have quantitatively measured 17 &#946;-estradiol levels in females at time of testing.
We hypothesized that high levels of 17 &#946;-estradiol would enhance
performance on articulatory tasks (e.g., counting, list reading, and color
naming) and would impair performance on a visuo-spatial working
memory task. To test these hypotheses, performance on these tasks was
compared at two times, which coordinated with the menses (i.e., low 17
&#946;-estradiol, low progesterone) and late follicular (i.e., high 17
&#946;-estradiol and low progesterone) phases of the estrus cycle. Participants included naturally cycling (e.g., those not using synthetic hormone
regulation or replacement) healthy young females. Saliva samples were
collected at time of testing and processed via high sensitivity 17 &#946;estradiol and progesterone enzyme immunoassays. Preliminary results
provide support for the first hypothesis, improved articulation, and suggest that fluctuations in 17 &#946;-estradiol underlie the variations in
cognitive abilities observed across the estrus cycle.
H99
EFFECTS OF WORKING MEMORY LOAD ON THE BOLD AND
ERP RESPONSE IN YOUNGER AND OLDER ADULTS. Brian
Gordon1,2, Nils Schneider1,2, Eunsam Shin1,2, Carrie Brumback1,2, Yukie Lee2,
Ed Maclin2, Gabriele Gratton1,2, Monica Fabiani1,2; 1University of Illinois,
2Beckman Institute — Increasing age is accompanied by a decline in working memory (WM) performance. This age-related change is exacerbated
at higher memory loads, and may originate from impairments in supraspan memory processing, necessary with increasing task demands. To
examine differential WM performance, we recorded behavioral, BOLD,
and electrophysiological data on 15 young and 30 old adults during a
Sternberg memory task, with memory set sizes of 2-6items. As expected,
older adults were less accurate and slower than younger adults, especially at the higher set sizes. Within the fMRI data, linear trend analyses
were performed separately for set sizes 2-4 and 4-6. An analysis of the
percent signal changes by load revealed a linear increase in the BOLD
response in visual cortex (B17/18) and superior parietal cortex (B7) for
young adults with increasing memory set sizes, with the greatest effects
occurring in the 4-6 comparison. The old adults showed linear effects for
set sizes 2-4, but no further increases at set sizes 4-6. These differences
suggest altered WM processing in older adults. ERP data revealed a linear increase for the old during the presentation of the memory set, up to
set size 6. The ERP slopes for set sizes 4-6 did not differ between young
and old adults. These results suggest that, although neuronal activation
(as represented by the ERPs) linearly increased in the old adults up to set
size 6, the blood flow may already have reached ceiling at lower set sizes,
indicating potential changes in neurovascular coupling.
H100
SHORT-TERM MEMORY FOR SIGN LANGUAGE: ANALYSIS OF
SERIAL AND FREE RECALL ERRORS IN DEAF AND HEARING
PARTICIPANTS Marta Gozzi1, Carlo Geraci1, Carlo Cecchetto1, Costanza
Papagno1; 1University of Milano, Bicocca — Phonological similarity and
length effects detected in American Sign Language (ASL) short term
memory (STM) tasks suggest that signs are retained in a system analogous to verbal STM. However, sign span is lower than word span with
both ASL/English material and Italian Sign Language (LIS)/Italian material, even when controlling for articulation rate. Our studies investigated
two factors potentially causing this discrepancy: (a) difficulty in maintaining sequential information with signs; (b) signs’ weight. In Study 1,
we tested serial recall in 12 deaf and 12 matched hearing participants
with 20 sequences that were one item longer than their span, using LIS

Poster Session H

signs for deaf participants and visually and auditorily presented Italian
words for hearing participants. All were able to correctly recall at least
one sequence, confirming that the task was feasible. There were no significant differences between groups in the proportion of item or order
errors. Deaf people made significantly more item than order errors, ruling out the possibility that lower span for signs is due to hypothesis (a).
In Study 2, 16 deaf and 16 hearing participants were presented with 8item sequences for free recall. In addition to the standard serial position
curve, we calculated the recency index (Postman and Phillips, 1965). Deaf
participants showed a recency effect, but their recency index score was
lower than that of hearing people. Since recency represents the output of
the phonological store without the contribution of rehearsal, this suggests
that signs are “heavy” and need more “space” to be stored, supporting
hypothesis (b).
H101
USING MORSE CODE TO UNDERSTAND VERBAL WORKING
MEMORY REPRESENTATIONS Sara Guediche1,2, Maryam Khatami1,
Jody Manners1, Julie Fiez1,2; 1University of Pittsburgh, 2Center for the Neural
Basis of Cognition, University of Pittsburgh — In this study, we use Morse
code to probe the nature of the representations that are maintained during verbal working memory. In participants who are fluent in Morse, we
compared verbal working memory performance on a serial recall task
using acoustically presented letters in speech and Morse code. Previous
work has suggested that sentence comprehension ability is linked to verbal working memory performance. Therefore, we also assessed participants’ ability to listen to full sentences in Morse code and then copy the
sentences. Participants who performed well on this task had equivalent
verbal working memory performance for speech and Morse across the
entire serial position curve whereas participants who were unable to
maintain Morse sentences in memory performed better with speech. Preserved recall for final list items is especially noteworthy since some theories of verbal working memory have posited that a speech-specific
acoustic store, the echoic store, contributes to recall of the final item.
These results have two implications: 1) strong recency effects can be
observed with stimuli that don’t have the spectro-temporal properties of
speech, and 2) they provide further evidence for links between working
memory and sentence comprehension. Future experiments will examine
suffix effects on recency to permit further characterization of echoic representations in working memory.
H102
DELAY-PERIOD NEURONAL OSCILLATIONS ARE MODULATED
BY 10 HZ RTMS: A SIMULTANEOUS RTMS/EEG STUDY
Massihullah Hamidi1, Heleen Slagter1, Giulio Tononi1, Bradley Postle1;
1
University of Wisconsin, Madison — Several recent studies have demonstrated that repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) leads to
behavioral facilitation during tasks requiring spatial working memory.
Specifically, we have previously shown that 10 Hz delay-period rTMS of
the parietal, but not prefrontal, cortex produces improvements in working memory performance. To determine the possible mechanism behind
this facilitation, we repeated this study with simultaneous rTMS and electroencephalography (EEG). Healthy, young adult subjects performed two
types of working memory tasks: one requiring memory of shapes,
another requiring memory of locations. In half the trials, 10 Hz rTMS
(110% of motor threshold) was applied during the delay-period to the
superior parietal lobule (SPL) and, as a control, the somatosensory cortex
of the post-central gyrus (PCG). We replicated the behavioral effect that
rTMS to the SPL results in facilitation of memory of locations, but we
found no change with memory of shapes. Preliminary EEG results
revealed that during location memory trials, rTMS to the SPL resulted in
a large increase in alpha-band (8.5-13 Hz) power in the posterior electrodes during the delay-period, whereas with memory of shapes, this
change was not evident. rTMS of the PCG did not significantly affect
alpha-band power with either memory task. Oscillatory changes in other

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

frequency bands, as well as changes in cross-frequency coherence were
also assessed.
H103
COMMON OR DISTINCT NETWORKS FOR PERCEPTUAL AND
REFLECTIVE SELECTION? EVIDENCE FROM VIEWING AND
REFRESHING FACES AND SCENES Matthew
Johnson1,
Marcia
1 1
Johnson ; Yale University — People can selectively highlight information
for preferential processing in one of two ways: either perceptually, via
direction of covert or overt attention in the presence of the stimulus, or
reflectively, by preferentially mentally reviewing certain information
after the original stimulus has disappeared from the environment. In this
fMRI experiment, we compared the neural correlates of perceptual and
reflective selection. On each trial, a face and a scene were shown simultaneously. Participants were cued either before presentation to look only at
one of the pictures (overtly) and ignore the other (Attend condition), after
presentation to think back to, or visualize, only one of the pictures
(Refresh condition), or after presentation to simply press a button and not
think of either picture (Act condition). Both overlapping and distinct patterns of activation were observed for perceptual (i.e., Attend-related) and
reflective (i.e., Refresh-related) selection in brain areas associated with
working memory, attention, and cognitive control. In addition, both
types of selection were associated with modulation of activity in face- or
scene-specific perceptual areas, with both enhancement and suppression
of activity occurring in these areas relative to the control Act condition.
H104
HIPPOCAMPAL INVOLVEMENT IN BETWEEN-DOMAIN BUT
NOT WITHIN-DOMAIN ASSOCIATIONS Roy
P.C.
Kessels1,2,
Carinne Piekema3, Mark Rijpkema3, Guillén Fernández3; 1NICI, Radboud
University Nijmegen, 2Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 3F.C.
Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Radboud University
Nijmegen, — The medial temporal lobe, and specifically the hippocampus, is important for associative memory in general. Furthermore, previous studies have shown that the human hippocampus is more involved
in binding item information to spatial locations than other forms of itemcontext binding. These findings may be explained by the distinction
between within- and between-domain associations. Presumably, the hippocampus is activated more in between-domain associative memory than
in within-domain associative memory, operating as a binding device that
integrates information processed in distinct brain regions. In an fMRI
study, we investigated this hypothesis directly. Nineteen participants
performed a 3-pair delayed-match-to-sample task in the scanner (Siemens Sonata 3T; 37 axial slices, TR = 2.18 s, TE = 25 ms), where associations had to be made between items processed within the same
neocortical region (within-domain associations; house/house and face/
face associations) and between items that are processed in different neocortical regions (between-domain associations; house/face associations).
This setup allowed us to directly compare the neural correlates of withindomain and between-domain associations. We show significantly more
activation in the parahippocampal gyrus bilaterally (right local maximum at [34 -32 -16], t(16)=4.59, p=0.011; left local maximum at [-26 -20 16], t(16)=3.78, p=0.028) and the right hippocampus (local maximum at
[26 -16 -16], t(16)=4.13, p=0.019) when between-domain associations have
to be made, compared to within-domain associations. These results support the notion that both the hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus
are involved in the binding of information processed in distinct neocortical regions, and not only during spatial binding.
H105
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WORKING MEMORY AND
FILTERING EFFICIENCY REVERSES WITH TASK DEMANDS: AN
ERP AND BEHAVIORAL STUDY Maria Kharitonova1, Tim Curran1,
Akira Miyake1, Yuko Munakata1; 1University of Colorado, Boulder — Greater
working memory capacity leads to better filtering of irrelevant information (e.g. de Fockert et al., 2001; Vogel, McCollough & Machizawa, 2005),
potentially by enabling more efficient allocation of memory resources.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

257

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

However, this finding comes from tasks with clear demands for filtering,
where subjects were instructed to filter irrelevant information and filtering was reliably advantageous for performance. In situations where it
might ultimately help performance to represent currently irrelevant
information, greater working memory capacity might support less filtering. To test this possibility, we assessed working memory capacity and
filtering in tasks with differing filtering demands. In the high-filteringdemand task, participants made same/different judgments for visual
arrays that contained 2 task-relevant and 2 irrelevant objects (as in Vogel
et al., 2005). Filtering the irrelevant objects was advantageous for reducing memory demands. The low-filtering-demand task consisted of a taskswitching paradigm, in which the features that were irrelevant on one
trial became relevant on the subsequent trial. Filtering the currently irrelevant information could thus hurt performance. In both cases, filtering
efficiency was measured as the difference in performance across trials
where irrelevant information was present (or was important for the subsequent trial) and when it was absent (or irrelevant for subsequent trials).
As in previous work, under high filtering demands, working memory
capacity (measured both with ERPs and behaviorally) and filtering efficiency (measured behaviorally) were positively correlated. However, this
effect reversed under low filtering demands, demonstrating that greater
working memory capacity can support less filtering under conditions
where filtering is harmful for overall performance.
H106
PROBING WORKING MEMORY REPRESENTATIONS WITH
PATTERN CLASSIFICATION Jarrod Lewis-Peacock1, Bradley Postle1;
1University of Wisconsin, Madison — We describe a fMRI imaging study of
humans engaged in long-term and working memory tasks. A patternclassification algorithm identified patterns of cortical activity associated
with viewing and making judgments about three categories of pictures
(famous people, famous locations, and common objects). Although perceptual processing was necessarily involved in this task, the study of
these stimuli also relied on the processing of long-term semantic and episodic memories. The classifier was then used to track the reappearance of
category-specific activity patterns during a delayed paired-associate recognition task. Results show that a given category’s activity pattern reappears and is maintained during the delay-period when a stimulus from
that category was (1) presented at the beginning of the trial (a retrospective representation) or was (2) the probe stimulus anticipated to appear at
the end of the trial (a prospective representation). This result is consistent
with the hypothesis that working memory is supported by the temporary
activation of long-term memory representations. Having established this
theoretically important result, we next investigated the nature of these
delay-period representations by comparing classification performance
under several conditions: (1) whole-brain activity vs. a ‘feature selected’
subset of voxels, and (2) simple 2-layer network vs. a 3-layer network
capable of identifying conjunctive representations of the input. Additionally, we explored the contribution of several local regions -- canonical
cortical regions associated with category-specific representation (fusiform face area, parahippocampal place area, and lateral occipital cortex);
and PFC -- by masking them and classifying activity from the remaining
cortical regions.
H107
VISUAL CHUNKING ALLOWS EFFICIENT ALLOCATION OF
MEMORY CAPACITY Andrew McCollough1, Edward Vogel1; 1University
of Oregon — The ability to group information into "chunks" is a well
know phenomenon in verbal working memory paradigms. However, the
effects of chunking in the visual domain has not been well described.
Here, we investigate the effects of visual chunking on working memory
capacity, or K, utilizing gestalt principles to bias subjects to group individual items into larger, virtual objects. Subjects were presented with
groups of three "pacmen", elements of Kaniza figures, that were either
coherently organized to form illusory Kaniza triangles or randomly oriented, and asked to remember the orientation of the individual pacmen.

258

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

Subjcts performed a change detection task on a single pacman probe after
a brief delay, indicating whether the pacman probe was in the same or
different orientation as the sample. We then measured memory capacity
based on the number of chunked objects versus individual elements in
the display. Memory capacity was greater in the Kaniza triangle condition than the random condition. ERPs were also recorded during the
experiment. In particular, the contralateral delay activity is an ERP component sensitive to the number of items held in memory during the delay
activity of a visual working memory task. The effects of visual chunking
on this component will be discussed.
H108
AN INVESTIGATION OF WORKING MEMORY CORTICAL
NETWORKS USING INDEPENDENT COMPONENT ANALYSIS
Shashwath Meda1, Bradley Folley1,5, Vince Calhoun1,2,4, Michael Stevens1,
Godfrey Pearlson1,2,3; 1Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center, Institute of
Living at Hartford Hospital, Hartford, 2Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, 3Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 4The MIND Institute,
Albuquerque, 5Vanderbilt University, Kennedy Center, Nashville — Background: Human working memory (WM) is a multi-regional task involving “temporary storage and manipulation” of information. We used
independent component analysis (ICA) to identify different spatiotemporal networks involved in a Sternberg WM fMRI paradigm. Methods:
Healthy controls (N=57) (Age- Mean+Stdev: 36.96+11.2 yrs; 31 male, performed a modified version of the Sternberg task, (Johnson et. al. 2006).
Exclusion criteria included present/past DSM-IVAxis I disorder or psychotic first-degree relatives. Functional images were preprocessed using
SPM2 and imported into the GIFT toolbox for ICA analysis. Resulting
component networks were then correlated to the encoding and recognition phases of the experiment using multiple regression, to determine
individual association (beta) values for each phase. Further, we performed paired sample t-tests on the beta values to identify componentrelated differences between conditions. Results: ICA revealed 15 taskrelated neural networks. Non-cognitive networks included: Motor, cerebellum, extrastriate visual, default mode. 5/15 networks were cognitiverelated task components: C1. Superior frontal-frontal eye fields (FEF)
(p=3.3*10-7) C2. FEF- parts of DLPFC-anterior cingulate (ACC) (p = Not
significant) C3. DLPFC-ACC-basal ganglia-STG-Broca (p=0.0003) C4.
Superior and Inferior parietal (p=0.0003) C5. Anterior STG-FusiformInferior Temporal-Hippocampus/parahippocampus (p=0.0009) All components except C2 differed significantly between the two experimental
conditions (Related p values indicated in brackets). Specifically, components C3 and C4 were more associated with the recognition phase and C1
and C5 with encoding. Conclusion: For the first time, we have demonstrated the usefulness and sensitivity of ICA in delineating different WM
networks. Further, we determined specific associations between cognitive networks and WM task conditions.
H109
BRAIN
REGIONS
MEDIATING
WORKING
MEMORY
COMPONENT PROCESSES Michael
Motes1,2,
Bart
Rypma1,2;
1
University of Texas at Dallas Center for BrainHealth, 2University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center — Exploration of the component processes
that comprise delayed-response working-memory (WM) tasks is difficult
due to the chronology of the component processes and the temporal resolution of FMRI. Assumptions about the shape of the BOLD response for
each component process must be made, and sequential overlapping
BOLD responses may not be able to be uniquely identified via traditional
regression modeling. Resolving controversies regarding the role of prefrontal cortex (PFC) in encoding and maintaining information in WM (see
Rypma, 2006) requires isolating component-related BOLD responses.
“Partial-trial paradigms” (Ollinger et al, 2001) can obviate these problems. In the present study, we used the partial trial paradigm to examine
brain regions mediating WM encoding, maintenance, and retrieval processes involved in a delayed-response WM task. Participants completed
full trials that involved encoding one or six letters, maintaining the mem-

Poster Session H

ory-set over a delay, and then searching WM to determine whether a
probe was in the memory-set. Participants also completed encoding only,
encoding and maintenance, and encoding and retrieval partial trials
intermixed with the full trials. For the encoding only and encoding and
maintenance trials a cue was given to terminate the trial and lead the participants to terminate the processes. Using this method, we were able to
identify PFC regions that mediate WM encoding, maintenance, and
retrieval component processes involved in remembering sub- and supracapacity memory sets.
H110
TESTING COMPUTATIONAL PREDICTIONS OF THE ROLE OF
BASAL GANGLIA DOPAMINE IN WORKING MEMORY:
PARKINSONISM AND MEDICATION EFFECT Ahmed
Moustafa1,
Scott Sherman2, Michael Frank2; 1Rutgers University, 2University of
Arizona — Computational models suggest that the basal ganglia, in particular striatal dopamine, play a critical role in working memory (WM)
(O'Reilly & Frank, 2006; Moustafa & Maida, 2007). The models suggest
that the basal ganglia trigger the updating of prefrontal cortical WM representations, and that phasic dopamine amplifies the updating of taskrelevant information relative to distractors. To test these ideas, we tested
Parkinson's patients both off and on their dopamine medications on a
modified version of the AX-CPT task. In this task, knowing when and
when not to update information are both important for successfully performing different aspects of the task. The task also includes distractor,
attentional shifting, and learning phases that assess the role of striatal
dopamine in WM. Preliminary results suggest that Parkinson's patients
are more impaired in comparison to matched controls and that striatal
dopamine modulates working memory processes. We will discuss the
results of this study pointing out the successes and failures of the neurocomputational models.
H111
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF RETRIEVAL FROM SHORT-TERM
MEMORY Derek Nee1, John Jonides1; 1University of Michigan — Theories
of short-term memory (STM) are divided regarding architecture. Much of
the controversy surrounds the capacity of STM, and whether information
within STM shares an equal status, or whether there are distinct states of
STM. One prominent proposal posits that within STM, a single item
within the focus of attention is available for immediate cognitive operation that is distinct from other information in memory. At the present,
neuroimaging studies investigating STM have not carefully examined
this issue. Here, we used event-related fMRI to examine the neural correlates of STM retrieval while subjects performed a 3-item recognition paradigm. The rapid presentation of materials minimized rehearsal,
permitting the ability to contrast retrieval of the presumed focus of attention versus retrieval of other items in STM. We found that relative to the
focus of attention, retrieval of other items in STM elicited increased activation in regions of left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (BA 45), left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (46/9), and left parahippocampal gyrus. By
contrast, inferior temporal cortex demonstrated increased activation to
recognition probes matching the focus of attention relative to other items
in STM. Many of these regions also demonstrated significant correlations
with behavioral measures of retrieval speed. These results support a distinction between the focus of attention and other information in STM.
H112
LEARNING AND AWARENESS IN MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS:
DISSOCIATING AGE-RELATED EFFECTS FROM COGNITIVE
PERFORMANCE Geoffrey O'Shea1, Kimberly Sena Moore2, Dave
Peterson3, Benjamin A. Clegg2, Gerald C. McIntosh2,4, Michael Thaut2;
1
SUNY-Oneonta, 2Colorado State University, 3University of California San
Diego, 4Poudre Valley Hospital, Fort Collins, CO — Multiple sclerosis (MS)
patients exhibit retrieval deficits from short-term memory (STM) while
performing comparable to controls on implicit learning tasks involving
motor skill acquisition and word priming. These studies are paradoxical
in that MS patients can form long-term representations despite STM

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

retention difficulties. The present investigation assessed implicit learning
in MS patients using the Hebb Digits (HD) task, which involves the incidental learning of a repeating nine-digit sequence. In the HD task,
implicit learning is indexed through gradually improved memory for a
repeating pattern of digits compared to a random series of digits. In contrast to other implicit learning tasks, such as the serial reaction task, performance in the HD task requires less motor responding and more
reliance on working memory processes. The results of our investigation
revealed that MS patients demonstrated HD learning. However, recall of
both the repeating and random series was significantly greater in an agematched control group compared to the MS participants suggesting a
global memory deficit associated with MS. The results of a post-experimental recognition test revealed HD learning in both groups to be reliant
on explicit awareness of digit repetition. In summary, our results provide
evidence for explicit, but not implicit learning in both MS patients and
age-matched controls suggesting that global memory deficits in MS may
limit working memory capacity, but not the ability to learn through repetition. Furthermore, these results suggest that the implicit learning capabilities of MS individuals are a function of the working memory
component of the task.
H113
MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE AND THE LEFT INFERIOR FRONTAL
GYRUS JOINTLY SUPPORT INTERFERENCE RESOLUTION IN
VERBAL WORKING MEMORY Ilke Öztekin1, Clayton Curtis1,2, Brian
McElree1; 1New York University, 2Center for Neural Science, New York
University — Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was used to
investigate the role of left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) and medial temporal lobe (MTL) regions in resolving proactive interference (PI) in verbal
working memory. Participants were presented 6-item study lists, and a
recognition probe after a short distracter task. PI was manipulated with a
release from PI paradigm: study lists were constructed from the same
semantic category (e.g. animals), and the category was switched (e.g.
fruits) after three consecutive trials. Interference from episodic familiarity
was examined by comparing recent negative (RN) probes (lures studied
in previous trial) to distant negative (DN) probes (lures not presented
within a block). Both proactive and episodic interference effects resulted
in enhanced activation in LIFG and MTL regions. However, the two
effects interacted: In the absence of PI, RNs resulted in more activation
than DNs in both LIFG and MTL; in the presence of PI, DNs engendered
more activation than RNs in both regions, reversing the classical episodic
familiarity effect. These findings suggest that LIFG supports the successful resolution of PI induced by semantic similarity, in addition to its wellestablished role in resolving misleading episodic familiarity. Results also
indicate that LIFG and MTL jointly contribute to the resolution of interference in verbal working memory. Both regions may do so by mediating
controlled retrieval processes that provide access to detailed episodic
information (e.g. list-specific information or source memory).
H114
DISENTANGLING THE WORKING MEMORY IMPAIRMENT IN
ADHD. Joanne Park1, Sarah Seth2, David Coghill2, Sinead Rhodes1;
1University of Stirling, 2University of Dundee — Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is characterised by pervasive inattention, hyperactivity and impulsivity and is prevalent in around 3-5% of children.
Dysfunction of executive neuropsychological functioning e.g. working
memory (WM), mediated by the prefrontal cortex, has been the central
focus of recent ADHD research. Previous research conducted by our
group has suggested that children with ADHD may be impaired in executive (manipulation) and non-executive (maintenance) aspects of working memory. The aim of the current study was to characterise WM
functioning in ADHD using tasks specifically designed to tap both verbal
and visuo-spatial executive and non-executive components of WM.
Twelve drug-naïve children (all boys) with ADHD (mean age: 9.75, age
range:7-13) and sex and age-matched controls participated in the study.
All children were assessed on a vocabulary task (BPVS II), verbal and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

259

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

spatial WM tasks and on a range of standardized neuropsychological
WM tasks from the CANTAB battery. Children with ADHD were
impaired on visuo-spatial but not verbal WM tasks. Impairment was particularly marked on the spatial executive WM task, requiring the ability
to manipulate spatial locations in WM. Performance on standardized
neuropsychological verbal and spatial WM tasks from the CANTAB battery corroborated these findings. The current data adds to evidence of
WM impairment in ADHD suggesting that children with the disorder
may have particular difficulties in executive aspects of visuo-spatial WM.
H115
CONSTRUCTING AN INTEGRATED WORLD IN THE MIND:
REFRESHING A SCENE IN THE PPA AND RSC Soojin Park1, Marvin
M. Chun1, Marcia K. Johnson1; 1Yale University — Constructing a rich and
coherent visual experience involves maintaining visual information that
is not perceptually available in the current view. Recent studies suggest
that briefly thinking about a stimulus can modulate activity in category
specific visual areas. Here, we tested the nature of such perceptually
refreshed representations in the parahippocampal place area (PPA) and
retrosplenial cortex (RSC) using fMRI. We asked whether a refreshed representation is specific to a restricted “view” of a scene, or more abstract
and view-invariant. Participants saw a panoramic scene and were asked
to refresh part of the scene after it disappeared. In half of the trials, the
refresh cue appeared twice on the same side (e.g., left refresh-left refresh),
and other trials, the refresh cue appeared on different sides (e.g., left
refresh-right refresh). A control condition presented physical halves of
the scene twice on same sides (e.g., left repeat-left repeat) or different
sides (e.g., left repeat-right repeat). When scenes were physically
repeated, both the PPA and RSC showed greater activation for the different side repetition than the same side repetition, suggesting view-specific
representations. However, when participants refreshed scenes, the PPA
showed view-specific activity just as in physical repeat conditions,
whereas the RSC showed an equal amount of activation for different and
same side conditions. This finding suggests that, in the RSC, refreshed
representations were not restricted to a specific view of a scene, but
extended into the whole scene and thus could provide a mechanism for
integrating multiple views.
H116
MEMORY DEMAND-INDUCED INCREASES IN ALPHA-BAND
POWER CORRESPOND TO DYNAMIC NETWORK CHANGES
Lisa Payne1, John Kounios1; 1Drexel University — Accumulating evidence
supports that the phenomena of working memory (WM) is a result of
synchronous oscillations between distant foci of activity. To elucidate
WM network dynamics, scalp EEG was recorded while 10 participants
performed a modified Sternberg task. Coherence was then measured
between the electroencephalogram at different sites. In each trial, participants judged whether a probe consonant was one of the memory set of 2,
4, or 6 consonants. Analysis of the 2.8 s retention period confirmed previous findings of a parietal-occipital alpha frequency (8 – 12 Hz) peak that
systematically increased with the number of items held in WM. Alpha
frequency coherence increased between electrode PZ and left-lateralized
parietal-temporal sites only between set sizes 2 and 4. There was no
change in alpha coherence from 4 to 6 consonants. Interestingly, coherency between parietal electrode PZ and left temporal electrode T7
showed the most significant enhancement. Further analysis revealed that,
although there was no change in theta band (4 – 7 Hz) power, theta coherence between T7 and frontal-central sites increased between set sizes 4
and 6 while simultaneously decreasing with parietal-occipital sites. These
findings demonstrate that the WM network responds to initial increases
in demand with enhancement of alpha band coherence, but higher
demand is reflected by changes in theta band coherency. The changes in
theta coherence confirm its expected, but previously undiscovered,
involvement in increasing WM load. The increase in alpha coherence
affirms its direct participation in the WM network, and combined with
the theta results, indicates an inhibitory role.

260

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

H117
DISTINGUISHING VISUAL SEARCH AND WORKING MEMORY
VIA CORTICAL AND HEART-RATE RESPONSES Pandelis
Perakakis1, Jaime Vila1, Walter Machado-Pinheiro2, Pedro Guerra1, Aydamari
Faria Jr2, Isabel DePaula Antunez2, Lourdes Anllo-Vento1,3; 1University of
Granada, Spain, 2Federal Fluminense University, Niteroi, Brazil, 3University of
California, San Diego — In this study, we investigated the spatio-temporal
dynamics of visual search (VS) and visual-spatial working memory (WM)
with cortical potentials (ERPs) and phasic heart-rate changes. Previous
studies demonstrated that these cognitive operations were associated
with distinct heart-rate response patterns. Thirty volunteers carried out
VS or WM tasks in counterbalanced order. Each trial included two visual
displays separated by 900 ms. In the WM task, subjects held in working
memory the colors of 4 squares in the visual field signaled by a central
arrow cue(1). During VS, subjects searched the cued visual field to detect
a line crossing one of the squares. Following the second display, subjects
reported either a color change in one of the squares (WM), or a change in
line orientation (VS). Continuous EEG, horizontal EOG, and ECG were
recorded throughout the experiment. RTs and percentage of correct
responses were obtained following change and no-change trials. Percentage of correct responses did not differ across tasks. The amplitude of the
N2pc component, a neural index of VS and filtering of irrelevant stimuli,
was greater in the VS task, while the CDA, a contralateral parietal wave
reflecting WM load, was similar under both conditions. Evoked heartrate changes were significant under VS but not WM conditions. These
findings demonstrate that, though tightly coupled, VS and WM constitute distinct cognitive and neural operations. (1) Vogel & Machizawa,
2004, Nature, 428: 748-51
H118
THE INTERACTION BETWEEN STIMULUS FAMILIARITY AND
RECENCY IN PROACTIVE INTERFERENCE RESOLUTION
Ranjani Prabhakaran1,2, Sharon L. Thompson-Schill1,2; 1University of
Pennsylvania, 2Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, University of
Pennslyvania — Proactive interference (PI) refers to interference from previously encountered items in memory. Resolution of PI involves rejecting
a familiar but incorrect probe item and often results in increased reaction
times and error rates in working memory (WM) tasks. Although previous
studies have investigated the role of familiarity in terms of the short-term
recency of the probe item, the interaction between a long-term memory
manipulation in the form of stimulus familiarity and short-term recognition memory has not been investigated. The goal of this study was to
determine the effect of stimulus familiarity on PI resolution in WM. In
addition, this study aimed to tease apart the contributions made by fast
assessments of familiarity versus slower recollective processes to recognition memory performance through the manipulation of response deadline (see Oztekin & McElree, 2006). A behavioral experiment was
conducted in which subjects performed an item recognition task. Longterm stimulus familiarity was manipulated through the use of famous
and nonfamous faces as stimuli. Response deadline was manipulated as a
between-subjects variable, where half of subjects were presented with the
probe item for 500 ms and the other half of subjects were presented with
the probe item for 3000 ms. An interaction between recency and stimulus
familiarity was found only in the shorter response deadline condition
due to a larger interference effect in terms of both reaction time and false
alarm rate for the famous compared to nonfamous faces. These data
implicate a role for stimulus familiarity in the resolution of PI in WM.
H119
NEURAL SYSTEMS INVOLVED IN WORKING MEMORY FOR
SEMANTICALLY RELATED OBJECTS: AN FMRI STUDY Yakeel T.
Quiroz1, Karin Schon1, Chantal Stern1,2; 1Center for Memory and Brain, and
Center for Excellence in Learning, Education, Science, and Technology, Boston
University, Boston, 2Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown — The role of cortical structures, particularly the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), in working

Poster Session H

memory (WM) is well known. Recent reports have also indicated an
important role for the basal ganglia (BG) and medial temporal lobe (MTL)
regions in WM. In the present study, we investigated the role of the BG,
MTL, and DLPFC, in working memory for semantically related objects
vs. semantically unrelated objects. The stimuli consisted of 210 pictures of
everyday objects. Objects came from 12 semantic categories, and subjects
were pre-trained on the stimuli the day before scanning. Sixteen young,
healthy, subjects performed a Sternberg task while in a 3T Trio scanner.
There were two task conditions. The Semantic Category condition (SC)
included only items from the same category, and the Random Category
condition (RC) included only semantically unrelated items. Each trial
consisted of three sequentially presented events: encoding of 6 consecutively presented pictures (SC or RC), followed by a brief delay (maintenance), and then probe (retrieval). During retrieval, subjects indicated via
button-press whether the probe picture matched one of the pictures seen
during encoding. Results contrasted SC and RC trials. SPM analyses
revealed significant bilateral BG and right MTL activations during encoding, bilateral BG and left DLPFC activations during maintenance, and
frontal pole activation during retrieval. Our findings are consistent with
previous studies that have reported BG activity during non-spatial WM
tasks and extend previous findings by suggesting a role for this system in
the encoding and maintenance of semantically related objects. Funded by
NSFSBE-0354278.
H120
DYNAMICS OF BRAIN OSCILLATORY NETWORKS INVOLVED
IN WORKING MEMORY FROM MEG SIGNALS Sreenivasan
Rajamoni Nadar1, Fred Carver1, Tom Holroyd1, Richard Coppola1; 1MEG Core
Facility, National Institute of Mental Health, NIH, Bethesda — We characterized the functional organization of large-scale oscillatory networks
involved in prefrontal, parietal, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and other
areas involved in working memory task. Twelve subjects performed nback working memory task, while MEG recordings was sampled at
600Hz with a 275-sensor radial gradiometer system. The MEG sensor
data were mapped onto the MRI brain volume using Synthetic Aperture
Magnetometry (SAM), an adaptive beamformer technique, to look at the
variance between active states (1-back, 2 back) vs. control (0-back) and
identified statistically significant areas. Then we extracted the single-trial
time series for the brain regions that we obtained from SAM images and
computed coherence, Granger causality spectra using Bivariate Autoregressive models for all pairwise combination of the source areas. The
coherence and directed Granger matrix in theta, alpha, beta and gamma
bands were analyzed for graph theoretic measures including clustering
index and mean path length. These matrices were further analyzed to
identify the critical network nodes for each frequency, time window and
working memory conditions. Differences between memory loads (2back
vs. 0 back, 1 back vs. 0 back) were found to be more robust in the beta frequency band centered around the response time window. A distributed
set of interconnected network nodes were observed in prefrontal and
parietal regions. Many nodes in these regions exert a variety of top-down
and bottom-up causal influences in different frequency and time windows. Working memory was seen to engage a distributed network of
prefrontal, parietal and ACC regions.
H121
AGE-MEDIATED ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN REGIONAL BRAIN
ACTIVITY AND REACTION TIME COMMON TO WORKING
MEMORY ENCODING, REHEARSAL, AND RECOGNITION Brian
Rakitin1, Joseph Flynn1, Christian Habeck1, Jason Steffener1, Yunglin Gazes1,
Yaakov Stern1; 1Division of Cognitive Neuroscience, Taub Institute, Columbia
University — How do age and cognitive demands affect the brain regions
that determine working memory performance? Healthy young (n = 40;
mean age = 25.1 years) and elderly (n = 18; mean age = 74.4 years) subjects performed a delayed item recognition task for visually presented letters with three set sizes (1, 3, or 6 letters) while being scanned with BOLD
fMRI. Voxel-wise analysss within encoding (3 s), retention (7s), and

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

retrieval (3 s) task phases examined the age-mediated differences in slope
between change in BOLD signal and change in reaction time (RT), both
with respect to set size. Conjunction analysis identified voxels where the
difference-of-slopes test was significant during all three tasks phases.
This analysis identified a large set of brain regions including the insula,
DLPFC, and SMA, where higher set size-related BOLD signal predicted
higher set sized-related RT changes in the aging, but not the young participants. These results suggest the presence in all three phases of either
an inefficient representational scheme, or a counter-productive operation
-beyond the standard encoding, rehearsal and recognition processes - in
the aging participants only. In addition, a conjunction analysis of the
mean set size-related BOLD signal change without the RT covariate indicated significant results one-tenth the extent of the difference-of-slopes
analysis. These results suggest that the difference-of-slopes results are not
an artifact of the high correlation between the GLM predictors associated
with the time-locked task phases.
H122
EVIDENCE FOR VISUO-SPATIAL AND VERBAL WORKING
MEMORY IMPAIRMENT IN INDIVIDUALS WITH WILLIAMS
SYNDROME. Sinead Rhodes1, Emma Fraser1, Deborah Riby1; 1University
of Stirling, Stirling — Williams syndrome (WS) is a genetic neuro-developmental disorder caused by the microdeletion of numerous genes at site
7q11.23. Characterised by a distinct cognitive profile of peaks and valleys,
it is widely accepted that more severe impairments reside within the
visuo-spatial domain than the verbal domain. Accumulating evidence
suggests that individuals with WS show impairments in visuo-spatial
working memory (WM). The current aim was to characterise WM functioning in WS using tasks that tap both visuo-spatial and verbal components. A secondary aim was to compare functioning on tasks with and
without a central executive requirement. Twelve individuals with WS
(ranging: 12-26; mean age:21) and 12 chronologically age-matched controls participated in the study. All participants were assessed on verbal
(BPVS II) and non-verbal (Raven’s Progressive Matrices) ability tasks and
verbal and spatial WM tasks. Individuals with WS were impaired on both
executive and non-executive memory tasks. Surprisingly, individuals
with WS showed similar levels of impairment on verbal and spatial WM
tasks in comparison to matched controls. Verbal working memory abilities have not previously been assessed in WS. Our finding of impairment
on executive and non-executive verbal working memory tasks adds to
growing evidence suggesting that individuals with WS show deficits
across a range of verbal tasks. Although early research suggested ‘intact’
or even ‘superior’ verbal skills in the profile of cognitive abilities associated with WS, the current evidence suggests working memory deficits
within the verbal and visuo-spatial domain.
H123
THE TOP-DOWN INFLUENCE OF MEMORY REPRESENTATIONS
ON FACE PROCESSING Kartik K. Sreenivasan1, Deepak Sambhara1, Zev
B. Rosen1, Amishi P. Jha1; 1University of Pennsylvania, Center for Cognitive
Neuroscience — The present study investigated the top-down influence of
actively maintaining a face in memory on the perceptual processing of
faces. Previous reports have demonstrated enhanced neural activity in
perceptual brain regions to memory probes that matched items being
actively maintained in memory (e.g. Druzgal & D’Esposito, 2001). Yet,
the neural mechanisms by which match enhancement occurs are not well
understood. Here we investigated the hypothesis that match enhancement results from biased competition in favor of memory-relevant perceptual information. To test this hypothesis, we manipulated the
perceptual similarity between the probe item and the concurrently held
memory representation and observed the influence of the memory representation on the neural response to probes. Participants (n = 15) viewed a
series of faces, and responded to the presentation of a pre-learned target
face during event-related potential (ERP) recording. Non-target probe
faces varied in their similarity to the target face. The impact of memory
representations on perceptual processing was assessed by the amplitude

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

261

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

of the occipito-temporal N250 ERP component, a neural correlate of the
perceptual recognition of individual faces (Schweinberger et al., 1995).
N250 elicited by probe face presentation was strongly modulated by the
degree of similarity between the probe face and the target face; N250
amplitude was maximal to the target face and decreased as probe faces
decreased in similarity to the target face. These results suggest that perceptual features comprising memory items may bias activity in perceptual regions, and that this competition may give rise to the phenomenon
of match enhancement.
H124
PERSISTENT ACTIVITY IN THE HUMAN FRONTAL EYE FIELD
WHEN MAINTAINING SPACE THAT IS ‘OFF THE MAP’ KyeongJin Tark1, Clayton Curtis1,2; 1New York University, 2New York University,
Center for Neural Science — During the maintenance of visuospatial information in working memory, neural activity in the frontal eye field (FEF)
persists. Such signals are spatially selective, where activity is greatest in
neurons whose response fields match the retinal location of the visual
cue. Here, we used fMRI to test if human FEF activity persists when
maintaining auditory space, and further test if the activity is selective for
retinal space. We recorded binaural sounds emitted from 36 positions
around the subject from microphones placed within each subject’s ear
canals. Subjects could localize the replay of these sounds because the
recordings preserved the interaural time and level differences. Then, we
scanned subjects while they performed an audiospatial working memory
task. They maintained the location of a sample sound (S1) over a long
delay period and then indicated if it matched the location of a test sound
(S2). Half of the sounds were emitted from locations that if visible would
fall on the retina and half were from behind the subject. Independent
staircases equated the difficulty for front and back cued trials by adjusting the distance of the S1/S2 discrimination. Putative FEF activity persisted when maintaining auditory-cued space, even when locations were
behind the subject. We found this activity was greater in the hemisphere
contralateral to the side of the cue when representing retinal space as well
as extra-retinal space. Therefore, human FEF activity represents a map of
space that includes locations in which it is impossible to make a saccade.
H125
COMPUTERIZED TRAINING OF WORKING MEMORY - A
METHOD FOR COGNITIVE ENHANCEMENT IN HEALTHY
ADULTS Helena Westerberg1, David Söderman1, Yvonne Brehmer1, Nicolas
Dhondt1, Håkan Fischer1, Stuart MacDonald1, Lars Bäckman1; 1Aging
Research Center, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm — Goal: To examine the
effects of computerized training of Working Memory (WM) in normal
adults (N100). Background: WM is essential for cognitive functioning.
Age-related decline is typically observed in WM tasks but cognitive
enhancement by training of WM has not been investigated earlier. Methods: 45 participants in ages 60-70 were randomized to a treatment or a
comparison condition. To compare age differences in baseline performance and in training effects, a younger group, 20-30 years (N55) were
included and randomized cross conditions. The treatment consisted of
intense and adaptive computerized training (Cogmed QM) on WM tasks
for five weeks. The comparison condition involved training using the
same software, but the difficulty level remained constant. A cognitive test
battery including non-trained tasks assessing WM, attentional functions,
perceptual robustness, episodic memory, and reasoning were administered before and after the training period. The Cognitive Failure Questionnaire (CFQ) was used to measure memory and attention in daily
living. Results: In both age groups there was a significant difference
between pre- and post training assessment in the training group, compared to the comparison group on the non-trained tests for WM, attention and perceptual robustness (reaction time). There were also a
significantly lower number of cognitive symptoms reported. At followup three months after the intervention, most training effects were still significant between conditions. Conclusions: WM training can improve cognitive performance in healthy adults, -on neuropsychological tests and in

262

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

cognitive functioning in daily life. At follow-up three months after the
training period most training effects remained.
H126
FACE PROCESSING STRENGTH IN WILLIAMS SYNDROME
EXTENDS TO MEMORY FOR FACES Anna Yam1, Yvonne M. Searcy1,
Kiley J. Hill1, Mark Grichanik1, Ursula Bellugi1; 1The Salk Institute for
Biological Studies — Williams syndrome (WS), a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by a hemizygous microdeletion on chromosome 7q11.23, is
characterized by profound impairments in visuo-spatial abilities, but relatively spared face recognition skills. Further, individuals with WS tend
to display “hyper-social’ behavior, the hallmark of which is a preference
for, and increased attention to, human faces relative to other visual stimuli. While previous studies have assessed short- and long- term auditory
and visuo-spatial memory in WS, memory for faces has not been
explored. Participants completed the immediate and delayed (30 minutes) conditions of three subtests of the Wechsler Memory Scale - 3rd Edition, including one auditory memory (Logical Memory) and two visual
memory (Faces & Family Pictures) subtests. Performance of the WS
group was compared to that of age-, gender-, and IQ- matched individuals with developmental disorders of unspecified etiologies (DD). While in
the visual domain, results revealed no significant differences between WS
and DD groups on immediate or delayed memory for Family Pictures,
the WS group performed significantly better than the DD group on
immediate and delayed memory for Faces. These results suggest that the
relative strength in face processing in WS extends to memory for faces.
H127
AGE RELATED CHANGES IN TOP-DOWN MODULATION OF
LOW-LEVEL VISUAL PROCESSING Theodore Zanto1, Brian Toy1,
Adam Gazzaley1; 1University of California San Francisco — Top-down modulation refers to our ability to focus attention on task-relevant stimuli
while ignoring irrelevant distractions and it shares an intimate relationship with memory, as the focus of attention will restrict content to relevant information and limit interference from irrelevant stimuli. In the
current study, we assessed the influence of aging on the relationship
between top-down modulation during low-level (i.e. color or motion)
visual processing and working memory (WM), as it has been shown that
older adults exhibit slower processing speeds and deficits in WM and
attention. Subjects were between 18-35 y.o. and 60-80 y.o. Both age
groups were presented sequential, random-dot circular apertures that
contained stationary colored dots or gray dots that moved coherently in
one direction. Each trial contained two different directions of motion and
two different colors followed by a four second delay and a probe stimulus. Subjects were given four task conditions: remember the directions of
motion (ignore color), remember the colors (ignore motion), remember
both directions and colors, or passively view all stimuli. All subjects were
pre-thresholded for discrimination and performance measures revealed a
significant age-related decrease in WM for color, but an increased RT for
both color and motion. Attentional (top-down) modulation was observed
in posterior electrodes and did not differ in magnitude between the age
groups. However, older subjects displayed longer reaction times and
delayed neural responses as indexed by a shift in the selection negativity
and alpha desynchronization. The relationship between delayed neural
modulation and WM performance is being further explored.
H128
DIRECT EVIDENCE FOR BINDING IN VISUAL WORKING
MEMORY Weiwei Zhang1, Steven Luck1,2; 1Center for Mind & Brain, UC
Davis, 2UC Davis — Most visual objects in the natural environment contain feature values along multiple dimensions. Luck & Vogel (Nature,
390, 1997, 279-281) argued for integrated object-based representations in
visual working memory (VWM), and they showed that multi-feature
objects can be held in visual working memory as well as single-feature
objects. However, it is important to show that the features are actually
bound together in some direct manner. In the present study, subjects
made separate reports of the color and orientation of a previously pre-

Poster Session H

sented bar. Feature binding was assessed on the basis of a contingency
analysis of response accuracy. That is, when one feature is or is not
remembered, is the other feature remembered? We found that memory
for one feature of an object was strongly associated with memory for the
other feature of the object. Furthermore, VWM precision and capacity
were equivalent for single-feature and multiple-feature objects. These
results therefore provided direct evidence for binding in VWM. Some
constraints on VWM binding were also tested. In Experiment 2, we found
that it was possible to represent one feature of an object without representing the other feature of that object when the other feature was selectively masked. In Experiment 3, we ruled out an alternative locationbased encoding account by showing that spatially overlapping colors &
orientations that belonged to different objects were encoded into VWM
independently. Taken together, these results provided direct evidence for
automatic, flexible, and object-based feature binding in VWM.
H130
A NEW MODEL AND TREATMENT FOR POST-STROKE TACTILE
ALLODYNIA. Paul McGeoch1, Lisa Williams1, Vilayanur Ramachandran1;
1
Centre for Brain and Cognition, UCSD — Central post-stroke pain (CPSP)
follows about 5% of all strokes and is characterised by severe, unrelenting
pain throughout the contralateral half of the body, with sufferers also frequently complaining of an acute exacerbation of their pain to light touch;
tactile allodynia. Whilst there is now significant evidence to support the
thermosensory disinhibition hypothesis for the constant background
pain in these patients, tactile allodynia has until now been something of
an unexplained anomaly. We found using magnetoencephalography
(MEG) that tactile allodynia in CPSP corresponds to activation of the primary motor cortex (M1) and subsequently the anterior cingulate cortex,
which is known to be responsible for the motivational component of
pain. Moreover, we also show that stimulation of the brain’s vestibular
system can temporarily return the pattern of brain activation after light
touch to normal (predominantly primary somatosensory cortex (S1) activation), with consequent relief of the persistent tactile allodynia. We propose a model for tactile allodynia in CPSP in which the interoceptive
cortex in the dorsal posterior insula modulates activation of S1 and M1 in
response to light touch. The evolutionary drive behind such a mechanism
may have been to induce a sub-threshold activation of M1 to facilitate
rapid corrective action when a deviation from homeostatic norms occurs.
This model, not least with its suggestion of a sensory of role for M1, ties
in with the modern view of the brain as a series of interconnected systems
that serve several functions.

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

revealed that a corresponding region of inferior medial PFC was
recruited by healthy participants when determining whether imagined
stimuli had been perceived or imagined, and that reduced activity in this
region was associated with making “imagined-to-perceived” misattribution errors. These findings provide converging evidence from lesion and
neuroimaging studies suggesting that reality monitoring abilities are
associated with the inferior medial frontal lobe. An impairment in discriminating between real and imagined events might account for some
confabulations seen in neurological patients with damage to inferior
medial PFC.
H132
LONG-LASTING EFFECTS OF A VISUALLY-ENHANCED STUDY
CONDITION ON THE N400 AND P600 COMPONENTS. John
Olichney1,2, Alexander Bressler3, James Gatherwright4, Hillert5, Shaiohui
Chan1,2, Vincente Iragui5,3, Marta Kutas5,6; 1UC Davis, 2Center for Mind and
Brain, Davis, CA, 3VA San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, CA, 4School
of Med., Case Western Reserve University, Cleaveland, OH, 5UCSD, ,
6UCSD — Background: The P600 and N400 (sensitive to semantic processing) have both been linked to aspects of verbal learning or memory.
While much is known regarding the modulation of these components by
repeating stimuli within an experiment, little is known regarding the correlates of long-term learning. Thus, we designed a visually-enhanced
study condition (VESC) in which color photographs of objects (semantically congruous or incongruous) were studied for 3.5 hours over 7 days
preceding the Event-related potential (ERP) session. Methods: Ten normal young adults were studied with 32 channel ERP. 50% of the stimuli
were semantically congruous vs. incongruous. Both studied and unstudied stimuli had a 67% probability of repeating (10-140 seconds later).
Results: Prior visual study resulted in a large decrease of P600 amplitude
for the initial presentation of congruous words. The amplitude of this
decrement correlated with subsequent recall and recognition (r’s=.65.68). For incongruous words, smaller N400 and P600s were elicited by
studied items. For unstudied new words, but not for initial presentations
of studied words, larger N400s were elicited by incongruous than congruous words. Free recall was strongly correlated with the P600 word
repetition effect amplitude (r =.84). Cued recall and recognition were
strongly correlated with the N400 repetition effect amplitude (r’s =.86.91;p’s<0.001). Conclusions: Prior study of color photographs had large
effects on ERPs obtained >12 hours later. Both the N400 and P600 showed
sensitivity to the VESC. These data suggest that the VESC fostered memory “binding” and long-lasting semantic associations, even for incongruous material usually difficult to learn.

Memory: Memory disorders
H131
CONFABULATION, REALITY MONITORING AND THE INFERIOR
MEDIAL PFC: CONVERGING EVIDENCE FROM LESION AND
FUNCTIONAL IMAGING STUDIES. Martha Turner1, Paul Burgess1,
Lisa Cipolotti2, Chris Frith3, Sam Gilbert1, Tim Shallice1, Jon Simons4;
1
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, UCL, London, 2National Hospital for
Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, 3Wellcome Trust Centre for
Neuroimaging, Institute of Neurology, UCL, London, 4University of
Cambridge — Confabulation, the pathological production of false memories, occurs following a variety of etiologies involving the frontal lobes.
However the critical frontal regions and specific cognitive deficits
involved remain unclear. This poster reports three studies investigating
the association between confabulation, reality monitoring abilities, and
the inferior medial PFC. In the first, an investigation of the localization of
confabulation in an unselected series of 38 patients with frontal lesions
revealed an association with inferior medial lesions. In the second, an
investigation of reality monitoring abilities in four spontaneously confabulating patients with damage to inferior medial PFC revealed a tendency
to misidentify imagined events as real. In the third, an fMRI study

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

263

Tuesday, April 15, 8:00 - 10:00 am

264

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session H

Poster Session I
Attentional processes: Auditory
I1
EFFECTS OF TASK PERFORMANCE ON THE AUDITORY
BRAINSTEM RESPONSE TO SPEECH Karen Banai1, Nina Kraus1;
1Northwestern University — Auditory processing in the human brainstem is
influenced by non sensory factors such as music and language expertise.
Whether it is also influenced online by auditory selective attention has
been subject to much controversy and the prevailing view is that while
auditory selective attention influences early cortical responses, it does not
influence sub-cortical auditory processing. Here we used a dichotic listening oddball procedure to determine whether the scalp recorded auditory
brainstem response to a speech syllable (speech-ABR) is affected by selective attention or active task performance. Speech-ABRs were recorded
from 12 young adults in two conditions: an active listening condition in
which listeners were asked to attend speech syllables presented to one ear
and detect occasional targets differing in fundamental frequency while
ignoring the same syllables presented to the other ear, and a passive listening condition in which the same stimuli were presented but listeners were
not required to perform any task and could watch a silent movie. Active
task performance resulted in a small but significant reduction in the amplitude of the brainstem response to both actively-attended and activelyignored standard sounds relative to passive listening, but not in a specific
effect of attention. These data suggest that actively engaging in an auditory
discrimination task can modulate sub-cortical processing of speech sounds
in a task relevant manner; however, this modulation can not be attributed
to selective attention because the effects of task performance are similar
across the attended and ignored auditory channels.
I2
GENETIC INFLUENCES ON SELECTIVE AUDITORY ATTENTION
AS INDEXED BY ERPS Theodore Bell1, Laura Batterink1, Jeff Currin1, Eric
Pakulak1, Courtney Stevens1,2, Helen Neville1; 1University of Oregon, 2Sarah
Lawrence College — Recent electrophysiological work on selective attention
has demonstrated that young children (3-5 years old) can selectively
attend to one auditory stream while ignoring another (Sanders, Stevens,
Coch, & Neville, 2005). The current work examines how selective attention
indexed by event-related potentials (ERPs) may be influenced by genotype
for a small set of genes implicated in cognition and attention. In a dichotic
listening task designed for children, two stories were played simultaneously from speakers to the left and right of the listener. Children were
cued to attend only one of the two stories and ERPs were recorded and
compared for probe stimuli embedded in the attended versus unattended
stories. We examined whether the ERP attentional modulation varied as a
function of genotype. DNA was collected using buccal swabs and genotyped for the following genes: COMT, DAT1, DBH, DRD2, MAOA, and
CHRNA4. The magnitude of the ERP attention effect varied significantly
as a function of allelic variation in CHRNA4 and DAT1.
I3
SPECTRAL ANALYSES OF THE TOP-DOWN CONTROL OF
ATTENTION TO LINGUISTIC AND MUSICAL INFORMATION
USING MEG Corby Dale1, Gregory Simpson1, Tracy Luks1, Anthony
Kaveh1,2, Darren Weber1,3, Robert Zatorre4; 1University of California San
Francisco, 2University of California, Berkeley, 3Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research
Institute, 4Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University — Functional
imaging studies demonstrate involvement of frontal, parietal and auditory
association cortices in processing linguistic and musical pattern information. Some studies also find hemispheric asymmetries whereby language

is predominately processed in the left hemisphere and tonal patterns in the
right. Less is known about the dynamics and patterns of activity between
cortical regions, and how selective attention modulates this activity. We
recorded magnetoencephalographic (MEG) signals from 12 right-handed
volunteers performing a discrimination task requiring processing of linguistic information, simultaneous suppression of tonal pattern information, and vice versa. The two conditions used identical physical stimuli,
differing only in instruction for which information to attend (tonal or linguistic). Subjects were visually instructed to task condition at the start of
each block, after which they heard a series of compound stimuli containing
one of two types of tonal pattern and either a word or non-word. Images of
cortical currents were derived using cortically-constrained minimumnorm methods (BrainStorm) specific to the anatomy of each subject (Freesurfer) for an epoch of -500 to +600 ms. Dynamic maps of Event-related
activity, spectral power and synchrony between brain areas were obtained
for regions of interest (ROIs) in frontal, parietal and temporal cortex,
defined by Talairach coordinates derived from task-relevant imaging
(fMRI/PET) studies. Results reveal synchrony between frontal and temporal ROIs that reflects the interaction between top-down control of attention
and auditory processing. Spectral analysis of attention to linguistic versus
tonal pattern information indicates left-right hemisphere differences in
dynamic interactions between cortical regions in different frequency
bands.
I4
EARLY GATING OF AUDITORY NOVELTY PROCESSING BY
EMOTIONAL CONTEXT IN SUPERIOR TEMPORAL GYRUS Judith
Domínguez-Borràs1, Manuel Garcia-Garcia1, Sina Alexa Trautmann2,3, Peter
Erhard3,4, Thorsten Fehr2,3, Manfred Herrmann2,3, Carles Escera1,5; 1Cognitive
Neuroscience Research Group, University of Barcelona, Spain, 2Institute for
Cognitive Neuroscience, Bremen University, Germany, 3Center for Advanced
Imaging, Bremen University, Germany, 4Bremen University, Germany, 5HanseWissenschaftskolleg, Delmenhorst, Germany — We conducted two experiments, using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and eventrelated brain potentials (ERPs), respectively, to asses the neural correlates,
timing and modulatory effects of a negative emotional context on the processing of task-irrelevant novel sounds. In Study I, seventeen healthy volunteers responded to a visual color discrimination task, with images of
emotional facial expressions (angry, fearful or neutral), while recorded in a
3Tesla scanner. In Study II, fourteen healthy volunteers responded to a
visual discrimination task, with either neutral or threatening sceneries,
while a 64-channel electroencephalogram (EEG) was recorded. In both
studies, single auditory stimuli, consisting of either standard tones (700Hz,
p=0.8) or unique environmental novel sounds (p=0.2), preceded the
images in 300 ms and had to be ignored by the subjects. Novel sounds elicited a distractor effect on subjects’ performance, reflected by longer
response times (Study I: F(1,16)=35.93, p<0.001; Study II: F(1,13)=11.61,
p<0.01). This effect was enhanced when preceding and following images
were negative (Study I: F(1,16)=5.3, p=0.035; Study II: F(1,13)=6.4,
p=0.025). In study I, bilateral superior temporal gyri, areas known to be
involved in auditory novelty processing, were more activated in negative
context (p<0.001, k=20). Accordingly, in study II, early novelty-P3
responses to novel sounds were enhanced in negative context
(F(1,13)=9.52, p=0.009). Our data show that the emotional context
enhances excitability of auditory novelty cerebral regions at early stages of
the orientation response, making irrelevant sounds become more available
in the attentional set under threatening conditions.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

265

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

I5
REORIENTING NEGATIVITY: AN ERP CORRELATE OF OBJECTFILE UPDATING? János Horváth1, Urte Roeber1, Alexandra Bendixen1,
Erich Schröger1; 1Institute of Psychology I, University of Leipzig, Leipzig — Distraction triggered by unexpected stimuli is often investigated in oddball
paradigms. Distraction-related processes initiated by infrequent, unexpected stimuli (deviants) presented amongst regular stimuli (standards)
are reflected by a number of event-related potential (ERP) components.
Deviants usually elicit an N1-increment, a modality-specific mismatch
negativity (MMN), and a P3a. If participants have to perform a task based
on a feature unrelated to the deviant feature on every trial (including
deviant trials), deviants elicit an additional late frontal negativity termed
Reorienting Negativity (RON), which is thought to reflect recovery from
distraction. In the present study we investigated the necessary conditions
for the elicitation of RON, using a pitch discrimination task. In Condition
1, standards were high or low tones (45-45%), and deviants were
extremely high or extremely low tones(5-5%). In Condition 2, both standards and deviants were extremely high- or extremely low-pitched tones,
but deviants differed from standards in their spectral width. In Condition
3, standards were high or low tones; deviants were extremely high or low
and their spectral width differed from that of standards. Whereas deviants elicited an N1-increment/MMN and P3a in all conditions, RON was
only elicited in Condition 2, suggesting that RON is elicited only if the
task-relevant feature-level in the deviants is the same as in standards. A
new hypothesis on the functional significance of RON is suggested: RON
might reflect the update of an object-file, and not the restoration of the
task-optimal attention set.
I6
SELECTIVE ATTENTION TO ONE OF TWO COMPETING
AUDITORY RHYTHMS MODULATES PHASE OF BRAIN
RESPONSES TO THE ATTENDED RHYTHM John
Iversen1,
Aniruddh Patel1, Yanqing Chen1, Joseph Gally1, Gerald Edelman1; 1The
Neurosciences Institute — When listening to multiple competing sounds,
what brain mechanisms might enable us to attend to one sound while
resisting the influence of other sounds? We addressed this question by
measuring brain responses while participants tapped along with one of
two simultaneously presented metronomes. An underlying question is
whether selective attention is mediated by the amount of stimulusrelated brain activity or by the temporal pattern of this activity. Participants (n=14) were presented with two stimuli, dichotically. Stimuli were
a sinusoidal carrier (800 or 400Hz) with an isochronous rhythm
impressed by transiently increasing the amplitude, with an inter-onset
interval of 801 or 751 ms, respectively. During twenty 60 second trials,
participants were instructed to tap in synchrony with one of the stimuli
(target) while ignoring the other (distractor). To enable the independent
measurement of brain responses to the two stimuli, each was sinusoidally
amplitude modulated at a different frequency (typically 38 and 42Hz).
Auditory cortex steady state responses (aSSRs) were measured using
magnetoencephalography (MEG), and compared between target and distractor trials for each stimulus. Tap timing data were simultaneously collected. The phase of the aSSR was consistently slightly delayed by
attention (mean delay across participants ~5 degrees, p<0.023). In contrast, neither power nor partial coherence were affected by attention, suggesting that only the timing of brain responses is modulated by attention
in this task. Results from a new diotic version of this task will be compared to the current findings. Supported by Neurosciences Research
Foundation.
I7
HEART RATE VARIABILITY AND THE AUDITORY EVENT
RELATED BRAIN POTENTIAL Gregory Kellett1, Erin Ramage1, Mark
Geisler1; 1San Francisco State University — The autonomic nervous system
(ANS) often responds to cognitive events via physiological activity. Likewise, acute ANS activity has been shown to affect cognitive functioning
both hormonally and neurally. This study investigates the possible co-

266

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

variation of chronic ANS activity, or tone, with the cognitive indicator of
neuronal resource allocation and processing speed as indexed by auditory event-related potentials (ERPs). Participants included 30 healthy
men and women equally represented and between the ages of 18 and 35.
Heart Rate Variability (HRV), measured by the standard deviation of
inter-beat intervals and correlated with sympathetic and parasympathetic ANS activity, was established via ten minute heart rate readings
taken from wrist electrodes. High HRV is associated with healthy cardiovascular activity while low HRV is associated with poor cardiovascular
activity. ERPs were then recorded from multiple electrode sites using a 16
channel electrode cap representing a full distribution of the scalp in
response to an auditory oddball paradigm. Possible correlations between
the ERP’s and the standard deviation of HRV within each participant was
investigated. Preliminary results show a lack of significant correlations
between the heart rate variability and the amplitude and latency of the P3
component of the ERPs. These results are consistent with previous
research which has also shown a lack of co-variation between similar
indicators of ANS tone and ERPs.
I8
MEANINGFUL
AUDITORY
CONTEXT
AFFECTS
PREATTENTIVE AUDITORY DEVIANCE DETECTION Ursula Kirmse1,
Erich Schröger1, Thomas Jacobsen1; 1Institute for Psychology I, University of
Leipzig — Auditory deviance detection is reflected by the pre-attentively
elicited Mismatch Negativity (MMN), a negative ERP component
observed for a deviant in a sequence of standard sounds. Recent studies
found an enhanced MMN in a sequence of familiar in contrast to unfamiliar standard sounds, and concluded an enhanced MMN in a familiar context, which might lead to more elaborate processing of the auditory input.
However, the effect here might originate from a generally different quality of sound representation for familiar sounds as documented in other
studies. A genuine effect of context familiarity, in contrast, could be
stated when auditory context familiarity is varied outside the standarddeviant sequence. In the present study, a frequency oddball protocol
(standard 550 Hz, deviant 500 Hz) was presented simultaneously with
continuous speech that was either presented forwards (= familiar, meaningful context) or backwards (= unfamiliar, non-meaningful context).
Participants either ignored both streams or detected target words in
either text. Results showed that the additional secondary text stream generally diminished the MMN to the frequency deviants compared to a nocontext control condition. However, larger MMN responses to the frequency deviants were observed in the familiar context, reflecting a genuine effect of context familiarity on the MMN. The data did not support
the notion that this effect might have been due to increased attention to
the familiar text stream. Additionally, behavioral and ERP data indicated
that even active target word detection was easier in the familiar context.
I9
A QUESTION OF RELEVANCE: IS SUCCESSFUL COGNITIVE
AGING
ASSOCIATED
WITH
PRESERVED
INHIBITORY
CAPACITY AND ORIENTING ABILITY? Scott M. McGinnis1,2, Jenna
L. Riis1,2, David A. Wolk3, Hyemi Chong4, Dorene M. Rentz1,2, Phillip R.
Holcomb5, Kirk R. Daffner1,2; 1Harvard Medical School, 2Brigham and
Women's Hospital, 3University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 4University of
Texas Southwestern Medical School, 5Tufts University — Research has suggested an age-related decrease in the capacity to inhibit the processing of
task-irrelevant stimuli, which some investigators have argued plays a
major role in cognitive aging. Work in our lab has indicated that cognitively high-performing old adults pay more attention to novel aspects of
their visual environment than cognitively average-performing old adults.
Here, we examined the impact of age and cognitive functioning (defined
by performance on neuropsychological measures) on the amplitude of
the N1 to repetitive auditory standard stimuli and the P3a to highly
unusual novel auditory stimuli presented in a task-irrelevant sensory
channel. Young adults, cognitively high-performing old adults, and cognitively average-performing old adults carried out a visual n-back task,

Poster Session I

during which they were exposed to frequent standard tones, rare tones,
and infrequent novel sounds. The N1 amplitude to standard tones was
larger in old than young adults. There was no difference in N1 amplitude
between high and average-performing old adults. In contrast, high-performing old adults generated a P3a to novel sounds that was larger than
average-performing old adults, and comparable to young adults. These
results suggest that: (1) old adults are less able than young adults to suppress the processing of task-irrelevant auditory standards, 2) this reduction in inhibitory capacity does not appear to be a major factor that
distinguishes cognitively high from cognitively average-performing old
adults, and (3) compared to average-performing old adults, high-performing old adults may have more resources available to process potentially significant novel stimuli presented in a task-irrelevant channel.
I10
THE EFFECTS OF A VIDEO SOUNDTRACK ON THE
PROCESSING OF IRRELEVANT ACOUSTIC CHANGES: A
MISMATCH NEGATIVITY STUDY Patricia
Moreau1,2,
Isabelle
Peretz1,2, Pierre Jolicoeur1,2, Nathalie Gosselin1,2; 1BRAMS (Brain, Music, and
Sound), Montreal, 2CERNEC (Centre de recherche en neuropsychologie et
cognition), Université de Montréal, Montreal — The mismatch negativity
(MMN) is typically elicited by measuring the difference in the eventrelated potential (ERP) to frequently repeated auditory stimuli from the
ERP to rare deviant auditory stimuli. Often these stimuli are presented in
non-attentive conditions while subjects are being distracted by a variety
of tasks and are instructed to ignore the auditory stimulation. MMN has
been argued to be attention independent; however it is not yet clear if the
type of task used to distract the subject from the auditory stimulation can
influence MMN recording. In this study, we examined the effects of presenting a movie with the audio soundtrack on the mismatch negativity
(MMN). In three experiments we measured the MMN to tones that differed in pitch from a repeated standard tone presented in silence, with a
concurrent soundtrack played either forward or backward, or with
soundtracks set at different intensities (producing different signal-tonoise ratios of the MMN-critical tones relative to the soundtrack). In each
experiment we measured a reliable MMN despite the concurrent
soundtrack; however the amplitude of the MMN was reduced when the
soundtrack was presented compared to silence. Generally, MMN amplitude increased proportionally to the increments in the signal-to-noise
intensity ratio. These results likely reflect an acoustical interference effect
of the audio soundtrack with MMN-critical tones rather than to an auditory attentionnal effect.
I11
TEMPORALLY SELECTIVE ATTENTION DIRECTED BY EXPLICIT
INSTRUCTION AND PRECEDING RHYTHMS Nicolas Planet1, Lisa
D. Sanders1; 1University of Massachusetts, Amherst — Previous
studies
have shown that directing attention to specific time points modulates
early auditory evoked potentials. However, temporal judgments are
much more precise when participants are provided a rhythmic structure
rather than a single marker of interval onset. The current study was
designed to compare the effectiveness of rhythmic and single onset cues
at directing temporally selective attention and to assess any interactions
between cues. In instruction blocks, participants were asked to attend to a
time 500 or 800 ms after the onset of a visual cue and to press a button if
the deviant sound (20%) was heard at the attended time only. In rhythm
blocks, listeners were instructed to attend to the next beat in a structure
provided by flashing the visual cue five times with onset asynchronies of
500 or 800 ms. In interaction blocks, participants were instructed to
attend to a time 500 or 800 ms after the last visual flash regardless of
rhythmic structure. Visual onsets were consistent with the attended time,
consistent with the unattended time, or had no rhythmic structure. Standard sounds presented 500 ms after fixation onset elicited a larger negativity in the N1 and P2 time range when temporally selective attention
was directed to that time by instruction or rhythm, indicating that both
are effective cues. Further, listeners were able to ignore the preceding

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

visual rhythms when instructed to attend to a specific time as evidenced
by similar auditory attention effects across the interaction blocks.
I12
ATTENTION ENHANCES MEG RECORDED GAMMA-BAND
AUDITORY STEADY-STATE RESPONSE Bernhard Ross1,2, Steven
Hillyard3, Terence Picton1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Centre, Toronto,
2
University of Toronto, ON, 3University of California, San Diego — Gammaband oscillations (>30Hz) have been associated with perceptual binding
of stimulus features into an object. Selective attention is strongly connected to binding when focusing on target features while ignoring irrelevant information. We investigated the effect of attention on 40-Hz
auditory steady-state responses (ASSR) as a model of gamma-band oscillations. Human magnetoencephalography was recorded while young
adults listened to monaural sequences of 500-Hz tones with 40-Hz amplitude modulation (AM). In attended condition subjects responded with
right-hand button press to 10% of the stimuli with 30-Hz modulation. In
non-attended condition, only the 40-Hz AM tones were presented for 5
min while the subjects watched a series of photographs (one per 3 s) and
counted four categories of visual objects. Eight blocks of each attended
and non-attended conditions were recorded using left and right monaural stimulation respectively. The ASSR assessed by sources in bilateral
auditory cortices were significantly larger in attended condition compared to non-attended condition, while the effect was more expressed in
the contra-lateral hemisphere and to left ear stimulation. As even stronger effect of attention the sustained response were strongly enhanced.
However, attentional enhancement of transient gamma-band response
were small (40-80 Hz) or even not detectable (24-28 Hz). The results confirm that steady-state gamma-band oscillation is functionally dissociated
from transient components. Modulation of sustained rather than transient responses was interpreted as indicating involvement of top-down
attentional control.
I13
SUBJECTIVE RHYTHMISATION AS A PARADIGM FOR AN EEGDRIVEN BCI Rebecca Schaefer1, Rutger Vlek1, Peter Desain1; 1Radboud
University Nijmegen, Nijmegen Institute for Cognition and Information — In
the so-called clock illusion, isochronous stimulus trains are subjectively
grouped into a binary percept (tick-tick-tick-tick becomes tick-tock-ticktock). This subjective accenting, comparable to serial selective attention,
has previously been shown to be visible in the EEG-signal [cf. Psychological Science, 14 (2003), 362; Cognitive Brain Research, 24 (2005), 117]. To
use this manifestation to drive a Brain-Computer Interface (BCI), we
measured EEG after instructing participants to imagine different groupings superimposed on an isochronous train of stimuli, thus producing
accented and non-accented beats in identical metronome ticks. Binary,
ternary and quaternary metric patterns were investigated, including both
a perception part with real accents and an imagery part with subjective
accents. Testing contrasting hypotheses, namely structural isomorphism
on one end and gestalt perception on the other would reveal unseen patterns that are useful in single trial classification of separate events. Analyses in both the ERP and time-frequency domain reveal substantial
differences over participants that indicate a high level of individuality in
the brain response to this serial selective attention task, but significant
within-subject patterns. As realization of a BCI system only requires
robust within-subject consistency, the results appear promising. Next
steps will focus on detecting periodicity and single-trial classification of
single beats.
I14
NEURAL UNDERPINNINGS OF AUDITORY ATTENTIONAL
BLINK Dawei Shen1, Claude Alain1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute, Bacrest
Centre, 2University of Toronto, Ontario — The attentional blink (AB) is a
phenomenon where the correct identification of the first target (target)
causes a processing deficit of the second target (probe) when the two targets are to be presented among a rapid speed visual presentation. The AB
can last several hundred milliseconds and provides important informa-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

267

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

tion about the deployment of attention overtime. Recently, behavioral
studies (e.g., Shen & Mondor, 2006) have revealed the magnitude of the
auditory AB is affected by the stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) between
two successive items within a sequence. In the present study we investigated the processing stage at which the auditory AB occurs by measuring
scalp recorded auditory evoked potentials. On each trial, participants
were required to detect predefined target and probe sounds presented in
a rapid series of distractor sounds with short (90 ms), intermediate (120
ms), and long SOA (150 ms). The results showed a large AB when the
SOA was short (i.e., 90 ms), and it decreased with increasing the SOA.
This SOA-related decrease in the auditory AB was paralleled by an
increase in P3b amplitude at electrode Pz. The latency of the P3b elicited
by the probe following the target was delayed relative to the P3b elicited
by probe alone. Regardless of the SOA, the probe elicited N1 and P2
waves at electrode C3, indicating that the probe was perceived in auditory cortex during the AB. These results suggest that the auditory AB
reflects a limitation of short-term consolidation.
I15
MODULATION
OF
LATERALIZATION
OF
AUDITORY
CORTICAL RESPONSES BY SPATIAL ATTENTION Nathan
Weisz1, Bertrand Olivier1; 1INSERM U821, Lyon, France — Several studies
show a stronger left-hemispheric modulation of neuronal activity by
selective attention. However these works have not looked at spatial attention. Here we monaurally presented a cue sound before onset of a compound sound. The second sound included a target modulation frequency
(42 Hz) on one ear and a distractor (19 Hz) on the opposite side. Participants indicated on which ear they perceived the target. The cue was
informative (75%) of target location in one condition and uninformative
(50%) in the other. During the task we measured neuronal activity from
275 gradiometers projected onto a source montage. Our analysis focussed
on alpha band changes, as well as target evoked steady-state responses
(SSR). Behavioral responses were more accurate and faster when cue and
target side were congruent or less accurate when incongruent only in the
informative condition. Target related alpha desynchronization showed a
lateralization only when the preceding cue was informative, which was
largely driven by right-hemispheric modulations. For the SSR a conditions differences were only observed when the cue was presented to the
left ear. This stems mainly from a predominant right-lateralized SSR
when the preceding cue was uninformative. Our study is the first to show
that auditory SSRs and alpha desynchronization can be modulated in a
top-down manner. We hypothesize that our data reflect a "default" (bottom-up) processing advantage for stimuli presented to the left, that has to
be actively suppressed for stimuli presented to the right.
I16
STIMULUS
AND
ATTENTION
EFFECTS
ON
SOUND
ACTIVATIONS IN HUMAN AUDITORY CORTEX David
L.
Woods1,2,3, G. Christopher Stecker4, Teemu Rinne5, Anthony Cate1, Isaac Liao3,
Timothy Herron1, Xiaojian Kang1, E. William Yund1; 1Hcnlab, Vanchcs,
Martinez, CA, 2UC Davis, 3Center for Mind and Brain, UC Davis, 4University
of Washington, Seattle, 5University of Helsinki, Helsinki , Finland — Previous fMRI studies have shown that activations of auditory cortex vary
with the frequency, intensity, and location of sounds and with attention.
We present a group analysis of auditory cortical activations in nine subjects who participated in a factorial experiment that varied these factors
conjointly. Each subject was scanned on six separate sessions, three with
sparse (TR=11.6s) and three with continuous (TR=2.9s) sampling. Activations were analyzed using cortical-surface mapping tools. Subjects
attended to visual or auditory stimuli in separate blocks and performed a
difficult one-back matching task in the attended modality. Unimodal
stimulus sequences were included to isolate auditory stimulus-dependent activations (SDAs) by subtracting activations in visual-attention
blocks without auditory stimuli from those in visual-attention blocks
with concurrent sounds. Auditory SDAs were restricted to Heschl’s
gyrus (HG) and the adjacent superior temporal gyrus (STG) and were

268

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

larger during sparse than continuous sampling. Low-frequency tones
(~225 Hz) produced more extensive SDAs than loudness-matched highfrequency tones (~3600 Hz), particularly in mid-HG. Contralateral presentations enhanced SDAs throughout HG/STG, whereas increasing
intensity (70 to 90 dB SPL) enhanced SDAs in medial HG. Attentionrelated modulations (ARMs) were isolated by subtracting activations in
bimodal attend-visual blocks from those in bimodal attend-auditory
blocks. ARMs were largest in lateral STG with little enhancement seen in
medial HG. Additional analyses revealed further dissociations between
ARMs and SDAs. For example, ARMs to monaural tones were enhanced
in auditory cortex ipsilateral to stimulation. Auditory attention does not
simply amplify auditory sensory responses but dynamically modulates
processing in higher-order auditory cortical fields.
I17
THE TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF LISTENING TO VERSUS
HEARING WORDS: ATTENTION MODULATES BOTH EARLY
STIMULUS ENCODING AND PREPARATORY ACTIVITY Yuliya
Yoncheva1, Urs Maurer1,2, Zeeba Daruwalla1, Jason Zevin1, Bruce
McCandliss1; 1Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill
Medical College of Cornell University, New York, 2University of Zurich,
Switzerland — Top-down attention to linguistic information modulates
BOLD responses in a network including inferior frontal, temporal, and
fusiform regions. The current study employs electroencephalography to
investigate the temporal dynamics when attending to language, specifically to disentangle early influences on stimulus encoding from later
decision-making processes and to assess differential preparatory activity.
To isolate the impact of top-down attention we present pairs of chimeric
stimuli – tone triplets embedded in auditory words – and contrast ERP
responses during two tasks: linguistic (rhyme judgment) versus other
auditory (tone-triplet matching) performed on the same stimuli. As
revealed by a Topographic Analysis of Variance, linguistic focus drove
divergence in the response to the first auditory stimulus, evident as early
as ~100 msec after stimulus onset and spanning the whole 550-msec stimulus duration. Similar modulation of early stimulus encoding, encompassing the typical N1/P2/N2 auditory responses, was also present for
the second stimulus. The anticipation period between the first and second stimuli was dominated, in both tasks, by strong contingent negative
variation (CNV) that showed a significant shift in topography by task
focus. This robust attentional effect manifested along the anterior-posterior axis suggesting differential contributions of frontal and posterior
sources based on the need for maintenance of linguistic versus non-linguistic attentional set. The present findings suggest that attention to the
linguistic aspects of complex auditory signals influences both on-line
stimulus encoding operations as well as functions involved in maintaining relevant information for future comparisons. This work may inform
the contributions and interactions of attentional mechanisms active during language processing.
I18
ATTENTION EFFECTS OF THE AUDITORY STEADY-STATE
RESPONSE IN THE EEG EVOKED BY ARTIFICIAL AND NATURAL
SOUNDS Katja Saupe1, Andreas Widmann1, Alexandra Bendixen1,
Matthias Müller1, Erich Schröger1; 1Institute of Psychology I, University of
Leipzig, Germany — Isochronous modulations in a sound elicit the Auditory steady-state response (ASSR) in the EEG and MEG, with an optimal
modulation frequency of 40-Hz. Examinations of the effect of attention on
the Auditory steady-state responses have proven inconsistent. The
present study investigates whether the ASSR is enhanced with attention
(as is the case for steady-state visual evoked potentials), but in contrast to
further studies, not only when evoked by artificial but also by more natural sounds. 500-Hz tones and natural noise sounds with a 40-Hz amplitude modulation served as stimuli. In the attend condition, a modulation
discrimination task was performed (infrequent targets were 30-Hz modulated sounds). In the un-attend condition, the subjects performed a visual
discrimination task (detect occasional tiny changes in a fixation cross).

Poster Session I

We found a 40-Hz ASSR not only for artificial but also for complex noise
sounds. An attentional modulation of the ASSR was however only
obtained for artificial sounds. These results illustrate, once more, the
inconsistency in finding attention effects on the auditory ASSR, yet at the
same time show, that such modulations are possible. Thus, ASSR may
provide a useful tool for the investigation of auditory attention in the
future.

Attentional processes: Other
I19
ATTENTION TO HIERARCHICAL LEVELS AFFECTS CORTICAL
PROCESSING ACROSS MODALITY AND DIMENSION Lori
B.
Astheimer1, Ahren Fitzroy1, Lisa D. Sanders1, Matthew C. Davidson1;
1University of Massachusetts, Amherst — Several lines of evidence indicate
there is cortical specialization for processing hierarchical stimuli such
that local information is preferentially processed in the left hemisphere
and global information in the right hemisphere. However, it is not clear if
lateralization of local and global processing is limited to visual spatial
information or is a general organizational principle of the brain. Previous
behavioral and ERP studies suggest attention can be directed to distinct
hierarchical levels (defined by frequency or time) of auditory stimuli, but
have not definitively shown if doing so leads to lateralization of processing. To index lateralization of local and global processing across stimulus
modality (visual/auditory) and hierarchical dimension (space/time),
fMRI data were collected while participants observed three types of hierarchical displays: 1) static visual images of ten small arrows combined to
form a large arrow, 2) 40 ms frequency modulated sounds combined into
500 ms series that increased or decreased in pitch, and 3) a light that
moved on the vertical midline such that the overall motion was made up
of shorter paths. In separate blocks, participants were instructed to attend
to the local or global features and to report the direction (up or down) at
that level of the hierarchical display. An additional baseline condition
required participants to press a button as quickly as possible in response
to any stimulus. Analyses of BOLD signals revealed differential brain
activation according to attention condition, stimulus modality, and hierarchical dimension in areas associated with sensory processing and attentional control.
I20
FUNCTIONAL BRAIN ACTIVATION IN YOUNG ADULTS WITH
ADHD: A RESTRICTED RANGE OF DYNAMIC RESPONSE? Marie
T. Banich1,2,3, Gregory C. Burgess1, Brendan Depue1, Blaine Ames1, Luka
Ruzic1, Erik Willcutt1; 1University of Colorado at Boulder, 2Institute of
Cognitive Science, University of Colorado at Boulder, 3University of Colorado at
Denver — Relatively little is known about patterns of brain activation in
adults with ADHD during performance of attentionally-demanding
tasks. In this study we compared brain activation in 23 young adults with
ADHD, who were carefully screened to not have co-morbid psychiatric
disorders, and 23 age matched controls. All participants performed a
hybrid blocked/event-related version of the Stroop task composed of
neutral (e.g., “sum” in red ink), congruent (e.g., “red” in red ink) and
incongruent (e.g., “blue” in red ink) blocks of trials. Within each block,
half the trials were block specific (e.g. incongruent words) and half were
a set of neutral trials that occurred across all blocks. In addition, blocks of
fixation trials served as a low-level baseline. In the comparison of each
block type with the fixation baseline, ADHD individuals exhibited less
activity in prefrontal regions associated with attentional control. They
appear to have difficulty tonically directing attention towards ink color
identification and away from word reading. With regards to eventrelated comparisons of incongruent trials to neutral trials within the
incongruent block, ADHD individuals exhibited less activation in caudal
regions of the anterior cingulate cortex. These results suggest that brain
systems involved in attentional control act atypically in adults with

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

ADHD both with regards to tonic top-down regulation of attentional
resources and with phasic aspects of attentional control. Their inability to
recruit attentional areas to meet both tonic and phasic aspects of attentional control seems to occur as a result of a restricted dynamic range of
response.
I21
PREPARATORY MEG ACTIVITIES DURING CUED SPATIAL
ATTENTION TO AUDITORY OR VISUAL STIMULI Olivier
Bertrand1, Nathan Weisz1, Nelly Mainy1, Claude Delpuech1,2, Françoise
Bauchet2, Jean-Philippe Lachaux1; 1INSERM U821, University Lyon 1, France,
2CERMEP, Lyon, France — Neuroimaging studies have demonstrated
that sensory processing can be strongly affected by attention, acting
either on preparatory endogeneous processes or directly on the processing of the actual incoming stimulus. Our goal was to characterize MEG
correlates of endogenous spatial attention for audition and vision. We
examined activity following attention-directing cues, symbolically
instructing subjects to attend to one modality (auditory or visual) and to
one hemifield, and to perform a simple reaction time task after stimulus
presentation. A 1s-duration central visual cue indicated whether the subsequent stimulus would be auditory or visual, and left or right sided. The
cue diminished reaction times to both visual and auditory stimuli in the
valid trials (80% of the trials). Those facilitation effects were observed for
modality and lateralization, indicating an effective attentional manipulation. Transient, sustained and oscillatory MEG activities (275-channel
VSM-CTF) were analyzed during cue presentation and delay period prior
to the imperative stimulus. The transient responses to cue onset showed a
predominance controlateral to the cued side. During cue processing and
the delay period, an alpha desynchronisation over parieto-occipital cortices was observed controlaterally to the cued side. At the end of the delay
period, the sustain responses over the temporal cortices were increased
when attention is cued to the auditory modality. This study allowed to
disentangle the timing and the respective contribution of overlapping
networks during the preparatory period, either involving general attention and motor preparation processes, or implicating perceptual-related
areas, later involved in the processing of the attended stimulus.
I22
NORMAL AGING AND FEATURE BINDING: IMPLICATIONS FOR
CHOLINERGIC CONTRIBUTIONS TO ATTENTION Leigh
C.P.
Botly1, Matthew L. Dixon1, Eve De Rosa1,2; 1University of Toronto, St. George,
2Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Center for Geriatric Care — The
binding problem refers to the fundamental challenge of the central nervous
system to integrate sensory information to form a unified percept. It is
commonly accepted that feature-conjunction (FC) stimuli require feature
binding and are attention-dependent, while feature-singleton (FS) stimuli
only require the processing of single features and are much less attentiondependent. We previously demonstrated a critical role for the neuromodulator acetylcholine (ACh) in feature binding in rats, and proposed that
ACh facilitates this cognitive process by modulating attentional processes
at encoding. Given this finding and the recognized decline in cholinergic
function during normal aging, we expected that young adults only under
divided attention and older adults under full attention would be
impaired at acquiring an FC task relative to an FS task. Thus, we tested
thirty-one young adults (X= 19.2 years, S.D. = 1.1) while performing a
concurrent divided attention task and forty-one older (X= 75.2 years, S.D.
= 5.4) adults under full attention during acquisition of the visual FC and
FS tasks. As hypothesized, both groups were comparably impaired at
acquiring the FC task relative to the FS task; additionally, this pattern of
behaviour is strikingly similar to that of rats under the influence of the
cholinergic muscarinic antagonist scopolamine while they acquired comparable FC and FS tasks. Collectively, these data illustrate the susceptibility of the feature binding process to attentional challenges induced
pharmacologically, behaviourally, or as the result of normal aging. And
therefore lend further support for ACh’s role in the attentional modulation of learning.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

269

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

I23
ANTICIPATING CONFLICT SPEEDS-UP EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS LINKED TO CONFLICT DETECTION Angel
Correa1,2, Anling Rao2, Anna Nobre2; 1University of Granada, Spain,
2University of Oxford, United Kingdom — Cognitive control can be triggered in reaction to previous conflict, as suggested by the finding of
sequential effects in conflict tasks. Can control be also triggered proactively by presenting cues predicting conflict (‘proactive control’)? We
exploited the high temporal resolution of event-related potentials (ERPs)
and controlled for sequential effects to ask whether proactive control
based on anticipating conflict modulates neural activity related to cognitive control. ERPs associated with conflict detection (N2) were measured
during a cued flanker task. Symbolic cues were either informative or neutral with respect to whether the target involved conflicting or congruent
responses. Sequential effects were controlled by analysing the congruency of the previous trial. The results showed that cuing conflict reduced
both the behavioural conflict effect and the N2 latency. Other potentials
less specifically related to conflict processing, such as the frontal N1 and
the P3, were also modulated by cuing conflict. Cuing effects were most
evident after congruent than after incongruent trials. This interaction
between cuing and sequential effects suggests neural overlap between
the control networks triggered by proactive and reactive signals. This
finding then clarifies why previous (fMRI) studies, not controlling for
reactive sequential effects, have rarely found that proactive control attenuates ACC conflict-related activity. Finally, the high temporal resolution
of ERPs was critical to reveal a temporal modulation of conflict detection
by proactive control. This novel finding suggests that anticipating conflict
speeds-up conflict detection. Recent research suggests that this anticipatory mechanism may be mediated by pre-activation of the ACC during
the preparatory interval.
I24
EXAMINING THE ATTENTIONAL COSTS OF SELF-FOCUSED
ATTENTION Katrina Fincher1, Amishi Jha1; 1Center for Cognitive
Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania — We examined the hypothesis
that self-focused attention competes for attentional resources necessary to
attend and interact with the external environment. In Condition A, subjects (n = 25) rated the valence of adjectives using a 4 point Likert scale. In
Condition B, these words were presented as task-irrelevant distractors at
fixation as subjects performed a simple visual discrimation task for
peripheral stimuli. There was no significant main effect of valence ratings
on discrimination performance. In Condition C, subjects rated the selfrelevance of adjectives. In Condition D, similar to Condition B, these
words were presented as task-irrelevant distractors during a simple
visual discrimination task. There was no main effect of self ratings on discrimination performance. Importantly, response times (RTs) during word
rating in Condition C were slowest when the words were either rated as
high in self-relevance and negative (determined by Condition A) or low
in self-relevance and positive. This slowing may reflect high cognitive
and affective conflict associated with these word categories which may
heighten self-focused attention. We therefore predicted that these “high
conflict” words would result in slower discrimination performance in
Condition D as attention becomes usurped by self-focused processes initiated by the word presentation. Indeed, during Condition D, RTs were
significantly slower for high vs. low conflict distractor words, and the
magnitude of this effect correlated with the subject’s degree of depression, anxiety, and rumination as indexed by self-report measures. Thus,
self-focused distraction may have deleterious effects on attention to external tasks as well as overall mental health.
I25
ELECTRICAL CORRELATES OF THE RESTING STATE NETWORK
IN MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN HUMANS Kristie
J.
Fisher1,2, Kai J. Miller1,3, Jeffrey G. Ojemann1,4; 1University of Washington,
2
Psychology, 3Neurobiology and Behavior, 4Neurological Surgery — We
investigated changes in the dynamics of the resting state ("default") net-

270

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

work in medial prefrontal cortex in humans (Gusnard, NatRevNeuro,
2001), using the fine temporal resolution of electrocorticography (ECoG).
We studied 5 human subjects, with ECoG electrodes in dorsal and ventral
medial pre-frontal cortex. We performed a comparison between fixation
("disengagement") and one of three "engagement" tasks. The engagement
task was dependent on the placement of the other elements of the electrode array: a) Language (verb generation task with electrodes in left
fronto-temporal-parietal areas), b) Memory (n-back visual working memory task with electrodes in right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex), c) Target
Detection task (noise-masked faces and houses with electrodes in the subtemporal fusiform areas). We see the hallmarks of default network cortical activity during non-engagement using these metrics: 1) band specific
power (Miller, 2007, NeuroImage), 2) phase-amplitude coupling
(Canolty, 2006, Science), 3) cross-coherence between neighboring electrodes. Consistent with a study by Mantini (Mantini, 2007, PNAS), we
found band-specific changes in discrete rhythms. More importantly, we
also found changes in the high frequency amplitude-low frequency phase
coupling that we believe is the hallmark of coordination between cortex
and subcortical control structures (thalamic, basal ganglial). Our study
demonstrates the usefulness of high temporal resolution in identifying
distinct, separable properties of brain activity that show characteristic
electrical activity when not engaged in a cognitive task, and activity suppression during task engagement.
I26
THE EFFECTS OF REFLECTIVE STATE ON PERCEPTUAL
PROCESSING
IN
THE
CONTEXT
OF
EMOTIONAL
INFORMATION IN DYSPHORIA Sharmin Ghaznavi1, Susan NolenHoeksema1, Marcia K. Johnson1; 1Yale University — Theoretical accounts of
depression (Beck, 1967; Bower, 1981; Teasdale, 1983) predict that
depressed individuals will show selective attention to material congruent
with depressed mood. However, findings from previous work on mood
congruent attentional biases in depression are inconsistent across studies.
One reason for the inconsistencies across studies may be differences in
the reflective state of participants at the time of testing. The self-reflective
state of rumination (e.g., focusing on symptoms of distress) worsens
depression whereas distraction (e.g., focusing on non-self-relevant information) temporarily reduces depression. Whether depressed individuals
are in a self-focused, ruminative state, or a distracted state may have consequences for the impact of emotional information on their cognitive processing in the context of negative emotional information. We investigated
perceptual processing in dysphoric individuals (n = 30) and nondysphoric individuals (n = 30) while manipulating reflective state using an adaptation of a rumination/distraction state manipulation from Lyubomirsky
& Nolen-Hoeksema (1993). When negative emotional items were present
in the task, dysphoric individuals were affected by the state induction on
a perceptual task requiring them to process words for meaning (identifying an exemplar of a category), but not on a perceptual task requiring
participants to attend to basic perceptual features of a word (letter case).
State induction had no effect on performance in nondysphoric individuals. This evidence suggests that reflective state as well as the specific
types of processing required influences how emotional information is
processed by depressed individuals.
I27
TACTILE REFLEXIVE ATTENTION; AN INVESTIGATION OF ITS
TIME COURSE, AND ITS ROLE IN THE EXPERIENCE OF
MEDICALLY UNEXPLAINED SYMPTOMS. Eleanor Miles1, Ellen
Poliakoff1, Richard Brown1; 1University of Manchester, UK — In the visual
and auditory modalities, it has been demonstrated that peripheral cues
facilitate responses to targets presented at the same location, which is
thought to be due to reflexive (automatic) attention shifts. In the tactile
modality, however, the only studies to demonstrate facilitation include
potential methodological confounds (spatial discrimination tasks, or predictive cues) and involve processes in addition to reflexive attention. In
the current study, we investigated the time course of tactile reflexive

Poster Session I

attention by using a non-spatial tactile frequency discrimination task, following a non-informative tactile cue. When the target was presented 150
ms after the cue, we observed faster discrimination responses to targets
presented on the same side (compared to the opposite side) as the cue; by
1000ms, responses were significantly faster to targets on the opposite side
to the cue. Thus, we demonstrate that tactile attentional facilitation can be
observed in a non-spatial discrimination task, and provide the first demonstration of significant tactile facilitation and tactile inhibition of return
within a single experiment. These findings are discussed in relation to
medically unexplained symptoms (symptoms for which no physical
cause can be found). Theories suggest that people with a propensity to
unexplained symptoms have an attentional bias for the body, and a
recent model (Brown, 2004) suggests the underlying deficit may be in the
ability to disengage from the body. As yet there is no empirical support
for this, and investigation of tactile attention shifts in these patients may
provide a way forward.
I28
MADE YOU LOOK! IRRELEVANT INSTRUCTIONS HIJACK THE
ATTENTIONAL NETWORK Katherine Moore1, Clare Porter1, Daniel
Weissman1; 1University of Michigan at Ann Arbor — The ability to voluntarily orient attention when presented with an instructional cue (e.g.,
"Listen to the teacher!") is a fundamental aspect of human cognition.
Much evidence indicates that this ability depends on a fronto-parietal
network, which biases activity in sensory regions to enhance the processing of task-relevant stimuli. In the present fMRI study, we investigated
whether task-irrelevant instructions (e.g., "Look!") can hijack the frontoparietal network, leading to greater processing of irrelevant features in
the environment. In each trial, a visually-presented cue word ("Look" or
"Hear") instructed participants to attend to either the visual or the auditory sensory modality for a possibly upcoming relevant letter ("X or "O"),
while ignoring a simultaneously-presented irrelevant letter ("X" or "O") in
the opposite modality. Critically, the visually-presented cue word (e.g.,
"Hear") was accompanied by an irrelevant auditory instruction word that
signaled either the same sensory modality as the visual cue (e.g., "Hear";
congruent cues) or a different modality (e.g., "Look"; incongruent cues).
In line with our hypothesis that incongruent cues should interfere with
processes that orient attention, we observed greater activity for incongruent than for congruent cues in multiple regions of the fronto-parietal network. Also in line with our hypothesis, incongruent cues evoked greater
activity than congruent cues in sensory regions corresponding to the
uncued modality. These findings show for the first time that irrelevant,
consciously-perceived instruction words can hijack the fronto-parietal
network, resulting in greater attention to task-irrelevant features of the
environment.
I29
INFLUENCE OF SPATIAL ATTENTION ON INTERHEMISPHERIC
TRANSFER IN AN ACALLOSAL BRAIN Eric Mooshagian1, Marco
Iacoboni1, Eran Zaidel1; 1University of California, Los Angeles — In a lateralized simple reaction time (SRT) paradigm, a stimulus presented to the
right visual field (RVF) elicits faster right-hand (uncrossed) responses
than left-hand (crossed) responses. In the uncrossed condition, the stimulus and response are processed within the left hemisphere. In the crossed
condition, one hemisphere registers the stimulus while the other makes
the response. The crossed-uncrossed difference (CUD) is taken as a measure of interhemispheric transfer time via the corpus callosum. However,
the CUD in normal subjects has recently been demonstrated to be sensitive to spatial attention. When subjects used an unnatural, arms crossed
position and pressed the left button with the right hand, etc., the CUD
was reduced, indicating an influence of spatial attention (Mooshagian et
al., in press). Using the same task, it has been demonstrated that an
unnatural arms position reduces the CUD in a commissurotomy patient
as well (Mooshagian et al., 2001). In the present experiment, we tested an
acallosal subject, MM, using the same task. Results, again, indicate a
reduced CUD in the unnatural arms position. Importantly, MM’s natural

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

and unnatural CUDs fall between those obtained for normal subjects and
split-brain patients. This confirms that the CUD is not a pure measure of
callosal relay. The CUD reflects both interhemispheric transfer time and
spatial attention mechanisms that are not mediated by the corpus callosum.
I30
THE NEURAL BASIS OF ATTENTIONAL TASK SET AND
COGNITIVE CONTROL Kyle P. Tierney1, Preston P. Thakral1, Scott D.
Slotnick1; 1Boston College — Cognitive control involves retrieval and
maintenance of task set/rules. We hypothesized that neural activity associated with cognitive control would be revealed during a standard visual
spatial attention paradigm (which requires changes in task set). During
fMRI, participants were presented with two squares rotated 30° in polar
angle from horizontal with the nearest corners 2° of visual angle from fixation and an edge length 4° in visual angle. Within each square, 320 dots
(each 0.05° in width) moved 5° of visual angle per second and had 70%
coherence. Participants had been trained to shift and then sustain attention to the dots within either the left or right visual field based on an
auditory cue that occurred every 14 seconds. Their behavioral task was to
detect a brief change in dot speed that occurred at uncertain times within
the attended square, encouraging sustained attention at that location.
This design yielded four main types of cognitive events/task sets: shift
attention to the left (shift-left), shift attention to the right (shift-right), sustained attention to the left (sustained-left), and sustained attention to the
right (sustained-right). Our preliminary analysis suggests that attentional
shift task sets (shift-left > shift-right, shift-right > shift-left) were associated with differential activity in the prefrontal cortex, the anterior cingulate, and temporal cortex. Sustained attention task sets (sustained-left >
sustained-right, sustained-right > sustained-left) were associated with
differential activity in the prefrontal cortex and the intraparietal sulcus.
The prefrontal cortex association with attentional task set supports previous findings linking this region to cognitive control.
I31
INCREASED INTRA-INDIVIDUAL REACTION TIME VARIABILITY
IN ADHD ACROSS RESPONSE INHIBITION TASKS WITH
DIFFERENT COGNITIVE DEMANDS Rebecca G. Vaurio1,2, Daniel J.
Simmonds1, E. Mark Mahone1,2, Martha B. Denckla1,2, Stewart H.
Mostofsky2,3; 1Kennedy Krieger Institute, 2Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine — One of the most consistent findings in children with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is increased moment-tomoment variability in reaction time (RT). In a recent study, the source of
increased RT variability was examined using ex-Gaussian analyses of
reaction time series that divide variability into normal (“sigma”) and
exponential (“tau”) components. That study, however, reported performance on a choice RT task; it is unknown whether similar findings would
be observed during tasks involving response inhibition. The objective of
the present study was to examine these components of variability using
both a “simple” Go/No-go task and a more “complex” Go/No-go task
with increased working memory load. Participants were 108 children
(ADHD, N=41; Control, N=67) ages 8-13 (mean=11.1). Two methods
were used to measure variability: intra-individual coefficient of variability (ICV), calculated as (standard deviation of RT/mean RT) and exGaussian functions (sigma and tau). Repeated measures ANOVA
showed main effects of diagnosis and task for ICV, with ICV being
greater in the ADHD group (F=10.1, p=.002) and greater for the complex
task (F=22.4, p<.001), with no diagnosis-by-task interaction. Similar findings were observed using ex-Gaussian analyses, with stronger effects for
tau (greater sigma (F=3.2, p=.075) and tau (F=11.3, p=.001) in ADHD;
greater sigma (F=4.6, p=.034) and tau (F=18.7, p<.001) in the complex
task; and no diagnosis-by-task interaction). The results reveal increased
RT variability in ADHD regardless of task complexity. The stronger tau
effects suggest that increased variability is principally due to occasional
slow responses reflecting lapses in behavioral control.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

271

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

I32
ELECTRICAL SOURCE ANALYSIS OF DENSE ARRAY (256CHANNEL) EEG RECORDINGS OF SPIKE-WAVE SEIZURES
REVEALS MECHANISMS INVOLVED IN VOLUNTARY CONTROL
OF CONSCIOUS ATTENTION Allison C. Waters1, Don M. Tucker1,2,
Phan Luu1,2, Mark Holmes2; 1University of Oregon, 2Electrical Geodesics,
Inc. — The current study has two objectives: 1) to elucidate the neural
source of spike-wave discharges associated with a temporary loss of conscious attention; and 2) to contrast results gained through the application
of high-density (256 channel) EEG recording to results gained through
the use of conventional (19 channel) EEG recording. The neural substrate
of conscious attention involves thalamic control of widespread cortical
networks. Absence spells are characterized by a momentary loss of voluntary control of attention, during which the person is inactive and unresponsive. In this study, the neural sources of spike-wave discharges
associated with absence spells are elucidated using advanced methods of
electrical source analysis. This reconstruction of dynamic activity in the
brain is made possible by improved sampling of electrical potentials, volume-conducted to the face and neck in the 256-channel array, as well as
accurate characterization of head tissue conductivity. Source analysis
indicates that absence spells are associated with pathology in a circuit
comprising ventro-medial frontal cortex, rostral thalamic reticular
nucleus, and limbic nuclei of the thalamus. These findings are then contrasted with those obtained through conventional EEG (19 channels of
the International Ten Twenty system) recording and analysis. Advanced
methods of neural source analysis provide superior ability to resolve
neural mechanisms that are disrupted in absence and appear to regulate
important aspects of the voluntary control of conscious attention.
I33
DOES
AFFECTIVE
PRIMING
INFLUENCE
ATTENTION
PROCESSING IN SOCIALLY-ANXIOUS INDIVIDUALS? Lauren
White1, Sarah Helfinstein1, Yair Bar-Haim2, Nathan Fox1; 1University of
Maryland, 2Tel Aviv University — Anxious individuals show an attention
bias towards threatening information. However, under conditions of sustained environmental threat this otherwise-present attention bias disappears. It remains unclear whether this suppression of attention bias is due
to increased task effort under threat, or a shift in processing priorities.
Further, it is unknown whether this suppression of attention bias can be
caused by a transient activation of the fear system. In the present experiment, high socially-anxious and low socially-anxious individuals (HSA
group, n = 12; LSA group, n = 12) performed a modified dot-probe task in
which they were shown either a neutral or socially threatening prime
word prior to each trial. EEG was collected and ERP components to the
prime and face displays were computed. ERP results suggested differential processing of the faces display by HSA and LSA individuals. The
behavioral results indicated that HSA individuals show an attention bias
to threat after a neutral prime, but no attention bias after a threatening
prime, demonstrating that suppression of attention bias can occur after a
transient activation of the fear system. Reaction time data indicated that
suppression of attention bias is not due to an increase in task effort.
I34
MULTISENSORY CONFLICT MODULATES THE SPREAD OF
VISUAL ATTENTION ACROSS A MULTISENSORY OBJECT
Ulrike Zimmer1, Kenneth Roberts1, Marty Woldorff1; 1Center for Cognitive
Neuroscience, Duke University — Spatial attention to a visual stimulus
paired with a task-irrelevant sound occurring synchronously from a different location can lead to increased activity not only in visual cortex, but
also auditory cortex, apparently reflecting the object-related spreading of
attention across both space and modality (Busse et al., PNAS, 2005). The
processing of stimulus conflict, including multisensory stimulus conflict,
is known to activate the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), but the resultant
influence on the sensory cortices remains relatively unexamined. Here,
we asked whether the multisensory spread of visual attention across the
sensory cortices previously observed will be modulated by whether there

272

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

is conceptual or object-related conflict between the relevant visual and
irrelevant auditory inputs. In an fMRI-study, we presented matching and
non-matching letter-sound combinations while subjects visually attended
one of two lateralized visual letter-streams and ignored the synchronously occurring task-irrelevant central sounds. Spreading of visual
attention across modalities was again observed, replicating our previous
study. In addition, significant enhancements for incongruent versus congruent letter-sound combinations were observed in the ACC and in the
contralateral visual cortex when the visual component was attended, presumably reflecting the need for boosted attention to the visual stimulus
during incongruent trials. Moreover, activity in the auditory cortices also
varied as a function of whether the spatially discordant auditory stimulation was incongruent versus congruent. Thus, conflict processing modulates the spreading of visual attention across a multisensory object at both
the levels of the ACC and the sensory cortices.

Attentional processes: Visual
I35
AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL ACCOUNT OF ATTENTIONAL
ENHANCEMENT DUE TO ACTION AFFORDANCE Maha Adamo1,
Nevena Simic1, Susanne Ferber1; 1University of Toronto — When
an
observer must detect two targets that occur in rapid succession, identification of the second target (T2) is impaired if it appears within roughly
500 ms of the first target (T1). This phenomenon, known as the attentional
blink (AB), may be attributed to a failure of conscious report rather than
of perceptual processing. We have previously demonstrated that providing an action association between the two targets will enhance detection
of T2 such that the blink is diminished. In this study, we recorded EEG
while administering a rapid serial visual presentation task. Targets, presented in pale green, were embedded among greyscale images of common objects. T1 was always a tool, and T2 was either an object that could
be acted upon by that tool (ACT trials) or an unrelated object (NON trials). We tested three lags (200, 400, and 700 ms) in order to sample behavioural and neural responses at different phases of the blink. ACT trials
elicited a smaller blink relative to NON trials, with greater T2 detection at
the critical 200 ms lag. Furthermore, we observed sustained posterior
activity in the ERP waveforms for detected relative to missed T2s, which
was affected by both lag and condition. The enhancement in sustained
activity found over posterior scalp sites for ACT T2s is particularly interesting given that tools are selectively represented in posterior inferior
parietal cortices. Our ERP results may explain why action associations
improve the probability of conscious report under demanding attentional
conditions, such as during the AB.
I36
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY
MODULATE THE EFFECTS OF WORKING MEMORY LOAD ON
VISUAL SELECTIVE ATTENTION. Lubna Ahmed1, Jan de Fockert1;
1
Goldsmiths, University of London — Previous work has shown that both
high working memory (WM) load (Lavie et al., 2004) and low working
memory capacity (WMC; Kane & Engle, 2001) hinder the efficiency of
selective attention, presumably because both represent situations in
which resources needed for efficient selective attention become limited.
Although the impact of these two factors on selective attention has been
studied separately, it remains unknown how WM load and capacity
interact to affect selective attention. The current studies investigated the
interactive effects of WM load and capacity on distractor interference in
Flanker and Navon tasks. Increasing load led to the predicted increase in
distractor interference in high capacity individuals whereas for low
capacity individuals the interference levels were equivalently high during both low and high WM load conditions. Under low load interference
effects were greater for low capacity individuals compared to high, in
other words distractor rejection of low capacity individuals under low

Poster Session I

load were comparable to that of high capacity individuals under high
load. This enhanced efficiency of selective attention seen in high WMC
individuals under low Load presumably occurs because WM resources
are available for the high but not the low WMC group. High WMC individuals increased distractor effects under high WM Load also indicates a
reduction in these resources consequently leads to reduced efficiency of
selective attention processes. These studies, utilising individual differences in WM as well as load manipulations, provide further support for
the view that WM resources are required for the efficiency of selective
attention.
I37
NEURAL
CORRELATES
OF
CATEGORY-INVARIANT
ATTENTIONAL INHIBITION PRODUCED BY REJECTED VISUAL
DISTRACTORS JeeWon Ahn1, Brian Levinthal1, Alejandro Lleras1, Diane
Beck1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — In an oddball visual
search task, when participants view a target-absent display in which all
items share a unique visual feature, if on a subsequent trial, the target
shares that “rejected” feature, reaction times are slowed down by as
much as 80 ms as compared to RTs to trials in which the target does not
have the recently rejected feature. This phenomenon is known as the
“Distractor Previewing Effect” and is thought to reflect the inhibition of
attention to the previously “rejected” feature. Here we extend this effect
to a category-oddball search task and show that this attentional inhibitory effect generalizes to complex visual categories, such that attentional
allocation to any-and-all members of a recently rejected category is inhibited: our results show that focusing attention on an oddball “face” target
is delayed by as much as 96 ms if “faces” had been rejected as distractors
on the previous trial (compared to trials on which “houses” had been the
previous distractors). Similarly, RTs to oddball “house” targets were
delayed by 69 ms when “houses” had been recently rejected as distractors. This attentional inhibition is observed even though specific faces
and houses where never repeated in the experiment, suggesting generalized category-wide inhibition. Using fMRI, we looked at activity in the
human brain while participants performed this category-oddball task.
Specifically, we examined activity in FFA and PPA, as well as fronto-parietal regions typically associated with attentional allocation and control.
I38
EFFECT OF ALCOHOL ON PERFORMING A SECONDARY TASK
WHILE DRIVING Allyssa J. Allen1, Shashwath A. Meda1, Godfrey D.
Pearlson1,2, Robert S. Astur1,2, Vince D. Calhoun1,2,3, Pawel Skudlarski1,2,
Kathryn C. Ruopp1; 1Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center, Institute of Living
at Hartford Hospital, Hartford, 2Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, 3The MIND Research Network, The University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque — Introduction: In a recent analysis of traffic accidents, alcohol exacerbated the negative effects of performing a secondary task while
driving (Brewer 1980). Previous studies of visual oddball (VO) tasks
report dose-dependent increases in reaction time (RT) (but no effect in
correct hits or errors) with increased alcohol dose. We expect to replicate
findings and to find associated decreased performance on a simulated
driving task. Methods/Subjects: Forty male (N=20) and female healthy
social drinkers (24.75 years + 4.7 years) were given three different doses
of alcohol tailored to their gender and weight: placebo, moderate
(BAC=0.05), and high (BAC=0.1). The subjects performed a VO task as
part of a simulated driving paradigm, while being scanned in a 3T fMRI
scanner. Results: Behavioral analysis with repeated measures ANOVA
showed a dose-dependent linear increase in RT, with no effects in either
correct hits or false alarms. In all conditions, driving speed decreased significantly after VO. However, in the high dose this decrease was significantly less. Passenger-side line crossings significantly increased.
Functional analysis was done in SPM2 with repeated measures ANOVA
showed dose-dependent linear decrease in BOLD activation of the hippocampus, anterior cingulate, and the dorsolateral prefrontal areas, with
the least activation occurring during the high dose. Conclusions: These
results suggest that driving impairment during secondary task perfor-

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

mance may be associated with impairment in the above brain regions,
which are involved with attentional processes/decision-making. Drivers
with high BAC’s may be less able to orient or detect a novel or sudden
stimulus during driving.
I39
A CONTINUOUS ATTENTION TRACKING TASK FOR THE
COMPREHENSIVE ASSESSMENT OF ATTENTION PROCESSES
IN ADHD AND NON-ADHD SUBJECTS Lourdes
Anllo-Vento1,
1
1,2
Benjamin N. Cipollini , Vladimir López-Hernández , David L. Woods3;
1
University of California, San Diego, 2Diego Portales University, Santiago,
Chile, 3University of California at Davis — Continuous Performance Tests
(CPTs) have proven useful in the assessment of attention impairments
associated with developmental disorders. However, attention is a complex concept comprising multiple cognitive operations. And yet, current
computer-based CPTs have a limited capability of detecting and profiling
such processes. Here we present a newly developed Continuous Attention Tracking Task (CATT) that quantifies more than 30 measures of
attention in an immersive 3D video-game environment with sub-second
temporal resolution. Participants were 12 ADHD and 12 non-ADHD
adults. Continuous EEG was recorded from 62 scalp sites while subjects
engaged in the CATT in 4 blocks of 5 min each. We recorded responses to
targets and non-targets, tracking accuracy, and latency of stop-signal
responses at 60 Hz, as well as event-related potentials at 500 Hz. While
overall tracking accuracy was comparable for ADHD and non-ADHD
subjects, inhibition of tracking during a stop-signal was greater in control
than ADHD subjects. Similarly, the non-ADHD group stopped tracking
faster, and responded to targets faster and more accurately than ADHD
subjects. Event-related potentials evoked by the target and non-target signals showed that the brain activity of non-ADHD subjects was selectively
modulated starting at about 180 ms following stimulus onset. The CATT
replicates prior CPT and Stop-Signal Task results in a more ecologically
valid experimental setup that could be used in a clinical setting. As we
extend our analyses to utilize the numerous behavioral and physiological
measures provided by CATT, we hope to further characterize the patterns of attentional impairment associated with distinct developmental
disorders.
I40
SSVEP-BASED
SINGLE-TRIAL
CLASSIFICATION
OF
ATTENTION Andre Bastos1, Tim Mullen1, Ryan Canolty1, Brian Pasley1,
Ralph Freeman1, Robert Knight1; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, UC
Berkeley — A real-time, continuous measure of attention could prove useful for several applications, including attention monitoring and training.
Previous studies have shown that attention modulates the amplitude of
the Steady State Visual Evoked Potential (SSVEP), suggesting it could be
used as a real-time measure of attention. We simultaneously presented
two flickering stimuli to the left and right of central fixation. The stimuli
were high-contrast circular gratings oscillating at 12.5 and 16.7 Hz. In
response to a random cue, participants covertly attended to one stimulus
while simultaneously ignoring the other. Stimuli were presented for 4.8
seconds, with a 5 second rest between trials. Analysis of 64-channel EEG
collected throughout the task confirmed that attending to a particular
hemifield produces a systematic change in the amplitude of the SSVEP.
Narrow-band spectral estimation combined with Independent Component Analysis (ICA) allowed for robust single-trial classification of the
attended hemifield with accuracies comparable to the highest reported in
the literature. Based on these preliminary results, we suggest that the
SSVEP amplitude could be used as a feedback signal for attention training.
I41
PREDICTIVE GAZE-CUES INFLUENCE FACE PERCEPTION: THE
EFFECT OF EMOTIONAL EXPRESSION Andrew Bayliss1, Steven
Tipper1; 1Bangor University, UK — When we observe someone suddenly
shift their gaze, we automatically shift our own attention to the same
location. This ‘joint attention’ behaviour is very important for success-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

273

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

fully engaging in social interactions. In adapted Posner cueing paradigms, faces are presented in the centre of the screen, which look to the
left or right. Despite these gaze-cues being uninformative about the location of the target, participants are reliably faster to respond to targets that
appear where the eyes look, as compared with targets that appear elsewhere. This study used two sets of faces in a gaze-cueing paradigm. Ten
faces always correctly cued the target location (‘pro-predictive’), while
ten faces never looked at the target location (‘anti-predictive’). After the
cueing procedure, a series of 2AFC tasks showed that overall, ‘pro-predictive’ faces were evaluated as more trustworthy than ‘anti-predictive’
faces. Further, ‘anti-predictive’ faces appeared to be better encoded in
memory. Nevertheless, after full debrief, participants were unable to correctly choose the ‘pro-predictive’ faces from each pair, suggesting they
could not explicitly recall which faces had looked at the target. However,
these effects were only significant where each face had a happy expression. Faces with neutral and angry expressions did not reliably elicit these
effects of gaze-cueing on face processing. This suggests that a positive
facial expression is necessary for these gaze-cueing contingencies to affect
the evaluation of, and memory for faces in a joint attention episode.
I42
SPATIAL ATTENTIONAL (RE)ORIENTING IN ADHD AND NONADHD
CHILDREN:
ASSOCIATION
WITH
DOPAMINE
TRANSPORTER (DAT1) GENE VARIANTS. Mark
Bellgrove1,
Katherine Johnson2, Edwina Barry3, Ziarih Hawi3, Michael Gill3, Ian
Robertson2, Christopher Chambers4; 1School of Psychology and Queensland
Brain Institute, University of Queensland, Australia, 2School of Psychology and
Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland,
3School of Medicine and Health Sciences, and Trinity College Institute of
Neuroscience, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland, 4Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, University College London, UK — Impairments of spatial
selective attention in children with ADHD remain controversial. This
study examined whether individual differences in the spatial attention of
101 children with and without ADHD could be explained by allelic variation in the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1). DAT is the primary site of
action of stimulants used to treat ADHD and a number of DNA variants
within this gene appear to confer risk to ADHD. Importantly, anomalies
of spatial attention in ADHD have been reported to be improved by stimulants, suggesting a role for DAT1 in spatially selective deficits in ADHD.
All children performed a reflexive covert visual orienting paradigm in
which attention was cued validly, invalidly or un-informatively with
respect to the hemifield of an upcoming target. Children with ADHD had
a higher frequency of “high-risk” genotypes (homozygosity for the 10repeat DAT1 VNTR) than control children. In addition, irrespective of
diagnostic status, children who were homozygous for the 10-repeat allele
had higher ADHD symptomatology. ADHD children who carried the
high-risk DAT1 genotype displayed a number of attentional anomalies
relative to both ADHD children without the risk genotype and genotyped control children. At short stimulus-onset asynchronies (SOAs)
ADHD children with the high-risk DAT1 genotype were slow to reorient
attention on invalidly cued trials, particularly when targets appeared in
the left hemifield. At longer SOAs children with ADHD were slower to
reorient attention from invalid cues and this effect was also influenced by
DAT1 genotype. Results are discussed in terms of the role of dopamine in
spatial attention.
I43
EFFECTS OF PRISM ADAPTATION ON APPROACH AND
WITHDRAWAL Janet Bultitude1, Robert Rafal1; 1School of Psychology,
University of Wales, Bangor — Prism adaptation can ameliorate hemispatial neglect symptoms and induce neglect-like performance in healthy
participants. Two studies examined whether adaptation to 15º leftward
shifts in healthy participants can induce a non-lateralized motor-intentional bias associated with neglect: the tendency to make faster withdrawal than approach responses. In Experiment 1 participants moved a
lever forwards (approach) or backwards (withdrawal) in response to

274

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

arrows displayed on a computer screen. Faster withdrawal responses
were observed following adaptation to leftward shifting prisms, while
RTs for approach responses were unchanged. These results suggest that
prism adaptation may not only improve the spatially lateralized bias of
neglect, but also improve associated non-lateralized deficits. Experiment
2 sought to further illuminate the motor-intentional vs emotional-motivational nature of the induced withdrawal bias by requiring participants to
perform the same actions under conditions of participant-centred vs
screen-centred instructions. It was predicted that a motor-intentional
withdrawal bias would result in reduced post-adaptation RTs for backwards movements regardless of the frame of reference, whereas an emotional-motivational withdrawal bias would result in reduced RTs for
movement which caused the lever to be distanced from the object of reference.
I44
TEMPORALLY SELECTIVE ATTENTION MODULATES EARLY
PERCEPTUAL PROCESSING OF IMAGES PRESENTED IN
RAPIDLY CHANGING STREAMS William Bush1, Lisa D. Sanders1;
1
University of Massachusetts, Amherst — Spatially
selective
attention
allows viewers to preferentially process the most relevant information in
complex scenes. Temporally selective attention has been shown to
enhance processing of information presented at specific times. Temporal
selection is hypothesized to be particularly crucial when stimuli change
rapidly since under these conditions it is not possible to process all of the
information in detail. However, most ERP studies showing effects of temporally selective attention on early perceptual processing have not
included rapidly changing information. The current study examined the
effects of temporal attention on visual evoked potentials (VEPs) using
rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP). On each block of trials, participants were directed to attend to one of three times after a brief tone: short
(500 ms), middle (1000 ms) or long (1500 ms). They were asked to press a
button as quickly as possible if a deviant (digit) appeared at the attended
time only in a stream of letters. VEPs were measured in response to task
irrelevant probes presented at the critical times. Temporally selective
attention modulated early visual components such that mean amplitude
was larger in response to probes presented at attended times. The latency
and distribution of these affects were compared with what has typically
been reported for spatially selective attention. Additionally, a contingent
negative variation (CNV) was observed around the attended time. These
results demonstrate that temporally selective attention can be used to
preferentially process information presented at critical times within rapidly changing visual displays.
I45
SEPARATING THE EFFECTS OF INTERMODAL SELECTIVE
ATTENTION, AUDITORY DISTRACTION AND STIMULUS TYPE
ON VISUAL FMRI ACTIVATIONS Anthony D. Cate1, Timothy J.
Herron1, Xiaojiang Kang1,2, E. William Yund1, David L. Woods1,2,3; 1Human
Cognitive Neurophysiology Lab, VA Research Service, Martinez, CA, 2Center
for Neuroscience, University of California at Davis, Sacramento, 3UC Davis
Center for Mind and Brain, Davis — Cortical surface mapping was used to
distinguish the effects of intermodal selective attention, auditory distraction, visual stimulus type and their interactions on whole-brain fMRI
visual activations. Nine subjects each completed 6 hour-long sessions
employing both continuous (2.9s TR) and sparse image acquisition (10.4s
TR), which reduced activations due to scanner acoustic noise. Subjects
performed demanding one-back tasks with either visual (faces or words)
or auditory (tone triplets) stimuli in a blocked factorial design that
included four key conditions. In “bimodal visual” blocks subjects performed a visual task while ignoring auditory stimuli; in “unimodal
visual” blocks no auditory distracters were present. Equivalent bimodal
and unimodal auditory blocks were also included. Visual and auditory
stimuli had randomly staggered onsets to reduce crossmodal integration
effects. Subjects’ cortical hemispheres were segmented to isolate gray
matter, inflated to a sphere and aligned to a common coordinate system

Poster Session I

for group analysis using FreeSurfer. A bimodal visual vs. bimodal auditory contrast showed the effects of task modality-selective attention separate from stimulus-specific effects, since both conditions contained
identical stimuli. These visual attention-related modulations (ARMs)
comprised a specific subset of the stimulus-dependent activations
present in occipitotemporal (OT) and intraparietal sulcus (IPS) regions.
Additional contrasts isolated anterior visual ARM areas that were significantly more active when auditory stimuli were present. Interactions
between the attentional and stimulus type factors of the design further
specified well-defined subregions involved during face and word tasks,
not only in OT but also in IPS. These results clarify how attention modulates neural responses to visual stimuli.
I46
INFLUENCE
OF
PREFRONTAL-VISUAL
ASSOCIATIVE
CORTICAL NETWORKS IN A SELECTIVE-ATTENTION,
WORKING-MEMORY PARADIGM James Chadick1, Aaron Rutman1,
Adam Gazzaley1,2; 1University of California, San Francisco, 2Helen Wills
Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley — Prefrontal cortex
(PFC) has been shown to modulate activity in the visual association cortex (VAC) in a goal-directed fashion. As older adults show a deficit in
attention-driven modulation of VAC, the PFC-VAC network is a prime
target for studying the neural basis of age-related cognitive decline. Previous studies in our lab have focused on a selective-attention working
memory paradigm where relevant and irrelevant stimuli were presented
sequentially. A more real world based approach would be to study modulation associated with simultaneously presented stimuli, when a subject
is required to concurrently enhance and suppress competing visual information. To explore this, we employed a selective-attention working
memory task in healthy, young adults (22-35 years old) in both an fMRI
and EEG experiment. Subjects were presented with simultaneously overlapping stimuli consisting of faces and scenes and were instructed to
remember either faces or scenes, or to passively view the stimuli. After a
brief delay, a probe stimulus was presented and the subject’s responded
if the probe matched either relevant stimuli. We found significant modulation of BOLD signal in posterior stimulus-selective VAC regions based
on task instruction, which corresponded with early modulation (~100
msec) of posterior EEG waveforms. Preliminary multivariate analysis
indicates this modulation is associated with a PFC-VAC network. Currently, we are investigating the effects of aging on these networks with
the hypothesis that aging-related changes in VAC modulation may be
due to loss of fidelity of PFC-VAC connectivity.
I47
NEURAL BASES OF GOAL-DIRECTED SELECTION OF
INFORMATION FOR WORKING MEMORY Anthony J.-W. Chen1,2,3,
Terry Nycum3, Michael Britton2,3, Mark D'Esposito1,2,3; 1VA Medical Center,
2
University of California, San Francisco, 3University of California, Berkeley — Topdown selection of information for more in-depth processing in working
memory is a crucial step for efficient and effective goal-directed behavior.
On the other hand, selectivity of processing for particular features of
information appears to be an intrinsic property of ascending levels of
visual cortical processing. We hypothesize that modulation of this intrinsic selectivity is a mechanism for goal-directed modulation of information processing. We present an fMRI task that involves presentation of
serial image stimuli (two categories, faces and scenes, pseudo-randomly
inter-leaved), with demands for top-down selection of a subset for working memory processing, making the other images distractors in a category-selective n-back task. The design allows calculations of the relative
category-selectivity of activity in pre-defined regions of interest. We calculate (10 subjects) intrinsic category selectivity for regions of visual association cortex during baseline tasks requiring minimal selection (either
simply viewing and categorizing all images, or trying to hold in mind all
images), and results are congruent with an independent task with
blocked faces and scenes. We then show that selectivity in these regions is
modulated by goal-directed selection demands, such that selectivity for
goal-relevant stimuli is increased, while selectivity for non-relevant stim-

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

uli is decreased. Regions of the lateral prefrontal cortex show strong goaldirected stimulus-selectivity when tasks demand selection. These prefrontal regions may thus be a source of the top-down signals that bias the
selectivity of the posterior regions. These fMRI measurements should be
useful for examining how selection processes are affected by brain injuries and neurological interventions.
I48
ADULT AGE DIFFERENCES IN CORTICAL ACTIVATION
DURING TASK-SWITCHING Matthew Costello1, David Madden1, Julia
Spaniol2, Nancy Denis3, Barbara Bucur4, Roberto Cabeza3, James Provenzale1,
Scott Huettel1; 1Duke University Medical Center, 2Ryerson University, 3Duke
University, 4University of Missouri, St. Louis — Older adults have shown
increased top-down involvement in attentional tasks, suggesting a
greater role of frontal activity within a frontoparietal network. To explore
this possibility, we tested 18 younger (18-27 years; 9 female) and 16 older
(60-85 years; 9 female) adults in a 3T fMRI experiment that assessed transient cortical activation associated with task switching. On cue-plus-target trials, a visual cue indicated which one of two category judgments
was to be made on the upcoming target word: manmade/natural or
large/small. On cue-only trials, the cue was presented without an accompanying target. Each trial was coded as a task switch or repeat, relative to
the previous trial. Cue-related activity for both age groups was located in
occipital and frontal regions bilaterally, with additional left posterior
parietal activations for older adults. Target-related activity for younger
adults elicited broad occipital-parietal-frontal activations that were primarily left lateralized. Younger adults’ target-related activity was greater
for repeats than for switches. For older adults, target processing elicited a
similar network but maintained largely bilateral activity, with right parietal activation for switch trials. Functional connectivity analyses indicated that, for cue-related activity, older adults exhibited correlated
activation within occipital regions, whereas younger adults exhibited
greater bilateral frontal connectivity. For target related activity, older
adults showed widespread connectivity within the frontoparietal network, whereas for younger adults correlated activations were primarily
in occipital regions. The results suggest that, during task switching,
younger adults activate an attention-dependent frontoparietal network
during cue processing, whereas older adults activate this network later,
during target processing.
I49
MODULATION OF P1 AS A FUNCTION OF VISUAL SELECTIVE
ATTENTION IN ADULTS AND CHILDREN Jane
Couperus1;
1Hampshire College — Research suggests that children, like adults, show
modulation of early brain processes as a function of selective attention
(Bartgis, Lilly, & Thomas, 2003, Maatta, Paakkinen, Saavalaninen & Partanen, 2005, Perez-Edgar &Fox, 2005, Sanders, Stevens, Coch, & Neville,
2006, Taylor & Khan, 2000). However, while studies involving auditory
attention have shown modulations in the amplitude of the P1 event
related potential (ERP) component as a function of selective attention
(e.g. Sanders et al., 2006), only changes in latency of early components
have been demonstrated with visual stimuli (Taylor and Khan, 2000). The
present investigation first replicates adult studies of visual selective
attention (e.g. Mangun & Hillyard, 1991) showing selective attention
based modulation of the P1 and then extends this research to children
ages 7-10. Children and adults were presented with pictures at both fixation and in their peripheral visual field above fixation. In one task they
were asked to attend to only the pictures appearing at fixation and determine whether the picture was an animal or vehicle. In a second task they
were asked to maintain fixation but also report on pictures not presented
at fixation. In both children and adults, P1 amplitude to pictures presented above fixation were significantly increased when the target stimulus was attended (task at both fixation and above fixation) as compared to
unattended (task only at fixation) (adults: F(1,5)=15.23, p=.011, children:
F(1,6)=9.50, p=.022). These results show that stimulus processing in children, like adults, is modulated by selective attention early in visual processing.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

275

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

I50
MOTOR PLANS INFLUENCE THE VISUAL PROCESSING OF
OBSERVED ACTIONS Ross Cunnington1, Cassandra Biddick1, Jason B
Mattingley1; 1Queensland Brain Institute and School of Psychology, University
of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia — The perception and the execution of
action appear to be linked by common neural mechanisms. Observed
actions lead to increased activity in motor and premotor cortical areas
and can interfere with the execution of opposite or incongruent actions.
The “mirror” system has been suggested to mediate this link, directly
matching observed actions onto equivalent motor representations in the
motor system. While many studies have focussed on the influence of
observed actions on the motor system, it is not known whether motor
plans can similarly influence earlier visual processing associated with the
perception of actions in a top-down manner. We tested this hypothesis
specifically by examining visual evoked potentials (64-channel EEG) to
images of hand gesture actions that were either congruent or incongruent
with hand actions concurrently planned by participants in a Go-NoGo
paradigm. The visual processing of observed actions was found to be significantly influenced by concurrent motor plans. Specifically, the N170
component of visual evoked potentials, known to be associated with the
processing of biological stimuli, was significantly enhanced when
observed actions were incongruent with concurrently planned actiona.
Crucially, this effect was specific to the congruency of motor plans, and
was not observed in a control condition involving similar stimulus incongruency but without motor planning. Our results provide further evidence for the association between the perception and execution of action,
perhaps mediated by a mirror neuron system. Specifically, we have
shown that motor plans or representations in the motor system can influence the visual processing of observed actions.

Emotion
I51
EMOTION-COGNITION INTERACTION: WORKING MEMORY
AND TRANSIENT EMOTIONAL INTERFERENCE Alan Anticevic1,
Grega Repovs1, Jennifer Staplins1, Tara Benesch1, Todd Braver1, Deanna
Barch1; 1Washington University in St. Louis — Humans possess a unique
ability to sustain goal-directed attention for extended periods of time
regardless of incoming distractions. One example is maintenance and
manipulation of information in working memory (WM), which involves
a constellation of brain areas including the dorsal-parietal network. However, there are times when it is critical for humans to rapidly disengage
internally focused attention and attend to relevant environmental stimuli,
including those that might be task-irrelevant but survival relevant. Previous work has shown that a functional region at or near the temporo-parietal junction (TPJ) is a part of a system involved in detecting task-relevant
information. Furthermore, it has been hypothesized that TPJ acts as a
possible ‘circuit-breaker’ of the sustained, goal-directed system when reallocation of attention is warranted. However, previous investigations
have not addressed the question if TPJ plays a part in helping reorient
attention when emotionally salient, but task irrelevant information is presented. We used event-related functional neuroimaging at 3T to examine
whether TPJ is responsive to task-irrelevant emotionally salient distraction. Furthermore, we investigated whether TPJ responsiveness across
different distracter types (i.e. emotional and task-relevant) was moderated as a function of WM load. The results suggest that TPJ’s role in integrating attentional and cognitive processes might also extend to
emotional processing, and that the role of TPJ as a “circuit-breaker” varies as a function of memory load. Furthermore, these studies will shed
light on the mechanisms that govern the interaction between goalfocused processes and allocation of attention to emotionally salient
events in the environment.

276

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

I52
ROLE OF ALPHA-1 NOREPINEPHRINE RECEPTORS IN MDMA
(ECSTASY) EFFECTS: A CONTROLLED CLINICAL TRIAL
Matthew Baggott1,3, Gantt Galloway1, Margie Jang1, Ryne Didier2, John
Mendelson1; 1Cal Pac Medical Center Research Institute, San Francisco,
2
Oregon Health & Science University School of Medicine, Portland, 3Helen
Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley — BACKGROUND/AIMS: Preclinical data suggests psychostimulant effects are
mediated by multiple neurotransmitter mechanisms including noradrenergic, serotonergic, and dopaminergic. MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine, 'Ecstasy') is an illicitly used drug with some
typical psychostimulant effects (e.g., increased heart rate, blood pressure
and positive mood) and some putatively atypical social and emotional
(so-called ‘entactogen’) effects (e.g., increased self-report sociability). To
examine possible noradrenergic mechanisms of MDMA, we administered MDMA alone and in combination with the alpha-1 noradrenergic
inverse agonist prazosin. We hypothesized alpha-1 receptors contribute
to the typical psychostimulant but not putatively atypical effects of
MDMA. METHODS: 16 healthy MDMA-experienced participants (8
males and 8 females) received placebo, 1.5 mg/kg PO MDMA, 1-2 mg PO
prazosin, or both drugs in a four-session balanced controlled trial in a
laboratory setting. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic (physiological, neurocognitive, and self-report) measures were made and analyzed
using linear mixed-effects models in R. RESULTS: MDMA alone
increased measures of both typical psychostimulant (heart rate, diastolic
blood pressure, positive mood) and putatively atypical effects (sociability). Prazosin alone did not significantly affect these measures. As
hypothesized, co-administration of prazosin significantly modified
MDMA effects on typical psychostimulant but not putatively atypical
measures. CONCLUSIONS: Alpha-1 noradrenergic mechanisms may
contribute to some typical psychostimulant but not to putatively atypical
effects of MDMA. Although statistically significant, the influence of prazosin on MDMA effects was modest, suggesting a role for other receptors
or neurotransmitters. Supported by NIH DA 016776.
I53
MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM NOT BROKEN IN ADULTS WITH
AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER FOR VIEWING EMOTIONS OF
OTHERS Jojanneke Bastiaansen1,2, Marc Thioux1, Christian Keysers1;
1Social Brain Lab, BCN Neuroimaging Center, University Medical Center
Groningen, 2Lentis, Autism Team North Netherlands, Groningen — The mirror theory of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) proposes that ASD is characterized by reduced mirroring. For emotions, Dapretto et al. (2006)
found that while children with ASD view the facial expressions of other
individuals, they do not activate areas involved in producing their own
facial expressions or experiencing their own emotions as much as typically developing (TD) individuals. To test this whether this holds for
adults with ASD, we scanned 17 high functioning ASD adults and 17
matched TDs while they passively view movies of pleased, disgusted and
neutral facial expressions. To our surprise individuals with ASD activated their ‘social brain’ not less but more strongly than TDs. In particular while viewing disgusted facial expressions, they show stronger
activations in high level visual (fusiform gyrus), somatosensory (SI/SII),
motor (M1), emotional (insula, amygdala) and mentalizing (mPFC, TPJ)
areas as well as BA45 and posterior parietal cortex. This finding challenges the mirror theory of autism by showing that at least for movies of
certain facial emotional expressions, the adult autistic brain appears to
share motions and emotions even more strongly than the TD brain. This
raises the possibility that individuals with ASD may find the social world
challenging not because it fails to engage them but because it overwhelms them. Alternatively, the observed hyper-activation may indicate
high functioning ASD adults cope with a less efficient brain by making it
work harder, utilizing both reflective mentalizing (mPFC, TPJ) and simulation (SI/SII, insula, amygdalae) to obtain the social insights TDs take
for granted.

Poster Session I

I54
PERCEPTUAL DIFFERENCES IN THE USE OF MULTIPLE
EMOTION REGULATION STRATEGIES Genna
Bebko1,2,
Steven
2
3
1,2
1
Franconeri , Kevin Ochsner , Joan Chiao ; Northwestern University
Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, 2Northwestern University,
3
Columbia University — We constantly regulate the experience and
expression of our emotions in order to maintain physical, psychological,
and social well-being (Abelson, Liberzon, Young, Khan, 2005; Gross,
2002). Prior research has shown that multiple cognitive strategies are
employed to regulate emotional responses to aversive events, a process
which, at the neural level, reflects modulation of amygdala response by
prefrontal regions (Ochsner & Gross, 2005). Given the modulation of
amygdala activity not only by prefrontal regions but also by primary
visual cortices (Vuilleumier & Driver, 2007), we hypothesized that attentional deployment may also vary depending on the type of emotion regulation strategy used. To test this possibility, eye movements were
measured while healthy young adult participants viewed negative IAPS
images and regulated emotions by using either reappraisal (N=15), an
antecedent-focused emotion regulation strategy, or suppression (N=16), a
response-focused emotion regulation strategy. Consistent with prior
studies, participants reported lower negative valence ratings for pictures
during emotion regulation compared to the attend condition. Additionally, participants in the reappraisal group showed lower negative valence
ratings relative to those in the suppression group. Novel eye movement
results show that all participants made fewer fixations during emotion
regulation compared to the attend condition, particularly in a priori
defined emotionally salient areas compared with the background. Critically, participants suppressing their emotions made fewer eye movements relative to participants reappraising their emotions. Taken
together, these results demonstrate that reappraisal and suppression vary
not only in behavioral outcome but also in how attention is deployed
across emotionally-rich visual scenes during regulation.
I55
NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF EMOTION REGULATION AMONG
YOUNG ADULTS Cristina Benavides1, Christopher Beevers1, Natalie
Dailey1, David Schnyer2 ; 1University of Texas at Austin, 2Imaging Research
Center, University of Texas at Austin — Cognitive studies have indicated
that a human serotonin transporter (5-HTTLPR) gene polymorphism is
associated with biased processing of emotional information that likely
results from altered functional connectivity within a corticolimbic circuit.
The current study utilized functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
and an attentional cuing task utilizing emotional face stimuli to investigate the neural underpinnings of this biased emotional processing. While
recording fMRI, 18 young adult females were exposed to a briefly presented picture of a face with a happy, sad or neutral expression that was
lateralized to right or left screen positions. These faces were followed by a
target of one or two asterisks presented either in the location of the picture (valid-cue, VC) or in the opposing screen position (Invalid-cue, IC).
Participants were asked to indicate whether they saw one or two asterisks. Response times indicated a clear effect of cuing for emotional faces
(happy and sad). In addition, clear neural differences were associated
with VC and IC of sad facial expressions such that VC resulted in greater
left amygdala activity while IC was resulted in greater left prefrontal
activity. Participants were genotyped for 5-HTTLPR alleles and preliminary results from 7 subjects have indicated that allele status is predictive
of responses in the amygdala and prefrontal regions such that greater
prefrontal/less amygdala activity is associated with less vulnerability to
biased emotional processing. Division of the larger sample will be carried
out when genotyping is completed.

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

I56
AGGRESSION CHANGES THE PROCESSING OF EMOTIONAL
FACES - AN ERP STUDY Katja Bertsch1, Robina Khan1, Ewald
Naumann1, Menno Kruk2, Michael Hermes1, Patrick Britz1; 1University of
Trier, 2Leiden University — According to animal research on aggression,
the perception and processing of social conflict stimuli might play an
important role both in the elicitation and in the escalation of aggressive
behavior. So far, the influence of experimentally induced aggressive
behavior on information processing has barely been studied in humans.
In an ERP study, we investigated the processing of emotional faces
(happy, neutral, fearful and angry) in an emotional Stroop task after
experimentally provoking aggressive behavior in half of our healthy participants with the Taylor Aggression Paradigm. Although participants of
the experimental group showed similar reaction times than those of a
non-provoked control group, significant group differences were found in
the amplitude of three ERP components (P200, P300, slow wave). Only
for the P200 amplitude, this group effect was also modulated by the emotion of the faces, showing largest effects for negative emotional stimuli in
the experimental group. Furthermore, in the experimental group the P200
amplitude was positively correlated with aggressive behavior. These
results indicate an association between aggression and a change in early,
more automatic as well as in later, more controlled and conscious stages
of information processing without resulting in any behavioral differences.
I57
THE INFLUENCE OF ADVICE ON REWARD BASED DECISION
MAKING AND LEARNING Guido Biele1,2, Lea Krugel1,2, Jörg Rieskamp1,
Hauke Heekeren1,2; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 2Berlin
NeuroImaging Center, Charité University Medicine Berlin — When decision
makers choose between alternatives, they can rely on their own experience with the alternatives and on advice. Here we investigate how prior
advice influences learning between different alternatives by modeling the
learning process and by describing the influence of advice on the neural
representation of outcomes. 21 participants performed a modified version of the Iowa Gambling Task, after they received a recommendation
indicating which deck they should choose. Behavioral results indicate a
long-lasting influence of advice on decisions, which was reflected in participants’ preference of the recommended card deck over a corresponding deck with the same payoff distribution, even when advice was bad.
Participants’ reliance on advice was modeled with a Reinforcement
Learning model implementing the additional assumption that monetary
outcomes from recommended alternatives are perceived to be more positive than the same outcome from a non-recommended alternative. The
fMRI analysis showed that positive outcomes were associated with stronger bold responses in the ventral striatum and in the orbitofrontal cortex.
Negative outcomes were associated with stronger activation in the anterior insula. Region of interest analyses showed that positive feedback
after recommended choices led to stronger activation in the ventral striatum, compared to positive feedback after non- recommended choices.
Negative feedback after recommended choices led to a weaker activation
in the anterior insula. These results suggest that advice influences decision making and learning by directly changing the perception of outcomes, so that gains/losses from recommended choices are experienced
as more positive/less negative than the same outcomes from non-recommended choices.
I58
10 THINGS I HATE ABOUT YOU: THE NEURAL RESPONSE TO
SOCIAL PRAISE AND CRITICISM IN GENERALIZED SOCIAL
PHOBIA (GSP). Karina Blair1, Marilla Geraci1, Jeffrey DeVido1, Daniel
McCaffrey1, Pamela Ng1, Nick Hollon1, Matthew Jones1, James Blair1, Daniel
Pine1; 1National Institute of Mental Health — Background:
Generalized
social phobia (GSP) is characterized by fear/ avoidance of social situations. Previous studies have examined the neural responses of patients
with GSP to one class of social stimuli, facial expressions. However, stud-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

277

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

ies have not examined the neural response in GSP to another, equally
important class of social stimuli, the communication of praise or criticism. Using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),
the authors examined the neural response to receipt of praise or criticism
in GSP. Method: Seventeen unmedicated patients with GSP and seventeen age, IQ, and gender matched healthy comparison individuals read
positive (e.g., You are beautiful), negative (e.g., You are ugly), and neutral (e.g. You are human) comments that could be either about the self, or
about somebody else (e.g. He is beautiful). Results: Hypothesized significant group-by-valence-by-referent interactions were observed within
regions of medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) and bilateral amygdala. In
these regions, the patients with GSP showed significantly increased
BOLD responses, relative to comparison individuals, to negative comments (criticism) referring to themselves. However, in contrast, there
were no significant group differences with respect to neutral or positive
comments referring to self or others, or negative comments referring to
others. Conclusions: These results implicate the MPFC, involved in the
representation of the self, together with the amygdala, in the pathophysiology of GSP. Further, findings demonstrate a powerful effect of psychological context on neural-circuitry hyperactivity in GSP, findings that
may help guide novel therapeutics.
I59
THE VALUED BRAIN: THE NEURAL REFERENCE SPACE FOR
CORE AFFECT Eliza Bliss-Moreau1, Tor Wager2, Kristen Lindquist1, Hedy
Kober2, Josh Josephs2, Matthew Davidson2, Lisa Feldman Barrett1,3; 1Boston
College, 2Columbia University, 3Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School — The science of emotion has long been preoccupied with
determining which states are biologically primitive—states thought to be
neurologically hardwired, present at birth, and homologous across mammals. For decades, researchers have sought the distinct neural, physiological and behavioral patterns for discrete emotions such as “anger”,
“sadness” and “fear”. While there is some evidence for this “basic emotion perspective” (for reviews see Izard, 2007; Panksepp, 2007), the majority of the evidence is consistent with the existence of a broader system of
distributed neural networks supporting more general core affective states
which are themselves necessary (but not sufficient) for any emotional
event (for review, Barrett, Lindquist, Bliss-Moreau et al., 2007). Core
affect is a biologically primitive affective state that results from translating sensory information into an internal, neurophysiological code which
is experienced as pleasant or unpleasant (Barrett, 2006; Russell, 2003). In
the present meta-analytic review, we used new meta-analytic techniques
to identify the regions consistently activated across all neuroimaging
studies of emotion published from 1995 to 2005 (N = 163). First, we identified a neural reference space for core affective processing (i.e., the processing of value) that relies on a distributed network of both cortical (e.g.,
oribtofrontal, medial prefrontal) and subcortical (e.g., amygdala, hypothalamus) structures. Second, we demonstrated that the neural instantiation of each discrete emotion category is highly overlapping within this
neural reference space. Implications for the neural investigation of emotion and affect are discussed.
I60
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING BY PUNISHMENT AND REWARD
OMISSION: EVIDENCE FROM ERROR-RELATED EVENT RELATED
POTENTIAL COMPONENTS. Maarten Boksem1, Mattie Tops2, Evelien
Kostermans1, David De Cremer1; 1Tilburg University, Tilburg, The
Netherlands, 2Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands — In
a
recent
experiment (Boksem et al., 2006), we showed that error related Event
Related Potential (ERP) components, such as the Error Related Negativity
(ERN) and Error Positivity (Pe), were related to punishment and reward
sensitivity. The present study was conducted to further evaluate the relationship between punishment/reward sensitivity and error related ERP
components. Therefore, we scored our subjects on the Behavioral Inhibition – Behavioral Activation (BIS/BAS) measures of punishment and
reward sensitivity. Then, subjects performed one of two versions of a

278

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

Flanker task: in one, they were financially punished for committing
errors; in the other, they were financially rewarded for correct performance. Analyses of ERN amplitudes indicated significant interactions
between personality measures of punishment (BIS) and reward (BAS)
and actual punishment and reward, while analyses of Pe amplitudes
showed a significant interactions between personality measures of
reward and actual reward. We suggest that ERN/Ne amplitude is related
to concerns over mistakes and depends on the level of aversion experienced by individual subjects when making these mistakes. Subjects that
are highly sensitive to punishment are strongly motivated or engaged in
avoiding punishment, while subjects sensitive to rewards are motivated
to obtain rewards and therefore show high task engagement when
rewards may be earned. The error related ERP components appears to
track this level of engagement in task performance.
I61
FAILURE TO REVISE DECISION-MAKING STRATEGIES IN THE
FACE OF CONTINGENCY SHIFTS: THE MODIFIED IOWA
GAMBLING TASK AND SCHIZOTYPY Caroline
Bowman1,
Oliver
1 1
Turnbull ; School of Psychology, Bangor University, Gwynedd, Wales, UK — The
need to adapt to a changing environment in which once rewarding strategies have become punishing is an essential ability quite often disrupted
in people with schizophrenia. This study investigated whether individuals highly rated in schizotypy, although neurologically normal, had similar problems in modifying behaviour when faced with affective
contingency shifts. Following the three-factor model of schizotypy, candidates scoring either above the 75th percentile or below the 50th percentile on each factor were selected from a database of 404 undergraduate
participants who had previously completed the Schizotypal Personality
Questionnaire (SPQ; overall mean 26.78). Sixteen participants formed the
High Schizotypy group, while 20 participants comprised the Low Schizotypy group (overall mean 40.94 & 16.25, respectively). All participants
completed the modified Iowa Gambling Task, which in addition to the
original task included shifting phases in which deck contingencies
reversed. Measures of subjective awareness, assessing whether participants had explicit knowledge about deck properties, were also collected.
Additionally, skin conductance responses (SCR) were assessed to establish any differences in psychophysiological arousal. The results showed
that the High Schizotypy group learned the advantageous decision-making strategy during the original task, but made significantly more disadvantageous choices during the shifting periods than did the Low
Schizotypy group. Moreover, this occurred in spite of apparently normal
SCRs and awareness ratings, indicating knowledge of the new contingencies. The finding that those rated highly in schizotypy are seemingly
‘ignoring’ crucial information from subjective awareness and physiological sources to the detriment of behavioural performance has important
clinical and theoretical implications.
I62
THE NEURAL MECHANISMS OF SPECIFIC PAVLOVIAN-TOINSTRUMENTAL TRANSFER EFFECTS IN HUMANS Signe Bray1,
Bernard Balleine2, Shinsuke Shimojo3, Antonio Rangel4, John O'Doherty4;
1California Institute of Technology, Computation and Neural Systems,
2
University of California Los Angeles, 3California Institute of Technology,
Division of Biology, 4California Institute of Technology, Division of Humanities
and Social Sciences — There is considerable evidence that a cue established
as predictive of a specific outcome will bias choice towards actions associated with that outcome. Formally referred to as specific Pavlovian to
instrumental transfer (PIT), this effect has been argued to model the influence of reward-related cues in advertising and drug addiction. To assess
the neural bases of this influence we scanned 23 healthy subjects with
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) as they underwent Pavlovian and instrumental training, followed by a transfer test. During the
training phase, subjects learned to associate simple visual shape stimuli
with one of four outcomes: orange juice, chocolate milk, cola and an
affectively neutral tasteless control solution. The training session also

Poster Session I

included instrumental training trials in which the subjects chose from a
pair of four possible button push actions that earned distinct outcomes:
two of the button push actions led to reward outcomes and two led to the
neutral outcome. Next, specific transfer was assessed, in extinction, by
presenting the Pavlovian cues and assessing the choice between pairs of
actions. We found a significant specific transfer effect: when subjects
chose between actions, they favored the action corresponding to the outcome predicted by the concurrently presented Pavlovian cue. Neuroimaging results showed a significant difference in BOLD responses in
ventolateral putamen on trials when subjects chose the action compatible
with the Pavlovian cue compared to the incompatible action. These
results provide important insight into the neural processes that mediate
the influence of stimulus-outcome associations on decision making in
humans.
I63
BEHOLD THE VOICE OF WRATH: EMOTIONAL PROSODY
MODULATES EARLY STAGES OF VISUAL PROCESSING Tobias
Brosch1,2, Didier Grandjean1,2, David Sander1,2, Klaus R. Scherer1,2; 1Swiss
Centre for Affective Sciences, University of Geneva, Switzerland, 2University of
Geneva, Switzerland — Emotional attention, the boosting of the neural
representation of emotional stimuli, is usually investigated within a sensory modality, e.g. by using emotional pictures to modulate visual attention. In real-life environments, however, humans typically encounter
simultaneous input to several different senses, such as vision and audition. As multiple signals entering different channels might originate from
a common, emotionally relevant source, prioritization of emotional stimuli should be able to operate across modalities. Therefore, in this study
we explored cross-modal emotional attention. Spatially localized utterances with emotional and neutral prosody served as cues for visually presented non-emotional targets in a cross-modal dot probe task.
Participants were faster to respond to targets appearing at the spatial
source of emotional compared to neutral prosody. Event-related brain
potentials revealed emotional modulation of early visual target processing at the level of the P1 component. Neural sources in visual cortex were
more active for targets appearing at the spatial location of emotional
compared to neutral prosody. These effects were not found using synthesized control sounds matched for mean fundamental frequency and
amplitude envelope, ruling out the possibility that these low-level acoustic parameters triggered the effect. Our results show for the first time that
emotional attention can operate across sensory modalities by boosting
early sensory stages of processing, thus facilitating the multimodal evaluation of emotionally relevant stimuli in the environment. Based on previous anatomical evidence, we suggest that the enhanced occipital
activation for visual targets preceded by emotional voice cues is driven
by connections between amygdala and sensory cortices.
I64
COGNITIVE REGULATION OF EMOTION: A COMPARATIVE
META-ANALYTIC APPROACH Jason
Buhle1,
Jared
X.
Van
Snellenberg1, Edward E. Smith1, Tor D. Wager1; 1Columbia University — We
performed a meta-analysis of 13 human neuroimaging studies of volitional emotion regulation in order to identify common activity across
diverse stimuli, strategies and goals. Emotion regulation consistently
increased activity in several 'source' regions: left dorsal premotor area;
left pre-supplementary motor area; bilateral inferior frontal gyrus; left
dorsal anterior insula; and a dorsal medial junction (medial BA 6 and 8,
dorsal BA 32) region (DMJ; commonly referred to as anterior cingulate
cortex). The only ‘target’ region consistently modulated by regulation
was the left amygdala. To interpret these findings we compared them to
results of previous meta-analyses of emotion and cognition, including
working memory, long term memory, inhibition, and task switching.
DMJ activity has been identified in each of these cognitive meta-analyses,
suggesting it performs a general role in effortful mental activity, while
amygdala modulation may reflect changes in the perception of emotional
material and affective salience rather than the experience of negative

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

emotion per se. We use the present findings to assess several current neural models of volitional emotion regulation, and we offer revised models
with testable hypotheses. In addition, the ‘consensus’ voluntary emotion
regulation regions derived from the meta-analysis may be useful in formulating anatomically specific hypotheses in future studies. To facilitate
such efforts, we have made the maps used here available for download
on our website (http://www.columbia.edu/cu/psychology/tor/).
I65
SPATIAL ATTENTION RELATED AMYGDALA ACTIVITY TO
MASKED FEARFUL FACES Joshua Carlson1, Karen Reinke1,2; 1Southern
Illinois University Carbondale, 2University of Illinois at Springfield — Neuroimaging studies indicate that nonconscious fearful faces activate the
amygdala, superior colliculus, and pulvinar. It has been suggested that
these structures form a subcortical fear network involved in automatic
alerting. While behavioral studies indicate that nonconscious fearful faces
modulate spatial attention the amygdala’s role in this behavior has yet to
be assessed. Twelve participants performed a modified dot probe task
while fMRI activity was recorded. Each trial consisted of two faces (from
Gur et al, 2002) simultaneously presented (33 ms) to the left and right of
fixation and immediately masked by neutral faces (100 ms), followed by a
target dot. Participants then indicated which side of the screen the target
dot appeared. Directed attention trials consist of one fearful and one neutral 33 ms face while undirected attention trials consist of either both fearful or both neutral 33 ms faces. Behavioral results revealed faster reaction
times for fear congruent relative to incongruent trials in the LVF.
Amygdala ROIs were created using MARINA to assess its role in the processing of masked fearful faces and spatial attention. Consistent with previous research, we found increased bilateral amygdala activity for
nonconscious fearful relative to neutral faces independent of spatial
attention. However, of greater interest is the novel finding that directed
spatial attention elicited by LVF masked fearful faces is associated with
increased left amygdala activity compared to undirected attention.
Therefore, both behavioral and fMRI data reveal LVF spatial attention
effects for nonconscious fearful faces.
I66
WORKING MEMORY LOAD MODULATES PROCESSING OF
IGNORED EMOTIONAL STIMULI David Carmel1,2,3,4, Emma Jane
Bradford1, Geraint Rees2,3, Nilli Lavie1,2; 1University College London, London,
UK, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, UK,
3Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology,
University College London, UK, 4New York University, New York — Executive control processes such as working memory may be critical for reducing interference from irrelevant distractors, by maintaining current
processing priorities. Previous evidence regarding whether the processing of emotional stimuli is subject to attentional control has been mixed.
Here we investigate the role of working memory in the processing of
task-irrelevant emotional stimuli. Participants categorized the affective
valence of words (positive or negative). On each trial, the target word
was superimposed on an affective face, which participants were
instructed to ignore, and which was either congruent or incongruent with
the word’s valence. This task was performed while retaining one (low
load) or six (high load) digits in working memory. Two experiments
using different negative distractor faces (sad and angry) showed that
under high (compared to low) working memory load, reaction times in
the word categorization task were longer for incongruent faces than for
congruent faces, and this difference was greater under high working
memory load. Loading working memory therefore increased interference
from the concurrently presented affective faces. We also found that negative faces were more distracting than positive faces, and angry faces were
more distracting than sad faces. These results suggest that Lavie’s load
theory of attention (e.g. Lavie, 2005) can be extended to emotional stimuli, and support the view that emotional stimuli are amenable to cognitive control. Lavie, N. (2005). Distracted and confused?: selective
attention under load. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 75-82.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

279

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

I67
FEAR AND DISGUST HAVE DIFFERENT EFFECTS ON
ATTENTION AND MEMORY Hanah Chapman1, Kristen Johannes1,
Adam Anderson1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research Institute,
Baycrest Centre for Geriatric Health — Introduction: Basic emotions models
claim that the affective domain is comprised of discrete emotions, such as
anger, fear, joy etc. By contrast, dimensional models maintain that all
emotions are just combinations of simpler dimensions, such as valence
and arousal. Most previous research on the mnemonic effects of emotion
has adopted a dimensional framework, focusing on the memory-enhancing effects of arousal. However, the effects of different basic emotions on
memory remain largely unexplored. We therefore investigated the
impact of two negative, highly arousing emotions—disgust and fear—on
memory, while simultaneously examining their role in modulating attention. Because disgust and fear have similar dimensionality, a dimensional
model predicts that they should have similar cognitive effects, while a
basic emotions model predicts that their effects may differ. Method: To
test these predictions, participants viewed neutral as well as disgusting
and fearful photographs of equivalent valence and arousal, with a horizontal line above or below each photograph. The task was to indicate the
location of the line as quickly as possible. Reaction times were significantly slower for disgusting vs. fearful images, suggesting greater attentional capture by disgust than fear. Memory was tested with a recall test
10 min after encoding. Recall of disgusting and fearful photographs was
enhanced equivalently, compared to neutral images. Conclusion: Disgust
and fear had similar effects on memory, but different effects on attention.
Thus, a dimensional model may best capture the mnemonic effects of different emotions, while a basic emotions model may best account for their
attentional effects.
I68
INFANTS’ ATTENTION TO EMOTIONAL EXPRESSIONS:
EVIDENCE FOR UNIVERSAL BIASES AND INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES Frances Chen1, Susan Johnson1; 1Stanford University — Research has shown that facial expressions of emotion influence attentional
processes in adults. Generally, spatial attention is more strongly captured
and held by negative than neutral expressions (cf., Dolan, 2002).
Depressed individuals are biased toward sad faces (Gotlib et al., 2004);
anxious individuals toward angry faces (Fox el al., 2002). Our study
investigated whether (1) emotional expressions exert similar influences in
infancy, (2) such effects are lateralized, and (3) individual differences
could be predicted by disorganized behavior in the Ainsworth’s (1972)
Strange Situation—a risk factor for later psychopathology. We tested 32
thirteen-month-olds, showing randomized, centrally-presented pictures
of a single woman producing neutral, fearful, angry, sad, and happy
expressions. 1000 ms after the infant fixated the face, it was replaced by a
small target to the far left or right. Latency to shift attention away from
the central fixation was measured. A repeated-measures ANOVA was
run with expression and target side as within-subject variables. Infants
disengaged more slowly from some expressions than others (F=6.54,
p<.001). Both fear and anger took significantly longer to disengage from
than neutral (p <.001 and p<.05 by simple contrast tests.) Infants were
also slower to disengage from the faces when the target appeared in the
left visual field (F=6.43, p<.02), suggesting a right hemisphere emotion
processing bias. The interaction between expression and disorganization
(a between-subject variable) was also significant (F=2.82, p<.03). To our
knowledge, these results provide the first direct evidence that universal
biases and individual differences exist in infants’ attention to emotional
expressions.
I69
SUBLIMINALLY-ACTIVATED EMOTION IS NOT SUFFICIENT TO
BIAS DECISION MAKING Kuan-Hua Chen1, Nai-Shing Yen1,2, HuiKuan Chung1; 1National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Research

280

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

Center for Mind, Brain, and Learning, National Chengchi University, Taipei,
Taiwan — The Somatic Marker Hypothesis (SMH) proposed Somatic
Marker (SM) can operate to bias decision making without coming into
consciousness (Bechara et al., 1997). However, other studies suggested
that the role of consciousness might be underestimated in SMH (e.g.,
Maia & McClelland, 2004). For the reason, the aim of this study was to reexamine the role of consciousness in SMH via a revised Iowa Gambling
Task. In the revised Iowa Gambling Task, we controlled the expected values of the four decks to rule out the confounding of conscious operation.
On the other hand, 10 positive and 10 negative pictures from IAPS were
subliminally presented when subjects made card selection. Specifically,
two decks were always associated with positive pictures (i.e., P-decks)
whereas the other two decks were always associated with negative pictures (i.e., N-decks). It was hypothesized that the subliminally-presented
pictures could make different emotions being generated and being
attached to different decks. Then, as SMs, these emotions would reappear
before card selection to make subjects approach to P-decks or withdraw
from N-decks. Results from 24 Taiwanese undergraduates showed that
SCRs were higher after P-decks selection than after N-decks selection
(marginally significant). More importantly, SCRs were significantly
higher before P-decks selection than before N-decks selection. However,
regarding to the number of card selection from decks, no difference was
revealed. The findings in this study altogether suggested that the emotions which were activated by subliminally-presented can reappear
before decision making. However, these subliminally-activated emotions
were not sufficient to bias decision making.
I70
PICTURE CONTENT VARIATION IN EMOTION RELATED P3
AND LPP Hui-Kuan Chung1, Kuan-Hua Chen1, Nai-Shing Yen1,2;
1National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Research Center for Mind,
Brain, and Learning, National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan — The
emotion related P3 and late positive potential (LPP) are suggested to be
related to increased attentive processing to emotional visual stimulus
(Cuthbert et al., 2000). Accordingly, it is argued that, among positive or
negative pictures, content variance might be expected because it is no
doubt that some kinds of pictures (e.g., erotic couples) are easier to catch
one’s attention than some other kinds of pictures (e.g., food). Anokhin et
al. (2006) demonstrated that viewing erotic pictures were related to larger
positivity from 200 to 600 ms post-stimulus. However, it is notable that,
in their study, (a) content variance among negative pictures was not
reported; and (b) given that the LPP can sustain to 6000 ms post-stimulus,
they only analyze the data from 0 to 3000 ms. For these reasons, the study
of Cuthbert et al. (2000) was replicated and the 18 positive and the 18 negative pictures were categorized into erotic and non-erotic, attack/mutilation and non-attack/mutilation respectively. In addition, the epoch of 120 to 6000 ms was used. Sixteen Taiwanese graduate and undergraduate
students were recruited. Results indicated that both P3 and LPP were
higher for erotic than for non-erotic pictures, and were higher for attack/
mutilation than for non-attack/mutilation pictures. Furthermore, the
content effects were announced even to 5000-6000 ms post-stimulus. As
the results, the findings in this study extend the findings by Anokhin et
al., and confirm the suggestion that the emotion related P3 and LPP
might relate to attentive processes.
I71
PREDICTING INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN DOPAMINEINDUCED
REWARD
AND
PUNISHMENT
BIASES.
A
PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGICAL PET STUDY. Roshan Cools1,2, Sasha
Gibbs2, Asako Miyakawa2, William Jagust2, Mark D'Esposito2; 1FC Donders
Centre, Radboud University Nijmegen, 2University of California, Berkeley — Adequate adaptation to our constantly changing environment requires the
anticipation of biologically relevant events by learning signals of their
occurrence, i.e. reward and punishment prediction. This learning critically depends on our ability to respond to unexpected rewards and unexpected punishments. Here we investigated the role of dopamine in

Poster Session I

responsiveness to unexpected outcomes during an observational reversal
learning task by assessing the effects of oral administration of bromocriptine (a dopamine D2 receptor agonist; 1.25mg) to eleven young healthy
volunteers. Previous research has revealed that there is large variability
in the direction and extent of dopaminergic drug effects. We aimed to
elucidate the neurobiological basis of this large variability by combining
neurochemical (fluorometatyrosine) PET imaging and behavioural psychopharmacology. The results indicate that the effects of bromocriptine
on responsiveness to unexpected outcomes can be predicted from
dopamine synthesis capacity in the striatum (r = 0.9). Furthermore, we
found contrasting effects of bromocriptine on reward and punishment
responsiveness, so that the drug induced either a bias away from reward
towards punishment or vice versa. Specifically, bromocriptine increased
reward responsiveness but reduced punishment responsiveness in subjects with low dopamine synthesis capacity. Conversely, the drug
reduced reward responsiveness but increased punishment responsiveness in subjects with high dopamine synthesis capacity. These data demonstrate that baseline levels of dopamine synthesis predict dopamineinduced biases in reinforcement-based learning and adaptation.
Supported by NIH grant DA20600
I72
NEURAL ASPECTS OF RUMINATIVE SELF-FOCUS IN
DEPRESSION Rebecca Cooney1, Jutta Joormann2, Fanny Eugène3,1, Lauren
Atlas4, Hannah Kang5, Ian Gotlib5; 1Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
Columbia University, 2University of Miami, 3Concordia University, 4Columbia
University, 5Stanford University — Rumination, or recursive thinking
about one’s symptoms and the consequences of those symptoms, has
important implications for understanding the development and maintenance of depressed moods. Rumination may also enhance cognitive
biases by increasing affective responses to negative material, increasing
access to negative memories, and diminishing successful regulation of
affect. It is important, therefore, to understand the basis of rumination,
including its neural substrates. The present study was designed to use
fMRI to examine rumination in depressed and healthy control individuals. Depressed (MDD) and control (CTL) participants underwent functional imaging while focusing on blocks of statements: Rumination,
Abstract Distraction, Concrete Distraction, and a Fixation (Baseline) condition. Compared with CTLs, MDD participants exhibited increased activation in emotion processing centers (i.e., amygdala, rostral anterior
cingulate, subgenual cingulate, and orbitofrontal cortex) and in areas
associated with autobiographical memory (i.e., parahippocampus) during ruminative self-focus conditions contrasted with distraction conditions. Further, percent signal change in the amygdala was found to be
significantly correlated with self-reported rumination. Interestingly,
MDD participants also exhibited increased activation in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex across all of the contrasts, suggesting that during ruminative self-focus depressed individuals may attempt to engage in more
effortful regulation than do controls. These findings represent the first
examination of the network of neural regions involved in ruminative selffocus in depressed individuals and add to our growing understanding of
the ways in which the brain is dysregulated in major depression.
I73
THE TIME COURSE OF PROCESSING EMOTIONAL PROSODY:
BEHAVIORAL
AND
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
INVESTIGATIONS Lauren Cornew1, Leslie Carver1, Tracy Love1,2;
1University of California, San Diego, 2San Diego State University — Research
focusing on emotion processing in the visual modality suggests an
advantage for emotionally salient stimuli; however, it remains unclear
whether a similar bias exists in the auditory modality. The experiments
presented here were designed to test for enhanced processing of emotional stimuli in the domain of speech prosody. We first utilized a gating
paradigm and presented participants with successive 250ms segments of
Jabberwocky ‘sentences.’ One group of participants heard sentences spo-

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

ken with happy, angry, or neutral intonation and indicated the emotion
conveyed following each segment. In a second group of participants, half
distinguished between happy and neutral prosody, and the other half
distinguished between angry and neutral prosody. Results indicated that
both groups identified neutral prosody more rapidly and accurately than
happy or angry prosody, arguing against a processing advantage for
emotional compared to neutral prosody. To further investigate the time
course of emotional prosody processing, and to examine whether our
results reflect a bias in perception or attention, we are currently collecting
data in a complementary event-related potential (ERP) study. The same
happy, angry, and neutral Jabberwocky stimuli are presented, but in their
entirety rather than in the spliced and successively building format utilized previously. These stimuli alternate with sequences of tones ascending, descending, or remaining constant in pitch, and a target detection
task allows for manipulation of the task-relevance of emotion. The effects
of emotion and task-relevance on components previously linked to attention (including the P300) will be discussed in the context of the aforementioned behavioral findings.
I74
GAZE DIRECTION AND FACIAL EXPRESSION RECOGNITION IN
AMYGDALA-DAMAGED PATIENTS. Chiara Cristinzio1,3,5, Karim
N'Diaye1,2,3, Margitta Seeck5, Patrik Vuilleumier1,2,5, David Sander3,4; 1Laboratory
for Behavioral Neurology and Imaging of Cognition, Geneva, 2University Medical
Center, Geneva, 3Swiss Center for Affective Sciences, University of Geneva,
4
University of Geneva, 5University Hospital, Geneva — Past
studies
have
shown a critical role for the amygdala in emotion processing. Bilateral
amygdala damage may impair recognition of facial expressions, particularly fear. However effects of unilateral amygdala damage are more controversial: some findings show that unilateral damage is not sufficient to
impair emotion recognition, whereas others show selective deficits after
right amygdala damage. Various stimulus or task parameters might
account for such differences in results, including gaze direction or presence of static vs dynamic cues. These variables have been demonstrated
to influence emotion perception. Here we investigate facial emotion recognition and its interaction with gaze in unilateral amygdala-damaged
patients (n= 19), compared to healthy control subjects (n= 10), using computer-generated dynamic face stimuli. These faces could express variable
intensities of fear, anger, or joy, with different gaze directions. According
to appraisal theory, emotion perception depends by self-relevance of the
expression. Therefore a fearful face should be more relevant if gaze is
averted than direct, because it signals danger near to the observer;
whereas anger with direct gaze should be more relevant than with
averted gaze, because it directly threatens the observer. Our results confirm a critical role for the amygdala in emotion and appraisal, showing an
interaction between gaze and emotion in controls, but not in patients.
Moreover, patients showed a general impairment in emotion recognition,
especially for fear, but with different profiles depending on the side of
lesion (greater deficit for right vs left damage) and age of pathology onset
(broader deficits before vs after 7 year-old).
I75
AFFECTIVE PRIMING OF PAIN: EFFECTS OF CUE VALENCE AND
AROUSAL ON PAIN PERCEPTION Katharine P. Dahl1, Matthew J.
Greene1, Tor D. Wager1; 1Columbia University — In this study, we investigate the influence of emotional primes and sympathetic arousal on participants' perception of painful stimuli. There are two frequently cited
“routes” to how emotional states can affect the experience of pain. The
emotional priming hypothesis suggests that exposure to unpleasant
images should amplify pain ratings, whereas pleasant images should
decrease them. The arousal hypothesis suggests that sympathetic arousal
acts to inhibit pain; by this hypothesis, high-arousal images should
decrease pain ratings while low arousal images should increase them. To
explore these questions, we presented participants with cues that varied
systematically in valence and arousal, followed by painful thermal stimuli. Cues included pairs of relatively high-arousal (High) and lower-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

281

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

arousal (Low) negative, neutral, and positive stimuli. Negative cues were
pain-specific (High) and nonspecific (Low) aversive images. Neutral cues
were the Valsalva maneuver (blowing against a closed glottis, which elicits sympathetic arousal; High) and neutral images (Low). Positive cues
were images indicating wins of $5 cash (High) and positive images
(Low). In addition to behavioral measures, skin conductance response
(SCR) and heart rate were recorded throughout the study. Preliminary
results show that, contrary to the arousal hypothesis, pain ratings were
higher when preceded by negative, high-arousal cues. Path models relating the experimental manipulations to anticipatory SCR, pain ratings,
and pain SCR are presented.
I76
NEURAL CORRELATES OF ENVISIONING EMOTIONAL EVENTS
IN THE NEAR AND FAR FUTURE Arnaud
D'Argembeau1,5,
Gui
2,3
2,3
1,4
Xue , Zhong-Lin Lu , Martial Van der Linden , Antoine Bechara2,3;
1
University of Liège, Belgium, 2Dana and David Dornsife Cognitive
Neuroscience Imaging Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
3Brain and Creativity Institute, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
4
University of Geneva, Switzerland, 5Belgian National Fund for Scientific
Research, Belgium — Adaptive decision making depends crucially on the
ability to mentally simulate emotional situations that might happen in
the future. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we
addressed the functional neuroanatomy of this process and investigated,
in particular, whether distinct brain regions are engaged depending on
the perceived temporal distance of the future episodes. Participants
imagined positive and negative events that might happen to them in the
near future (i.e., in the next few days or weeks) or in the far future (i.e., in
at least one year); they were also asked to think of some routine activities
(e.g., showering), which served as a control condition. The results
showed that envisioning near and far future events recruited the medial
prefrontal cortex and medial posterior regions (posterior cingulate/retrosplenial cortex) to a greater extent than imagining routine activities. More
importantly, part of the neural circuit engaged when envisioning the
future was modulated by the temporal distance of the events. Specifically, activation of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC; BA 11)
was greater when envisioning emotional events in the far future, whereas
the left caudate nucleus responded more to emotional (and especially
positive) events in the near future. We argue that the vmPFC might
assign emotional values to mental representations of future events that
pertain to long-term goals. On the other hand, the caudate might support
more concrete simulations of action plans to achieve rewarding situations
in the near future.
I77
HUMAN AMYGDALA RESPONSES ARE MODULATED BY
UNPREDICTABLE
PRESENTATIONS
OF
AMBIGUOUSLY
VALENCED FACIAL EXPRESSIONS. Caroline
Davis1,
Emily
Mazzulla2, Jonathan Oler2, Paul Whalen1; 1Dartmouth College, 2University of
Wisconsin, Madison — The human amygdala is highly responsive to facial
expressions of emotion, particularly expressions with ambiguous predictive value. We have previously shown that habituation rates of amygdala
response to facial expressions differ as a function of predictive value. Specifically, amygdala reactivity to clearly negative expressions (e.g., fear)
habituates rapidly with repeated presentations, while a sustained
response is observed to ambiguously valenced expressions (e.g., surprise). Importantly, the ambiguous predictive value of surprised facial
expressions can be resolved with contextual information, and amygdala
responsivity is sensitive to such context manipulations. Recent research
suggests that the amygdala is also sensitive to subtle contextual manipulations, such as temporal unpredictability, and that such unpredictability
primes anxiety-like behaviors. These results suggest that otherwise
ambiguous stimuli (such as innocuous tones or surprised faces) may be
perceived as negative in an unpredictable context. Based upon our previous data, we hypothesized that an unpredictable context would disambiguate the valence of surprised faces, resulting in habituation of

282

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

amygdala response to these faces. In the present experiment, we used
fMRI to examine amygdala responsivity to surprised faces presented in
temporally predictable (i.e., constant) and unpredictable (i.e., jittered)
sequences. We found that predictable presentations of surprised faces
produced moderate but sustained activation of the amygdala over time.
Amygdala responses to unpredictable surprised faces were initially
greater than those observed to predictable faces. Consistent with our prediction, these responses habituated over time. Future studies will be
aimed at determining whether surprised faces presented in an unpredictable fashion are indeed interpreted more negatively.
I78
FMRI BOLD SIGNAL AND ENDOCRINE CHANGES IN ELITE
SWIMMERS WHILE VIEWING VIDEOS OF SUCCESSFUL AND
FAILED PERSONAL PERFORMANCE Henry Davis1, Sari M. van
Anders2, Helen S. Mayberg3, Jared X. Van Snellenberg4, Rachel McKay5,
Aynsley Smith6, Neil V. Watson5, Todd S. Woodward5, Elton T. Ngan5, Mario
Liotti7; 1Swimming Canada, 2Indiana University, 3Emory University,
4Columbia University, 5University of British Columbia, 6Mayo Clinic, 7Simon
Fraser University — Athletes who fail may develop negative affect (NA);
those who succeed may become happy. We used mood provocation to
investigate interrelationships between mood, neural and hormonal activity as internationally competitive athletes engaged in personal self-reference (PSR) by viewing video of a personal competitive performance. As
negative provocation 14 athletes watched a PSR of career-threatening
failure whereas 12 athletes viewed exceptional, international success as
positive provocation. Post-video mood was rated. Neural activation was
measured via echoplanar fMRI BOLD signals in two blocks (4-min neutral, 8-min PSR). Salivary hormone measures (testosterone; cortisol) were
taken at Time 1 (T1: pre-fMRI blocks) and Time 2 (T2: post-fMRI blocks).
Mood provocation produced expected results with successful athletes
reporting less NA following the viewing of the PSR video than failed athletes (p<.0001). ANOVA on BOLD activations in regions of interest - premotor and sensorimotor cortices - showed greater activations for
successful than failed athletes during viewing of the PSR video (p<.01).
There were no group differences in BOLD activity during neutral stimulus viewing. Importantly, 2-way repeated measures ANOVA showed
that the ratio of testosterone to cortisol change (T:C) between T1 and T2
increased only among success athletes (p<.01). Right premotor cortex
BA6 BOLD activity was positively correlated with this percentage gain in
T:C (TCG), computed between T1 and T2 (p<.05). TCG was not significantly correlated with left sensori-motor cortex activity. Overall, the data
suggest that negative and positive PSR correspond to interrelated neural
and endocrine change.
I79
WHO CAUSED THE PAIN? AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF
EMPATHY AND THEORY OF MIND IN CHILDREN Jean Decety1,
Kalina Michalska1, Yuko Akitsuki1; 1Social Cognitive Neuroscience, The
University of Chicago — When we perceive other people in pain, the neural circuits underpinning the processing of first-hand experience of pain
are emulated in the observer. This basic neural mechanism plays a critical
role in the primitive building block of empathy that allows emotional
contagion and sharing of other’s distress. However the full blown capacity of human empathy is more sophisticated than the mere simulation of
the target’s affective state. Indeed, empathy is both about sharing and
understanding the emotional state of others in relation to oneself. In this
study, a group of typically developing children (7-11 yrs) was scanned
while presented with short animated visual stimuli depicting painful and
non-painful situations (e.g., hand stuck in a car door). Further, these situations involved either one person whose pain was caused by mistake or
inflicted by another social agent. After scanning, children rated how
painful these situations were. Consistent with previous functional neuroimaging studies of pain empathy with adults, the perception of other
people in pain in children was associated with increased hemodynamic
activity in the neural circuits involved in the processing of first-hand

Poster Session I

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

experience of pain, including the anterior insula, the aMCC, PAG, and
SMA. Interestingly, when another person inflicted pain, regions that are
consistently involved in theory of mind and emotion regulation were
additionally activated, including medial prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortices. Childrens’ ratings of pain were higher when pain was caused by
another person as compared to pain caused by self, and these ratings
were correlated with activity in the ACC.

faces elicited later brain responses than human faces, and were processed
differently at the structural level, as indicated by the smaller N170 component. As early as 80 msec post stimulus, occipital responses differentiated neutral from happy faces for robotic as well as for human faces, with
P1 wave larger in response to happy than to neutral faces. Taken
together, these findings suggest a precedence of emotion perception over
recognition of facial identity, when robotic faces are concerned.

I80
INFERRING EMOTIONAL STATES FROM INTENTIONAL
ACTION Katrin Döhnel1, Monika Sommer1, Beate Sodian2, Christoph
Rothmayr1, Jörg Meinhardt2, Göran Hajak1; 1University of Regensburg,
Germany, 2Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Germany — In
the
course of development, reasoning about emotions precedes false belief
reasoning, a critical test for having a Theory of Mind (ToM). In adults,
reasoning about others’ emotional states and false belief reasoning activate similar brain regions, like the medial prefrontal cortex, the precuneus and temporal brain regions. By presenting cartoon stories, this fMRI
study explored the attribution of a protagonist’s emotion on the basis of
its intention and the outcome of the intentional action (intention fulfilled
or intention unfulfilled). Emotion attribution conditions were contrasted
with a control condition that required reality judgments. Emotion attribution inferred from an unfulfilled intention compared to emotion attribution inferred from a fulfilled intention led to a decrease in functional
activity in the rostral part of anterior paracingulate gyrus (BA 32). This
finding provides evidence that the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) is
centrally involved in Theory of Mind processing since it extends its role
in false belief processing on emotion attribution processes. The result is
discussed on the basis of the involvement of the default mode network in
mentalizing.

I83
THE EFFECTS OF SLEEP QUALITY ON VISUAL EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS IN RESPONSE TO INCREASING EMOTIONAL
INTENSITY OF ANGRY FACIAL STIMULI IN HEALTHY
ADULTS. Joey K.-Y. Essoe1, Erin M. Ramage1, Mark W. Geisler1; 1San
Francisco State University — Past research established that the amount of
sleep (quantity) effects many indices of cognitive performance, including
event-related brain potentials (ERP's); however, there is a paucity of
research on how the characteristics of sleep (quality) may affect sensory
perception and cognition. This study measured amplitude and latency in
response to visual ERP's using photographs of angry faces, reaction
times, and subjective ratings of anger intensity in 50 (22 male, 28 female)
good sleepers (GS) and 18 (9 male, 9 female) poor sleepers (PS) as measured by the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI). Greater amplitude
differences were found between early stimulus detection (N1 component) and early sensory processing (P2) in PS as compare to GS, while
greater amplitude of cognitive information processing (P3 component)
are found in GS as compare to PS. Reaction times were significantly
impaired in PS as compared to GS, while no significant difference in the
subjective degree of anger ratings was found between the sleep quality
groups. These results suggest that greater neuronal resources are allocated toward early cognitive processing and this may be a benefit of good
sleep quality. However, there appears to be hyper-arousal in early sensory processing, and delay in reaction times as a result of poorer sleep
quality. Thus, sleep quality may play an important role in enabling the
brain to detect visual stimuli more quickly, and to process and interpret
the stimuli more accurately.

I81
EMOTION RECOGNITION AND MENTALISING IN TOURETTE’S
SYNDROME Helena Drury1, Roxanne Barrett1, Mary-Beth Young1, Jeremy
Stern2, Mary Robertson2, Shelley Channon1; 1University College London, UK,
2St. George's Hospital, London, UK — Tourette’s syndrome (TS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder in which the core symptomatology consists of
motor and vocal tics. It has been linked to a range of everyday problems
including social difficulties and inappropriate behaviours, but these may
be primarily attributable to comorbid psychiatric symptomatology. Brain
regions thought to be disrupted in TS have been linked to emotion recognition, mentalising, and executive functions. The present study compared
adults with uncomplicated TS with a matched healthy control group.
Recognition of emotional faces was intact for the TS group. Prosody recognition was also intact for neutral, happy and sad emotional voices, but
there was evidence of mild weakness in anger recognition. On the faux
pas test, a social cognition task with separate scores for affective and cognitive mentalising, the TS group showed greater variability than controls.
Implications of the findings for our understanding of TS are considered.
I82
HOW HUMAN BRAIN PERCEIVE EMOTIONAL ROBOTIC
FACES Stephanie Dubal1, Aurélie Foucher1, Maud Simon1, Pierre Canet1,
Roland Jouvent1, Jacqueline Nadel1; 1CNRS_UPMC Emotion Center, CHU
Pitié-Salpétrière — Emotional facial expression can affect cortical processing at very short latencies: the occipital P1 component amplitude, peaking at about 100 ms post stimulus, is modulated by emotional content.
Later, at about 170 ms post stimulus, the N170 component is generally
modulated by facial identity. In this study, we used recordings of eventrelated brain potentials (ERPs) to investigate how human brain perceives
robotic compared to human facial expressions of emotion. Stimuli consisted of pictures from 4 different robotic heads displaying happy or neutral expressions that were intermixed with pictures of human expression
drawn from Ekman’s set of prototypical facial expressions. 15 participants were asked to distinguish neutral from joy by pressing a button.
Like human faces, robotic faces elicited a N170 wave, though not as large
and later. Human faces were processed faster than robotic faces, with earlier P1 component, N170 component and shorter reaction times. Robotic

I84
DEFAULT-NETWORK FMRI ACTIVATION AND RESPONSE-TIME
VARIABILITY IN TRAIT ANXIETY. Christina Fales1, Todd Braver1,
Jeremy Gray2, Deanna Barch1; 1Washington University in St. Louis, 2Yale
University — Trait-anxious individuals report difficulties concentrating
but increases in attentional lapses during emotionally-neutral tasks have
been difficult to document. Anxious participants do not always show
response time (RT) differences during working memory (WM) tasks, and
neuro-imaging studies have tended to show increased recruitment of
WM areas during such tasks, rather than reduced. Recently, activation
levels in default-network brain regions have been linked to the occurrence of attentional lapses, and deactivation in some of these regions has
been associated with response time improvements during cognitive
tasks. In the current study we conducted a mixed (blocked & eventrelated) fMRI neuro-imaging study of high and low-anxious participants
during a working memory task. High-anxious subjects showed reduced
sustained fMRI activation in working-memory brain regions and reduced
sustained activation (increased deactivation) in default regions. Behaviorally, the two groups showed no differences in accuracy rates, mean
response times, or RT standard deviations. We then conducted an exGaussian analysis of RT variability that provides separate parameter estimates for mean-RT values (mu), mean-RT variability (sigma) and
extreme-RT values (tau). Activity in working-memory regions showed no
relationship with any of the ex-Gaussian measures. Similarly, defaultnetwork activity showed no such relationship in low-anxious participants. However, in the high-anxious, sustained levels of default-network
activity were significantly positively correlated with mu and sigma values, while transient levels were significantly related to tau estimates.
These findings support the idea that deactivation in default-mode
regions may be related to maintenance of attentional focus, and that such
processing may be relatively more important for anxious individuals.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

283

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

I85
COGNITIVE CONTROL PROCESSES DURING ENCODING OF
AFFECTIVE STIMULI– AN FMRI STUDY IN PTSD Kristina
Fast1,
1
1
2
Christine Amrhein , Franziska Meister , Dorothea Huber , Günther Klug2,
Thomas Meindl3; 1University Hospital of Psychiatry, Ludwig-MaximiliansUniversity of Munich, Munich, Germany, 2Psychosomatic ClinicHarlaching,
Munich, Germany, 3Institute of Clinical Radiology, Ludwig-MaximiliansUniversity of Munich, Munich, Germany — Studies on Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder (PTSD) show that these patients are characterized by impairments of memory. Different implicit and explict strategies may help to
keep traumatic contents away from awareness. These processes might
have be risk factors for developing and maintaining PTSD. In the present
study, we aimed to examine the role of cognitive control during encoding
and retrieval of emotional (trauma-related) word stimuli in patients with
PTSD. We used a so-called “directed forgetting” paradigm and an emotional stroop paradigm, with additional registration of fMRI brain activity. Our results are in accordance with the hypothesis that attention and
inhibition have a crucial impact in episodic memory in general, but in
particular, in modulating the processing of affective stimuli. We conclude
that PTSD patients draw their attention away from the traumatic content,
making it difficult for them to voluntarily influence the encoding of aversive trauma-related stimuli. Notably, this effect was accompanied by an
activation of the dorsolateral prefrontal, orbitofrontal cortex / anterior
cingulate, brain areas linked to executive control functions and volitional
inhibition and modulation of emotions, especially regarding negative
emotional content.
I86
BILATERAL AMYGDALA DAMAGE DOES NOT IMPAIR RAPID
DETECTION OF FEARFUL FACES Csilla Felsen1, Naotsugu Tsuchiya1,
Farshad Moradi1,2, Ralph Adolphs1,3; 1California Institute of Technology, 2New
York University, 3University of Iowa — Lesion and imaging studies have
shown that the amygdala is important to fear perception, but it remains
unknown at what stage of face processing it plays a critical role. One
hypothesis is that the amygdala participates in early fear detection via a
putative rapid subcortical pathway that bypasses the geniculo-cortical
pathway. To test this hypothesis, we performed two psychophysical
experiments on patient SM, who has complete amygdala lesions and is
impaired on fear recognition tasks that permit free viewing without time
constraints. In the first rapid categorization task, we briefly (40 msec) presented side-by-side two faces of the same identity, one with a neutral and
the other with an emotional expression. Subjects pressed a button to indicate which of the two was the emotional face, and were instructed to
respond as quickly and accurately as possible. In the second task, we
used a more complex visual search array of a set of several morphed faces
ranging from fear to neutral as target and distractors. Contrary to the initial hypothesis, SM did not show any impairment on either task. In the
rapid categorization task, SM was as fast and as accurate as the controls.
In the visual search task, she showed category boundary effects with
search slopes (i.e. speed of detection per item) comparable to controls.
Taken together, our results suggest that the amygdala is not necessary for
early and rapid detection of fear, but that it comes into play in later judgment and recognition.
I87
NEURAL SYSTEMS OF VISUAL ATTENTION RESPOND TO
EMOTIONAL SYMBOLIC HAND GESTURES Tobias Flaisch1, Harald
Schupp1; 1University of Konstanz — Emotional cues guide selective attention. Specifically, erotic displays, emotional facial expressions, as well as
body posture elicit enhanced activation in associative visual processing
areas. Theoretically, selective processing of evolutionary relevant stimuli
may reflect phylogenetic heritage and ontogenic experiences. To isolate
ontogenetic processes, the present study examined hand gestures with
symbolic emotional meaning. The processing of the sexually insulting
middle finger jerk gesture was compared to the thumb up gesture signaling approval and a non-emotional control gesture, the forefinger point.

284

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

While being scanned in a 1.5 Tesla magnetic resonance imaging machine,
thirty volunteers viewed images of these hand gestures displayed by 8
models. Stimuli were grouped into 12s-blocks of a single stimulus condition, interleaved with 12s-fixation periods. The three conditions were
presented in a perceptually random order and each condition was
repeated 14 times. Expectations regarding reported level of emotional
valence and arousal and knowledge about the semantic meaning of each
gesture were confirmed. As compared to the affectively neutral forefinger point gesture, passive viewing of both the offensive middle finger
jerk, as well as the approving thumb up gesture resulted in increased
BOLD-activity in extrastriate visual cortex. The main loci of these effects
were observed dorsally in parieto-occipital areas and also covered temporo-occipital regions. These results show that culturally transmitted
symbolic gestures of threat and approval direct perceptual processing
similar to evolutionary relevant emotional cues.
I88
LONG
TERM
INTEGRATION
OF
REINFORCEMENT
PROBABILITY AND MAGNITUDE: NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL
AND GENETIC COMPONENTS Michael Frank1, Bradley Doll1;
1University of Arizona — Computational modeling suggests that the basal
ganglia (BG) and prefrontal cortex (PFC) contribute differentially to
reward-based decision making (Frank & Claus, 2006). Whereas the BG
can integrate the long term probability of reinforcement via changes in
synaptic weights driven by phasic dopamine signals, the PFC is specialized to maintain the magnitudes of recent reinforcement values in a
working memory-like state. A recent genetic study identified three genes
controlling striatal and prefrontal dopaminergic function which independently modulated different aspects of reinforcement learning in a probabilistic selection task. The striatal genes predicted long-term positive and
negative probability learning, whereas the prefrontal gene predicted
trial-to-trial adaption requiring working memory for recent negative outcomes. However, it was not tested in that study whether prefrontal genes
contribute differentially to learning about reinforcement magnitudes, as
compared with their probability. Here we introduce two novel frequency-magnitude tasks designed to measure the degree to which participants learn about positive and negative reinforcement probabilities
versus their magnitudes. Pilot studies tuned task parameters such that on
average half of participants preferred higher reward probabilities, and
half preferred large reinforcement magnitudes. We will report results
from approximately 70 subjects to determine whether these biases can be
predicted by striatal and prefrontal genetic markers. Behavioral data will
also be fit with computational reinforcement learning algorithms
designed to find best fitting parameters (learning rates, sensitivity to
magnitude, etc) to each subject and whether these parameters are predictably modulated by genotype.
I89
EFFECT
OF
EMOTION
REGULATION
ON
REWARD
PROCESSING: PRELIMINAL INVESTIGATION WITH EVENTRELATED POTENTIALS Hirokata Fukushima1, Kazuo Hiraki1; 1The
University of Tokyo — Reward processing is considered to inherently
involve emotional processing. However, neural correlates of emotional
process under reward perception has rarely, at least in human electrophysiology, been nvestigated,. This study aimed to shed light on emotional characteristic in reward processing, by examining whether the
volitional effort of emotion regulation would modulate the ERP components eminent in reward processing, i.e. Feedback-related negativity
(FRN) and P300. Being measured ERPs, subjects performed a simple
gambling task under two within-subject experimental conditions; up-regulation and down-regulation conditions. In the up-regulation condition,
subjects were instructed to try to mentally behave like a highly-emotional
person concerning the gambling task. In the down-regulation condition,
subjects were tried to be a calm and less-emotional person. After each
block, the subjects scored the degree of subjective emotional impact in the
task. Those scores confirmed that the subjects could, at least in terms of

Poster Session I

subjective feelings, regulate up and down the emotional impact inherent
in the gambling task. ERP results showed that the subjects’ effort of emotion regulation influenced only P300, but not FRN: P300 amplitude was
significantly larger in up-regulation than down-regulation condition. It
has been known that the amplitude of FRN reflects motivation, stress, or
affective states, but not reflects magnitude of reward. Along with these
knowledge, our data will provide further insight about relationship
among reward, emotion, and conscious awareness of them.
I90
ATTENTION AND AMYGDALA ACTIVATION IN SPIDER
PHOBIA Antje B.M. Gerdes1, Georg W. Alpers1,3, Bernadette Lagarie2,
Katharina Tabbert2, Dieter Vaitl2, Rudolf Stark2; 1University of Würzburg,
2
University of Giessen, 3University of Bielefeld — In theory, threat detection
operates on an automatic level and should therefore activate the
amygdala independently from allocation of attention. However, previous
studies using emotional facial expressions or phobic cues yielded contradictory results. We used fMRI to examine whether different attentional
allocation influences amygdala activation. Nineteen spider-phobic
women were instructed to pay attention to and identify as quickly as possible either a moving or a stationary animal in briefly presented doubleexposure displays. Compared to congruent neutral displays (two birds),
amygdala activation was most pronounced in response to congruent
phobic displays (two spiders) and less but still significant in response to
mixed displays (spider and bird) when attention was focused on the phobic component. When attention was focused on the neutral component,
mixed displays did not result in significant amygdala activation. This
was confirmed in a significant parametric graduation of the amygdala
activation in the order of congruent phobic displays, mixed displays with
attention focus on the spider, mixed displays with focus on the bird and
congruent neutral displays. These results show that attention does modulate amygdala activation in response to briefly presented phobic cues.
I91
INFLUENCES OF TESTOSTERONE, AGGRESSION AND ANGER
ON ULTIMATUM GAME BEHAVIOR Shauna Gordon-McKeon1, Noah
Isserman2, Cynthia Gill1; 1Hampshire College, 2Amherst College — Research
suggests that during the economic decision-making game known as the
Ultimatum Game players tend to reject low offers from another player
despite the fact that this leaves both players with nothing. Some researchers believe this behavior is driven by a negative emotional response such
as anger (Pillutla and Murninhan, 1996), rather than an abstract sense of
fairness. Anger, especially in response to a challenge, has been linked to
the androgen hormone testosterone. In this study, participants were
asked to accept or reject fair and unfair offers in a sham Ultimatum Game
network. They were then asked to make offers to others in the network.
Rates of offers and of rejection were examined in relation to saliva testosterone levels, digit ratio, and scores on the Buss-Perry Aggression
Questionnaire (BPA). Significant correlations were found between rejection rates and scores on the anger subscale of the BPA (offers of two: r =
.44, p = .04; three: r = .49, p = .02). Additionally, low offers were correlated with a low digit ratio (r = .41, p = .02) supporting previous research
(Van den Bergh and DeWitte, 2006). However, there was no correlation
between saliva testosterone and Ultimatum Game behavior. This suggests that while Ultimatum Game behavior may be determined in part by
a tendency towards aggression and high prenatal testosterone (supported by correlations with digit ratio), it is not influenced by, nor does it
influence, dynamic testosterone levels (reflected in saliva testosterone
level).
I92
SNAKE PHOBICS ANTICIPATING AND RESPONDING TO
SNAKES: SKIN CONDUCTANCE RESPONSES AND FMRI
Danielle Green1, Deborah Kerr1, Tim Flink1, Issidoros Sarinopoulos1,3, Jack
Nitschke1,2; 1University of Wisconsin, Waisman Laboratory for Brain Imaging
and Behavior, 2University of Wisconsin, 3Michigan State University — Anticipation and uncontrollability have been implicated as major contributors

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

to anxiety disorders (Barlow, 2002). Previous research has found that in
anticipation of threatening stimuli, various areas of the brain along with
the sympathetic nervous system (autonomic markers like skin conductance response) are activated abnormally in anxiety disorders. The current research explores the link between brain areas activated in snake
phobia – amygdala, insula, and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) – and
skin conductance response (SCR) in the anticipation of, and response to,
aversive stimuli in both specific phobia and non-phobic controls. In the
present event-related fMRI study, SCR was collected while participants
viewed snake, fish and disgust videos preceded by cues that were the
first letter of each stimulus type: S, F, and D. Preliminary results show
greatest SCRs in phobics during the anticipation of snake cues compared
to fish and disgust cues. Controllability modulates these responses, with
phobics showing greater SCRs to controllable vs. uncontrollable snake
cues. For the response portion of the task, phobics show significant SCRs
while viewing both snake and disgust videos compared to fish. Preliminary analyses suggest associations between these SCRs and previously
reported amygdala, insula, and ACC activations in anticipation of and
response to snake stimuli among snake phobics. These results confirm
the hypothesis that SCRs in phobics would be greatest in anticipation of
and response to snakes, consistent with amygdala, insula, and ACC activations in the same subjects, and suggest that autonomic arousal is modulated by controllability for phobogenic and aversive cues.
I93
AMYGDALA
REACTIVITY
TO
FACIAL
EXPRESSIONS:
SELECTIVITY, LATERALITY AND GENDER DIFFERENCES
Tsafrir Greenberg1, Merav Shor1, Lilianne Mujica-Parodi1; 1Stony Brook
University — Despite growing evidence for the amygdala’s role in emotional processing that extends beyond fear, studies presenting facial stimuli have reported mixed findings regarding amygdala reactivity to
different emotional expressions. Furthermore, it remains unclear to what
extent activation is lateralized in response to these and other emotional
stimuli and whether differences in patterns of activation exist between
men and women. To address these issues, we performed a functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scan in 66 healthy individuals while
they passively viewed angry, neutral, happy and fearful faces. Our large
sample size permitted us to investigate more closely the role of selectivity, laterality and gender differences in amygdala-activation patterns
within a healthy population. Random-effects analyses revealed significant bilateral activation for each of the facial expressions relative to baseline. In order to assess laterality differences in the blood oxygen leveldependent (BOLD) response we performed an analysis of variance on
parameter estimates extracted from each amygdala. There was a significant main effect for laterality with greater activation on the left side. Follow-up pairwise comparisons were significant for the angry and neutral
faces only. Overall, men and women exhibited equivalent patterns of
activation, for all facial expressions, except for greater activation in
women in response to the angry faces. The present findings provide support for an amygdalar role in processing facial expressions beyond fear
with predominant activation of the left amygdala. Similar activation patterns across gender groups suggest that other factors, besides gender,
may more reliably account for variability across participants.
I94
INVESTIGATING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EXECUTIVE
CONTROL OF ATTENTION AND EMPATHY Xiaosi Gu1, Jin Fan1,
Xun Liu1, Kevin Guise1, John Fossella2; 1Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
2Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Medical College of
Cornell University — The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and fronto-insular cortex (FI) are involved in multiple aspects of cognition and emotion.
Meta-analysis has shown that the ACC and FI are critical regions in executive control of attention. Recent brain imaging studies have shown that
the ACC and FI are also involved in social cognition such as empathy, the
ability to infer and generate sensory and emotional experiences of other
people. Given that the executive control of attention and empathy are

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

285

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

Poster Session I

supported by ACC and FI as the essential structures, we predicted that
the behavioral measurements of these two cognitive processes should be
highly correlated. In the current behavioral study we investigated the
functional relationship between executive control and empathy. Executive control of attention was tested using the Attention Network Test
(ANT). Empathy was assessed by showing a set of 256 photographs we
have recent developed with left/right hand/foot in either painful or context-matched non-painful situations, to effectively induce empathetic
responses. Participants were asked to judge how painful the situation
was. In addition we administered the Adult Temperament Questionnaire
(ATQ) and the Empathy Quotient (EQ). The correlation coefficients
between executive control and empathy measures were examined.
Results were further discussed with regard to the role of ACC and FI in
executive control of attention and empathy.

13 females) and middle-SES (n=25, 16 females) African-American adolescents were administered a modified version of the Trier Social Stress Test
in groups of 2 or 3, with 10 measurements of salivary cortisol taken
throughout the procedure. A preliminary analysis (n=43) using a mixed
model ANOVA with an unstructured covariance matrix showed no main
effect of SES on overall cortisol levels and no Time x SES interaction, indicating no difference between low- and middle-SES groups in their cortisol response to the stressor. However, there was a significant Time x
Gender x SES interaction: (1) males showed a larger response to the stressor than females; (2) low-SES females showed a larger response to the
stressor than middle-SES females; and (3) low-SES males showed a
higher but delayed peak cortisol response than middle-SES males.
Results suggest that SES is an important predictor of cortisol reactivity to
social stress in adolescents but this relationship is dependent on gender.

I95
THE HUMAN EMOTIONAL BRAIN WITHOUT SLEEP: A
PREFRONTAL-AMYGDALA DISCONNECT Ninad Gujar1, SeungSchik Yoo2, Peter Hu1, Matthew Walker1; 1Sleep and Neuroimaging Laboratory,
University of California, Berkeley, 2Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston — Introduction: A commonly reported consequence of sleep-deprivation is altered mood and affect. Furthermore, a
hallmark feature of many affective psychiatric conditions is abnormal
sleep. Here, we investigated the neural impact of sleep-deprivation on
the evaluation of negative emotional stimuli using functional MRI
(fMRI). Methods: Subjects (n=26) were either sleep-deprived for 35hr
(deprivation group) or allowed to sleep normally (control group) before
performing an emotional picture-slide assessment during fMRI scanning.
Subjects viewed a series of standardized emotional pictures, ranging
form neutral to increasingly negative and aversive, and made an emotional strength judgment to each. Results: Both groups demonstrated limbic brain activation to increasingly negative stimuli, specifically in
bilateral amygdala regions. However, the sleep-deprived group
expressed a far more profound, hyper-reactive amygdala response; levels
that were +60% more intense than the control group (P=0.004). Moreover,
sleep-deprived subjects expressed a three-fold increase in the extent of
amygdala activated in response to the negative stimuli (P=0.009). Most
interestingly, there was a significant loss of functional connectivity
between the amygdale and the medial-prefrontal cortex (MPFC) following sleep-deprivation. Discussion: Together, these data demonstrate an
amplified, hyper-limbic response by the human amygdala to negative
stimuli under conditions of sleep-deprivation, associated with a functional disconnection with the MPFC. It therefore appears that sleep may
“reset” the correct brain reactivity to next-day emotional and psychosocial challenges. Such findings provide new insights into the relationship between sleep loss and affective moods disorders, hostile and nonoptimal decision-making in sleep-curtailed work personnel, and more
generally, emotional irrationality in an increasingly sleep-deprived society.

I97
BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL CORRELATES OF EMPATHY IN
DEPRESSION Julie L. Hall1, Marc G. Berman1, Vincent A. Magnotta2,
Hanna Damasio3, Thad A. Polk1, Stephanie D. Preston1; 1University of
Michigan, 2University of Iowa, 3University of Southern California — Depression has consistently been linked to deficits in affective and cognitive processing. However, little research has investigated the relationship
between empathy and depression. Using an fMRI block design, the current study investigated the behavioral, psychophysiological, and neural
correlates of empathy in 11 depressed and 18 nondepressed women. Participants watched thirteen videos, in which real patients were interviewed about their experience with chronic and terminal illness. After
each video, participants provided self-report ratings about their emotions
(e.g., personal distress, empathy, positive and negative emotion) and
helping behavior (e.g., how much help the patient needed, their willingness to offer help). Data from both groups generally supported behavioral research on empathy in that personal distress and empathy were
positively correlated and activated similar brain regions. In addition,
empathy was more strongly associated with willingness to offer help
compared to personal distress. However, depressed women showed
greater emotional responses to the videos and did not demonstrate the
typical decrease in empathy and helping for highly distressing situations,
differences which were mirrored in the fMRI data. Our findings provide
novel evidence that depression may actually increase empathy and helping, which may be because depressed individuals can better relate to others’ distress. Our data support a Perception-Action Model of empathy,
which emphasizes the need for common past experiences and overlapping neural representations for empathy to occur. However, they also
suggest that an inability to down-regulate negative emotions and helping
behavior to others’ distress may be an important factor in the development and maintenance of depression.

I96
SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS AND STRESS PHYSIOLOGY: ACUTE
CORTISOL RESPONSE TO A SOCIAL STRESSOR IN
ADOLESCENTS. Daniel A. Hackman1, Laura Betancourt2, Hallam Hurt2,
Robert J. Gallop3, Martha J. Farah1; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2Division of
Neonatology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine and the Children’s
Hospital of Philadelphia, 3Applied Statistics Program, West Chester
University — One mechanism hypothesized to underlie the relationship
between socioeconomic status (SES) and cognitive development is early
life-stress and its influence on the basal functioning and reactivity of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Higher baseline levels of cortisol
have been found in children and adults of lower SES, while previous
work in our lab demonstrated a relationship between early-life home
experiences and medial-temporal memory in adolescence. No studies,
however, have directly examined if SES predicts both baseline levels of
cortisol and reactivity to a social stressor in adolescents. Low-SES (n=18,

286

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

I98
NEURAL CORRELATES OF MORAL SENSITIVITY IN AN ADULT
INCARCERATED POPULATION Carla L. Harenski1, Keith A.
Harenski1, Matthew S. Shane1, Kent A. Kiehl1,2; 1The MIND Institute,
2
University of New Mexico — The neural correlates of moral appraisals
have been well studied in healthy populations, but have been less studied
in individuals who may have diminished moral sensitivity (e.g. brain
damaged patients, criminal populations). The purpose of the current
study was to obtain converging behavioral and neural evidence of diminished moral sensitivity in an incarcerated population. The primary
hypothesis was that behavioral indices of diminished moral sensitivity
would be associated with reduced activity in brain regions associated
with moral appraisal, including medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS), and posterior cingulate cortex
(PCC). Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data was collected
from 40 incarcerated adult males on a mobile scanner (1.5T) while they
viewed 50 unpleasant pictures, 25 of which depicted moral violations
(moral) and 25 without moral violations (non-moral). Moral and nonmoral pictures were matched on emotional arousal and social complex-

Poster Session I

ity. Participants rated each picture according to the degree of moral violation they perceived (1=none, 5=severe). Moral sensitivity (defined as the
mean difference in moral severity rating between moral and non-moral
pictures) was highly variable across participants, ranging from -0.15 to
3.78. This variability was substantially higher than in previous normative
samples (Harenski et al., 2006; 2007). fMRI results indicated increased
mPFC, pSTS, and PCC activity when viewing moral relative to non-moral
pictures. Moral sensitivity was positively correlated with mPFC and PCC
activity (but not pSTS). These results suggest that reduced moral sensitivity in incarcerated populations is associated with reduced activity in
brain regions associated with moral appraisal.
I99
BRAIN
STRUCTURE
CORRELATES
OF
INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES IN THE ACQUISITION AND REGULATION OF
CONDITIONED FEAR. Catherine Hartley1, Janelle Szary1, Bruce Fischl2,
Elizabeth Phelps1,3; 1New York University, 2Athinoula A. Martinos Center for
Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, 3Center for Neural
Science, New York University — Research employing classical conditioning paradigms has elucidated the neural systems involved in acquiring
and diminishing fear responses. However, the factors that give rise to
individual differences in fear acquisition and regulation are not presently
well understood. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that the magnitude of individuals' fear-related arousal responses and their capacity to
diminish these responses, might be correlated with structural differences
in brain regions involved in affective processing. Two previous neuroimaging studies from our laboratory explored two methods of reducing
conditioned fear, extinction and intentional cognitive regulation. We reanalyzed skin conductance response and structural MRI data from these
studies to explore whether physiological measures of fear acquisition and
regulation covaried with cortical thickness and volume in our regions of
interest, ventromedial prefrontal cortex, insular cortex, and the
amygdala. Results showed that our physiological measures of fear acquisition in both data sets correlated with cortical thickness in a region of
posterior insula. This region is thought to be critically involved in the
experience and anticipation of aversive visceral stimulation. Replicating
previous results (Milad et al., 2005), thickness in ventromedial prefrontal
cortex correlated with fear reduction via extinction. Our intentional cognitive regulation measures had no brain structure correlates. Notably,
subjects’ acquisition and regulation measures were uncorrelated, suggesting that while individuals may have a structural propensity towards
increased fear expression, these responses can be diminished via passive
extinction learning and intentional cognitive regulation strategies.
I100
THE PREDICTIVE POWER OF SOCIAL SMILES Erin
Heerey1;
1Bangor University — How do humans navigate a social world in which
no two interactions are the same? How do we choose which of many possible social behaviors to make? It is likely that environmental cues, such
as the social cues of others, guide behavior in the social world. This
hypothesis suggests that the cues we see carry information that allows us
to make predictions about forthcoming social rewards. To test this idea,
participants (N=10) played a game in which they chose which of two
faces, presented side-by-side on a computer screen, would be “happy to
be picked.” After each choice, the chosen face generated a social cue. If
the face was incorrect, it frowned. If the face was correct, it smiled with
either a pleasurable or a polite smile. Smile cues were predictive of the
next correct answer. If the chosen face smiled pleasurably, the same face
would be correct again on the next trial. If it smiled politely, the other
face would be correct on the next trial. Each face was correct on 50% of
trials, randomly intermixed. Participants won 2 pence for each correct
answer, although they only received this non-social feedback at the end
of each block. Eight of ten participants learned the reward contingency.
Across all participants, smile-type predicted response to the next trial
(p=.02). Additional data collection is underway. These preliminary
results suggest that pleasurable and polite smiles may carry reinforce-

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

ment value in social contexts, allowing receivers to predict forthcoming
rewards and serving to guide social behavior.
I101
GENE ENVIRONMENT INTERACTION FOR COMT ON
EMOTIONAL PROCESSING Martin Herrmann1, Heidi Würflein1,
Theresa Schreppel1, Andreas Mühlberger1, Andreas Reif1, Klaus-Peter Lesch1,
Andreas Fallgatter1; 1University of Würzburg — The interaction between
genes and environment is highly relevant for our understanding of the
development of psychiatric disorders. Recently it has been shown that
the catechol-O-Methyltransferase genotype (COMT) modulates the brain
activity during the processing of negative stimuli, but not for positive
stimuli. Here we tested whether life stress, as an environmental factor,
modulates this COMT genotype effect. Therefore, we measured the
event-related brain potentials in 81 healthy subjects during the processing of positive and negative emotional pictures. As expected, we found
that COMT modulates the neural correlates of emotional processing (the
early posterior negativity, EPN), but only for negative and not for positive stimuli. Including the factor life stress we could explain this missing
COMT effect for positive stimuli. We found that high and low life stress
modulates the effect of the COMT genotype on the neural correlates of
positive stimuli processing in contrary manner. We found that high life
stress diminishes the positive evaluation of stimuli but only in subjects
with the Met/Met genotype. This might be relevant for the development
of depressions, as depressed patients often describe a lost of positive reinforcement.

Linguistic processes: Other
I102
AN ERP STUDY OF NONWORD RHYMING IN 3- TO 5-YEAR
OLDS: THE EFFECT OF AGE AND PROFICIENCY Annika
Andersson1, Yoshiko Yamada1, Jessica Fanning1, Helen J Neville1; 1University
of Oregon — Previous event-related potential (ERP) research of auditory
rhyming showed the classical phonological rhyming effect (RE; N450) to
be evident in children as young as 6 years of age (Coch, Grossi, Skendzel
& Neville, 2005). ERPs to spoken nonword targets preceded by nonrhyming nonwords showed increased negativity (400-600ms post-stimulusonset) in comparison to rhyming targets, and this effect was largest at
posterior medial sites bilaterally. Thus the previous research suggests
that the neurocognitive networks involved in processing auditory rhyme
information are comparable to adults by the age of 6. The current study
extends this finding to younger children aged 3, 4 and 5 years. Behaviorally, the proportion of children with proficiency in rhyming (production
and recognition skills) increased as a function of age. When comparing
the RE in these age groups, no differences were found in amplitude.
However, the onset of the RE decreased linearly with age. An examination of 4-year-old children with different levels of rhyming proficiency
revealed similar differences in the RE. Specifically, the onset of the RE
was earlier in children with rhyming skills (production and recognition)
as compared to children of similar age with little rhyming skills. These
results will be discussed in the framework of how phonological processing and awareness impact language and literacy development.
I103
CONSONANT-SPECIFIC DIFFERENTIAL ACTIVATION IN THE
SENSORIMOTOR CORTEX MAY OCCUR PREDOMINANTLY IN
THE LEFT HEMISPHERE Eishi Asano1, Miho Fukuda1, Masaaki
Nishida1, Robert Rothermel1, Csaba Juhasz1, Sandeep Sood1; 1Children's
Hospital of Michigan, Wayne State University — By measuring gammaoscillations on electrocorticography recording, we determined whether
consonant-specific differential activation during speech occurred in the
left, right or both primary sensorimotor lip areas in children with medically-uncontrolled focal epilepsy (age: 7-17 years), who underwent epilepsy surgery. Subdural electrodes were placed on the left hemisphere in

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

287

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

four children and on the right hemisphere in the remaining four. Subjects
were asked to vocally repeat a non-semantic sound consisting of either
“Fee”, “Faa”, “Hee” or “Haa” 80 times (= 20 vocalizations per each
sound) in a pseudorandom sequence, and the magnitudes of eventrelated gamma oscillations were measured. Analysis of all epochs for all
sounds showed that gamma oscillations were increased in the primary
sensorimotor cortex for the face around the onset of vocalization in all
eight patients. Comparison between epochs for vocalizing sounds with
“F” and those for vocalizing sounds with “H” revealed that the primary
sensorimotor lip area was activated by vocalizing “F” significantly more
than vocalizing “H” in 3/4 patients with left-sided recording and in 0/4
patients with right-sided recording. The subject who showed no such
consonant-specific differential activation in the left sensorimotor cortex
had many erroneous responses due to poor auditory memory. Larger
cortical activation in the left sensorimotor lip area during vocalizing “F”
may be partially attributed to larger movement of the lip. Lack of such
consonant-specific differential activation in the right hemisphere may
lead to the hypothesis that lip movement associated with vocalization is
predominantly driven by the left hemisphere, if intact, in humans.
I104
THE EFFECTS OF CONTEXTUAL CONSTRAINT IN THE
NEURAL SPECIALIZATION OF READING PROCESSES Noemi
Aznar-Bese1, Arturo E. Hernandez1, Pilar Archila1; 1University of Houston — The
aim of our study was to investigate how contextual cues modulate the
neural specialization of reading processes in the adult brain. Twenty-four
volunteers underwent fMRI scanning at 3 Tesla while they completed a
silent self-paced sentence reading task. A total of 102 sentences selected
from Bloom and Fishler’s “Completion norms for 329 contexts” were
grouped into three experimental conditions according to the cloze probability (CP) of their target words: a high-constraint (CP>0.70), a neutralconstraint (CP 0.40-0.70) and a low-constraint condition (CP<0.40). The
analysis of the functional data revealed significant differences in the
BOLD response across conditions. Low-constraint sentences led to
increased activation of the right MTG, STG, DLPFC, fusiform area, and
MFG, bilateral IFG, and left cingulate and SFG - areas involved in language and reading processes. These results are consistent with our
hypothesis of higher cognitive demands expected for low-constraint conditions. Surprisingly, the high-constraint condition led to greater activation of the left amygdala and bilateral middle cingulate – areas involved
in processes of response monitoring, decision making and their inherent
emotional effects. These results suggest that highly predictable contexts
engage, to a greater extent, an additional continuous feedback system
responsible for the self-monitoring of performance. Taken together, our
results stress the need for stricter contextual control in subsequent reading studies.
I105
READING
VERSUS
WRITING
IN
DEEP
DYSLEXIA:
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE COMMON AND INDEPENDENT
LEXICON THEORIES Venu Balasubramanian1, Anna Barrett2; 1Seton
Hall University, South Orange, New Jersey, 2Kessler Medical Rehabilitation
Research and Education Center, West Orange, NJ — The issue of the alleged
dependency of reading and writing on oral language, an issue that was
hotly debated in the classical neurology by Pitres (1884) Wernicke (1903)
and Dejerine (1914), is resonated in two contemporary cognitive neuropsychological theories: The ‘common lexicon’ theory postulates that one
single lexicon subserves both reading and writing (Coltheart & Funnell,
1987., Rapcsak & Beeson, 2002), whereas the ‘independent lexicon’ theory
claims that the input orthographic lexicon for reading is separate from
the output orthographic lexicon for writing (Rapp 2002., Rapp, Benzing,
& Caramazza, 1997). These theories deserve to be investigated further
because they rest on a few case studies that were inconclusive. The current study undertook an analysis of reading and writing of LK, a 45-yearold right-handed male school teacher with a stroke induced lesion in the
left temporo-frontal areas. A number of tests from Psycholinguistic

288

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

Assessment of Language Processing in Aphasics (Kay, Lesser & Coltheart, 1992) were used to assess LK’s oral reading and writing. LK’s reading and writing were found to be influenced by factors such as
grammatical class, imageability and word frequency, spelling regularity,
non-word, and homophone. Although the near identical patterns of
response in LK’s reading and writing could be construed as supportive
evidence for the ‘common lexicon’ theory, the discrepancy between the
presence of semantic substitutions in reading and its absence in writing
would warrant a cautious interpretation. The ‘Common lexicon theory’
finds itself in an incompatible position with the numerous reports on isolated agraphias (Luzzi & Piccirilli, 2003).
I106
SPORTS EXPERIENCE CHANGES THE NEURAL PROCESSING
OF LANGUAGE Sian Beilock1, Ian Lyons1, Andrew Mattarella-Micke1,
Howard Nusbaum1, Steven Small1; 1The University of Chicago — Sport
is
unlike most human activities, inspiring those who play as well as those
who merely watch. For those who aspire to achieve elite performance levels, intensive practice is necessary. However, whether athletic experience
carries implications beyond the playing field (i.e., beyond action perception and production) is unknown. Here we show that sports experience
changes the neural basis of language comprehension – even when there is
no intention to act based on the language. People with different motor
skill experience rely on different cognitive and neural operations in both
overt action execution (Beilock & Carr, 2001) and the comprehension of
action-related language. In an fMRI study, ice-hockey players (n=12), icehockey fans (n=8), and novices (n=9) passively listened to sentences
depicting ice-hockey scenarios and then performed a task that gauged
understanding of spoken hockey scenarios. Participants with more
hockey experience (players and fans) were better hockey language comprehenders. This relation was fully explained by increased neural activity
in left dorsal premotor cortex and decreased activity in both primary sensorimotor cortices that occurred while subjects initially listened to the icehockey scenarios. We conclude that athletic experience changes language
comprehension through the recruitment of neural areas involved in the
selection of well-learned action plans and procedures (Toni et al., 2002;
Wise & Murray, 2000) and the inhibition of neural areas known to support the explicit step-by-step control of novel movements (Rizzolatti &
Luppino, 2001) – areas not traditionally involved in language understanding. This occurs because of experience performing and watching the
actions in question.
I107
EXPLORING INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN LATERALIZATION
OF FUSIFORM ACTIVATION DURING READING Gal
BenYehudah1,2, Elizabeth Tricomi4, Julie Fiez1,2,3; 1University of Pittsburgh, 2The
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, 3The Center for Neuroscience,
University of Pittsburgh, 4California Institute of Technology — Reading
involves a set of processing stages from visual analysis to phonological
and semantic retrieval. A large body of work has identified a left fusiform
region that is crucial to the perceptual analysis of word form (i.e. the
visual word form area, VWFA). Readers of alphabetic scripts show strong
left lateralized activation of the fusiform cortex. In contrast, readers of
nonalphabetic scripts show bilateral activation of the fusiform cortex,
typically associated with the perceptual demands of processing complex
visuo-spatial scripts. Interestingly, variability also exists in the differential activation of left and right fusiform among readers of alphabetic
scripts. To investigate the functional consequences of these individual
differences, we conducted a post-hoc analysis of fMRI data collected during a visual word-pair associate learning task. For each right-handed participant, we identified the VWFA and its right homologue as reported in
past studies. In these regions, we determined the amount of signal
change during visual word presentation, and calculated a laterality index
based on magnitude differences between activations in left and right fusiform regions. At the group level there was a significant left bias in fusiform activity, whereas individual subjects showed considerable

Poster Session I

variability in their laterality index. We used a behavioral manipulation of
word inversion (rotation by 180 degrees) to probe the behavioral relevance of these individual differences in lateralization. We found a significant relationship between larger sensitivity to word inversion and
smaller laterality indices suggesting that the right fusiform is functionally
important for some readers of alphabetic scripts.
I108
BETWEEN LAN AND P300: MARKERS FOR DISSOCIABLE
ASPECTS OF RULE PROCESSING. Angele Brunelliere1, Peter Ford
Dominey2; 1FPSE, University of Geneva, 2EMC – EA 3082 – Université Lyon 2
/ CNRS — The LAN, a left anterior negativity component, has been found
both in language comprehension tasks, after function word that predicted the subsequent syntactic structure, and in non-linguistic tasks after
function symbols predicting structural transformations to be applied to
preceding symbols (Hoen & Dominey 2000). Such results led to assume
that the LAN is not specific to language, but rather an ability for treating
structural information in rule-governed sequences. However, it is not
clear whether the LAN is related to an extraction of rules indicated by
function information, or application of a structural transformation triggered by the rule. To investigate this question, we examined ERP
responses after function symbols which predicted order of upcoming letters, i.e. either in alphabetical order or in inverse order but involved no
structural transformation. A P300 effect was observed after function symbols. Moreover, the observed sub-components P3a and P3b were modulated by the complexity of non-linguistic sequences. Hence, the P300
effect appears sensitive to extraction of rules about upcoming symbols
order. The absence of the LAN component in this experiment suggests
that the LAN is not related to retrieval of rules from memory, but rather
to structural transformation processing triggered by the function information. Hence, in a sentence, the function information allows the mapping of previously recognized words in non-canonical syntactic structure
by structural transformations. Our experiment thus offers new insights
about the processes involved in language and non-linguistic rule processing.
I109
THE EFFECTS OF ANAPHOR FORM AND ANTECEDENT TYPE
ON ANAPHORIC PROCESSING Sarah Callahan1, Janet Nicol2, Tracy
Love1,3, Jeffrey Witzel2, David Swinney1; 1University of California, San Diego,
2University of Arizona, Tucson, 3San Diego State University — Psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic models of anaphoric processing have tended
to focus on the processing of phonetically overt noun phrase anaphors;
however, a recent event-related potential (ERP) study (Callahan et al.,
2007) demonstrated processing variation related to the form of the anaphor (i.e. phonetically null vs. overt) and the type of antecedent phrase
(i.e. noun phrase (NP) vs. verb phrase (VP)). The current study used eyetracking techniques to further investigate the effect of these factors on the
processing of NP anaphors and VP anaphors. Eye-movements were
recorded while participants (n = 36) read sentences involving overt NP
anaphors (e.g. The rebel pursued the boat and the colonel pursued it too
following for days.), overt VP anaphors (e.g. …and the colonel did it
too…), or null VP anaphors (e.g. …and the colonel did too…). As a secondary manipulation, the frequency of the antecedent of the overt NP
anaphor was also varied (e.g. HIGH-FREQ: boat vs. LOW-FREQ: raft). As
predicted, the frequency manipulation revealed the standard effect of
longer first-pass fixation times for low-frequency words. Of greater interest and consistent with the previous ERP study, both the antecedent type
and the anaphor form had a significant effect on first-pass fixation times
for the anaphor region (e.g. and the colonel did/did it/pursued it too).
Taken together, the results of the ERP and eye-tracking studies suggest
that the development of comprehensive models of anaphoric processing
will benefit from further research aimed at elucidating the effects of characteristics of the antecedent and anaphor.

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

I110
LANGUAGE CONTENT AND CARRIER: THE FUNCTIONAL
NEURAL
ORGANIZATION
OF
SIGN
AND
SIGNER
IDENTIFICATION FROM POINT-LIGHT DISPLAYS Cheryl
M.
Capek1, Karine Gazarian1, Ruth Campbell1, Bencie Woll1, Mairéad MacSweeney2,
Anthony S. David3, Philip K. McGuire3, Michael J. Brammer3; 1DCAL,
University College London, 2BBSU, Institute of Child Health, University College
London, 3Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College London — Language perception typically involves processing information about the carrier, in addition to lexical content. In spoken language, speaker identity is conveyed
by acoustic properties in voice whereas in signed language, signer identity is expressed through hand and body movements as well as visual
characteristics present in full pictorial displays. Using fMRI, we studied
12 congenitally, profoundly Deaf native signers of British Sign Language
(BSL) as they viewed blocks of point-light displays (PLDs) composed of
signers producing BSL signs alternating with two baseline conditions
(non-biological movement and still dot arrangements). PLDs were chosen to ensure that no facial or other pictorial information could aid identification. Participants viewed the stimuli in two identification
experiments: 1) sign and 2) signer. Compared to the moving dot baseline,
both identification tasks elicited activation in the right inferior and middle frontal gyri and temporo-parieto-occipital cortices in both hemispheres. In addition, distinct activations were observed as a function of
identity task, even when differences in task difficulty (signer > sign) were
accounted for in the analysis. Signer identification elicited greater activation than sign identification in the temporo-occipital cortices of both
hemispheres, including the posterior STS, which has previously been
shown to be involved in recognising person identity from voice and nonlinguistic PLDs. In contrast, identifying signs elicited greater activation
than identifying signers in the right inferior and superior parietal lobules
and superior extrastriate cortex. These findings suggest that, as for spoken language, identifying the language carrier and content in signed language relies on non-identical neural networks.
I111
IS LANGUAGE-SWITCHING A MATTER OF SUBJECTIVE
FREQUENCY?: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS STUDY
USING MASKED PRIMING Krysta Chauncey1, Jonathan Grainger2,
Phillip J. Holcomb1; 1Neurocognition Laboratory, Tufts University, 2Universite
de Provence — It is generally accepted that switching between languages
incurs cognitive costs under most circumstances. Previous research has
shown that this cognitive cost occurs during automatic lexical processes
(Chauncey, Grainger, & Holcomb, in press)--e.g., an L1 prime followed
by an L2 target causes an increase in the N250’s amplitude when compared to a within-language prime-target pair, whereas an L2 prime followed by an L1 target causes an increase in the N400’s amplitude when
compared to a within-language prime-target pair. As this was shown in
non-balanced bilinguals, these results could be due to experienced word
frequency (since participants had more exposure to their L1 than their L2,
all L1 items were necessarily higher frequency than any L2 items). This
possibility was tested by examining “frequency-switching” effects within
one language using masked priming and ERPs. Primes and targets could
either be from the same frequency range (low-low, high-high) or from
different frequency ranges (high-low, low-high). If the language-switching costs observed by Chauncey et al. (in press) were caused by differences in subjective frequency across L1 and L2 words, then the same
pattern of effects should be observed when switching between frequency
ranges as were seen when switching between languages. However, no
such effects were observed. This data will be discussed in relation to earlier language-switching data to examine the root of language-switching
costs.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

289

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

I112
WHEN THINGS DO NOT REFER: AN FMRI STUDY Nicole
Chevalier1, Edith Kaan1, Guojun He2, Yijun Liu2; 1University of Florida,
Program in Linguistics, 2University of Florida — How do we analyze quantifiers in multi-sentence discourses when they do not match? Discourse
processing is generally considered a right hemisphere function; however
this stance is somewhat controversial, as experiments until now have not
elicited consistent results. To determine what areas of the brain speakers
activate and thereby gain a better understanding of discourse and quantifier processing, we designed and conducted the following fMRI experiment. Sixteen neurologically healthy, monolingual speakers of English
viewed 133 sets of two-sentence trials (constructed based on the results of
3 offline pretests). Experimental sentences either had matching quantifiers or mismatched ones: Four tires were leaking some air. All four had
already been patched last week. (plausible); Four tires were leaking some
air. All three had already been patched last week (implausible). The first
sentence of each set was presented two words at a time, for 400ms each
(200ms blank in between). The first two words of the second sentence
(containing the second quantifier) were presented in the same manner;
the rest of the second sentence was shown word-by-word for 300ms each
(separated by 200 ms blank). Subjects were then cued to respond by
pressing buttons whether the two sentences were plausible or implausible together. Preliminary data from a comparison of the differential activation of the implausible versus the plausible condition supports the idea
that the right hemisphere is involved in discourse processing: the right
hemisphere cingulate, precentral, and postcentral gyri, as well as the left
inferior parietal lobule are activated to a significant degree.
I113
THE ROLE OF EXPERTISE IN LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION:
HOW NEURAL ACTIVITY CHANGES WITH INCREASING
EXPOSURE TO CATEGORICALLY RELATED SENTENCES
Matthew Cieslak1, Ian Lyons1, Sian Beilock1; 1The University of Chicago — We
are often repeatedly exposed to information about a specific category of
events. For example, in a meeting or lecture, one will hear a variety of different sentences all addressing the same topic. Does neural activity
underlying the comprehension of these sentences vary with increasing
exposure? Furthermore, does this pattern of activation depend on the
degree of prior experience we have with the topic at hand? In an fMRI
study, we examined how the neural activity of expert hockey players
(n=12) and hockey novices (n=9) changed as they listened to sentences
about hockey-specific events and everyday events in which all participants should be experienced. While passively listening to hockey-related
sentences, hockey players showed activation increases over time (i.e.,
after several minutes of exposure to 20 different sentences of each type
randomly intermixed) in occipital and parietal regions involved in visually simulating the meaning of linguistic stimuli. Novices also showed
increasing activation in these areas, but only for everyday (non-hockey)
sentences. These results suggest that visual cortical areas may be sensitive to repeated processing of event-related linguistic stimuli in a given
category. We interpret this finding to reflect changes in how the sentences’ meaning is understood. Moreover, these changes appear to be
sensitive to one’s domain of expertise. Experts (e.g., hockey players listening to hockey-sentences or even hockey novices listening to everyday
sentences) may increasingly recruit these visual areas as one hears more
sentences that are about domains with which they are familiar.
I114
“WHAT YOU ENCODE IS NOT NECESSARILY WHAT YOU
STORE”: AN ERP STUDY OF PHONOLOGICAL PROCESSING
Sonia Cornell1, Aditi Lahiri1,2, Carsten Eulitz1; 1University of Konstanz,
Germany, 2University of Oxford, England — Models of speech perception
differ with respect to the question, how detailed phonological information of speech is represented in the mental lexicon. One option is not to
store redundant information in order to ensure efficient processing.
Alternatively, models can assume full specification of all phonological

290

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

and phonetic details in the mental lexicon. The Mismatch negativity
(MMN), an automatic change detection response in the brain, which is
sensitive to language-specific information, has been used to demonstrate
underspecified phonological representations for isolated vowels. The
present MMN-study extends these findings by using linguistically more
complex stimuli.Three German vowels [e], [o], [Ø] placed in words (e.g.
M[Ø]ren-M[o]ren) and identical non-words (e.g. M[Ø]ken – M[o]ken)
were presented, each serving as standard and deviant. Only models
assuming underspecification of phonological features predict an asymmetry of MMNs within the reversal of vowel contrasts, presented as standard and deviant. For instance, vowels like [Ø] which are assumed to be
underspecified for place of articulation, cannot build up this representation when presented as standard. Consequently, they do not conflict with
other vowels, which will then be reflected in reduced MMN amplitudes.
Results showed exactly this asymmetry in the MMN with the largest
amplitudes when the unspecified deviant [Ø] maps onto the represented
standard /o/. Finding these differential MMN asymmetries for similar
acoustic/phonetic differences between pairs of vowels in isolation as well
as in linguistically more complex structures suggests that the brain refers
to underspecified phonological representations during speech perception.
I115
PHONEMIC DISCRIMINATION IN CHILDREN WITH CEREBRAL
PALSY Nina Davids1,2, Danille van den Brink2,3, Holger Mitterer4, Hans van
Balkom1, Jan de Moor1, Miranda van Turennout1,2, Ludo Verhoeven1; 1Behavioural
Science Institute, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2F.C. Donders Centre
for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Radboud University
Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands — Cerebral Palsy (CP) is a nonprogressive posture and motor disorder which is caused by brain damage during pregnancy, birth or first year of life. A large majority of children with CP have reading and spelling problems. If they could learn to
read they would be less restricted in communicating and would have
access to more learning materials. The cause of the reading and spelling
problems is unclear. Precursors of learning to read may not be normally
developed in children with CP. The present study investigates whether
children with CP differ from age-matched controls in phonemic discrimination, a low-level precursor of learning to read. This is studied by means
of an ERP study, using the mismatch negativity (MMN). The MMN
reflects the brain’s automatic response to any infrequent discriminable
change in a stream of auditory stimuli (Näätänen, 2003). ERPs were
recorded from children with CP (range: 4-6 years old) while they passively listened to series of speech stimuli and watched a silent movie.
Stimuli included standard /i/ sounds which were intermixed with three
deviants /u/, /y/ and high pitch /i/, resulting in a small and large phonemic contrast and a pitch contrast. The results indicated that the children with CP showed similar effects as the control children. We conclude
that children with CP do not have an impairment with respect to phonemic discrimination. Therefore, future research should focus on higher
levels of learning to read.
I116
CORPUS CALLOSUM AND LONGITUDINAL ASSOCIATION
FIBER RADIAL DIFFUSIVITY CORRELATES WITH READING
ABILITY IN DYSLEXIA AND NORMAL READING Marc
Dubin1,
Sumit Niogi1, Aziz Ulug2, Bruce McCandliss1; 1Sackler Institute for
Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Cornell Medical College, 2Weill Cornell
Medical College — Radial diffusivity (RD) provides a measure of the
degree to which white matter restricts diffusion of water, and has
recently been shown to correlate with an important precursor skill to
early reading, phonological awareness, specifically in regions of interest
in the corpus callosum (CC) restricted to fibers that project to temporal
lobes (Dougherty, et al 2007). The current study examines this effect by
attempting to correlate Tract Based Spatial Statistics (TBSS) analysis of
RD in all the major white matter tracts with a more direct measure of

Poster Session I

reading skill in a sample of average to reading disabled children. Replicating and extending previous findings, RD in caudal regions of the CC is
correlated with reading skill. As in the previous study, this finding is anatomically specific to a caudal subregion of the CC known to project to
temporal lobes. Furthermore, we find that correlation with reading skill
is cognitively specific in that there is no such correlation with standardized performance on a short term working memory task. Additional
regions demonstrating positive correlations between major white matter
tract RD and reading skill include clusters in the superior longitudinal
fasciculus (SLF) and inferior longitudinal fisciculus (ILF) in the left, but
not right, hemisphere. Results support recent findings suggesting that CC
morphology is implicated in developmental dyslexia in a way that might
specifically impact temporal lobe function and morphology, yet also suggest a role for association pathways within the left hemisphere, including
longitudinal fasciculi connecting anterior and posterior brain regions.
I117
EMOTIONAL VALENCE MODULATE THE PHONOLOGY
PROCESSING DURING CHINESE CHARACTER READING: AN
FMRI STUDY Ning Fan1, Danling Peng1; 1State Key Laboratory of
Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University — This
study used event-related fMRI to examine if the emotional valence can
impact on the phonological processing of Chinese character, and the
interaction with the character frequency. A 3 (Emotional valence: negative, positive, and neutral) × 2 (Frequency: high and low) design was
selected. The number of stroke, concreteness and arousal level of the
emotion characters were matched among the conditions. Subjects (N=14,
8 females) viewed a series of characters and were asked to perform a
rhythm decision task. The behavioral data revealed that negative and
positive valence accelerated the low-frequency characters’ performance,
but not for the high-frequency characters. However, high-frequency positive characters’ reaction was slower than high-frequency negative and
neutral stimulus. When contrast negative with neutral characters, there
was increased activation in anterior and posterior cingulate cortex, posterior area of left middle/superior temporal gyrus, as well as bilateral
amygdala. Compared positive to neutral character, only under the lower
threshold, greater activation was occurred in anterior cingulate cortex,
left hippocampus and bilateral superior parietal gyrus. Related to highfrequency characters, low-frequency characters activated left dorsal-lateral frontal cortex, left inferior parietal lobule, and right fusiform gyrus.
ROI analysis indicated that the interaction between emotional valence
and frequency was significant in left inferior frontal gyrus, anterior and
posterior cingulated gyrus. The result suggested that the emotional modulation on phonology processing had more efficiency in low-frequency
characters. Cingulated cortex, left temporal cortex and left inferior frontal
cortex, which related to attention, phonological store and retrieve respectively, were sensitive to the modulation.
I118
PROSODY
INFLUENCES
THE
LISTENER'S
ONLINE
REPRESENTATION OF THE SPEAKER'S THOUGHTS Evelina
Fedorenko1, Lillia Cherkasskiy2, Rebecca Saxe1; 1MIT, 2Stanford University — An
important factor that affects interpretation of a linguistic utterance is its
prosody (a combination of extra-lexical acoustic cues). In two studies
(one behavioral, one fMRI), we investigated the effects of prosody on
meaning in the domain of social cognition. We manipulated the prosodic
contour of the phrase “I think” in naturalistic dialogs, contrasting the version of “I think” where both words were unstressed and the version
where “I” was stressed (a combination of an increase in pitch height,
intensity and lengthening). Speakers use the latter prosodic contour to
draw attention to their own opinions, in contrast to opinions of others. In
the behavioral study, we found that people infer greater confidence of the
speaker (but do not themselves form more confident opinions) when “I”
is stressed. In the fMRI study we first identified brain regions that have
been implicated in forming a representation of someone’s thoughts. We
then compared the activation in these regions to “I think” sentences with

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

different prosodic contours. These regions show a higher response to the
condition where “I” is stressed than to exactly the same sentence if both
words are unstressed. These results have implications for both linguistic
processing (by demonstrating that subtle prosodic manipulations can
affect meaning), and for social cognition (by investigating the circumstances under which comprehenders represent a speaker’s thoughts in an
on-line, naturalistic task).
I119
THE
LONG
ROAD
TO
AUTOMATION:
TIMING
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF LETTER/
SPEECH-SOUND INTEGRATION REVEALED WITH ERP. Dries
Froyen1,2, Milene Bonte1,2, Nienke van Atteveldt1,2, Hanne Poelmans1,2, Leo
Blomert1,2; 1Maastricht University, The Netherlands., 2Maastricht brain
imaging center (M-BIC), The Netherlands — In transparent languages mastery of letter/speech-sound associations is standard within one year of
reading instruction. If and how this is reflected in brain processes is currently unknown. A recent event-related potentials (ERP) study demonstrated automatic integration of letters and speech-sounds in fluently
reading adults early in neural processing time (at 150 ms) [1]. Additionally, manipulating stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) revealed a narrow
temporal window of integration (at 0ms SOA, not at 100 or 200ms SOA).
The present study aimed to unveil when and how letter/speech-sound
integration becomes automatic by employing the same ERP-paradigm
with beginning (8y) and advanced (11y) readers. In an auditory oddball
paradigm, speech-sounds were presented in isolation or in the context of
letters appearing either simultaneous with or 200ms before the speechsound (0 or 200ms SOA). In beginning readers, the early effect of letters
on speech-sound processing (at 150ms), as shown in adults, was not
present. Instead, they showed a later effect (at 650ms), but only at SOA
200ms. Advanced readers showed an adult-like early effect (at 150ms),
however despite four years of reading instruction, only at 200ms SOA. At
0ms SOA, only a late effect (at 650ms) was present. In sum, a double shift
in timing characteristics of letter/speech-sound processing was found; in
latency (from late to early) and temporal window of integration (from 200
to 0ms SOA). These results indicate extended neural development of letter/speech-sound processing, most likely caused by a reciprocal interaction between brain maturation and reading experience. [1] Froyen e.a., in
press, NSL
I120
SUBTYPES OF DYSLEXIA Marion Grande1, Elisabeth Bay1,2, Helen
Schreiber2, Julia Tschierse1, Klaus Willmes1, Walter Huber1, Katrin Amunts1,2,
Stefan Heim2; 1University Hospital Aachen, 2Institute for Neurosciences and
Biophysics - Medecine, Research Centre Juelich — Different theories conceptualise dyslexia as either a phonological, attentional, auditory, magnocellular, or automatisation deficit. Such heterogeneity suggests the existence
of yet unrecognised subtypes of dyslexics suffering from distinguishable
deficits. The purpose of the study was to identify cognitive subtypes of
dyslexia. Out of 642 children screened for reading ability 49 dyslexics and
48 controls were tested for phonological awareness, auditory discrimination, motion detection, visual attention, and rhythm imitation. A combined cluster and discriminant analysis approach revealed three clusters
of dyslexics with different cognitive deficits. Compared to reading-unimpaired children cluster #1 had worse phonological awareness; cluster #2
had higher attentional costs; cluster #3 performed worse in the phonological, auditory, and magnocellular tasks. These results indicate that dyslexia may result from distinct cognitive impairments. The underlying
neurofunctional mechan isms are currently being investigated and will
also be presented.
I121
HOW DOES THE BRAIN DEAL WITH THE SYNTAX OF TWO
NATIVE LANGUAGES? AN ERP STUDY IN EARLY BILINGUALS
Manfred F. Gugler1, Sonja Rossi1, Angela D. Friederici1, Anja Hahne1; 1Max
Planck Institute for Human Cognitive & Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — The
age of acquisition of one or more languages seems to be one important

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

291

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

factor in determining how the learned languages are processed in the
brain. In the present study the syntactic processing in German-Italian
bilinguals was investigated with event related brain potentials (ERPs).
For this purpose, a German and an equivalent Italian material were created. Each material contained four different experimental conditions,
namely a correct sentence, a word category violation, a morphosyntactic
violation, and a combination of both violation types. 12 German-Italian
bilinguals who learned both languages in their families from birth on and
thus had a very early age of acquisition participated in the EEG study.
The results show the same ERP components when participants heard the
German and the Italian sentences. In detail, word category violations
compared to correct sentences elicited an early anterior negativity reflecting early phrase structure building processes, followed by an additional
negativity probably reflecting referential integration processes and a
P600 suggesting syntactic reanalysis. Results for the morphosyntactic
versus correct condition show an anterior negativity indicating the processing of the morphosyntactic error followed by a P600. Finally, combined violations elicited the same ERP components as in the pure word
category condition suggesting a primacy effect of word category information over morphosyntactic aspects. These findings indicate that at least
when two languages are acquired very early the brain processing mechanisms are similar for both languages suggesting that both languages
recruit the same underlying neuronal mechanisms.
I122
THE N200 AS AN INDEX OF ORTHOGRAPHIC PROCESSING IN
A REICHER-WHEELER PARADIGM Margaret M. Gullick1, Elyse
George1, Priya Mitra1, Donna Coch1; 1Dartmouth College — Previous
research has suggested that the N200 component of the event-related
potential (ERP) waveform may index early, automatic orthographic processing. To investigate the sensitivity of the N200 to orthography, we
used a variant of the Reicher-Wheeler task in an ERP paradigm. We
briefly presented (40 ms) four-letter strings, followed by a mask (200 ms),
then a string of four hash marks with one letter below and one letter
above a given hash mark; this required a button-press response indicating which of the two letters had been presented in the masked string in
that position. ERPs were recorded to the masked four-letter strings,
which were real words (DARK/PARK), pseudowords (DARL/PARL), or
nonwords (RDKA/RPKA); here followed by forced-choice letters D and
P. In participants run to date (n = 13, half the full sample), a behavioral
word superiority effect (WSE) was evident: letter choices were more
accurate for words than nonwords (p < .01). A pseudoword superiority
effect (PWSE) was also evident, with greater accuracy for letters in
pseudowords than nonwords (p < .01). Electrophysiologically, mean
amplitude of the N200 (170-220 ms) was greater for nonwords than
words at posterior, right hemisphere sites (condition x hemisphere x
anterior/posterior, p < .05) and was greater for nonwords than
pseudowords (condition, p < .05). Our findings from a classic masked
priming, forced-choice letter paradigm adapted into an ERP format are
consistent with the suggestion that the N200 is sensitive to early, automatic orthographic processing in terms of both a WSE and a PWSE.
I123
WHAT’S THE POINT OF GESTURES? ERPS DURING CO-SPEECH
POINTING IN ABSTRACT SPACE. Thomas Gunter1, Henning Holle1,
Douglas Weinbrenner1; 1Max-Planck-Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — An increasing number of neuroscience studies have shown that gestures can impact language comprehension. Here,
we explored the effects of abstract pointing gestures. Typically, a pointing gesture indicates a certain direction, location or object. It is, however,
also possible that a pointing gesture does not have a preexisting target,
but is directed towards seemingly empty space. In such abstract deixis a
physically empty location is assigned a meaning by virtue of being the
target of a pointing gesture. For instance, when talking about pets, a
speaker could refer to ‘cat’ using a left pointing gesture and to ‘dog’ by a
right one. Then, by observing a pointing either to a left or right position,

292

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

all interlocutors may be able to infer which animal is referred to. While
EEG was recorded, participants were presented with an interview in
which a female was interviewed on 84 topics (i.e. animals: ‘What kind of
pets do you like more, cats or dogs?’). By answering several topic-related
questions the interviewee established abstract space (cf. left: cats, right:
dogs). During the response on the last question of a particular topic,
either a correct or an incorrect pointing gesture was made by the interviewee. The ERPs elicited by incorrect co-speech pointing showed an
N400-like negativity between 200 and 450 ms followed by a slow positivity between 600 and 800 ms. Tentatively, we interpret the negativity to
reflect difficulty of semantic integration of co-speech pointing into the
speech context, whereas the positivity possibly reflects a reanalysis process.
I124
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL BRAIN ACTIVITY IN SPANISH SIGN
LANGUAGE PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FOR SEMANTIC AND
PHONOLOGICAL STRUCTURE. Eva Gutierrez1, Oliver Müller1,
Cristina Baus1, Manuel Carreiras1; 1University of La Laguna — The present
ERP study investigates lexical processing in Spanish Sign Language by
means of formal and semantic priming. Studies of word recognition in
spoken languages have used priming as a tool to explore the structure of
word representations: Word pairs are presented that share a property of
interest and performance is compared to word pairs without any relation.
The assumption is that only the manipulation of properties encoded in
word representations would lead to processing differences. Such priming
effects have not only been found for behavioral measures, but also for the
ERP. This study extends the ERP priming methodology to a signed language, testing whether overlap in phonological properties, as well as
semantic characteristics, affects word recognition also in a different language format. According to the seminal work of Stokoe one can classify
each sign regarding three phonological parameters: handshape, location,
and movement. In three phonological experiments, critical prime-target
pairs were equal regarding one particular parameter (handshape, movement, or location) while being different on the other two. In addition, we
included an identity priming condition to differentiate phonological and
visual-perceptual effects. A further experiment manipulated the semantic
relatedness of prime-target pairs. Eight deaf native speakers and ten deaf
non-native speakers participated in the experiment. Results indicate a
difference in amplitude in the N400 window for the semantic manipulation, as well as for phonological manipulations involving location and
movement, but not handshape. Furthermore, identity priming produced
a difference in peak latency, with repeated signs showing an earlier peak
than unrelated ones.
I125
CORTICAL ACTIVATION EVOKED BY SPOKEN WORD FORMS
AND REPETITIONS IN SLI AND DYSLEXIA Päivi Helenius1, Tiina
Parviainen1, Ritva Paetau2, Riitta Salmelin1; 1Brain Research Unit, Helsinki
University of Technology, Finland, 2Helsinki University Central Hospital,
Finland — Young adults with a history of specific language impairment
(SLI) differ from reading impaired (dyslexic) individuals in terms of limited vocabulary and poor verbal working memory capacity. We tracked
cortical processing of spoken word forms in young adults with SLI
(n=10), dyslexia (n=9), and normal language development (n=13) using
magnetoencephalography (MEG). The stimuli were 7-8-letter spoken real
words and pseudowords, presented every 2.5 seconds. Stimuli were
either repeated immediately after first presentation (75 target words/
pseudowords) or presented only once (150 filler items). The participants
were instructed to listen to the stimuli and respond to proper nouns by
button press. The spoken words evoked a transient peak at 100 ms (N100)
followed by longer-lasting activation peaking around 400 ms (N400) in
the left and right temporal cortex. The effect of lexicality (words vs.
pseudowords) was detected about 400 ms onwards as activation culminated for words but continued for pseudowords. This effect was more
pronounced in the left than right hemisphere in control subjects. The left

Poster Session I

hemisphere lexicality effect was also present in dyslexic adults but was
insignificant in subjects with SLI, possibly reflecting their limited vocabulary. The N400 activation between 200-700 ms was attenuated by the
immediate repetition of words and pseudowords in both hemispheres. In
SLI adults the repetition effect was abnormally weak between 200-400 ms
after word and pseudoword onset, suggesting impaired short-term maintenance of recently activated lexical candidates in the bilateral temporal
networks. The potential role of attenuated repetition effect in vocabulary
growth and SLI is discussed.
I126
ROUTES TO ACHIEVING LITERACY IN DEAF READERS: THE
CASE OF NATIVE AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE (ASL) USERS
Elizabeth Hirshorn1, Matt W.G. Dye1, Peter C. Hauser2, Daphne Bavelier1;
1Brain and Cognitive Sciences & Center for Language Sciences, University of
Rochester, 2National Technical Institute for the Deaf, Rochester Institute of
Technology — For hearing children, the sounds of a language play a key
role in learning to read. They learn early on that the sound of the word
'cat' is composed of separable sound units /k/-/a/-/t/. This 'phonological awareness' is tightly coupled with reading skills in normal readers
and dyslexics alike. If sounding out words is so important to young readers, how do profoundly deaf individuals, with little or no hearing in the
speech range, achieve literacy? A battery of new behavioral measures
was administered to deaf native signers to assess the role of phonological
awareness, short-term memory, speech-reading, and ASL fluency in
reading comprehension in this population. The goal was to characterize
the skills that distinguish good deaf readers from poor ones. Importantly,
our tests of phonological awareness were designed to detect phonological
knowledge based solely on orthographic cues separately from that based
on a deeper understanding of sound structure, by taking advantage of
the irregularities of grapheme to phoneme correspondence in English.
Tests at varying levels of analysis (e.g., phoneme, syllable, rime) also provided greater details about the profile of a good deaf reader. Finally,
functional imaging during single word and sentence reading allowed us
to characterize the neural networks involved in reading in the deaf, and
how such networks correlate with the cognitive skills identified to support reading in the deaf. Implications for clinical populations who face
difficulties learning to read through traditional instruction will be discussed.
I127
LEFT, RIGHT, CENTER: INTERHEMISPHERIC COMMUNICATION
IN WORD NAMING Zoe Hunter1,3, Padraic Monaghan2; 1University of
Muenster, Germany, 2University of Lancaster, United Kingdom, 3Royal
Holloway University of London, United Kingdom — To try and define those
principles that govern interhemispheric communication, we investigated
how different types of supplementary stimuli can influence processing
speed in a lateralized word naming task. In order to identify information
that is beneficial to processing when presented contralateral to the target
word we compared five conditions in a cued visual half-field design: unilateral (____>word), bilateral length (xxxx>word), bilateral congruent
(word>word), bilateral CAPITAL (WORD>word) and bilateral incongruent (foil>word). For all conditions the target was also shown in the LVF.
We found a significant RVF advantage for word naming responses in all
five conditions. We did not find a bilateral redundancy gain for the ‘bilateral congruent’ condition (a phenomenon that has been demonstrated in
several lexical decision studies), but rather observed that the more complex the contralateral stimulus was, the slower the response times. The
‘unilateral’ and ‘bilateral length’ conditions were most beneficial, while
the ‘bilateral congruent’ and ‘bilateral CAPITAL’ conditions showed a
strong advantage over the ‘bilateral incongruent’ condition. We reproduced this result pattern with a lexical decision version of the same task.
In both cases response times depend strongly on the lexical properties of
the stimulus presented contralateral to the target, which can either inhibit
or aid processing. Interhemispheric interaction and input comparison is
based on letter-level information and takes place after processing of basic

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

visual features. Word naming is fastest if there is no interference on a lexical level and benefits from congruent perceptual and/or lexical properties.
I128
DISSOCIATING MEMORY REPRESENTATIONS FOR DISCOURSE
FROM GENERAL MEMORY REPRESENTATIONS: EVIDENCE
FROM ERPS Clinton L. Johns1, Peter C. Gordon3, Tamara Y. Swaab1,2;
1University of California, Davis, 2Center For Mind and Brain, University of
California, Davis, 3University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill — The use of
repeated name anaphora to establish coreferential relationships in discourse contexts induces processing difficulty when such anaphors' antecedents are names in discourse focus (e.g., John went to the store because
John…"). This repeated name penalty (Gordon et al., 1993) manifests as
an N400 effect in ERP research (e.g., Swaab et al., 2004). A previous study
(Johns et al., 2007) examined whether this effect of discourse prominence
could be distinguished from more general memory effects by manipulating perceptual characteristics of the antecedent names (e.g., "Alexis" vs.
"lAexis"). Behavioral results showed that these perceptual manipulations
enhanced memory performance. ERPs timelocked to the coreferential
repeated name anaphors replicated the RNP N400 effect when antecedent names did not contain a letter reversal. In addition, increased priming
for repeated names with antecedents in discourse focus when the antecedent contained the perceptual manipulation was found. The present
study applied this perceptual manipulation to names in unstructured
word lists in order to dissociate the memorial effects of the perceptual
manipulation from memorial effects of discourse focus; critical names
either were repeated from an earlier instance in the list, or were not.
Results reveal repetition priming effects in both conditions; these results,
in concert with previous research, suggest that discourse-driven memory
effects can be dissociated from the effects of general, stimulus-driven
memory operations.
I129
AN ERP STUDY OF CEREBRAL ASYMMETRIES FOR PROCESSING
LITERAL AND FIGURATIVE MEANINGS Natalie
A.
Kacinik1,
Johnchristopher A. Aragon1, Tamara Y. Swaab1; 1University of California,
Davis — The right hemisphere has been proposed to be preferentially
involved in comprehending subordinate figurative meanings (Anaki et
al. 1998; Beeman, 1998; Brownell, 2000; Jung-Beeman, 2005). However, a
series of behavioral divided visual field (DVF) and central ERP experiments (Kacinik & Chiarello, 2007; Kacinik et al., in preparation) have
repeatedly failed to show hemispheric and N400 differences for the integration of literal and figurative meanings into ambiguous contexts. Since
figurative senses are generally extended from the literal meaning, they
may not engender the kind of semantic competition and selection processes typical of homonymous words like BALL. The current experiment
was designed to further directly test this hypothesis by measuring ERPs
to lateralized sentence-final words related to the literal or figurative sense
of polysemous words in ambiguous contexts (e.g., The girl did not
approach the slimy FROG / CLERK). No significant differences between
the integration of literal and figurative meanings were found in either
visual field with respect to both N400 and late positive effects. The more
imageable literal endings, however, did show a bigger frontal imageability effect in the LVF/RH than the RVF/LH, supporting prior indications
that brain activity differences in understanding literal and figurative
meanings mainly reflect differences in imageability rather than the literal
or figurativeness per se. Semantically incongruent endings in the LVF/
RH also resulted in a larger N400 than for the RVF/LH, providing further
evidence of RH involvement in sentence comprehension and sensitivity
to message-level meaning.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

293

Tuesday, April 15, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

I130
PREFRONTAL NONVERBAL INFORMATION PROCESSING IN
TRANSLATION OF VERBAL SPEECH INTO FINGER BRAILLE: A
FNIRS STUDY. Takeo Kondo1, Naoyuki Okochi1, Satoshi Fukushima1;
1Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of
Tokyo — Deaf-blind people can talk with other people through a special
communication method called finger braille. In this method, well-trained
translators listen the speech, then they real-timely types six points braille
expressing the speech contents directly on the deaf-blind people’s six fingers of both hands. By this method, deaf-blind people can “listen” the
speech from the tactile information. Finger braille users among deafblind people say that they can feel nonverbal aspects (e.g., prosody) of
vocal speech from the touch. To investigate whether translators are translating nonverbal aspects of speech into tactile information or not, we
recorded touch-strength of translations by pressure sensors. And coincidently with the pressure recording, we recorded prefrontal neural activations through functional near-infrared imaging method (fNIRS) to
investigate neural basis of the processing. Seven translators participated
in three fNIRS sessions. One session for tasks of translating adjectives
with rich emotional prosody, one for adjectives with less emotional prosody (flat intonation), and one for control tasks in which they simply
typed their six fingers according to repeated sequences of beep sounds.
Touch-strength of well-trained translators varied dynamically according
to the prosody and their bilateral orbitofrontal region significantly activated in both translating tasks against the control task. Though it has
been known that orbitofrontal region involved nonverbal processing (i.e.,
aprosodia) , these results also suggest that this region might also
involved in inter-modality translation of prosody information.
I131
BRAIN RESPONSES EVOKED BY PHONOLOGICAL, SEMANTIC
AND SYNTACTIC PROCESSES OF AUDITORY JAPANESE
Ayumi Koso1,2, Shiro Ojima3,1, Hiroko Hagiwara1,3; 1Tokyo Metropolitan
University, 2Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, 3Research Institute of
Science and Technology for Society — Modern linguistic theories assume
that human language consists of components, such as phonology, semantics and syntax. The accumulated electrophysiological literature provides
evidence for the distinctiveness of brain responses that reflect phonological, semantic and syntactic processes. Here, we report an event-related
potential (ERP) study that investigated the brain responses evoked by
sentences that were phonologically (PHO), semantically (SEM) or syntactically (SYN) anomalous. The present study exploited the properties of
Japanese (head-final, agglutinative and pitch-accent) to control for factors, such as linear distance and morpheme type across conditions. The
electroencephalogram was continuously recorded while participants listened to the PHO sentences that violated pitch-accent, the SEM sentences
that contained non-words and the SYN sentences that violated a syntactic
dependency. The PHO condition displayed a combination of anterior
negativity and P600. The SEM condition elicited a broadly distributed
N400 followed by a wide spread P600, whereas the SYN condition elicited only a P600. The anterior negativity was interpreted as reflecting
phonological processes, in contrast to the N400 that reflected semantic
integration difficulty. The P600 observed among all three conditions was
considered as reflecting the costs of integration. Moreover, an analysis of
the onset latencies of the negativities elicited by the PHO and SEM conditions revealed that the former onset latency was earlier than the latter.
The present results suggest that phonological, semantic and syntactic
processes are indexed by distinct electrophysiological indices and that
phonological analysis occurs before semantic analysis.

294

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Poster Session I

I132
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN INTERLINGUAL PRIMING: AN
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
AND
BEHAVIOURAL
INVESTIGATION Shanna Kousaie1, Natalie Phillips1,2; 1Center for
Research in Human Development, Concordia University, Montreal, Canada,
2
Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Sir Mortimer B. Davis, Jewish
General Hospital, Montreal, Canada — The available literature is inconsistent regarding the representation of a bilingual individual's two languages. Some studies suggest that language access is non-selective (i.e.,
both languages are accessed simultaneously), while others find language
access to be selective (i.e., one language is accessed preferentially). Furthermore, the aging literature suggests age-related slowing in semantic
activation or processing resulting from an inhibition deficit, which limits
the ability of older adults to ignore irrelevant information, causing them
to rely more heavily on compensatory strategies such as context. This
study examines age-related differences in bilingual language selectivity
and processing using both event-related brain potentials (ERPs) and reaction time (RT) measures. Using interlingual homographs (IH, i.e., words
with identical orthography in French and English but with distinct
semantic features, e.g., COIN meaning 'corner' in French and 'money' in
English) in a semantic priming paradigm we investigated the use of language context in biasing the reading of an IH towards one language.
Young (n=19; M = 24.5 years) and older (n=13; M = 72 years) highly proficient French/English bilinguals were presented with triplets of letter
strings comprised of a language context, an IH, and a target word, in a
lexical decision task. RT data revealed no age-difference in language context use. ERP data show less widespread N400 priming in older relative
to younger adults and differential priming effects based on language consistency between the language context and target word. Results will be
discussed in terms of language selectivity and processing in the native
and second language of bilinguals.

Author Index

Index

A
Aarts, E 235
Abbadessa, C 230
Abe, N 130, 132, 133, 136, 207
Abe, S 253
Abelson, J 28
Abercrombie, H 86
Abraham, A 36
Acres, K 163
Adam, C 225
Adamo, M 177, 272
Adamovich, S 144
Adcock, RA 187, 223
Addis, DR 36
Adelore, TA 61
Adelstein, JS 84
Adolphs, R 83, 93, 142, 201, 284
Aglioti, S 52
Agosta, S 74
Aguera, P-E 224
Ahdidan, J 76
Ahissar, M 230
Ahlstrom, J 242
Ahmed, L 272
Ahn, J 273
Aichele, S 61
Akitsuki, Y 282
Alain, C 231, 233, 267
Alam, N 179
Alba Hernandez, J 86
Aldebot, S 47, 121, 187
Aleman, A 51, 85, 149, 211
Alexander, MP 139
Alexander, W 235
Alho, K 76, 224
Al-Khateeb, E 36
Allan, L., R 113
Allen, AJ 273
Allen, J 63
Allendorfer, J 64, 254
Almeida, D 154, 158
Almeida, Q 67
Alpers, GW 285
Altamirano, LJ 237
Altmann, U 87
Altschuler, E 140
Altschuler, T 141
Alvarez, B 109
Alvarez, L 201
Amalberti, R 244
Ambrus, G 220
Ames, B 269
Amorapanth, P 246
Amrhein, C 284
Amsel, B 246

Amunts, K 219, 291
Anand, R 99, 219
Andermann, F 20
Anderson, A 43, 95, 148, 244, 280
Anderson, J 72, 210
Anderson, MC 190
Anderson, S 20
Andersson, A 287
Andersson, F 151
Ando, H 169
Ando, Y 100
Andreano, J 36
AndrÈs, P 138
Andrews, M 27, 122
Andrews-Hanna, J 37
Andric, M 246
Anllo-Vento, L 260, 273
Anne, H 202
Ansari, D 49, 96, 98, 99
Anticevic, A 276
Antonovsky, C 164
Appelbaum, LG 34
Aragon, JA 293
Aragon, O 21, 235
Archila, P 288
Ardestani, A 75
Arend, I 61
Arevalo, A 247
Ark, W 221
Armel, C 30
Armstrong, N 224
Aron, A 121
Arsalidou, M 254
Artieda, J 201
Arzouan, Y 247
Arzy, S 100
Asano, E 287
Ashby, FG 45
Ashby, G 38
Ashby, J 154
Asher, D 21
Ashton, R 249
Askren, M 235
Askshoomoff, N 221
Assaf, M 67, 200
Astheimer, LB 269
Astur, R 37, 46
Astur, RS 273
Atkins, AS 137
Atlas, L 28, 52, 75, 281
Attali, E 136
Avants, B 192
Avenengo, S 44
Avison, MJ 184
Awh, E 56
Aziz-Zadeh, L 146

Aznar-BesÈ, N 189
Aznar-Bese, N 288
Azuar, C 236
B
B¸chel, C 158
Bachhuber, DR 149
Bachorik, J 190
Bachoud-LÈvi, A-C 222
Bachoud-Levi, A-C 151
Bachrach, A 217
Bäckman, L 262
Bacon, M 235
Badre, D 29
Badzakova-Trajkov, G 236
Baehne, CG 121
Baena, E 200
Baess, P 224
Baggio, G 247
Baggott, M 276
Bahrami, B 99
Bai, J-M 21
Baime, M 181
Baird, A 49
Bais, L 85
Bak, T 158
Baker, D 96
Baladi Nejad, A 245
Balasubramaniam, R 79, 80, 81
Balasubramanian, V 288
Baldeweg, T 142
Baldo, J 247
Ballard, K 100
Balleine, B 278
Ballesteros, S 42
Banai, K 265
Banaji, MR 105
Band, G 115, 124
Banich, M 33, 55, 70, 186
Banich, MT 255, 269
Banissy, M 52
Bao, M 228
Barber, H 218
Barber, HA 112
Barbey, A 72
Barbieri, F 245
Barcelo, F 116
Barch, D 63, 117, 276, 283
Barde, LH 236
Barense, M 195
Bargh, J 28
Bar-Haim, Y 272
Barkley, C 228
Barnard, P 92
Barnea, A 182

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

295

Author Index

Barnes, KA 130, 182
Barnes, M 224
Baron-Cohen, S 206
Barrett, A 288
Barrett, L 89
Barrett, LF 87, 278
Barrett, R 71, 283
Barrie, JN 183
Barrow, R 101, 105, 145
Barry, E 274
Bartolomeo, P 180
Barton, JJS 66, 166
Bassetti, C 94
Basten, U 100
Bastiaansen, J 276
Bastos, A 273
Batten, J 71
Batterink, L 265
Bauchet, F 224, 269
Baucom, L 33
Baulac, M 225
Baumann, O 195
Bäuml, K-H 37
Baus, C 292
Bavelier, D 293
Baxter Ito, JM 184
Bay, E 291
Bayliss, A 273
Baym, C 133
Baym, CL 125
Bays, P 58, 254
Bean, J 244
Bean, S 193
Beaton, E 192
Beattie, R 71
Bebko, G 277
Bechara, A 20, 116, 126, 282
Beck, D 273
Becker, T 236, 239
Bedny, M 209, 210, 248
Beer, JS 16, 17
Beets, IAM 120
Beevers, PhD, C 277
Beguhn-Madeska, GM 149
Behrmann, M 185
Beilock, S 288, 290
Bell, T 265
Bellebaum, C 47
Bellgrove, M 35, 274
Bellugi, U 262
Beltrame, MA 230
Benaros, S 31, 119
Benasich, AA 109
Benau, E 183
Benavides, C 277
Bendixen, A 266, 268
Bendlin, B 206
Benesch, T 276
Bengtsson, SL 236
Ben-Moshe, Z 109
Bennett, C 49
Bennett, IJ 195
Benoit, RG 237
Benson, JE 183

296

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Bentin, S 135
Ben-Yehudah, G 288
Berens, M 154, 194
Berentsen, S 216
Bergman, S 237
Bergstrˆm, Z 37
Berkman, E 21
Berman, M 75
Berman, MG 286
Bernardis, P 248
Berry, A 254
Bertrand, O 101, 140, 224, 269
Bertsch, K 87, 277
Besle, J 140, 224
Betancourt, L 286
Betti, V 52
Bettman, JR 124
Betz, S 217
Beversdorf, D 20
Bianchi-Demicheli, F 101
Bianchin, G 230
Biasutti, E 246
Biddick, C 276
Bidet-Caulet, A 224
Biederman, J 123
Biele, G 100, 277
Bien, CG 203
Bienkowski, M 170
Billington, M 193
Binder, J 216
Birch, S 150
Bird, A 32
Bird, G 184
Birnbaum, C 235
Bischof, GN 52
Bishop, CW 230
Bisiacchi, P 183, 241
Bisiacchi, PS 121
Biswal, BB 84
Black, J 172
Black, S 67
Black, SE 177
Blaesi, S 163
Blair, C 96
Blair, J 85, 153, 277
Blair, K 277
Blair, KS 85
Blair, R 92
Blais, C 181, 237
Blakemore, S-J 191
Blanke, O 100, 165
Blau, V 140
Bliss-Moreau, E 87, 89, 278
Blomert, L 111, 113, 140, 291
Blumenthal, J 66
Blumstein, S 160
Boas, D 183
Boatman, D 106
Bockholt, J 145, 147
Boes, A 20
Boesiger, P 94
Boettiger, CA 237
Bogey, R 56
Bogod, N 66

Bohlin, G 237
Boissé, M-F 136
Boksem, M 278
Bokura, H 253
Bolger, D 63, 159, 233
Bolger, N 75, 92, 153
Bolourchi, M 164
Bonfioli, F 230
Bonnefond, M 101, 211
Bonnet-Brilhault, F 244
Bonte, M 291
Book, G 67, 75
Booth, J 63, 159, 184, 233
Born, C 34
Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, I 113
Borowsky, R 250
Bortfeld, H 183
Bösel, R 138
Botly, LCP 269
Bottari, D 230
Botzer, L 102
Boudewyn, MA 248
Boulenger, V 248
Boureau, Y-L 218
Bowles, B 196
Bowman, C 144, 278
Bowman, L 30
Bowman, LC 183, 184
Boxer, AL 67
Boyce, WT 191
Boynton, G 7, 8
Brad, D 168
Bradford, EJ 279
Bradley, B 90
Brady, C 191
Brady, R 86
Braganza, G 254
Braida, LD 225
Brammer, MJ 289
Brander, C 61
Brandwein, A 141
Brang, D 141, 235
Brannon, E 188
Brass, M 238
Braun, A 65
Braun, M 196
Braver, T 89, 118, 126, 276, 283
Braver, TS 30, 239
Bray, S 278
Brehmer , Y 262
Breitenstein, C 43
Brendan, A 182
Breslawski, H 37, 46
Bressler , A 263
Bressler, SL 61
Breuer, A 181
Brick, G 164
Bridwell, D 61
Brier, M 196
Brinkley, J 82
Britton, M 275
Britz, J 186, 238
Britz, P 87, 277
Brodbeck, C 92

Author Index

Brodeur, M 63, 214
Brogdon, C 98
Broks, P 138
Brosch, T 279
Brown, A 123
Brown, E 210
Brown, J 235, 238
Brown, JW 30, 245
Brown, M 217
Brown, R 270
Brown, S 103
Brown, T 167
Bruce PhD, M 113
Bruchmann, S 43
Bruggeman, R 51, 149
Brühl, R 94
Brumback, C 256
Brüne, M 47
Brunelliere, A 289
Bruno, J 71
Buccino, G 246
Buchler, N 196
Buchsbaum, B 174
Buchy, L 87
Buck, S 26
Buckner, R 37, 134
Bucur, B 275
Buechel, C 156
Buhle, J 28, 123, 279
Bulik, C 154
Bultitude, J 274
Bunge, S 25, 73, 237
Bunge, SA 125, 190
Burden, M 186
Burden, MJ 184
Burgess, G 55
Burgess, GC 255, 269
Burgess, P 263
Burgess, PW 65, 237
Burgund, ED 166
Burkhalter, M 245
Burkhardt, P 222
Burklund, L 21
Burman, D 63, 159
Burnett, S 184
Busch, M 173
Buschkuehl, M 28
Bush, W 177, 274
Butcher, A 179
Butler, A 37
Butler, S 65
Butterworth, B 99
Butz, M 58
Bux, C 26
Byars , AW 161
Byrd, A 145
C
Cabeza, R 38, 41, 150, 196, 200, 275
Cacciari, C 160
Cahill, L 21, 36
Cain, MS 238
Calhoun, V 200, 258
Calhoun, VD 273

Callahan, S 289
Calley, C 196
Calvo-Merino, B 164
Camblin, CC 248
Camerer, C 104
Camille, N 238
Campbell, J 135
Campbell, M 117
Campbell, R 289
Camprodon, J 212
Canal, P 160
Candy BA, H 113
Canet, P 283
Cañive, J 226
Canli, T 241
Canolty, R 273
Cao, F 159, 184, 233
Capek, CM 289
Caplan, D 218
Caprihan, A 101
Caramazza, A 248
Caramelli, N 248
Cardenas, C 217
Carey, S 235
Carlson, C 132
Carlson, J 185, 279
Carlyon, RP 227
Carmel, D 279
Carpenter-Cohn, J 181
Carreiras, M 112, 155, 160, 218, 292
Carriere, J 205, 239
Carriere, JSA 179
Carroll, D 125
Carrus, S 136
Carter, C 68, 69
Carter, CS 212
Carter, O 231
Carter, RM 240
Carver, F 190, 261
Carver, L 281
Casasanto, D 220
Case, L 62
Casey, B 89, 187
Casper, C 231
Cassell, J 103
Castel, A 39
Castellanos, FX 83, 84
Castelli, F 142
Castle, P 68
Cate, A 127, 268
Cate, AD 274
Catmur, C 101
Cavanagh, J 63
Cave, K 177
Cecchetto, C 256
Celano, M 194
Celone, K 138
Cerruti, C 71
Chadick, J 275
Chai, XJ 38, 189
Chakrabarti, B 206
Chambers, C 274
Chambers, D 21
Chambers, R 206

Chan, J 46
Chan, S 263
Chan, W-H 155
Chang, L 151
Chang, Y-F 239
Channon, S 71, 283
Chapman, H 280
Chapman, S 99, 245
Chard, D 69, 194
Charman, T 142, 191
Chatterjee, A 179, 246
Chauncey, K 289
Chavez, R 101, 105, 145, 147
Checa, P 190
Chen, A 122
Chen, AJ-W 30, 275
Chen, C 89
Chen, F 280
Chen, JA 120
Chen, K-H 153, 280
Chen, L 181, 218
Chen, Y 136, 266
Cheng, K 107
Cheng, S-K 112
Cheng, S-k 136
Cheng, T 36
Cheon, B 139
Cherkasskiy, L 291
Chevalier, N 290
Cheylus, A 101
Cheyne, D 165
Cheyne, JA 179, 239
Chiao, J 101, 103, 213, 277
Chiarello, C 81, 112, 216
Chiew, KS 239
Chinnery, P 227
Chiu, P 102
Choi, A 251
Choi, H 136
Chong, H 117, 266
Chong, T 61
Chou, I-C 153
Choudhury, N 109
Christie, G 179
Christie, J 64
Christoff, K 29, 33, 120, 243
Christopher, E 39
Chu, W 76
Chuang, V 253
Chun, MM 260
Chung, D-I 88
Chung, H-K 153, 280
Chwilla, DJ 112, 124, 249
Ciaramelli, E 197
Cicero, D 236, 239
Cieslak, M 290
Cipollini, BN 273
Cipolotti, L 263
Civai, C 74
Clapham, E 144
Clapp, W 254, 255
Clare, L 46
Clark, CM 140
Clark, H 68

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

297

Author Index

Clark, KR 240
Clark, L 241
Clarke-Davidson, CM 253
Clasen, L 66, 194
Classen, J 91
Clegg, BA 259
Clithero, JA 240
Closshey, W 41
Cloutier, J 209
Coch, D 108, 292
Cockburn, J 71
Coghill, D 259
Cohen, H 249
Cohen, M 73
Cohen, N 26, 134
Cohn, N 251
Cojan, Y 240
Colcombe, S 144
Cole, MW 77, 119, 240
Collette, F 103, 137
Collins, P 189
Colonius, H 141, 143
Colzato, L 85, 240
Conant, L 106
Cone, N 63
Congdon, E 241
Connolly, AC 75
Connor, E 63
Constable, RT 241
Constans, JI 93
Cook, E 191
Cook, L 245
Cools, R 118, 242, 280
Cooney, R 281
Cooper, F 227
Coppola , R 190
Coppola, R 261
Corballis, P 55, 82, 176
Corina, D 82, 155, 157
Corlett, P 242
Corley, M 107
Cornell, S 290
Cornew, L 281
Cornish, K 194
Corradi-Dell'Acqua, C 141
Correa, A 10, 270
Coslett, H 51
Costello, M 275
Costello, P 164
Cottrell, G 48, 49
Coulson, S 141, 252
Couperus, J 275
Couperus, JW 27
Cowper-Smith, C 78
Cox, LS 206
Craig, A 73, 241
Craig, AD 8, 9
Crane, D 197
Crane, S 151
Cree, G 246
Cremasco, L 176
Cristinzio, C 281
Cristo, Y 200
Crockett, M 241

298

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Crone, E 211
Crone, EA 194
Crone, N 106
Crossley, M 38
Crowe, S 153
Cruse, D 197
Csibra, G 193
Cuetos , F 112
Cummine, J 250
Cunnington, R 61, 276
Curran, T 127, 257
Currin, J 69, 265
Curtis, C 59, 255, 259, 262
Cusack, R 55, 79, 182
Cutini, S 241
D
D'Argembeau, A 282
D'Esposito, M 29, 60, 72, 116, 122, 174, 185,
237, 275, 280
D’Esposito, M 30, 191
Dˆhnel, K 148, 188, 283
Daffner, KR 117, 266
Dagenais, JE 209
Dager, S 66
Dahl, K 52
Dahl, KP 281
Dailey, N 156, 277
Dale, C 265
Dale, CL 61
Dalgleish, T 92
Dalla Barba, G 136, 137
Dalla Volta, R 245
Damarla, S 164
Damasio, H 286
Danckert, J 115
Dang-Vu, T 137
Daniels, L 250
Darsaud, A 137
Daruwalla, Z 268
Darvas, F 74, 75, 108
Daselaar, S 41
Daselaar, SM 38
Daum, I 47, 128, 129, 131, 169
Daunizeau, J 93
Davachi, L 132, 198, 255
Davalos, D 233
David, AS 289
David, B 116
Davidov, T 164
Davids, N 290
Davidson, M 52, 75, 88, 89, 152, 242, 278
Davidson, MC 256, 269
Davidson, PSR 45
Davidson, R 86, 145, 152
Davidson, RJ 120, 149
Davis, C 282
Davis, H 282
Davis, M 215
Davis, MH 157, 227, 249
Davis, T 102
Dawson, G 66
Dawson, M 177
Day, B 201

de Almeida, R 162
De Anna, F 136
de Boer, J 225
de Bruin, L 124
De Cremer, D 278
De Fockert, J 37, 167
de Fockert, J 272
de Gelder, B 93
De Grauwe, S 246
de Haan, M 142
de Jong, R 180
de Kleine, E 78
de Lange, FP 212
De Marchena, A 40
de Moor, J 290
de Mornay Davies, P 106
De Rosa, E 55, 95, 269
De Ruiter, J-P 207
de Souza, K 228
de Vries, M 218
de Wit, S 242
de Zubicaray, G 249
Deacon, D 251
Debruille, B 215
Debruille, JB 63, 214
Decaix, C 137
Decety, J 88, 282
Defrin, R 53
Dehaene, S 97, 184, 218
Dehon, H 137
Dell'Acqua, R 241
Della Rosa, A 182
Dellacherie, D 225
Dellerba, M 206
Delpuech, C 101, 269
DeLuca, J 205
DeMaster, D 38
Demaster, D 39
Dembler, T 94
Denburg, NL 116
Denckla, MB 271
Deng, X 159
Deng, Y 159, 184
Denis, N 275
Dennis, E 102
Dennis, M 182
Dennis, N 38
Dennis, S 127
Denslow, S 242
Deouell, LY 74
DePaula Antunez, I 260
Depue, B 55, 269
Desai, R 106
Desain, P 267
DeSouza, J 115
Desrocher, M 47
Desseilles, M 137
Detwiler, T 82
Devauchelle, A-D 218
Devereux, B 163, 214
DeVido, J 85, 277
Devinsky, O 132
Devlin, J 229
Devlin, JT 78

Author Index

DeVylder, J 55
Dhondt , N 262
Di Lollo, V 62
Diamond, A 11, 12
Diana, R 197
Dick, AS 184
Dick, F 229
Dickinson, A 242
Didier, R 276
Diederich, A 141, 143
Dieguez, S 165
Dien, J 74, 250
Dierks, T 134
Diesendruck, L 102
DiLalla, L 185
Dine, C 128
Ding, G 159
Ding, G-s 160
Dishion, TJ 91
Ditman, T 63, 251
Ditman-Brunye, T 246
Dixon, M 55, 95, 205
Dixon, ML 269
Do Lam, A 39
Dobbins, I 40, 196
Dobel, C 165
Dobryakova, E 80
Dockree, P 56
Dolan, R 93
Dolcos, F 150
Doll, B 102, 284
Dominey, PF 289
Domínguez-Borràs, J 265
Donaldson, D 107, 199
Donaldson, DI 131, 199
Donnelly, J 206
Donner, E 189
Donovan, C-L 197
Dopkins, S 139
Doron, K 82
Dosch, M 185
Dow, M 194
Downing, PE 81
Downs, K 126
Doyle, C 71
Doyle, JL 185
Dräger, B 43
Drew, T 56
Dronkers, N 247
Drury, H 71, 283
Drury, J 249
Drury, JE 216
Du, X 181
Dubal, S 95, 283
Dubin, M 290
Dubins, M 194
Dubno, J 242
Dubois, B 136, 236
Duchaine, B 65
Dudai, Y 146
Duff, M 134, 201
Duffau, H 180
Duhamel, J-R 213
Dumontheil, I 242

Dunbar, K 104
Duncan, J 182, 242
Duncan, KD 255
Duncan, KJ 78
DuÒabeitia, JA 155, 160
Dupuis, K 225
Duque, J 25
Dutilh, G 103
Duverne, S 198
Dvorkin, A 56
Dwivedi, V 249
Dwyer, D 50
Dye, C 64
Dye, MWG 293
Dykstra, AR 225
Dzielinski, D 86
E
Eaton, D 205
Eckert, M 242
Eddy, M 165
Edelman, G 266
Edward, W 129, 135
Edwards, L 235
Egner, T 242
Ehlis, A-C 121
Eich, T 39
Eickhoff, S 219
Eisner, F 65, 95, 226
El Massioui, F 244
Elam, K 185
Elger, CE 203
Eliassen, J 64, 76, 254
Ell, SW 198
Ellamil, M 148
Ellenbogen, J 198
Elliot, M 219
Ellison, A 56
El-Yagoubi, R 98
Emily, J 256
Emmorey, K 155, 168
Emrah, D 168
Emrich, S 165
Endestad, T 25, 195
Endrass, T 119, 243
Engel , AK 142
Engel, AK 143
Engel, R 34
England, R 101
Ennis, J 38
Enrique, E 21
Eran, A 116
Erez, J 243
Erhard, P 265
Erhart, M 21
Erickson, D 107, 174
Ernst, M 90
Escera, C 265
Escoffier, N 147
Eskes, G 64
Eslick, A 40
Eslinger, P 32, 96
Esopenko, C 250
Espy, K 125

Espy, KA 243
Essoe, J 94
Essoe, JK-Y 283
Ester, E 56
EugËne, F 281
Eulitz, C 157, 290
Evans, KM 39
Evans, L 198
Ezzyat, Y 198
F
Fabiani, M 32, 76, 256
Fales, C 283
Fallgatter, A 287
Fallgatter, AJ 121
Fan, J 40, 285
Fan, N 159, 184, 291
Fan, S 181
Fanning, J 287
Fannon, SP 57
Farag, C 243
Farah, M 192
Farah, MJ 286
Faraone, S 123
Farb, N 244
Faria Jr, A 260
Fast, K 34, 284
Fatima, Z 244
Faulkner, A 226
Faust , M 247
Faust, M 252
Fava, E 183
Fawcett, J 165
Fay, S 42
Federmeier, K 216
Federmeier, KD 39, 252
Federspiel, A 134
Fedorenko, E 220, 291
Fedota, J 57
Fegen, D 116
Fehr, T 265
Feldman Barrett, L 92
Fellows, L 122
Fellows, LK 34, 105, 120
Felsen, C 284
Felsovalyi, O 217
Ferber, S 165, 177, 272
Ferdinand, NK 244
Feredoes, E 256
Fernández, G 257
Ferree, T 196
Ferrera, V 31
Ferri, F 245
Ferri, J 113
Ferris, S 139
Fias, W 98
Ficco, L 256
Fichtenholtz, H 39
Fiebach, CJ 100
Fields, HL 237
Fiez, J 257, 288
Figueroa, C 63
Filipek, P 82
Fillmore, P 228

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

299

Author Index

Fillmore, PT 226
Fincham, J 244
Fincher, K 270
Findlay, A 52
Findlay, AM 187
Fink, GR 141, 180
Finke, C 196
Finn, AS 185
Fischer , H 262
Fischer, C 140, 224
Fischer, J 57
Fischer-Baum, S 64
Fischl, B 287
Fiset, D 181
Fisher, KJ 270
Fisher, M 41, 47, 121, 223, 226
Fisher, S 252
Fitzgerald, M 206
Fitzpatrick, S 71
Fitzroy, A 269
Flaisch, T 145, 284
Flegal, KE 137
Fletcher, P 242
Flicker, B 149
Flink, T 285
Flitton, A 142
Flueckiger, P 142
Flynn, C 103
Flynn, J 261
Fogelson, N 244
Folegatti, A 176
Folley, B 258
Ford, M 157, 163, 214
Ford, MA 163
Forgeard, M 186, 190
Formigoni, P 230
Fornette, M-P 244
Forster, A 240
Forsting, M 128
Forstmann, B 117
Forstmann, BU 28, 103
Fortenbaugh, F 57
Fossella, J 242, 285
Fossella, JA 40
Foss-Feig, J 191
Foster, B 111
Foucher, A 283
Fox, A 145
Fox, CJ 66, 166
Fox, N 176, 272
Foxe, J 48, 141
Foxton, J 227
Fradin, J 244
Frady, TB 27
Franconeri, S 277
Frank, M 17, 18, 63, 69, 259, 284
Frank, MC 156
Frank, MJ 102
Fraser, C 199
Fraser, E 261
Freeman, K 67
Freeman, R 273
Freyman, RL 234
Fried, I 143

300

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Friederici, A 219, 221
Friederici, AD 220, 291
Friedman, B 156
Friedman-Hill, S 57
Friedrich, CK 156, 161
Frishkoff, G 250
Frith, C 93, 184, 263
Frith, CD 65, 237
Frithsen, A 199
Fritz, T 226
Froud, K 172
Froyen, D 291
Fu, S 57
Fugelsang, J 104
Fujii, T 130, 132, 133, 136, 207
Fujioka, T 103
Fukuda, M 287
Fukunaga, R 245
Fukushima, H 284
Fukushima, S 294
Fuller, D 186
Fumiko, H 113
Funk, C 82
Fuster, J 75
Futagaki, C 235
G
Gaab, N 229
Gabrieli, J 102, 109, 217
Gabrieli, JDE 38, 104, 189, 229
Gabrieli, JJD 90
Gadde, K 152
Gage, N 82, 228
Gage, NM 226
Gaillard, WD 182
Gais, S 137
Gallinat, J 70, 94
Gallo, D 137
Gallop, RJ 286
Galloway, G 276
Gally, J 266
Galow, A 138
Gamage, T 21
Gamberini, L 241
Gamboz, N 246
Gamino, J 245
Gamson, D 96
Gan, G 156
Ganis, G 166, 172
Garcia-Garcia, M 265
Gardian, G 220
Garrido, L 65
Gaspar, J 166
Gaspoarovic, C 105
Gatherwright , J 263
Gauggel, S 39
Gayda, J 103
Gazarian, K 289
Gazes, E 131
Gazes, Y 261
Gazzaley, A 125, 254, 255, 262, 275
Gazzola, V 20, 142, 210
Gee, J 192
Gehring, W 32, 115

Geisler, M 94, 266
Geisler, MW 283
Gennari, S 253
Genova, H 205
Gentilucci, M 245
George, D 68
George, E 292
Geraci, C 256
Geraci, M 85, 277
Gerdes, AB 285
Gerdes, ABM 153
Germain, S 103
Germine, L 168
Gertner, L 102
Gerwin, S 182
Ghaleb, H 43
Gharabaghi, A 172
Ghaznavi, S 270
Ghetti, S 38, 39, 190
Gheytanchi, A 146
Ghochani, Y 21
Gianelli, C 245
Giard, M-H 140, 224
Gibbs, S 280
Gibson, E 220
Gibson, L 250
Gidley-Larson, J 223
Giedd, J 66, 194
Giesbrecht, B 178
Gilbert, S 263
Gilbert, SJ 65, 237
Gilboa, A 138
Gilhooly, TA 150
Gill, C 285
Gill, M 274
Gillon Dowens, M 218
Gilmore, S 21
Gindri, P 176
Ginn, J 61
Giovanello, KS 129
Gizewski, E 128
Glaser, N 39
Glass, BD 71
Glenn, AL 209
Glickstein, M 82
Gliori, G 206
Glover, GH 229
Gluck, MA 139
Goebel, R 140, 210
Goel, P 20
Goel, V 69
Goh, J 59, 149
Golby, A 77, 83
Gold, KF 36
Goldfarb, L 102
Goldin-Meadow, S 246
Goldman, J 71
Goldsmith, DR 209
Goldstein, A 247
Goldstein, D 38
Goldstein, M 146
Goldwater, M 156
Golestani, N 82
Golomb, J 139

Author Index

Gomes, H 141
Gomez, R 205
Gondan, M 162
Gonzalez, R 28
Goolkasian, P 51
Gordon, B 106, 256
Gordon, N 51
Gordon, P 111
Gordon, PC 248, 293
Gordon, R 173
Gordon-McKeon, S 27, 285
Gorman, S 226
Gosselin, N 267
Goswami, U 107
Gotlib, I 281
Goto, S 100
Gowin, J 104
Gozal, D 224
Gozzi, M 213, 256
Grabowecky, M 72, 149
Grabowski, T 93, 155, 161
Grady, C 197
Grady, CL 45
Grafman, J 69, 72, 139, 193, 213
Grafton, S 101, 135, 144, 207
Graham, K 195
Graham, R 85
Graham, S 109, 245
Grahn, J 227
Grainger, J 158, 289
Gran·, A 98
Granà, A 246
Grande, M 291
Grandjean, D 151, 279
Gratton, G 32, 76, 256
Gray, J 28, 104, 283
Grealy, M 79
Greathouse, A 139
Green, A 104
Green, D 285
Green, J 58
Green, S 154
Greenberg, T 285
Greene, D 182
Greene, DJ 58
Greene, MJ 281
Greenlaw, K 181
Greenlee, MW 195
Greenwood, P 60, 254
Greischar, L 145
Greischar, LL 149
Greve, A 199
Grezes, J 93
Grichanik, M 262
Grieser Painter, J 250
Griffiths, D 79
Griffiths, R 42
Griffiths, T 227
Grilli, M 134
Grinband, J 31
Groen, R 66
Groh-Bordin, C 133
Grönemeyer, D 173
Groppe, D 250

Grose-Fifer, J 251
Gross, JJ 90, 91
Grossman, E 248
Grossman, M 97, 110, 214, 216, 243
Grosvald, M 155, 157
Grothe, J 251
Grube, M 227
Gruber, T 165
Gruender, G 148
Gruendler, T 63
Grunert, H 199
Gu, X 40, 285
Guardini, P 131
Guediche, S 257
Guerin, S 199
Guerra, P 260
Guerreschi, M 50
Guerrette, N 79
Gugler, MF 291
Guild, E 205
Guise, K 285
Guise, KG 40
Gujar, N 151, 286
Guler, OE 40
Gullick, MM 292
Gunter, T 292
Gunther Moor, B 194
Guo, J 217, 218
Guo, T 217, 218
Guo, Y 166
Guthrie, N 109
Gutierrez, E 292
H
Haas, B 102
Habeck, C 261
Haberman, J 166
Habib, R 21, 60
Hackman, DA 286
Hadar, U 109
Hafer-Zdral, JS 49
Hagerman, R 192
Haggard, P 52, 70, 164
Hagiwara, H 294
Hagoort, P 144, 207, 212, 223, 247
Hahn, A 228
Hahn, T 28
Hahne, A 291
Haimson, B 171
Hajak, G 148, 283
Halderman, L 112, 157
Halgren, E 14, 15
Hall, J 212
Hall, JL 286
Halverson, J 86
Hamann, S 152, 153
Hameed, A 189
Hamidi, M 257
Hamilton, R 51
Han, I-C 112
Han, S 40, 104
Handy, T 35
Handy, TC 59, 175
Hanie, E 116

Hanley, R 65
Hanlon, F 226
Hannemann, R 157
Hannon, E 231
Hannula, MM 96, 177
Hansen, K 25, 173
Hansen, P 106
Hanslmayr, S 37
Hanulikova, A 110
Harada, T 101
Hard, K 28
Hare, T 89, 104
Harenski, C 145
Harenski, CL 286
Harenski, KA 286
Harlow, I 199
Harn, B 69, 194
Harris, T 221
Harsay, H 117
Hart, J 99, 196, 245
Hartley, C 287
Harvey, M 65, 68
Harvey, R 56
Hasboun, D 225
Hasegawa, T 27
Hashimoto, R-i 65
Hassabis, D 132
Hatta, T 176
Hauck, M 143
Hauert, C-A 186
Hauk, O 128, 157, 248
Hauser, M 70, 212
Hauser, PC 293
Hauswald, A 40
Hauthal, N 231
Hawi, Z 274
Haxby, J 7
Hayama, H 200
Hayden, BY 120
Hayes, SM 200
Haynes, J-D 236
Hazeltine, E 119
He, C 227, 232
He, G 290
Head, D 11, 66
Hearst, A 47, 121, 187, 223
Heatherton, TF 212
Heaven, T 239
Hebb, AO 74
Heberlein, AS 105
Hebrank, A 149
Hecht, E 116, 235
Hedden, T 104
Heeger, D 60
Heekeren, H 277
Heekeren, HR 100
Heerey, E 287
Heim, S 219, 291
Heinen, S 25
Heinen, SJ 59
Heinrich, A 227
Heinz, A 70, 94
Helenius, P 292
Helfinstein, S 272

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

301

Author Index

Hellige, J 208
Hellwig-Brida, S 26
Helskog, E 25
Hendler, T 53
Henik, A 97, 102, 249
Hennig, P 121
Henri-Bhargava, A 105
Henson, R 41, 50, 195
Henson, RNA 169
Herdman, A 166, 183
Hermes, M 87, 277
Hermida, J 31, 119
Hernandez, AE 189, 288
Herpertz , S 173
Herrington, M 125
Herrmann, M 265, 287
Herrmann, MJ 153
Herrnberger, B 251
Herron, J 198
Herron, T 69, 76, 268
Herron, TJ 224, 274
Hershey, T 117
Hervais-Adelman, A 227
Hesselbrock, J 85
Hester, R 25, 35
Hetrick, W 86
Heyes, C 101
Hickey, C 62
Hickok, G 163, 222
Hilfiker, A 44
Hill, K 232
Hill, KJ 262
Hillary, F 205
Hillenbrand, S 25
Hillert , 263
Hillman, C 26
Hillyard, S 267
Hilton, J 131
Hines, P 158
Hines, T 65
Hinshaw, S 185
Hinton, S 51
Hiraki, K 284
Hiraoka, K 136
Hirayama, K 133, 136
Hirsch, J 31, 170, 180, 208
Hirsh, JB 105
Hirshorn, E 293
Hochstadt, J 219
Hodges, L 51
Hodgson, T 26
Hoeft, F 102
Hoekert, M 85
Hoenig, K 26, 251
Hoetting, K 52
Hoffmann, K-T 196
Holcomb, P 158, 165, 246, 251
Holcomb, PJ 117, 289
Holcomb, PR 266
Holland, C 41, 226
Holland, S 112
Holland, SK 161
Holle, H 292
Hollon, N 277

302

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Hollon, NG 85
Holloway, I 96, 98, 99
Holmes, M 272
Holmes, MD 74
Holroyd, C 50, 71, 125
Holroyd, T 190, 261
Holt, L 229
Holtpatrick, C 39
Hommel, B 85, 115, 124, 240
Honey, R 50
Hong, Y-Y 59
Hontiveros, B 50
Hoogenboom, N 58
Hooper, C 189
Horemans, I 161
Horie, K 113
Horn, H 134
Horner, A 41
Horowitz, T 56
Horv·th, J 266
Horwitz, A 242
Hoshino, N 158
Houde, J 232
Howard Jr., JH 130, 182, 195
Howard, CE 138
Howard, DV 130, 182, 195
Hsiao, JH-w 48
Hsieh, L 105, 178, 213
Hsu, C-W 112
Hsu, S-M 86
Hu, P 198, 286
Hu, S 181
Huang, C 100
Hubbard, E 97
Huber, D 284
Huber, O 210
Huber, W 291
Huberle, E 167
Huettel, S 35, 152, 275
Huettel, SA 120, 124, 173, 240
Huey, E 69
Huey, ED 72
Huff, N 86
Huffstetler, S 48
Hughes, B 28, 152
Hughes, G 167
Hugueville, L 225
Huijbers, W 38, 41
Huizinga, M 26
Humphries, C 106
Hung, DL 136
Hunter, Z 293
Hurt, H 286
Husain, M 58, 118, 179, 254
Hutchinson, A 186
Hutchinson, JB 200
Hutsler, J 186
Hviid, LB 76
Hwang, H 25
Hyafil, A 26
Hylton, J 27, 122
I
Iacoboni, M 143, 271

Ian, R 68
Iaria, G 66, 166
Idsardi, W 108, 228
Iidaka, T 101
Iizuka, O 136
Ikeda, K 27
Ikkai, A 59, 255
Ing Berne, Y 245
Inzlicht, M 105
Iragui , V 263
Irmak, A 148
Isaja, A 214
Isel, F 156, 158
Isenberg, AL 82, 226, 228
Isenberg, L 163
Ishai, A 167
Isom, M 66
Isserman, N 285
Isserman, NJ 27
Itier, R 167
Ito, J 30
Ito, JMB 183
Itoh, M 130, 133
Iversen, J 266
Iverson, G 110
Ives, D 227
Ivry, R 68, 131
Ivry, RB 198
Iyengar, U 190
Izuma, K 27
J
Jabbar, B 206
Jabbi, M 86
Jackendoff, R 251
Jacko, JA 61
Jacob, CP 121
Jacobs, LF 38
Jacobs, T 59, 61
Jacobs, WJ 102
Jacobsen, T 224, 266
Jacobson, B 186
Jacobson, J 186
Jacobson, JL 184
Jacobson, S 186
Jacobson, SW 184
Jaeggi, S 28
Jagannathan, K 200
Jagust, W 280
Jahanshahi, M 201
Jahfari, S 28
Jahn, A 86
James, C 186
James, K 37
Janata, P 201, 250
Jang, M 276
Janschewitz, K 28
Jantzen, M 228
Japee, S 209
Jaspers-Fayer, F 87, 150
Jelowicka, A 158
Jena, D 116
Jenkins, A 209
Jenkins, L 59, 149

Author Index

Jenner, J 51
Jensen, U 201
Jenson, M 148
Jeong, J 88, 208
Jerde, T 59
Jessica M. MA, B 113
Jha, A 270
Jha, AP 181, 261
Jiang, X 171
Jin, Z 159, 184
Joerger, T 137
Joh, AS 234
Johannes, K 280
Johansson, M 46
John DE, G 113
John, A 244
Johns, CL 293
Johnson, A 180
Johnson, D 146
Johnson, J 188, 240, 254
Johnson, JD 201
Johnson, JK 67
Johnson, K 274
Johnson, M 39, 257
Johnson, MH 193
Johnson, MK 260, 270
Johnson, S 21, 206, 280
Johnsrude, IS 227
Johnstone, T 120
Jolicoeur, P 13, 14, 267
Jolicouer, P 13
Jolicúur, P 115
Jonathan, W 182
Jones, L 143
Jones, M 85, 277
Jones, RM 187
Jongen, E 187
Jonides, J 75, 259
Jonkman, L 187
Jonkman, LM 121
Jonsson, B 80
Joormann, J 281
Joseph, J 87, 89
Josephs, J 278
Joshua BA, H 113
Jost, K 28, 251
Jouvent, R 95, 283
Juckel, G 47
Juhasz, C 287
Jung, R 101, 105, 145, 147
Jung-B, M 252
Jung-Beeman, M 72, 252
Junghˆfer, M 165
Juranek, J 82
Jürgenson, I 110
Just, M 164, 221
Justus, T 106
K
Kˆhler, S 196
Kaan, E 228, 290
Kacinik, N 111
Kacinik, NA 293
Kaczkurkin, A 63, 190

Kadis, D 189
Kafkas, A 202
Kahn, RS 85
Kalpakidou, A 187
Kaluzhny, P 68, 69
Kam, J 59
Kan, IP 139
Kanai, S 141
Kang, E 202
Kang, H 281
Kang, X 69, 76, 268, 274
Kang, YN 28
Kanno, S 136
Kanske, P 87
Kantner, J 181
Kaplan, LA 28
Kappenman, ES 73
Karnath, H-O 167
Karst, A 144
Karunanayaka, P 161
Kastman, E 206
Kaszniak, A 94
Katayama, J 21, 178
Kathmann, N 119, 243
Kato, K 176
Katrin, T 202
Katrina, L 68
Kaufmann, JM 168, 231
Kautz, J 143
Kaveh, A 265
Kawahara, H 231
Kayali, A 102
Kayser, A 72, 174
Keen, RE 234
Keifer, O 82
Keil, A 192
Keller, T 164
Kellett, G 266
Kelley, EA 237
Kelley, WM 212
Kelly, AC 83
Kelly, AMC 84
Kelly, B 120
Kelly, P 78
Kelly, S 56
Kemeny, M 146
Kemner, C 49, 121
Kempen, G 223
Kenealy, L 191, 193
Kensinger, E 43
Kenworthy, L 62
Kenworthy, LE 182
Keramatian, K 29, 120
Kern, S 86
Kerns, J 236, 239
Kerr, D 285
Kessels, RPC 257
Kessler, K 58, 105
Kessler, Y 97
Keysers, C 8, 9, 16, 17, 20, 86, 142, 210, 276
Khader, P 251
Khaled, S 191
Khan, AZ 59
Khan, R 87, 277

Kharitonova, M 257
Khatami, M 257
Khatami, R 94
Khatibi, K 52, 187
Khng, K-H 29
Kiefer, M 26, 251
Kiehl, K 75, 145
Kiehl, KA 286
Kiff, J 110
Kikuchi, H 136
Kim, ASN 45
Kim, C 29, 30
Kim, H 202, 229
Kim, J 202
Kim, J-J 48
Kim, N 20
Kim, YY 41
King, D 199
King, S 214
Kingston, J 154
Kinkingnehun, S 236
Kinzel, EN 61
Kircher, T 39, 148
Kirk, IJ 236
Kirmse, U 266
Kirsch, H 52
Kirschbaum, C 86
Kirwan, CB 130
Kishida, K 102
Kishiyama, M 244
Kisley, M 233
Kissler, J 40, 41, 202
Klaver, P 185
Klein, D 26
Klein, N 94
Klein, R 64
Klein, S 194
Kleykamp, B 42
Kliemann, D 205
Klingberg, T 237
Klinger, L 102
Klinger, M 102
Klivenyi, P 220
Klorman, R 184
Klostermann, EC 202
Kloth, N 168, 231
Klug, G 284
Kluger, A 139
Klupp, E 91
Knecht, S 43, 218
Knegtering, H 51
Knight, R 146, 244, 273
Knoblauch, K 95
Knoeferle, P 251
Knowlton, B 28, 39
Knutson, B 5, 100
Knutson, JB 5
Kober, H 87, 89, 91, 278
Koch, B 131
Koechlin, E 26, 35, 173, 236
Koelsch, S 226, 250
Koenig, T 28, 134
Koenigs, M 72
Koester, D 161

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

303

Author Index

Koh, CK 225
Kohl, A 205
Köhler, S 127
Kohls, G 148
Koivisto, M 177
Kokal, I 20
Kolk, HH 112
Komarova, Y 73, 241
Komeda, H 101
Kondo, T 294
Konrad, K 148
Kool, W 85
Kopp, F 188
Koralek, A 29
Koso, A 294
Koss, S 97
Köster, O 169
Kostermans, E 278
Kotz, S 221
Kotz, SA 87, 231
Kounios, J 260
Kousaie, S 294
Kov·cs, G 168
Kovelman, I 154, 194
Kovic, V 158
Koyama, M 106
Koyama, S 111, 229, 232
Krach, S 148
Kraemer, D 104
Kragel, J 150
Krägeloh-Mann, I 50
Krajbich, I 30
Kramer, J 32
Kraus, N 265
Krause , H 142
Kraut, M 196
Krawitz, A 30, 245
Kray, J 244
Krick, C 133
Kriegeskorte, N 7
Krigolson, O 50, 71
Kritikos, A 79, 80
Kroger, J 29, 30
Kross, E 88, 91
Krueger, F 72, 193, 213
Krug, MK 212
Krugel, L 277
Kruk, M 87, 277
Kuhl, P 231
Kuhn, C 152
Kumar, N 45
Kumar, R 60
Kunz, D 70
Kuo, B-C 30, 112
Kuperberg, G 63, 213, 246, 251
Kuriki , S 232
Kuriki, S 229
Kurylo, DD 164
Kutas , M 263
Kutas, M 135, 250, 251
Kwan, D 205
Kwon, JS 41
Kyong, J-S 229

304

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

L
LaBar, K 38, 86
Labar, K 154
Lacey, S 142
Lachaud, C 155, 157
Lachaux, J-P 269
Lachter, J 178
Lackner, C 30
LaConte, SM 153
Lagarie, B 285
Lagnado, D 71
Lahiri, A 290
Lai, G 31
Laka, I 155
Lakshminarayanan, K 229
Lambon Ralph, M 70
Lamm, C 88, 150
Lamy, M 64, 76, 254
Lancaster, J 168
Lancaster, K 105
Landau, A 60
Lane, S 104
Langay, R 46
Lange, K 10, 11
Langner, O 144
Lany, J 205
Lapate, RC 149
Lappe, M 167
Larsen, D 69
Larsen, J 106
Lassonde, M 20
Laszlo, S 252
Latchoumane, C-F 88
Lau, E 154, 158, 214
Lauritzen, T 60
Lava, M 142
Lavie, N 279
Le, CN 40
LeÁaignard, F 101
Leahy, R 75
Leahy, RM 61
Leamon, M 68
Leavitt, V 48
Lebiere, C 210
Ledoux, K 106
Lee, A 190
Lee, B-T 62, 120
Lee, C-Y 112, 155
Lee, D 109
Lee, DH 55
Lee, E 88
Lee, H 88
Lee, J 39
Lee, J-H 76
Lee, K 29, 65
Lee, KH 88
Lee, NR 66
Lee, PS 182
Lee, T-W 31
Lee, Y 256
Leech, R 229
Lefèvre, J 225
LeFrancois, C 244
Lehmann, T-N 196

Lehtonen, M 159
Leibenluft , E 190
Leibenluft, E 57
Leknes, S 89, 147
Lenroot, R 66, 193, 194
Leonard, C 81, 112
Lepore, F 20
Lesch, K-P 241, 287
Lessard, J 89
Levin, I 116
Levin, IP 126
Levine, B 45, 117
Levinson, M 146
Levinson, S 207
Levinthal, B 273
Levita, L 89
Levy, J 254
LEVY, R 236
LÈvy, R 137
Levy, R 180
Lewis, J 244
Lewis, MD 150
Lewis, R 100
Lewis, TL 171
Lewis-Peacock, J 258
Li, C-SR 31
Li, K 159
Li, P 218
Li, X 126
Li, YH 168, 182
Li, Z 101, 103
Lia, C 242
Liao, I 268
Libertus, M 188
Liberzon, I 28
Liebenthal, E 106
Lieberman, DA 229
Lieberman, M 21
Lien, M-C 178
Liew, S-L 146
Light, G 70
Liley, D 111
Lim, K 189
Limmer, WM 139
Limongi-Tirado, R 60
Linden, D 46, 144
Lindenberger, U 11, 12
Lindgren, M 46
Lindquist, K 87, 89, 278
Lindquist, M 52, 75, 152
Lindqvist, S 237
Lionnet, C 63, 214
Liotti, M 31, 87, 96, 150, 183, 282
Lipina, S 31, 119
Litke, R 255
Liu, H-M 231
LIU, L 159
Liu, L 184
Liu, X 285
Liu, Y 32, 159, 218, 290
Liu-Ambrose, T 35
Lleras, A 273
Locke, H 89
Lohmann, H 43

Author Index

Lombardi, S 202
Lombardo, M 206
Long, M 32, 96
Longo dos Santos, C 206
Longo, M 52
Loomis, J 252
Lopez, G 201
López-Hernández, V 273
Lopez-Paniagua, D 32
Loudermilk, B 82
Loui, P 229
Louie, E 50
Love, B 102
Love, T 281, 289
Lovett, C 252
Lovett, M 72
Low, K 32
Lu, D 159
Lu, J 162
Lu, Z 126
Lu, Z-L 282
Lu, Z-l 71
Lubinsky, T 67
Luce, MF 124
Lucia, L 164, 166, 203
Luciana, M 189
Luck, S 262
Luck, SJ 73
Ludowig, E 203
Lukacs, A 220
Lukas, S 220
Luks, T 47, 121, 265
Luks, TL 32
Lundahl, LH 184
Luo, H 230
Luo, Y-l 160
Lupien, S 45
Lustig, C 11, 12, 235
Lutz, A 152
Lutzenberger, W 50
Luu, P 91, 151, 206, 208, 272
Luxen, A 137
Lyons, I 288, 290
M
M¸hlberger, A 287
MacDonald , S 262
MacGregor, L 107
Machado, L 61
Machado-Pinheiro, W 260
Macias, R 201
MacKenzie, G 199
Mackiewicz, K 33
MacLean, K 61
Maclin, E 76, 256
Macrae, CN 209
Macrae, N 211
MacSweeney, M 107, 289
Madden, D 275
Madden, DJ 195
Maddock, R 95
Maddox, WT 71, 73, 102, 126, 135
Madeley, J 25
Maedler, B 29, 120

Magnotta, VA 286
Magnuson, J 160
Magnussen, S 195
Maguire, EA 132
Maguire, M 43, 99, 196, 219
Mahalingam, M 61
Mahendra, N 139
Maher, S 138, 166, 169
Mahone, EM 34, 271
Main, KL 61
Mainy, N 269
Makeig, S 121, 250
Mak-Fan, K 33
Makris, N 123
Malaia, E 219
Malcolmson, KA 66
Malison, R 37
Malone, M 189
Mancini, F 171
Mandic, M 45, 117
Mangels, J 137
Mangun, G 61
Mangun, GR 57
Mani, N 160
Manis, F 71
Maniscalco, B 137
Manly, T 79
Manners, J 257
Mano, Y 101
Maquet, P 137
Marantz, A 162, 217
Marco, E 52
Marco, EJ 188
Maren, S-K 219
Margulies, DS 83, 84
Marian, DE 90
Mari-Beffa, P 139
Marini, M 74
Mark, D 256
Markes, O 28
Markman, A 156
Markman, AB 71, 73
Marois, R 13
Marques, T 187
Marrett, S 209
Mars, R 117
Marslen-Wilson, W 158, 163
Marslen-Wilson, WD 157
Martens, S 180
Martin, A 62
Martin, E 185
Martin, L 40
Martin, LE 206
Martinez, A 170
Martins, B 77, 119
Marzi, C 171
Mashal, N 252
Maslowsky, J 90
Mason, A 179
Masson, M 181
Matarazzo, L 137
Matell, M 51
Matheson, E 71
Matheson, K 71

Mathew, SM 40
Mathias, J 186
Matsuda, Y-T 107
Mattarella-Micke, A 288
Mattingley, J 25, 35
Mattingley, JB 61, 276
Mattson, C 206, 208
Maudgil, D 71
Maurer, D 171, 192
Maurer, U 107, 268
Mauss, IB 90
Maxwell, J 145
Mayberg, H 244
Mayberg, HS 282
Mayberry, EJ 42
Mazuka, R 107
Mazzocco, M 192
Mazzoni, G 138
Mazzulla, E 282
McCaffrey, D 277
McCaig, G 29, 33, 120
McCandliss, B 96, 113, 268, 290
McCandliss, BD 99, 107
McCarley, R 65, 172
McCarthy, G 39, 150, 152
McCarthy, R 199
McClelland, J 70
McClure Tone, E 90
McCollough, A 258
McCullough, S 155
McDermott, K 46
McDonald, J 58, 62
McDonough, I 137
McElree, B 259
McGeoch, P 263
McGettigan, C 65, 226
McGinnis, SM 117, 266
McGrath, M 61
McGuire, PK 289
McIntosh, A 43
McIntosh, AR 123
McIntosh, GC 259
McKay, R 282
McKenney, D 194
McKeon, D 244
McLaren, D 206
McMahon, K 249
McMenamin, B 145
McMullen, P 64
McPeek, R 62
McPeek, RM 59, 81
McQuiggan, D 95
McQuire, M 252
McRae, K 90, 91
Mecklinger, A 42, 244
Meda, S 27, 122, 258
Meda, SA 273
Medler, D 216
Meegan, D 90
Meek, S 33
Megnin, O 142
Mehta, S 93, 155, 161
Meier, B 134
Meindl, T 34, 284

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

305

Author Index

Meinhardt, J 148, 188, 283
Meisel, J 158
Meister, F 34, 284
Meitzler, T 170
Mella, N 90
Mellon, S 41
Melody, MJ 182
Mendelson, J 276
Mende-Siedlecki , P 91
Mendoza, N 71
Menon, E 241
Mento, G 183
Merbah, S 42
Merchant, J 51
Meredith, M 249
Merikle, PM 66
Merison, K 124
Merkle, K 66
Mertens, M 251
Merzenich, M 41, 226
Meschino, LM 62
Meschyan, G 189
Mesulam, M-M 140
Metcalfe, J 209
Metzak, P 125
Meulemans, T 42, 45, 103
Meuwese, J 65
Meyer, JR 120
Meyerhoff, K 34
Michalska, K 282
Michel, C 186, 238
Mickleborough, MJS 175
Midgley, K 158
Mijovic-Prelec, D 104
Milanova, M 175
Miles, E 270
Milham, MP 83, 84
Milivojevic, B 236
Miller, G 226
Miller, K 108
Miller, KJ 270
Miller, L 67, 232
Miller, LM 215, 230
Miller, M 197, 199
Miller, S 108, 188, 233
Millner, A 150
Mills, M 146
Min, B-K 48
Minnebusch, D 169
Mintzer, M 42
Minzenberg, MM 40
Miranda, R 108
Mirman, D 160
Mirous, H 252
Mirsattari, SM 196
Misra, M 156
Misra, S 91
Mitchell, D 153
Mitchell, JM 237
Mitchell, JP 209
Mitra, P 108, 292
Mitterer, H 290
Miyakawa, A 280
Miyake, A 257

306

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Miyamoto, T 229
Moadab, I 91
Modarresi, F 253
Modirrousta, M 34
Moehr, M 243
Mogg, K 90
Mohr, B 207
Moiseev, A 166
Molfese, D 177, 188, 224
Molholm, S 48, 141
Molinaro, N 160
Moll, F 32
Moll, J 32, 184
Möller, J 203
Moloney, KP 61
Molteno, C 186
Monaghan, P 218, 293
Monahan, P 108, 228
Monahan, PJ 159
Mondloch, CJ 171
Monk, C 90
Monnig, M 226
Montague, R 102
Montaldi, D 202
Monuteaux, M 123
Moody, C 253
Moore, J 70
Moore, K 271
Moore, P 97, 243
Mooshagian, E 84, 271
Moradi, F 284
Moreau, P 267
Morgan, P 46
Morgan-Short, K 220
Mori, E 130, 133, 136
Moroschan, G 253
Morris, D 33
Morris, J 154
Morrison, RG 203
Morsella, E 28
Morton, JB 124
Moscovitch, M 43, 44, 45, 197
Moses, S 133, 203
Mostofsky, S 64, 78, 223
Mostofsky, SH 34, 192, 271
Motamedinia, S 198
Motes, M 258
Mouchlianitis, E 50
Moustafa, A 259
Moutsopoulou, K 79
Mozer, M 117
Mueller, K 226
Muennig, P 146
Muetzel, R 189
Muftuler, LT 201
Muftuler, T 77
Mugikura, S 132
Mühlberger, A 91
Mühlberger, P 153
Muir, K 65, 68
Mujica-Parodi, L 285
Mukai, I 175
Mukamel, R 143
Mullen, T 273

Müller, M 268
Müller, O 160, 292
Mullette-Gillman, O 35, 152
Munakata, Y 257
Mundy, M 50
Münte, T 203
Murohashi, H 229
Murray, R 187
Murthy, N 255
Muthusamy, S 115
Myers, CE 139
N
N'Diaye, K 170, 281
Na, C 63
Nacewicz, BM 149
Nachev, P 118
Naci, L 169
Nadeau-Noel, K 216
Nadel, J 283
Nadel, L 135
Nagamatsu, L 35
Nagarajan, S 52, 188, 232
Nahum, M 230
Naidich, T 146
Nair , N 45
Nakano, H 221, 231
Naparstek, S 97
Narayana, S 232
Nathan, C 168
Naumann, E 87, 277
Nava, E 230
Nawa, N 169
Nee, D 259
Need, A 38
Negreira, A 92
Neil, R 125
Nelken, I 230
Nelson Schmitt, S 154
Nelson, CA 184
Nemeth, D 64, 220
Neppi-MÚdona, M 176
Neumann, D 83
Neumann, J 103
Neumann, MF 175
Neville, H 69, 107, 195, 265
Neville, HJ 287
Newman, A 165
Newman, L 204
Newman, S 109
Newman-Norlund, S 207
Ng, P 92, 109, 277
Ng, YK 45
Ngan, ET 282
Ngo, C 139
Nguyen, J 97
Nicol, J 289
Niedeggen, M 138, 176
Nielsen, C 207
Nieuwland, M 213
Nigbur, R 35
Nikolaizig, F 220
Nils, S 76
Niogi, S 290

Author Index

Niogi, SN 99
Nishida, M 287
Nishimura, M 171
Nishimura, R 176
Nishio, Y 136
Nitschke, J 148, 285
Nitschke, JB 5, 6
Noad , R 138
Nobre, A 270
Nobre, AC 10
Nolen, W 211
Nolen-Hoeksema, S 270
Noordzij, M 207
Nopoulos, P 20
Nordahl, T 68
Norman, K 129
Norman, KA 75
Norris, CJ 149
Norton, A 186, 190
Norton, I 83
Nosarti, C 187
Noseworthy, M 64
Notebaert, K 98
Noveck, I 101, 116
Nuechterlein, K 177
Nusbaum, H 288
Nyberg, L 80
Nycum, T 122, 275
Nyhus, E 127
O
O'Connell, R 35, 56
O'Connor, C 117
O'Doherty, J 94, 278
O'Donnell, L 83
O'Hare, A 74
O'Neil, E 127, 196
O'Shea, G 44, 259
O'Shea, RP 174
O’Doherty, J 104
Oakes, TR 149
Oathes, D 148
Oberman, L 67
Obeso, J 201
Obleser, J 231
Obrig, H 110, 111
Ocampo, B 80
Ochsner 152
Ochsner, K 28, 88, 91, 92, 153, 277
Ochsner, KN 16, 17, 90
Ody, C 35
Ofen, N 189
Ogden, R 143
Oh, T 109
Ojemann, G 82
Ojemann, J 108
Ojemann, JG 74, 270
Ojima, S 294
Okada, K 127
Okochi, N 294
Okubo, M 92
Okuda, J 207
Oler, J 282
Olichney , J 263

Oliver, RT 127
Oliveria, M 32
Olivier, B 268
Olk, B 65
Olson, E 189
Olsson, A 92
Olsson, C 80
Omori, T 229
Onelio, L 190
Onton, J 121
Ooi, C 173
Oostenveld, R 223
Oosterhof, N 117
op de Macks, Z 194
Orcutt, K 33
Orellana, G 115
Orr, J 115
Ortigue, S 101, 144, 207
Ortiz-Mantilla, S 109
Osann, K 82
Osherson, D 75
Osorio, A 42
Ostendorf, F 196
Osterhout, L 110
Ostreicher, M 203
Ott, D 226
Otto, R 81
Ovaysikia, S 115
Owen, A 55
Owens, EA 189
Öztekin, I 259
Özyürek, A 212
P
Pa, J 67
Pacini, A 92
Paczynski, M 251
Paetau, R 292
Pagnoni, G 209
Pakulak, E 265
Paller, K 133
Paller, KA 140, 149, 203
Pallier, C 218
Palti, D 109
Pan, E 95
Panagiotides, H 74
Pang, E 189
Pannebakker, M 115, 124
Pannese, A 208
Pantazatos, S 170
Pantazis, D 61
Papagno, C 256
Papeo, L 214
Parasuraman, R 57, 60, 254
Parisi, D 69, 195
Park, D 59, 149, 170
Park, H 110, 127
Park, H-J 48, 110
Park, J 170, 259
Park, N 67, 202
Park, S 88, 208, 260
Parkin, B 249
Parks, L 226
Parks, N 55, 176

Parra, M 42
Parris, B 26
Parsons, MA 127
Parviainen, T 292
Parvizi, J 83
Pasco, G 206
Pascual-Leone, A 210, 212, 248
Pascual-Leone, J 254
Pasley, B 273
Passingham, RE 236
Patai, EZ 120
Patel, A 220, 266
Patel, U 208
Pathak, S 77, 240
Patterson, K 128
Patterson, R 227
Patton, J 56
Pauli, P 91, 153
Paulmann, S 87
Paulsen, D 69
Pavani, F 230
Pavlova, M 50
Pavlova, MA 131, 172
Pavon, N 201
Payne, J 43, 198
Payne, JW 124
Payne, L 260
Paz-Alonso, PM 190
Pearlson, G 27, 67, 75, 122, 200, 258
Pearlson, GD 273
Peelle, J 97, 214, 216
Pekar, J 78
Pekar, JJ 192
Pelletier, I 20
Pelphrey, K 154, 188
Pelton, H 21
Peng, D 159, 184, 291
Peng, D-l 160
Peng, K 44
Penhune, V 206
Pennartz, C 41
Pennartz, CMA 38
PeÒa, M 115
Perakakis, P 260
Perea, M 155
Peretz, I 267
Perez-Edgar, K 176
Perfetti, C 157, 250
Perianez, JA 116
Perrig, W 28
Perschler, P 21
Pesenti, M 98
Pessiglione, M 93
Pessoa, L 86
Peters, J 128, 129
Peters, KD 93
Peterson, D 259
Peterson, E 77
Peterson, MS 122
Petersson, KM 144, 223
Petitto, L-A 154, 194
Petrides, M 83
Petrovic, P 93
Pfeuty, M 225

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

307

Author Index

Pfordresher, PQ 232
Phan, L 221
Phelps, E 16, 287
Philippi, C 93, 161
Phillips, C 223
Phillips, J 66, 128
Phillips, M 33
Phillips, N 225, 294
Pia, L 176
Piantoni, G 223
Piazza, M 97
Pichon, S 93
Pichora-Fuller, K 225
Picton, T 267
Picton, TW 215
Piekema, C 257
Pierce, L 50, 60, 170
Pine , D 190
Pine, D 57, 90, 277
Pineda, J 21, 116, 235
Pinto, S 46, 201
PiÒeyro, M 220
Pitk‰nen, I 110
Pitts, M 170
Pitts, MA 49
Pizzioli, F 221
Planet, N 267
Plassmann, H 94
Platt, ML 120
Plichta, MM 121
Pliszka, SR 31
Ploner, CJ 196
Plunkett, K 158, 160
Poe, G 17, 18
Poelmans, H 113, 291
Poeppel, D 154, 158, 159, 214, 230, 232
Poggel, DA 48
Poliakoff, E 270
Polk, T 170, 204
Polk, TA 286
Polse, L 217
Pomplun, M 180
Ponto, L 155
Ponz, A 94
Poolman, P 151
Poppenk, J 43, 196
Porter, C 271
Portioli, G 230
Poryazova , R 94
Possin, K 32
Postle, B 257, 258
Postle, BR 256
Postle, N 249
Poulin, R 37
Poulsen, C 151, 206, 208
Pouthas, V 42, 90
Powell, LJ 209
Prabhakaran, R 260
Pradat-Diehl, P 238
Pradhan, S 116
Prado, J 116
Prat, C 221
Pratt, N 177
Prelec, D 104

308

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Preston, AR 200
Preston, S 212
Preston, SD 286
Preus, A 65
Preuschoff, K 8, 10
PrÈvost, M 63, 95, 214
Price, A 128
Price, C 82
Price, G 96, 98
Primo, SA 61
Propper, R 83
Provenzale, J 275
Pruessner, J 46
Pulverm¸ller, F 248
Pulvermuller, F 110, 128, 157
Pun, C 177
Pustina, D 129
Pye, E 128
Q
Quadflieg, S 209
Quamme, J 129
Quintero, A 209
Quiring, J 151
Quiroz, YT 260
R
Rˆder, B 156, 161
Rˆsler, F 28, 162, 251
Raber, S 125
Race, E 129
Rach, S 141
Rachael , E 129
Raettig, T 87, 221
Rafal, R 61, 139, 144, 274
Rafal, RD 81
Ragot, R 90
Railo, H 177
Raio, C 146
Raizada, R 7, 8, 231
Rajah, M 197
Rajah, MN 46
Rajamoni Nadar, S 261
Rakitin, B 261
Ralph, ML 14, 15
Ramachandran, V 67, 70, 140, 263
Ramachandran, VS 141
Ramage, E 94, 266
Ramage, EM 283
Ramchandran, K 116
Ramos, A 44
Ramos, AI 209
Randall, B 163, 214, 215, 222
Ranganath, C 197
Rangel, A 30, 94, 104, 278
Ranzini, M 97
Rao, A 270
Raposo, A 40
Rapp, B 64, 232
Räsänen, P 98
Raskin, S 43
Rasmussen, J 112, 161
Ratlif, K 109

Rauscher, F 51
Ravizza, S 68
Ravnkilde, B 76
Ray, C 94, 231
Raymont, V 72, 139
Razafimandimby, A 134
Read, J 70
Reagor, MK 43, 196, 219
Realmuto, J 32, 96
Reber, PR 203
Rees, G 99, 279
Reicherts, P 153
Reif, A 287
Reilly, J 214, 221
Reinholz, J 43
Reinke Pressley, K 185
Reinke, K 51, 60, 279
Reiser, M 34
Reith, W 133
Renner, B 145
Renoult, L 63, 214, 215
Rentz, DM 117, 266
Repin, N 125
Repovs, G 117, 276
Restagno, A 117
Reuter, J 94
Reuter-Lorenz, PA 137
Revonsuo, A 177
Rey, G 95
Reynolds, J 117
Reynolds, MG 62
Reynvoet, B 98
Rhodes, S 259, 261
Riby, D 261
Rich, B 190
Rich, J 67
Richard, N 117
Richards, A 95
Richardson, B 80
Richardson-Klavehn, A 37
Richiedei, JC 177
Richman, L 20
Richmond, LL 110
Ridderinkhof, KR 28, 103, 117, 123
Ridderinkhof, R 115, 124, 126
Ries, M 206
Riesenhuber, M 171
Rieskamp, J 277
Rifkin, L 187
Riggs, L 95
Riis, JL 117, 266
Rijpkema, M 144, 257
Rilling, JK 209
Rinne, T 224, 268
Risko, E 237
Rissling, A 177
Ristic, J 178
Rizzo, S 37
Rizzolatti, G 207, 246
Ro, T 61
Roach, A 68
Roarty, M 199
Robbins, RA 171
Robbins, T 241

Author Index

Roberts, K 272
Roberts, RE 118
Robertson, D 231
Robertson, I 56, 274
Robertson, L 57, 60
Robertson, M 283
Robinson, O 241
Robinson, OJ 118
Rodd, J 222
Rodier, M 63
Rodriguez-Oroz, MC 201
Roeber, U 266
Roeder, B 52
Roehm, D 222
Roelofs, A 124, 235
Rogalsky, C 222
Rogers, J 215
Rogers, JC 249
Rogers, TT 14, 15, 42
Roh, AY 41
Rohrer, L 96
Rombouts, C 81
Rombouts, S 124, 211
Rombouts, SARB 194
Rosa, C 20
Rosario, M-A 231
Rosburg, T 203
Rosen, S 226, 229
Rosen, Z 146
Rosen, ZB 261
Rosenberg, J 220
Rosenberg, R 76
Rosenberg-Lee, M 72
Roshan, C 256
Rosner, Z 44
Ross, B 103, 165, 267
Ross, J 192
Rossi, J 240
Rossi, S 110, 111, 291
Rossier, L 240
Rossion, B 221
Rossit, S 65, 68
Rothermel, R 287
Rothmayr, C 283
Rouleau, I 20
Rouw, R 171
Rovet, J 47
Rowe, J 227
Rowland, M 139
Roy, E 67
Roye, A 224
Royle, P 216
Rudoy, JD 140
Rudrauf, D 93, 161
Rueda, MR 190
Ruge, H 118
Rugg, M 127, 134, 198, 200
Rugg, MD 127, 133, 201
Ruiz, E 193
Rumiati, RI 214
Ruopp, KC 273
Rupek, P 167
Rush, L 44
Russell, G 79

Rute, NM 149
Ruthruff, E 178
Rutman, A 254, 275
Ruzic, L 269
Ruzik, L 186
Ryan, J 95, 133, 167, 203
Ryan, L 135
Rymer, W 56
Rypma, B 258
S
Sabbagh, M 30
Sabbagh, MA 183, 184
Sabel, BA 48
Sabhlok, S 73
Sabourin, L 194
Sabri, M 106
Sadato, N 27, 101
Sadek, S 206
Sage, K 70
Sagiv, N 98
Sahakian, BJ 118
Saint-Amour, D 20, 141
Saito, D 27, 101
Sakai, K 236
Salillas, E 98, 248
Sallet, J 238
Salmelin, R 292
Salo, R 68
Sambhara, D 261
Sambin, S 222
Samson, A 210
Samson, S 225
Sander, D 151, 170, 279, 281
Sanders, LD 10, 11, 154, 177, 234, 267, 269,
274
Sandgren, S 219
Sanfey, A 151
Sanfey, AG 102
Santens, S 98
Santonja, M 190
Sanz, C 220
Sarinopoulos, I 285
Saron, C 61
Sartori, G 74
Sarty, G 250
Sathian, K 142
Sathishkumar, M 44
Saupe, K 268
Sauter, D 65, 95
Savage, CR 206
Savazzi, S 171
Savine, A 118
Sawaki, R 178
Saxe, R 156, 205, 209, 210, 212, 248, 291
Scatturin, P 241
Schabus, M 137
Schacter, D 134
Schacter, DL 36
Schaefer, R 267
Schaefer, SM 149
Schell, A 177
Schendan, H 130, 138, 164, 166, 169, 203
Schendan, HE 172

Schenk, T 56
Scherer, J 165
Scherer, KR 279
Scheres, A 84, 190
Scherf, KS 185
Schild, U 156, 161
Schiller, D 5, 16
Schiller, M 123
Schiller, N 161
Schippers, M 210
Schirmer, A 147
Schlaggar, BL 11, 12
Schlaug, G 71, 186, 190, 229
Schlenker, P 222
Schlesewsky, M 113
Schmalz, C 207
Schmer-Galunder, S 132
Schmidt, L 176
Schmidt, M 64, 98, 148
Schmithorst, V 112
Schmithorst, VJ 161
Schmitz, T 95
Schneider , TR 142
Schneider, N 256
Schneider, W 77, 119, 240
Schnitzler, A 58
Schnyer, D 44, 126, 156
Schnyer, DM 71, 135
Schnyer, PhD, D 277
Scholte, HS 28
Scholte, S 171
Scholz, J 205, 209, 210
Schon, K 260
Schooler, JW 59, 212
Schrˆger, E 266, 268
Schreiber, H 291
Schreppel, T 287
Schroeger, E 224
Schubert, F 94
Schubotz, R 36
Schuermann, B 119
Schuil, KDI 189
Schulte, D 173
Schultz, W 104
Schumacher, EH 61, 119
Schupp, H 145, 284
Schürmann, B 243
Schwarb, H 119
Schwartz, DP 225
Schwartz, M 131, 219
Schwartz, MF 236
Schwartz, S 94
Schwartzman, Y 109
Schwarz Glezer, L 171
Schweinberger, S 65
Schweinberger, SR 168, 173, 175, 231
Schwerdtner, J 148
Schyns, P 77
Scimeca, J 137
Scott, A 178
Scott, S 82, 95
Scott, SK 226, 229
Scwartz, G 45
Seaman, S 105, 178, 213

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

309

Author Index

Searcy, YM 262
Sebanz, N 80
Sebastian, C 191
Seeck, M 281
Sefcsik, T 220
Segal, R 197
Segal, S 21
Segal, Z 244
Segall, J 101, 145, 147
Seger, C 77
Seger, CA 32
Segretin, S 31, 119
Seidenberg, M 216
Seidman, L 123
Seifert, F 94
Seigel, S 37
Seitz, J 140
Semenza, C 98, 246
Semrud-Clickeman, M 31
Sena Moore, K 259
Seniow, J 158
Senkowski , D 142
Senkowski, D 143
Seo, BS 110
Serences, J 56
Seth, S 259
Settle, K 56
Shachar, N 97
Shackman, A 145
Shafer , A 171
Shafto, M 215
Shahbazi, R 48
Shahin, AJ 215, 230
Shalgi, S 56
Shalinsky, M 154, 194
Shallice, T 263
Shamosh, N 28
Shan, H 49
Shane, M 145
Shane, MS 286
Shanker, S 129
Shapiro, EG 40
Sharma, S 144
Sharot, T 146
Sheard, ED 47
Sheffield, T 243
Sheftel, J 152
Shehzad, Z 83, 84
Sheldon, S 44
Sheline, Y 63
Shen, D 267
Sheng, T 146
Sheridan, M 191
Sheridan, MA 185
Sherman, S 259
Shestyuk, A 146
Shi Dong, Z 182
Shieff, C 71
Shigemune, Y 130, 133
Shimamura, A 44
Shimamura, AP 90, 202, 238
Shimojo, S 278
Shimura, Y 107
Shin, E 256

310

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Shin, J 88, 191
Shipman, S 37, 46
Shiv, B 94
Shook, D 191, 193
Shor, M 285
Shrager, Y 130
Shtyrov, Y 110
Shu, H 159, 162, 218
Sibuma, B 172
Siegle, G 88
Silfverhuth, M 74
Silver, M 60
Silverman, M 146
Sim, E-J 251
Simic, N 272
Simioni, AC 120
Simmonds, D 78
Simmonds, DJ 34, 192, 271
Simon, JR 130
Simon, M 283
Simon, TJ 192
Simons, J 263
Simpson, AP 231
Simpson, E 147
Simpson, G 265
Simpson, GV 47, 61, 121
Sindi, S 45
Singer, T 8, 9
Singh-Curry, V 58, 179
Sinha, R 31
Sirigu, A 213, 238
Skavhaug, I-M 131
Skipper, J 80, 113, 187
Skudlarski, P 273
Slachevsky , A 115
Slagter, H 257
Slagter, HA 120
Slevc, LR 220
Slocombe, E 172
Slooff, C 51
Slotnick, SD 179, 271
Small, S 246, 288
Small, SL 184
Smallwood, J 181
Smilek, D 62, 66, 179, 205, 239
Smith, A 206, 208, 282
Smith, D 56, 177
Smith, DV 120
Smith, E 28, 192
Smith, EE 279
Smith, M 77, 170
Smith, R 29, 120
Smith, S 101, 105, 145, 147, 179
Smith, SD 147
Smolinski, T 175
Smolka, E 162
Sniedt, F 187
Snijders, T 223
Snyder, A 72
Snyder, G 147
Snyder, J 231
Snyder, K 192
Snyder, T 148
Soderlund, H 45

Söderman, D 262
Sodian, B 148, 188, 283
Soei, EX-C 131
Sohn, E 170
Sohn, M-H 120
Sokolov, A 50
Sokolov, AA 172
Sokolov, AN 131
Soldan, A 131
Solman, GJF 179
Solodkin, A 246
Solomon, J 139
Solomon, M 68, 69
Solomyak, O 162
Soltesz, F 99
Sommer, M 148, 188, 283
Song, A 120
Song, J-H 81
Song, S 88, 122
Sonja A., K 219
Sood, S 287
Souza, MJ 190
Spaniol, J 45, 275
Spector, F 192
Speer, A 57
Spence, MA 82, 226, 228
Spencer, K 172
Spencer, R 131
Spezio, M 142
Spiegel, D 102
Spiering, B 45
Spinazzola, L 176
Spolaore, E 99
Sportiche, D 222
Spreckelmeyer, KN 148
Spring, D 29, 30
Spronk, M 121
Squire, LR 130
Sramko, V 96
Sreenivasan, KK 261
Sreenivasan, R 61
Srimal, R 255
St¸rmer, B 35
Stamatakis, E 163
Stamenova, V 67
Stanley, EM 232
Stanton, M 186
Staples, A 148
Staplins, J 276
Staresina, B 132
Stark, R 285
Staub, F 69
Stecker, GC 268
Steckley, R 68
Steenken, R 143
Stefanatos, G 194
Stefaniak, N 45
Steffener, J 261
Stein, J 106
Stein, M 191
Steinbrink, J 75, 111
Steinhauer, K 216, 220, 249
Stengel, B 216
Stern, C 130, 138, 260

Author Index

Stern, J 283
Stern, Y 131, 261
Sterpenich, V 137
Stevens, A 125
Stevens, C 69, 194, 265
Stevens, M 27, 75, 122, 258
Stewart, L 65
Stickgold, R 17, 18, 43
Stiles, J 221
Stilla, R 142
Stippich, C 100
Stitzer, M 146
Stocco, A 210
Stockall, L 162
Stodola, D 152
Stogryn, R 166
Stokes, J 150
Stokes, M 182
Stollstorff, M 193
Strakowski, S 76
Strasburger, H 48
Strenziok, M 193
Strik, W 134
Stroud, C 223
Stuss, DT 123
Suarez, R 77, 83
Subhani, D 121
Subramaniam, K 47, 121, 187, 226
Suchan, B 128, 169, 173
Suk, D 235
Summerfield, C 26, 173, 242
Summerfield, JJ 132
Sundermeier, B 212
Suppiej, A 183
Susskind, J 148
Sutterer, MJ 149
Sutton, B 149
Suzuki, A 149
Suzuki, M 130, 132, 133, 207
Suzuki, S 72, 149
Suzuki, WA 132
Swaab, T 111, 217, 252
Swaab, TY 248, 293
Swain, A 246
Swanberg, K 43
Swann, N 121
Swart, M 149
Sweeny, T 149
Swick, D 106
Swindells, SJ 56
Swinney, D 289
Szaflarski, J 112
Szalewski, K 112
Szary, J 287
Szeles, D 46
Szpunar, K 46
Szucs, D 99
T
Taake, I 87, 150
Tabbert, K 285
Takagi, M 136
Takahashi, S 132
Takeichi , H 232

Takeichi, H 111
Takeuchi, F 232
Tallal, P 229
Talmi, D 43
Tam, J 156
Tam, P 215
Tamm, S 138
Tan, D 61
Tanaka, J 50, 90, 170
Tanaka, K 107
Tang, CY 40
Tankersley, D 173
Tarantino, V 121
Tark, K-J 262
Tartaro, A 103
Tashiro, M 130, 133
Tata, M 179
Tatagiba, M 172
Taylor, K 194
Taylor, KI 163, 169, 214
Taylor, L 71
Taylor, MJ 33
Taylor, SF 28
Teichmann, M 222
Tejeiro, J 201
Telkemeyer, S 111
Teng, S 232
Tenison, C 156
Terao, A 229
Thakore, J 48
Thakral, PP 179, 271
Thangavel, A 47, 223
Thaut, M 259
Thesen, T 132
Thiebaut de Schotten, M 180
Thiel, CM 180
Thieme, R 43
Thill, M 83
Thioux, M 276
Thoermer, C 188
Thoma, R 226
Thomas, A 27, 122
Thomas, C 185
Thomas, KM 40, 193
Thomas, L 185
Thompson, H 86
Thompson, R 242
Thompson-Schill, SL 48, 75, 127, 236, 260
Thomson, LA 105
Thorell, L 237
Thorne, S 96
Thornton, R 225
Tie, Y 77
Tierney, KP 271
Tierney, M 69
Tillman, G 196
Timberlake, A 194
Tinaz, S 138
Tipper, S 79, 273
Tivarus, M 20
Tjokro, T 216
Todd, RM 150
Toffanin, P 180
Toga, A 75

Tokiko, H 213
Tom, J 235
Tomalski, P 193
Tomasino, B 141
Tomer, O 74
Tomer, R 53
Tomlin, D 102
Tomlinson, S 150
Toni, I 207
Tononi, G 257
Tontsch, C 190
Tops, M 278
Tottenham, N 150, 187
Towgood, K 65
Towler, S 81
Toy, B 262
Toyomaki, A 232
Toyomura, A 229
Toyosawa, Y 232
Tracey, I 89, 147
Trainor, L 227, 232
Tramo, MJ 225
Tranel, D 20, 116, 134, 201
Trautmann, SA 265
Treese, A-C 46
Treutwein, B 48
Triantafyllou, C 210
Tricomi, E 288
Trigeiro, A 235
Trinkler, I 151
Trksak, G 148
Troiani, V 97, 214, 216, 243
Trong, T-K 120
Troup, LJ 49
Tsai, J-L 155
Tsai, Y-FD 122
Tsang, C 193
Tsao, F-M 231
Tschierse, J 291
Tseng, A 193
Tsuchida, A 122
Tsuchiya, N 284
Tsukada, M 207
Tubridy, SM 132
Tucker, D 151
Tucker, DM 91, 206, 208, 272
Tunik, E 144
Tura, E 77
Turk, D 211
Turk, DJ 209
Turken, A 69
Turnbull, O 144, 278
Turner, G 122
Turner, J 77
Turner, M 77, 263
Tyler, L 163, 215
Tyler, LK 163, 169, 214, 222
Tzeng, OJ-L 136
U
Uddin, LQ 83, 84
Ueno, A 130, 132, 133
Ueno, K 107
Ullman, M 64, 108, 220, 223

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

311

Author Index

Ulug, A 290
Umali, M 180
Umla-Runge, K 133
Ungerleider, L 25, 57, 175
Ungerleider, LG 209
Unni, VK 180
Urbach, TP 251
Ursu, S 68
V
Vaessen, a 111
Vaidya, C 191, 193
Vaidya, CJ 130, 182, 195
Vaitl, D 285
Valentine, G 110
Valera, E 123
Valiquette, L 46
Vallesi, A 123, 214
Valois, K 20
van 't Wout, M 151
van Anders, SM 282
van Atteveldt, N 140, 291
van Balkom, H 290
van Berkum, J 223
van Bussel, K 211
van Dam, W 115
van de Meerendonk, N 112
van den Bos, W 211
van den Brink, D 290
van den Wildenberg, W 126, 240
van den Wildenberg, WPM 28, 123
van der Helden, J 81
van der Helm, E 151
van der Helm, PA 180
Van der Henst, J-B 101, 116, 211
Van der Linden, M 47, 282
van der Lubbe, RHJ 78
van der Meer, E 193
van der Meer, L 211
van der Meij, M 112
van der Molen, M 26
van Dijk, E 211
van Duijvenvoorde, A 117
van Eimeren, L 99
van Koningsbruggen, MG 81
van Lambalgen, M 247
van Leeuwen, T 144
Van Leijenhorst, L 194
van Loon, A 26
van Paasschen, J 46
van Reekum, CM 149
van Rossum, MCW 199
van Schie, HT 81
Van Snellenberg, JX 123, 279, 282
van Turennout, M 290
van Veen, V 212
van Vugt, M 181
van Wouwe, N 85, 124, 126
van Wouwe, NC 123
Vandewalle, G 137
Vanegas, S 245
VanMeter, J 144
Vannest, J 112, 161
Vargas, G 179

312

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Vartanian, O 69
Vaurio, RG 271
Vecsei, L 220
Velmans, M 167
Vendemia, J 33, 73, 241
Venkatraman, V 124
Ventura, M 232
Vercammen, A 51
Verfaellie, M 139
Vergara, M 155
Verguts, T 98
Verhoef, KMW 124, 180
Verhoeven, L 290
Vertinski, M 187
Vesely, L 97, 110
Vespignani, F 160
Vesterinen, M 98
Vetter, P 99
Videbech, P 76
Viding, E 191
Vila, J 260
Vilberg, KL 133
Villate, C 133, 167, 203
Vinogradov, S 41, 47, 52, 121, 188, 223, 226
Virtue, S 212
Vissers, CTWM 112
Vitulano, M 123
Vlamings, P 49
Vlek, R 267
Vocat, R 69
Vocks, S 173
Vogel, E 56, 258
Vogel, EK 13
Volle, E 236
Vollmer, S 173
von Cramon, DY 36, 125
von Grunau, M 162
Voss, H 89
Voss, HU 107
Voss, J 133
Voss, M 70, 94
Vosse, T 223
Vossel, S 180
Vrticka, P 151
Vuilleumier, P 69, 151, 170, 186, 240, 281
Vytal, K 152
W
Waber, L 240
Waford, R 224
Wagenmakers, E-J 103
Wager, T 28, 52, 75, 87, 89, 278
Wager, TD 123, 152, 279, 281
Waggoner, RA 107
Wagman, M 57
Wagner, A 129
Wagner, AD 200
Wagner, DD 212
Waidergoren, S 138
Waiter, GD 209
Wakabayashi, M 35
Walczak, A 242
Waldhauser, G 42
Waldie, KE 236

Walenski, M 64, 223
Walker, M 17, 18, 198, 286
Walker, MP 151
Wallace, G 62, 66, 194
Walsh, V 52, 101
Wan , N 45
Wang, F 189
Wang, J 32, 96, 212
Wang, L 40, 152
Wang, M-Y 112
Wang, P 181
Wang, T 134
Wang, W-C 129
Wang, X 76, 162
Ward, J 52, 98
Ward, R 61
Warm, H 223
Warren, C 90, 181
Warren, D 134
Wartenburger, I 110, 111
Waszak, F 238
Watanabe, M 207
Waters, AC 272
Waters, G 218
Waters, S 38
Watson, NV 282
Watts, C 151
Watts, R 174
Waxer, M 124
Wayland, R 228
Wearden, J 143
Webb, SJ 66
Weber, D 265
Weber, DL 61
Weber, E 31
Weber, M 75
Weber-Fox, C 219
Webster, L 98
Weekes, B 159
Wegbreit, E 72
Weger, UW 177
Weidner, R 180
Weierich, M 92
Weiler, JA 47
Weiler, N 88
Weinbrenner, D 292
Weiner, MW 67
Weinstein, A 198
Weintraub, S 140
Weis, S 39
Weiss, D 129
Weissman, D 271
Weisz, N 268, 269
Welbourne, S 70
Welcome, S 81, 112
Weldon, B 120
Wendelken, C 25, 73
Weng, H 152
Wenke, D 238
Werner, J 146
Wersching, H 43
Werth , E 94
Wessinger, C 144
Wessinger, CM 240

Author Index

Westbury, C 253
Westenberg, M 211
Westenberg, PM 194
Westenbroek, H 51
Westerberg, H 262
Westerlund, AJ 184
Westermann, G 158
Westwood, D 64, 78, 181
Weyers, P 91
Whalen, P 282
Whalen, S 77, 83
Wheeler, M 128
Wheeler, SM 47
Wheelwright, S 206
White, D 81
White, K 154, 194
White, L 272
White, S 99, 194
Whitfield-Gabrieli, S 102, 210
Whitmer, A 70
Whitney, D 50, 57, 166, 232
Wible, C 65
Wicha, NYY 232
Widick, P 246
Widmann, A 224, 268
Wiebe, S 125, 243
Wiener, M 51
Wiersma, D 149
Wiese, H 173
Wieser, MJ 91, 153
Wig, G 134
Wijnen, J 117
Wilbur, R 219
Wilcke, JC 174
Wilding, E 197, 199
Wilding, EL 131
Wilkins, D 247
Wilkinson, L 201
Willcutt, E 55, 255, 269
Willems, G 113
Willems, RM 212
Willems, S 47
Williams, J 125
Williams, K 191
Williams, L 70, 263
Williams, V 126, 156
Williamson, M 194
Willmes, K 291
Willoughby, KA 47
Wilson, J 131
Wilson, JS 153
Wilson, M 168
Wilson, ML 163
Wilson, S 163
Winawer, J 220
Winkielman, P 67
Winner, E 186, 190
Wirth, M 134
Wise, R 14, 15, 50
Wise, RJS 229
Witzel, J 289
Wlotko, E 216
Wodka, EL 34
Wojciulik, E 59
Wolcott, C 74

Woldorff, M 34, 272
Wolfensteller, U 28, 125
Wolff, S 113
Wolk, D 128
Wolk, DA 117, 266
Wolkowitz, O 41
Woll, B 289
Wolmetz, M 232
Wolosin, SM 135
Wong, LM 181
Wood, SL 73, 241
Woods, D 69, 76
Woods, DL 224, 268, 273, 274
Woods, R 46
Woodward, T 125
Woodward, TS 256, 282
Woolverton, C 135
Worthy, DA 73
Wraga, M 103
Wright, C 92
Wright, SB 125
Wu, C 153
Wu, O 175
Wu, X 162
Würflein, H 287
Wurnitsch, N 50
Wylie, G 205
Wylie, S 126
Wylie, SA 123
Wymbs, N 135
X
Xavier, P 196
Xavier, R. , O 113
Xiang, M 214, 217
Xu, G 206
Xu, Y 13, 14
Xue, G 126, 282
Y
Yadon, C 233
Yadon, CA 49
Yam, A 262
Yamada, Y 194, 287
Yamaguchi, S 253
Yamasaki, H 136
Yamazaki, K 21
Yan, P 31
Yang, I 177
Yang, Q 32, 44, 96
Yang, S-n 25
Yang, Y-h 160
Yang, Y-J 59
Yao, L 162
Yarkoni, T 126
Yayoi, S 132
Ybarra, O 186
Yeap, S 48
Yee Ying, Y 135
Yee, A 100
Yee, E 48, 160
Yeh, IB 109
Yeh, Y-Y 30
Yen, N-S 153, 239, 280

Yi, J 164
Yoder, P 188
Yoncheva, Y 268
Yoncheva, YN 107
Yonelinas, A 197
Yoo, S-S 286
Yoshizaki, K 176
You, W-p 160
Young, L 205, 212
Young, M 60
Young, M-B 71, 283
Young, R 105, 178, 213
Yulin, Q 244
Yun, K 208
Yund, EW 268, 274
Yund, W 69
Yuval-Greenberg, S 74
Z
Zaidel, E 58, 84, 168, 182, 271
Zakerani, N 113
Zaki, J 153
Zald, DH 147
Zamboni, G 213
Zanbaka, C 51
Zanesco, A 61
Zanto, T 254, 262
Zatorre, R 265
Zaveri, R 233
Zeidan, F 51
Zeithamova, D 126, 135
Zelazo, PD 55
Zendel, B 103, 233
Zeng, W 78
Zeng, Y 159
Zevin, J 113, 268
Zevin, JD 107, 187
Zhang, H 192
Zhang, L 213
Zhang, Q 218
Zhang, W 262
Zhang, Y 108, 218, 233
Zhou, H 162
Zhou, T 181
Zhu, L 159
Zhu, Z 52
Zhuang, J 163
Zhuo, Y 181
Ziemba, C 217
Zimmer, HD 133
Zimmer, U 272
Zimmerman, E 96
Zimmermann, R 143
Zion-Golumbic, E 135
Ziv, M 53
Zobel, B 234
Zollei, L 83
Zorzi, M 241
Zubieta, J-K 5, 6
Zucker, N 154
Zumberge, A 71
Zwitserlood, P 218
Zysset, S 210

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

313

