Cognitive Neuroscience Society
20th Annual Meeting, April 13-16, 2013
Hyatt Regency Hotel, San Francisco, California

2013 Annual Meeting Program
Contents
2013 Committees & Staff . . . . . . . .
Schedule Overview . . . . . . . . . . .
Keynotes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
George A. Miller Prize . . . . . . . . . .
Distinguished Career Contributions Award
Young Investigator Award . . . . . . . .
General Information . . . . . . . . . . .
Exhibitors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Invited-Symposium Sessions. . . . . . .
Mini-Symposium Sessions . . . . . . . .
Poster Schedule . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poster Session A . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poster Session B . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poster Session C . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poster Session D . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poster Session E . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poster Session F . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poster Session G . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poster Session H . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poster Topic Index . . . . . . . . . . .
Author Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hyatt Regency Floorplan . . . . . . . .

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

. 2
. 3
. 5
. 7
. 8
. 9
. 12
. 15
. 16
. 23
. 31
. 32
. 62
. 92
121
151
180
209
238
267
269
280

A Supplement of the Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Cognitive Neuroscience Society
c/o Center for the Mind and Brain
267 Cousteau Place, Davis, CA 95616
ISSN 1096-8857 © CNS
www.cogneurosociety.org

2013 Committees & Staff
Governing Board

Mini-Symposium Committee

Roberto Cabeza, Ph.D., Duke University

Elizabeth Kensinger, Ph.D., Boston College (Chair)

Marta Kutas, Ph.D., University of California, San Diego

David Badre, Ph.D., Brown University

Helen Neville, Ph.D., University of Oregon

Clayton Curtis, Ph.D., New York University

Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University

Lila Davachi, Ph.D., New York University

Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D.,University of California,
Santa Barbara (ex officio)

Scott Huettel, Ph.D., Duke University

George R. Mangun, Ph.D., University of California,
Davis (ex officio)

Kia Nobre, Ph.D., University of Oxford

Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan
(ex officio)

Gina Kuperberg, Ph.D., Harvard University
Thad Polk, Ph.D., University of Michigan
Marty Woldorff, Ph.D., Duke University

Program Committee

Young Investigator Award Committee

George R. Mangun, Ph.D., University of California,
Davis (Chair)

Charan Ranganath, Ph.D., University of California,
Davis (Chair)

Marie Banich, Ph.D., University of Colorado

Sabine Kastner, Ph.D., Princeton University

Roberto Cabeza, Ph.D., Duke University

Kevin LaBar, Ph.D., Duke University

Manuel Carreiras, Ph.D., Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, Spain

Eleanor Maguire, Ph.D., University College London
Cathy Price, Ph.D., University College, London

Alan Kingstone, Ph.D., University of British Columbia

Founding Committee (1994)

Ken Paller, Ph.D., Northwestern University
Brad Postle, Ph.D., University of Wisconsin-Madison
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan

Poster Committee
Tobias Egner, Ph.D., Duke University (Chair)
Xu Cui, Ph.D., Stanford University

Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D., University of California,
Santa Barbara
George R. Mangun, Ph.D., University of California, Davis
Steve Pinker, Ph.D., Harvard University
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan
Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University

Nadine Gaab, Ph.D., Harvard Medical School

Art Shimamura, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley

Brian Gonsalves, Ph.D., University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign

Administrative Staff

Hauke Heekeren, Ph.D., Freie Universität Berlin
Fumiko Hoeft, Ph.D., University of California,
San Francisco
Matthew Jerram, Ph.D., Suffolk University
Irene Kan, Ph.D., Villanova University
Dante Picchioni, Walter Reed Army Institute for Research
Jelena Ristic, Ph.D., McGill University
Rebecca Spencer, Ph.D., University of
Massachusetts- Amherst

Kate Tretheway, Executive Director
Sangay Wangmo, Administrative Assistant

TM Events, Inc. Meeting Staff
Tara Miller, Event Director
Kerry Bosch, Staff & Volunteer Manager
Joan Carole, Exhibits Manager
Shawna Lampkin, Event Associate
Renee Smith, Registration Manager
Shauney Wilson, Submissions Manager
Jeff Wilson, Website & Program Manager

2

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Schedule Overview
Saturday, April 13
11:00 am – 3:00 pm

Exhibitor Check-In, Exhibit Hall

11:00 am – 6:30 pm

Onsite Registration & Pre-Registration Check-In, Grand Ballroom Foyer

3:30 – 6:30 pm

Exhibits on Display, Exhibit Hall

3:30 – 6:30 pm

Poster Session A, Exhibit Hall

4:30 – 5:30 pm

Opening Ceremonies & 19th Annual George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience Lecture –
Fred Gage, Grand Ballroom

5:30 – 6:30 pm

GAM & Welcome Reception, Grand Ballroom Foyer & Exhibit Hall

Sunday, April 14
7:30 am – 4:30 pm

Onsite Registration & Pre-Registration Check-In, Grand Ballroom Foyer

8:00 am – 4:30 pm

Exhibits on Display, Exhibit Hall (Closed from 12:00 – 1:30 pm)

8:00 – 8:30 am

Continental Breakfast, Exhibit Hall

8:00 – 11:00 am

Poster Session B, Exhibit Hall

9:00 – 10:00 am

Keynote Address – Wiley Lecture in Cognitive Neuroscience, William Newsome, Grand Ballroom

10:15 am – 12:00 pm

Invited Symposium 1 – Order and Disorder in the Emotion Brain: Emotional Regulation in Health
and Disease – Richard Davidson, Chair, Grand Ballroom

12:00 – 1:00 pm

NSF Workshop, Seacliff Room

12:00 – 1:30 pm

Lunch Break

1:30 – 4:30 pm

Poster Session C, Exhibit Hall

1:30 – 3:00 pm

Invited Symposium 2 – Building Blocks for Language – Peter Hagoort, Chair, Grand Ballroom

3:00 – 3:30 pm

Coffee Service, Exhibit Hall

3:00 – 4:30 pm

Mini-Symposium 1- Analyzing patterns of brain activity to understand human vision and cognition,
Bayview Room
Mini-Symposium 2 - The role of concepts in affect and emotion: Contributions from affective neuroscience, Seacliff Room

20th Anniversary Gala Event
6:30 – 7:30 pm

Cocktails, Atrium

7:30 – 10:00 pm

Gala Dinner & Entertainment, Grand Ballroom

Monday, April 15
8:00 am – 8:00 pm

Onsite Registration & Pre-Registration Check-In, Grand Ballroom Foyer

8:00 – 8:30 am

Continental Breakfast, Exhibit Hall

8:00 – 11:00 am

Poster Session D, Exhibit Hall

8:00 am – 8:00 pm

Exhibits on Display, Exhibit Hall (Closed from 12:00 – 1:30 pm)

9:00 – 10:00 am

Keynote Address – MIT Press Lecture in Cognitive Neuroscience, Patricia Kuhl, Grand Ballroom

10:15 am – 12:00 pm

Invited Symposium 3 – Memory On Time – Howard Eichenbaum, Chair, Grand Ballroom

12:00 – 1:00 pm

Federal Funding Workshop, Grand Ballroom B

12:00 – 1:30 pm

Lunch Break

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

3

Schedule Overview

2013 Annual Meeting

1:30 – 4:30 pm

Poster Session E, Exhibit Hall

1:30 – 3:00 pm

Routledge Psychology YIA Special Lectures, Uta Noppeney, Tor Wager, and Roshan Cools,
Bayview Room
Mini-Symposium 3 - The effects of working memory training on brain and behavior, Garden Room
Mini-Symposium 4 - Where memory meets language, Grand Ballroom B

2:30 – 3:00 pm

Coffee Service, Exhibit Hall

3:00 – 4:30 pm

Invited Symposium 4 – Functional Speciﬁcity in the Visual System
Nancy Kanwisher, Chair, Grand Ballroom

4:45 – 5:45 pm

Distinguished Career Contributions in Cognitive Neuroscience Lecture
Robert Knight, Grand Ballroom

5:45 – 6:45 pm

DCC Reception, Grand Ballroom Foyer & Exhibit Hall

5:00 – 8:00 pm

Poster Session F, Exhibit Hall

Tuesday, April 16
8:00 am – 5:00 pm

Onsite Registration & Pre-Registration Check-In, Grand Ballroom Foyer

8:00 am – 4:30 pm

Exhibits on Display, Exhibit Hall (Closed from 12:00 – 1:30 pm)

8:00 – 8:30 am

Continental Breakfast, Exhibit Hall

8:00 – 11:00 am

Poster Session G, Exhibit Hall

9:00 – 10:00 am

Keynote Address – The New York Academy of Sciences Lecture in Cognitive Neuroscience
Joseph LeDoux, Grand Ballroom

10:15 am – 12:00 pm

Invited Symposium 5 – Networking Attention – Anna Nobre, Chair, Grand Ballroom

12:00 – 1:30 pm

Lunch Break

1:30 – 3:00 pm

Mini-Symposium 5 - Neuroscience and Law: Promise and Perils – Grand Ballroom B

1:30 – 4:30 pm

Poster Session H, Exhibit Hall

2:30 – 3:00 pm

Coffee Service, Exhibit Hall

3:00 – 4:30 pm

Invited Symposium 6 – Emerging Models of Human and Animal Decision-Making
Paul Glimcher, Chair, Grand Ballroom

CNSSA Student Social Night
Saturday, April 13, 6:30 pm, Hotel Reception Area
Come and join us for the annual CNSSA Student Social Night, Saturday April 13th,
after the GAM reception. We will meet at 6:30 in the hotel reception area (close to
the escalators on the second floor), and walk out to a nearby bar/restaurant. There
will be no cover-charge and light snacks will be provided at the restaurant (cash
bar). This event is open to all students and postdocs of the CNS. Come network with
other students and explore the wonderful city of San Francisco with us!

4

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Keynotes
William Newsome
HHMI and Department of Neurobiology, Stanford University

Wiley Lecture in Cognitive Neuroscience Keynote Address
Sunday, April 14, 9:00 – 10:00 am, Grand Ballroom

A New Look at Gating: Selective Integration of Sensory Signals Through Network
Dynamics
A hallmark of decision-making in primates is contextual sensitivity: a given stimulus can
lead to different decisions depending on the context in which it is presented. This kind
of flexible decision-making depends critically upon gating and integration of context-appropriate information sources within the brain. We have analyzed neural mechanisms
underlying gating and integration in animals trained to perform a context-sensitive
decision task. Surprisingly, both relevant and irrelevant sensory signals are present
within frontal lobe circuits that form decisions, implying that gating occurs very late in
the process. Dynamical systems analysis of the neural data, combined with a dynamical
recurrent network model, suggests a novel mechanism in which gating and integration
are combined in a single process.
Sponsored by

Patricia K. Kuhl, Ph.D.
Co-Director, Institute for Learning & Brain Sciences Director, NSF Science of Learning Center (The LIFE Center)
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington

MIT Press Lecture in Cognitive Neuroscience Keynote Address
Monday, April 15, 9:00 – 10:00 am, Grand Ballroom

The Human Language Puzzle: Advancing Theory Through Brain Science
Debate on the origins of humans’ capacity for language has engaged philosophers,
neuroscientists, and biologists, and more recently engineers and computer scientists who
want to create technologies that enhance language learning. In this talk, I will show how
co-registration of MRI, DTI, and Magnetoencephalography (MEG) in young infants is
revising traditional views on the brain mechanisms underlying human language. I will
describe a theoretical model that addresses the initial state of language learning as well as
the role of input in modifying that state. The main tenet is that in early language learning
children’s statistical learning and computational skills are ‘gated’ by the social brain. This
model has led to the discovery of linguistic biomarkers that may allow early diagnosis of
disabilities such as autism.
Sponsored by

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

5

Keynotes

Joseph LeDoux
Center for Neural Science, NYU, Emotional Brain Institute at NYU & Nathan Kline Institute

The New York Academy of Sciences Lecture in Cognitive Neuroscience Keynote Address
Tuesday, April 16, 9:00 – 10:00 am, Grand Ballroom

Emotion and Survival
The capacity to detect and respond to threats is an ancient survival mechanism, and
predates, evolutionarily speaking, the capacity to have conscious emotional experiences.
Circuits that detect and respond to threats are not fear circuits, not emotion circuits. In
those organisms that have evolved the capacity to be aware of their environment and
their internal physiological states, the feeling of fear can be experienced while the brain
and body are responding to a threat. But the capacity to respond to threats is not the
same as the capacity to consciously experience fear when well-being is threatened. Hardwired survival circuits are often mistakenly described as emotion circuits. But these did
not evolve to make emotions. They exist to keep animals alive and well.
Sponsored by

6

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

George A. Miller Prize
Congratulations to the 2013 George A. About the George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive
Neuroscience
Miller Award Winner, Dr. Fred Gage!
Please join us on Saturday, April 13, 4:30 pm, in the Grand
Ballroom when Dr. Gage accepts this prestigious award and
delivers his lecture. Reception to follow 5:30 – 6:30 pm in the
Exhibit Hall.

Function and Regulation of Adult
Neurogenesis
Fred H. Gage
Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute, California
Most neurons in the adult
central nervous system
(CNS) are terminally differentiated, but evidence
now exists that small populations of neurons are
generated in the adult
olfactory bulb and hippocampus. In the adult hippocampus, newly born
neurons originate from
putative stem cells that
exist in the subgranular
zone of the dentate gyrus.
Progeny of these putative stem cells differentiate into neurons in the granular layer within a month of the cells’ birth,
and this late neurogenesis continues throughout the adult
life of all mammals. The timing a process of neurogenesis in
the adult dentate gyrus is now well characterized. In addition, environmental stimulation can differentially affect the
proliferation, migration, and differentiation of these cells in
vivo. These environmentally induced changes in the structural organization of the hippocampus, result in changes in
electrophysiological responses in the hippocampus, as well
as in hippocampal related behaviors. We are studying the
cellular, molecular, as well as environmental influences that
regulate neurogenesis in the adult brain and spinal cord.
Computational model of adult neurogenesis has generated
novel hypotheses with regard to its function with the hippocampus. The functional and practical significance of these
findings will be discussed in light of their implications for
alternative or expanded views of structural plasticity in the
adult brain.

The George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience was
established in 1995 by the Cognitive Neuroscience Society to
honor the innovative scholarship of George A. Miller, whose
many theoretical advances has so greatly influenced the discipline of cognitive neuroscience. The first ten years of the
prize were funded by generous support from the James S.
McDonnell Foundation.
The Prize shall be awarded to the nominee whose career is
characterized by distinguished and sustained scholarship
and research at the cutting-edge of their discipline and that
has in the past, or has the potential in the future, to revolutionize cognitive neuroscience. Extraordinary innovation
and high impact on international scientific thinking should
be a hallmark of the recipient’s work.
Each year a call for nominations for the George A. Miller
Prize will be made to the membership of the society. The
recipient of the prize will attend the annual meeting of the
Cognitive Neuroscience Society and deliver the George A.
Miller lecture.

Previous Winners of the George A. Miller
Lectureship
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
2006
2005
2004
2003
2002
2001
2000
1999
1998
1997
1996
1995

Eve Marder, Ph.D., Brandeis University
Mortimer Mishkin, Ph.D., NIMH
Steven Pinker, Ph.D., Harvard University
Marcus Raichle, Ph.D., Washington
University School of Medicine
Anne Treisman, Ph.D., Princeton University
Joaquin M. Fuster, Ph.D.,
University of California Los Angeles
Steven A. Hillyard, Ph.D.,
University of California San Diego
Leslie Ungerleider, Ph.D., National
Institute of Mental Health
Michael Posner, Ph.D., University of Oregon
Michael Gazzaniga, Ph.D., Dartmouth College
Daniel Kahneman, Ph.D., Princeton University
William Newsome, Ph.D., Stanford University
Patricia Churchland, Ph.D.,
University of California, San Diego
Giacommo Rizzolatti, Ph.D.,
University of Parma, Italy
Susan Carey, Ph.D., New York University
Roger Shepard, Ph.D., Stanford University
David Premack, Ph.D., CNRS, France
David H. Hubel, Ph.D., Harvard Medical School

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

7

Distinguished Career
Contributions Award
Congratulations to Dr. Robert Knight
for being awarded this honor!

About the Distinguished Career
Contributions Award

Dr. Knight will give his special lecture on Monday, April 15,
4:45 pm, in the Grand Ballroom. Reception to follow 5:45 –
6:45 pm in the Grand Ballroom Foyer and Exhibit Hall.

The Distinguished Career Contributions (DCC) award
honors senior cognitive neuroscientists for their distinguished career, leadership and mentoring in the field of
cognitive neuroscience. The recipient of this prize will give
a lecture at our 20th annual meeting at the Hyatt Regency in
San Francisco, CA.

Prefrontal Cortex and Behavior: Insights
from Neurological and Neurosurgical
Patients
Robert T. Knight, M.D.
Department of Psychology and the Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley
Human
neuroscience
began with the study of
neurological patients in the
1800’s with an ultimate
goal of understanding cognition in health and disease. Damage to human
prefrontal cortex
(PFC)
results in a profound disintegration of goal- directed
behavior. Data from neuropsychological, electrophysiological and electrocorticographic
studies
in
neurological and neurosurgical patients will be reviewed
providing evidence that prefrontal cortex is a critical node
for top-down control of neural networks supporting cognitive processing. For instance, studies of stroke patients
reveals that multiple cognitive processes are dependent on
PFC. Recordings of the electrocorticogram (ECoG) obtained
directly from the cortical surface in neurosurgical patients
document that high gamma oscillations (60-250Hz) are generated in PFC in a host of cognitive operations including
attention, working memory, response selection and language. The behavioral and physiological findings obtained
from PFC lesioned patients and ECoG recording in neurosurgical patients provide evidence that the devastating
human prefrontal syndrome can be viewed as a failure of
PFC to control distributed neural networks subserving
human behavior.

8

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Previous Winners of the Distinguished
Career Contributions Award
2012

Morris Moscovitch

Young Investigator Award
Routledge Psychology YIA Special
Lectures
YIA special lectures takes place on Monday, April 15, 1:30 –
3:00 pm, in the Bayview Room.
Congratulations to the 2013 Young Investigator Award
Winners:

Uta Noppeney, Ph.D., University of Birmingham, UK
Tor Wager, Ph.D., University of Colorado
The 2012 Young Investigator winner is also presenting this
year:

Roshan Cools, Ph.D., Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Department of Psychiatry
The purpose of the YIA awards is to recognize outstanding contributions by scientists early in their careers. Two
awardees, one male and one female, are named by the
Awards Committee, and are honored at the CNS annual
meeting. Each award includes $500 US to be used by the
winners toward travel costs to the meeting, or for any
other purpose. Each YIA award winner will give a special
30-minute talk at the meeting.

See What You Hear – The Neural Basis of
Audiovisual Integration
Uta Noppeney
Department of Psychology and Computational Neuroscience and Cognitive Robotics Centre, University of
Birmingham, UK
Integrating
information
across the senses is critical
for effective interactions
with the environment.
Over the past decade, evidence has accumulated
that multisensory integration is not deferred to later
processing in association
cortices but starts already
in primary, putatively unisensory, areas. Given this
multitude of multisensory
integration sites, characterizing their functional similarities and differences is of critical
importance.

temporal coincidence detection in primary sensory, informational integration in association and decisional interactions in prefrontal areas. Audiovisual interactions in low
level sensory areas are mediated via multiple mechanisms
including feedforward thalamocortical, direct connections
between sensory areas and top down influences from higher
order association areas.
In addition to identifying where in the brain sensory information is integrated, we also aimed to provide insights into
the underlying computational operations using multivariate
analyses at the macroscopic level of the BOLD response. In
line with Bayesian principles our results suggest that audiovisual neural representations are formed by integrating sensory signals weighted according their relative reliability and
task-relevance.

About Uta Noppeney
Uta Noppeney is Professor of Computational Neuroscience
and co-head of the Computational Neuroscience and Cognitive Robotics Centre at the University of Birmingham, UK.
She received a degree in medicine (1997, Freiburg University, Germany), a doctorate in medicine (1998, Freiburg University) and a PhD in neuroscience (2004, University College
London, UK). After training in neurology at the University
Hospital in Aachen, she conducted neuroscience research at
Magdeburg University and subsequently at the Wellcome
Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, University College London.
In 2005, she became research group leader at the Max Planck
Institute for Biological Cybernetics in Tübingen, Germany.
She serves on the editorial boards of the Journal of Neuroscience, NeuroImage and Frontiers of Integrative Neuroscience. Her group’s research employs psychophysics, functional imaging, transcranial magnetic stimulation and
patient studies to better understand how the human brain
integrates sensory information into a coherent percept of the
environment and how it stores and retrieves this information from memory. To gain a more informed perspective on
the computational operations and neural mechanisms of
information integration, the group combines functional
imaging with models of Bayesian inference and learning.

Combining psychophysics, functional imaging and effective
connectivity analyses, our research demonstrates that multisensory integration emerges in a functional hierarchy with
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

9

Young Investigator Award

2013 Annual Meeting

Towards a Neuroscience of Human Emotion
Tor D. Wager
The University of Colorado, Boulder
Emotions are powerful
organizers of perceptual,
mnemonic, motivational,
and physiological processes.
Understanding
emotions, and their basic
affective and cognitive
ingredients, is essential for
understanding healthy and
disordered brain function.
However, in spite of some
claims to the contrary in
the popular press, there are
as yet no reliable human
brain markers for affective processes. Here, I introduce an
analysis framework for identifying fMRI patterns specific to
particular types of mental events. This framework is qualitatively different from the “brain mapping” approach because
it emphasizes a) optimization of psychological (“reverse”)
inference using machine learning; b) quantitative assessment of the diagnostic value of brain patterns; and c) prospective use of the same diagnostic patterns across studies.
Using this approach, we have identified a brain pattern that
can predict the intensity of physical pain at the level of the
individual person with 90-100% accuracy in some tests. This
brain marker for pain is distinct from other patterns that are
diagnostic of other types of affective events (e.g., observed
pain, aversive images, and romantic rejection). These results
suggest that it may be possible to develop fMRI-based brain
markers for distinct emotional states. Such markers would
provide new ways of measuring and classifying emotions,
characterizing brain disorders, and testing the effects of cognitive manipulations on pain and emotion.

About Tor Wager
Dr. Wager is the director of the Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience laboratory at the University of Colorado, Boulder.
He received his Ph.D. from the University of Michigan in
cognitive psychology in 2003, and served as an Assistant
and Associate Professor at Columbia University from 20042009. In 2010, he joined the faculty of the Department of
Psychology and Neuroscience at the University of Colorado,
Boulder. He has a deep interest in how thinking influences
affective experiences, affective learning, and brain-body
communication.
Current studies in the lab are aimed at understanding how
the brain represents different types of affect (including pain,
rejection, canonical emotions, and compassion), and how
affective representations are influenced by both conceptual
and associative processes. These studies employ mainly
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and behavioral measures, but also include work combining fMRI with
peripheral physiology, electroencephalography (EEG), transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), and pharmacology. In
addition, though most studies investigate basic mechanisms
in healthy individuals, collaborative studies include work
on clinical pain, PTSD, depression, schizophrenia, and borderline personality disorder.
Dr. Wager places particular emphasis on the development
and deployment of analytic methods, and has developed
publically available software toolboxes for fMRI analysis, including optimized experimental design, multi-level
mediation, change-point analysis, machine learning, and
meta-analysis. He believes that collaborative development
and open sharing of tools and data are critical ingredients in
the advancement of human neuroscience.

National Science Foundation Wants Your Innovative Ideas
Sunday, April 14, 12:00 – 1:00 pm, Seacliff Room
The director for the Program in Cognitive Neuroscience at the NSF will discuss
program funding priorities, review criteria and proposal process, and new funding
mechanisms to give you the critical information for creating a successful application. Tips will be provided on how to reach your program director and how to
prepare for an effective pre- and post-review discussion.
Speaker: Akaysha Tang, NSF

10

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

Young Investigator Award

Dopaminergic Modulation of Frontostriatal
Cognitive Function
Roshan Cools
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Radboud
University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department of
Psychiatry
The
neurotransmitter
dopamine is well known to
play a key role in a wide
variety of cognitive functions. Dopaminergic drugs
are frequently prescribed
for the treatment of neuropsychiatric disorders and
they are also taken by
healthy adults in order to
boost cognitive performance. However there is
large variability in the
direction and extent of
dopaminergic drug effects on cognition. In prior work we
have focused on variability of drug efficacy between individuals, highlighting the role of individual differences in
baseline levels of dopamine, personality, genetic predisposition and neuroanatomical connectivity. In the present talk, I
will review these individual difference factors, but I will
also present data that help understand the nature of within-subject variability in dopaminergic drug efficacy. Thus
drug effects vary not only across different individuals but
also within the same individual as a function task demands.
Our pharmacological neuroimaging data elucidate the
nature of this dependency on task demands and show that
the same drug can have different effects on cognitive flexibility and cognitive stability depending on its site of action.

About Roshan Cools
Roshan Cools is Full Professor of Cognitive Neuropsychiatry at the Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre and
the Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
where she directs the Cognitive Control group. She received
her MPhil (1999) and PhD (2003) in Experimental Psychology at the University of Cambridge, UK. After her PhD
she received a Royal Society Dorothy Hodgkin (2002) and
a Royal Society University Research Fellowship (2006).
From 2003 until 2005, she conducted postdoctoral work
at the Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute at UC Berkeley,
California. Her group combines psychopharmacology with
experimental psychology, functional and chemical neuroimaging, patient work, genetics and transcranial magnetic
stimulation to address mechanistic questions about neural,
neurochemical and psychological processes of the cognitive
and motivational control of decision making. In particular
her group aims to advance our understanding of the systemlevel mechanisms by which the ascending neuromodulators dopamine and serotonin affect behavioural control in
humans, with the ultimate aim to contribute to both basic
cognitive neuroscience and cognitive neuropsychiatry.

Federal Funding: Training and Research Opportunities
Monday, April 15, 12:00 – 1:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B
We will highlight current federal training, career development, and research funding opportunities available. NIH Program Director will present an overview of relevant funding at each agency, the grant application, review and funding processes,
and provide hints for successful grant writing along the way. Come learn how to
advance your research with federal support!
Speaker: Steven Grant, NIH/NID

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

11

General Information
20th Anniversary Gala Event

Catering

Celebrating 20 years of Mind and Brain Discoveries. Join us
on Sunday, April 14 in the Hyatt Regency Grand Ballroom
for a celebration to last two decades.

Catering will be available during the conference and is
included in the registration fee. Please refer to the schedule
below for the catering times.

6:30 – 7:30 pm
7:30 – 10:00 pm

Saturday, April 13

Cocktails, Atrium
Gala Dinner & Entertainment

Formal Banquet Dinner - Reception featuring cocktails,
hors d’ouevres and LIVE MAGIC will be held in the Hotel
Lobby Atrium for Gala attendees. Daniel J. Levitin, Master
of Ceremonies, LIVE MUSIC featuring Ben Sidran and Jessie
Farrell.

Abstracts
Poster abstracts can be found in the printed program and in
the PDF version which is downloadable from www.cogneurosociety.org.

ATM
An ATM is located on the Atrium level of the hotel for your
convenience.

GAM and Welcome Reception, 5:30 – 6:30 pm,
Grand Ballroom Foyer & Exhibit Hall
Sunday, April 14
Continental Breakfast, 8:00 – 8:30 am, Exhibit Hall
Coffee Break, 3:00 – 3:30 pm, Exhibit Hall
Monday, April 15
Continental Breakfast, 8:00 – 8:30 am, Exhibit Hall
Coffee Break, 2:30 – 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
DCC Reception, 5:45 – 6:45 pm, Grand Ballroom Foyer
& Exhibit Hall
Tuesday, April 16
Continental Breakfast, 8:00 – 8:30 am, Exhibit Hall
Coffee Break, 2:30 – 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

Audiovisual Equipment for Talks

Certificate of Attendance

LCD projectors (e.g., for PowerPoint presentations) will be
provided in all rooms where spoken sessions are scheduled;
however, computers will NOT be provided. Presenters must
bring their own computers and set them up BEFORE the
start of the session in which they are presenting. Facilities
will be provided to allow several computers to be connected
to the LCD projector in a room. Presenters are strongly
encouraged to arrive in their scheduled symposium room a
minimum of 30 minutes before their talks so that they know
how to set up their equipment.

To receive a Certificate of Attendance, please visit the Registration Counter on the Ballroom floor of the San Francisco
Hyatt Regency Hotel. If you require any changes, we will
be happy to email/mail a copy after the meeting. See also
Receipts.

Baggage Check
The Bell Desk - Assistance with luggage, packages and other
carry-on’s, is located with the Concierge, next to the front
desk.

Business Center
The Business Center is located on the Bay Level adjacent
to the Drumm Street windows. The following services are
available: Copy Services, Facsimile Services, On-Site Computers, Internet Access, Typing Services, and Shipping
Services (UPS and FedEx). After staffed hours, the business
center can be accessed with your room key to access computers with internet and printing capabilities.

12

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Chair People
Please ensure that you are available in your presentation
room at least thirty minutes before the start of the session.
Persons chairing sessions are asked to keep the talks on time.

Contact Us
To contact us onsite, visit the CNS Registration Desk on the
Ballroom floor of the San Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel
or send an email to meeting@cogneurosociety.org We will
respond to your email at our soonest opportunity.

Disclaimer
The Program Committee reserves the right to change the
meeting program at any time without notice. Please note
this program is correct at time of print.

2013 Annual Meeting

General Information

Drink Tickets

Member Services

Each Attendee will receive two drink tickets; they can
be redeemed for alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverages at
the GAM and Welcome Reception on Saturday or at the
Distinguished Career Award in Cognitive Neuroscience
(DCC) Reception on Monday. Lost drink tickets will not be
replaced.

The member services desk is located at the Registration
Counter on the Ballroom floor of the San Francisco Hyatt
Regency Hotel. The member services desk will be open at
the following times:

Exhibit Hall
The conference exhibit is located in Pacific Concourse Exhibit
Hall of the San Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel. Located in
this room are the posters, exhibit booths, and catering. The
Exhibit Hall is open to all attendees at the following times:
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday

8:00 am – 12:00 pm
8:00 am – 12:00 pm
8:00 am – 12:00 pm

3:30 – 6:30 pm*
1:30 – 4:30 pm*
1:30 – 8:00 pm*
1:30 – 4:30 pm*

Saturday, April 13
Sunday, April 14
Monday, April 15
Tuesday, April 16

11:00 am – 5:00 pm
7:30 am – 4:30 pm
8:00 am – 8:00 pm
8:00 am – 12:30 pm

Message Center
Messages for meeting registrants can be left and retrieved
at the Registration Counter on the Ballroom floor of the San
Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel. A bulletin board will be
available for announcements and job postings.

Mobile Phones

*Please note the room will close and lock sharply, there is no
admittance until the following day.

Attendees are asked to silence their mobile phones when in
sessions.

Facebook

Name Badges

Find us on Facebook search for “CNS Annual Meeting” and
like us!

The San Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel and Convention
Center is open to public access. For security purposes,
attendees, speakers and exhibitors are asked to wear their
name badges to all sessions and social functions.

Hotel
The San Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel is our exclusive
Hotel for the CNS 2013 Annual Meeting and where all CNS
2013 meeting events will be held. Hyatt Regency San Francisco, 5 Embarcadero Center, San Francisco CA 94111.

Hotel Restaurants
Eclipse Restaurant & Lounge. Whether you are in the mood
for quick refreshment or a full meal, the culinary offerings at
Eclipse will satiate you with an unforgettable interpretation
of global dining.

Internet Access
CNS attendees will receive complimentary wireless internet
in their guest room, when reserved within the CNS block
and before March 21, 2013.
Free internet terminals are located in the Ballroom Foyer
near the CNS Registration Desk. Internet terminals are
available during the meeting registration hours on Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday when not needed for
onsite registration. See Onsite Meeting Registration.

Lost & Found
The meeting Lost and Found is located at the Registration
Counter on the Ballroom floor of the San Francisco Hyatt
Regency Hotel.

Entrance into sessions is restricted to registered attendees
only. Entrance to the Exhibition will be limited to badge
holders only. If you misplace your name badge, please go
to the Registration Counter on the Ballroom floor of the San
Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel for a replacement.

Parking
The San Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel offers secured and
covered Valet parking. Parking rates are currently $61.00/24
hour for hotel guests or $67.00/24 hour for non-guests.
(Please note this information was correct at time of print.)

Phone Charging Station
There will be a small phone charging station located at the
Registration Counter on the Ballroom floor of the San Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel.

Photo Disclaimer
Registration and attendance at, or participation in, the Cognitive Neuroscience Society meetings and other activities
constitute an agreement by the registrant/attendee to CNS’s
use and distribution (both now and in the future) of the registrant’s or attendee’s image in photographs of such events
and activities.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

13

General Information

2013 Annual Meeting

Poster Sessions

Speakers

Poster sessions are scheduled on Saturday, April 13, Sunday,
April 14, Monday, April 15, and Tuesday, April 16. The presenting author must be present during the assigned session
and other authors may be present to answer questions. The
poster sessions are in the Pacific Concourse Exhibit Hall of
the San Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel. Badges are required
at all times. Do not leave personal items in the poster room.

All speakers must register and wear name badge to present.
Please ensure that you are available in your presentation
room at least thirty minutes before the start of the session.
See also Audiovisual equipment for Talks.

Printed Program
One copy of the printed program is available to each attendee
who requested one. Please email registration@cogneurosociety.org if you require an additional copy.. Every effort
has been made to produce an accurate program. If you are
presenting at the conference, please confirm your presentation times as listed in this program. Attendees also have
the option to view the program by downloading it from our
website.

Receipts

Transportation
Taxis - There is a taxis stand at the front of the Hotel. A Taxi
to or from SFO is about 20-30 minutes and is approximately
$50-55.
BART (Bay Area Rapid Transit) -Please visit www.bart.gov
for fares and schedules. Station is located within steps of the
hotel’s front entrance. Approximate one-way fare from San
Francisco International Airport $8.25
Lorrie’s Shuttle - Offers service to the Hyatt Regency San
Francisco. Shuttles depart every 20 minutes. Board shuttles
just outside of the luggage carousels on the lower level of
SFO. Fare is $16 from the airport to the hotel.
Fares subject to change without notice.

You received two receipts via email, one at the time of purchase and a second with your registration confirmation.
Please email the registration desk if you require an additional copy. See also Certificate of Attendance.

Twitter

Receptions

Website

The GAM & Welcome Reception will be held in the Grand
Ballroom Foyer & the Pacific Concourse Exhibit Hall, from
5:30 – 6:30 pm on Saturday, April 13, directly following
the GAM Lecture honoring Fred Gage winner of the 19th
Annual George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience.

http://www.cogneurosociety.org/annual-meeting/

Join us on Monday, April 15 from 5:45 – 6:45 pm in the
Grand Ballroom Foyer & the Pacific Concourse Exhibit Hall,
for the DCC reception directly following the DCC Lecture
honoring Robert Knight, winner of the 2nd Annual Distinguished Career Contributions Awards.

Registration
The Registration Counter is located on the Ballroom floor
of the San Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel. The Registration
Counter will be open at the following times:
Saturday, April 13
Sunday, April 14
Monday, April 15
Tuesday, April 16

11:00 am – 6:30 pm
7:30 am – 4:30 pm
8:00 am – 8:00 pm
8:00 am – 5:00 pm

Smoking
Smoking is not permitted in or outside any of the meeting
rooms or the exhibition hall.

14

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Follow CNS Annual Meeting (@CNSmtg). Our Hashtag this
year is #CNS2013

Exhibitors
2013 Exhibitors

Exhibit Hours

Visit our exhibitors in the Exhibit Hall located in the Pacific
Concourse, one floor down from the CNS Registration
Desk. Take the stairs outside the Market Street Foyer on the
ground floor.

Exhibit Hall open to all attendees:

ANT North America
Avatar EEG Solutions, Inc.
BIOPAC Systems, Inc.
Cedrus
Compumedics USA
Cortech Solutions, Inc.
Electrical Geodesics, Inc.
Elsevier
Hitachi Medical Corporation
MagVenture
Neurobehavioral Systems, Inc
NITRC: Neuroimaging Informatics Tools and Resources
Clearinghouse
Oxford University Press
Psychology Press
Psychology Software Tools
Rogue Resolutions Ltd.
Sinauer Associates, Inc
Smart Eye AB
Society for Neuroscience
The MIT Press
Tobii Technology
W.W. Norton

Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday

8:00 am – 12:00 pm
8:00 am – 12:00 pm
8:00 am – 12:00 pm

3:30 – 6:30 pm
1:30 – 4:30 pm
1:30 – 8:00 pm
1:30 – 4:30 pm

Exhibit Hall closed for the day - no entry:
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday

6:30 pm
4:30 pm
8:00 pm
4:30 pm

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

15

Invited-Symposium Sessions
#

Title

Date

Time

Location

1

Order and disorder in the emotion brain:
Emotional regulation in health and disease

Sunday, April 14

10:15 am – 12:00 pm

Grand Ballroom

2

Building blocks for language

Sunday, April 14

1:30 – 3:00 pm

Grand Ballroom

3

Memory on time

Monday, April 15

10:15 am – 12:00 pm

Grand Ballroom

4

Functional Speciﬁcity in the Visual System

Monday, April 15

3:00 – 4:30 pm

Grand Ballroom

5

Networking Attention

Tuesday April 16

10:15 am – 12:00 pm

Grand Ballroom

6

Emerging models of human and animal
decision-making

Tuesday April 16

3:00 – 4:30 pm

Grand Ballroom

Invited-Symposium Session 1

response to affective stimuli. Finally, behavioral strategies
that alter brain function to improve emotion regulation for
alleviating symptoms and promoting well-being will be
described.

ORDER AND DISORDER IN THE EMOTION BRAIN:
EMOTIONAL REGULATION IN HEALTH AND
DISEASE
EMOTION REGULATION: CONCEPTUAL AND EMPIRICAL
Sunday, April 14, 10:15 am – 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom

FOUNDATIONS

Chair: Richard J Davidson, UW-Madison
Speakers: Richard J Davidson, James Gross, Regina Lapate,
Karina S. Blair
This symposium will feature recent research on the neural
bases of emotional reactivity and regulation and illustrate
the application of insights gleaned from basic research to the
clinical arena in understanding fundamental abnormalities
in mood and anxiety disorders. In addition, new approaches
to the treatment of mood and anxiety disorders, as well
to the promotion of well-being in putatively psychologically “healthy” individuals, based upon knowledge of the
neural bases of emotion regulation, will be considered. The
following speakers will participate: Richard J. Davidson,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Organizer James Gross,
Stanford University Regina Lapate,University of Wisconsin-Madison, Karina Blair, NIMH

James Gross, Stanford University
The past decade has seen an extraordinary increase in
research on emotion regulation. Work from dozens of laboratories around the world has converged to establish that
emotion regulation plays a crucial role in determining a
wide range of affective, cognitive, and social outcomes.
My talk will have three parts. In the first part of the talk,
I will define emotion regulation and describe a framework
for understanding the role of emotion regulation in healthy
adaptation. In the second part of the talk, I will review key
behavioral findings which suggest that specific forms of
emotion regulation have different consequences for affective, cognitive, and social functioning. In the third part of
the talk, I will discuss the neural bases of one particularly
important form of explicit emotion regulation, namely
cognitive reappraisal, and consider how adaptive forms of
emotion regulation such as reappraisal fail in the context of
psychopathology.

REACTIVITY, REGULATION AND RECOVERY: THE R’S OF
EMOTION REGULATION FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OF
AFFECTIVE NEUROSCIENCE
Richard J Davidson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Parsing the temporal dynamics of emotional responding
provides insights into understanding how reactivity, regulation and recovery in response to affectively salient stimuli
can be disentangled. This talk will consider each of these
subcomponents and provide illustrations from studies
with both normal individuals and patients with mood and
anxiety disorders/symptoms. Emphasis will be placed on
prefrontal-amygdala and prefrontal-striatal connectivity, as
well as on the temporal dynamics of amygdala activation in

16

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

INVESTIGATING EMOTIONAL REGULATION:
INTEGRATING PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY AND NEUROIMAGING WITH AN INDIVIDUAL-DIFFERENCES APPROACH
Regina Lapate, University of Wisconsin-Madison
The remarkable inter-individual heterogeneity that characterizes emotional responding makes individual differences
a powerful tool for the study of emotional regulation processes and associated neural mechanisms. In this light, this
talk will underscore the value of adopting an individual-differences approach to examine the neural bases and information-processing conditions promoting successful emotional
regulation. In the first part of the talk, I will report on neu-

2013 Annual Meeting

roimaging and psychophysiological data suggestive of high
stability and generalizability of success in a particularly
effective form of emotional regulation: cognitive reappraisal.
In the next part of the talk, I will examine the regulatory
consequences of processing emotion in conditions precluding cognitive reappraisal due to lack of awareness of the
source of emotion. Specifically, I will review recent findings
demonstrating a benefit of conscious awareness in preventing physiological responses to emotional provocation from
biasing appraisal of unrelated neutral stimuli, including the
neural bases underlying those effects. Finally, I will discuss
the relevance of this work for understanding emotional circuitry function and dysfunction with improved specificity
under a biologically informed and process-based approach.

EMOTIONAL REGULATION IN PATIENTS WITH ANXIETY
DISORDERS
Karina S Blair, NIHM
Clinical reports suggest that emotion regulation difficulties
are seen in a variety of anxiety conditions; e.g., Generalized
Social Phobia (GSP), Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD)
and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). However, the
specific computational nature of this difficulty has only
begun to emerge. This talk will focus on three studies of one
form of emotional regulation; the role of dorsal prefrontal
cortex (both medial and lateral regions) in attention control
priming task relevant representations at the expense of
emotional information. In the first study, patients with GSP,
GAD and co-morbid GSP/GAD and healthy controls (HCs)
performed an emotional reappraisal paradigm. Patients in
all three groups showed reduced recruitment, relative to
HCs, of dorsal anterior cingulate (dACC) and parietal cortices (PC) when explicitly regulating an emotional image. In
the second study, patients with GSP, GAD and co-morbid
GSP/GAD and healthy controls (HCs) performed the affective Stroop (AS) paradigm where task related priming of
number representations implicitly reduces representation
of emotional distracters. Again patients in all three groups
showed reduced recruitment, relative to HCs, of dACC and
PC as a function of task demands. In the third study, patients
with PTSD, trauma controls (TCs) and HCs performed the
AS. Patients with PTSD showed reduced recruitment of lateral frontal and PC when engaged by task demands while
TCs showed indications of heightened recruitment of these
regions. These data will be discussed in terms of emotional
regulation deficits as a general risk factor for the development of a variety of anxiety conditions.

Invited-Symposium Sessions

Invited-Symposium Session 2
BUILDING BLOCKS FOR LANGUAGE
Sunday, April 14, 1:30 – 3:00 pm, Grand Ballroom
Chair: Peter Hagoort, Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging
Speakers: Simon Fisher, Ghislaine Dehaene-Lambertz, Kara
Federmeier, Peter Hagoort
The language system is based on a language-ready brain
whose development is instructed by genes for building such
a brain, by a structural and functional organization of the
newborn and infant brain that seems predisposed to develop
a full-fledged language system, and by the recruitment of
other than core areas in the perisylvian cortex to realize the
communication potential of language. This symposium will
focus on these building blocks for language in its full glory.

DECODING THE GENETICS OF SPEECH AND LANGUAGE
Simon Fisher, MPI for Psycholinguistics; Nijmegen, the Netherlands
Researchers are beginning to uncover the neurogenetic
pathways that contribute to our unparalleled capacity for
spoken language. Initial clues come from identification of
genetic risk factors implicated in developmental language
disorders. The underlying genetic architecture is complex,
involving a range of molecular mechanisms. For example,
we have shown that rare protein-coding mutations of the
FOXP2 transcription factor cause severe problems with
sequencing of speech sounds, while common genetic risk
variants of small effect size in genes like CNTNAP2, ATP2C2
and CMIP are associated with typical forms of language
impairment. In my talk I will describe how investigations of
genes like FOXP2, in humans, animals and cellular models,
can unravel the complicated connections between genes
and language. This depends on interdisciplinary research
at multiple levels, from determining molecular interactions and functional roles in neural cell-biology all the way
through to effects on brain structure and activity.

NEURAL BASIS OF INFANTS’ LANGUAGE ABILITY
Ghislaine Dehaene-Lambertz, INSERM, Neurospin; Saclay,
France
The development of non-invasive brain imaging techniques
has opened the black-box of the infant brain and recent studies have revealed the early and complex organization of the
peri-sylvian areas from the onset of the cerebral circuitry
before term. I will discuss how these new data shed light on
the emergence of language in the human species.

MANY STRUCTURES FROM THE SAME BLOCKS:
LANGUAGE PROCESSING DYNAMICS IN THE TWO
CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES
Kara Federmeier, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign &
Beckmann Institute
Appreciating the meaning of a word, sentence, or larger
discourse involves analyzing complex, often ambiguous
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

17

Invited-Symposium Sessions

perceptual inputs and linking them to information stored in
long-term memory. Electrophysiological data suggest that
meaning arises through a binding process, established via
activity in temporal lobe areas and reflected in the N400
component, which creates an initial semantic representation
built from activity in a distributed, multimodal set of brain
areas. Although initiated by word perception, this process is
not strictly feedforward. Top-down information built over
time from context substantively changes processing by preactivating features of likely upcoming words. Strong temporal pressures are created by the fact that words are encountered at a rapid rate and that the binding process seems
to be temporally constrained (N400 latency is strikingly
invariant); information that is not available quickly enough
cannot be incorporated immediately. Top-down processes
that come on-line later thus serve to refine and revise the
initial representation. The efficacy of top-down processing
depends on the integrity of neural feedback connections,
which appear to be different for the left and right cerebral
hemispheres. In particular, left hemisphere dominance for
language production attests to the presence of concept-toform connections that are less well-developed in the right
hemisphere. The consequence of this difference is a set of
parallel, partially independent language comprehension
systems. The multifaceted nature of meaning processing
affords the brain important flexibility for dealing with varying processing circumstances, task demands, and resource
availability.

THE NEUROBIOLOGY OF LANGUAGE BEYOND THE
INFORMATION GIVEN
Peter Hagoort, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour & Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics
Speakers and listeners do more than exchanging propositional content. They try to get things done with their utterances. For speakers this requires planning of utterances with
knowledge about the listener in mind, whereas listeners
need to make inferences that go beyond simulating sensorimotor aspects of propositional content. For example, the
statement “It is hot in here” will usually not be answered
with a statement of the kind “Yes, indeed it is 32 degrees Celsius”, but rather with the answer “I will open the window”,
since the listener infers the speaker’s intention behind her
statement. I will discuss a series of studies that identify the
network of brain regions involved in audience design and
inferring speaker meaning. Likewise for indirect replies that
require conversational implicatures, as in A: “Did you like
my talk?” to which B replies: “It is hard to give a good presentation.” I will show that in these cases the core language
network needs to be extended with brain systems providing
the necessary inferential machinery.

18

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

Invited-Symposium Session 3
MEMORY ON TIME
Monday, April 15, 10:15 am – 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom
Chair: Howard Eichenbaum, Boston University
Speakers: Marc Howard, Lila Davachi, Wendy Suzuki, Howard
Eichenbaum.
The idea that memories are organized in time was initially
proposed by Aristotle and was a central feature of Tulving’s
original characterization of episodic memory. There is now
considerable evidence that the hippocampus plays a central
role in the temporal organization of memory. Furthermore,
recent studies are beginning to inform us about how memories are organized in time, and by what mechanisms the
hippocampus plays its role in temporal organization. This
symposium will review recent evidence from state-of-theart research on this topic in human and animal studies.

WHAT AND WHEN IN THE MIND AND BRAIN
Marc Howard, Boston University
The perception of time and memory are intimately linked.
We consider the hypothesis that a variety of findings from
cognitive and experimental psychology can be understood
as operations on a gradually-changing representation of
temporal history. Behavioral findings suggest three principles that this representation of temporal history should
obey. First, at each moment this history contains information both about what stimuli were experienced and how far
in the past they were experienced. Second, rather than falling off abruptly after some time scale, the history degrades
gradually over hundreds or even thousands of seconds.
Third, when an episodic memory is recovered, the brain
“jumps back in time” to recover a previous state of the temporal history. We review neurophysiological evidence from
a variety of species and brain regions and find evidence suggesting that each of these principles are respected in neural
ensembles. These results suggest that it is possible to link
cognition to neurophysiological findings across a variety of
brain regions and domains of cognitive psychology.

CONTEXT AND THE HUMAN HIPPOCAMPUS
Lila Davachi, New York University
Hippocampal function has long been associated with our
ability to form, consolidate and retrieve episodic memories.
Hippocampal processing is tightly linked with binding
sequential representations to the context in which they were
encountered allowing for recovery of the ‘what’ (i.e. episodic
representations), ‘when’ (i.e. sequential information) and the
‘where’ (i.e. context). I will present a series of behavioral and
fMRI experiments focused on understanding how we form
mnemonic links across sequences of stimuli and how event
boundaries disrupt sequential associations. Thus, representations spanning the same event become better integrated
in memory (measured using explicit and implicit measures)
and are associated with greater hippocampal neural similarity measures. Likewise, representations within the same

2013 Annual Meeting

event become reactivated during retrieval even when not
deemed necessary for behavior. Thus, our perception of
shared context modulates hippocampal neural similarity
across sequential episodic representations and is related
to how linked those representations become in memory.
Further I will present evidence that hippocampal-prefrontal
interactions support bridging across contexts to allow for
higher-level temporal organization of our experiences.

INCREMENTAL TIMING IN THE MONKEY MEDIAL
TEMPORAL LOBE
Wendy Suzuki, New York University
Recent work in my lab has focused on understanding how
the brain encodes memory for temporal order, a critical
component of episodic memory. To address this question,
we recorded single unit activity and local field potentials
from the medial temporal lobe including the hippocampus,
the entorhinal cortex, the perirhinal cortex and visual area
TE as monkeys performed a temporal order memory task.
We found striking incremental timing signals from one item
presentation to the next in the hippocampus. In contrast, the
perirhinal cortex signaled the conjunction of items and their
relative temporal order. These findings suggested that the
perirhinal cortex might integrate timing information from
the hippocampus with item information from visual area TE.
We next asked if similar hippocampal incremental timing
signals were also seen in other tasks that did not explicitly
require memory for temporal order. When we examined
hippocampal data from an object-place associative learning
task we saw incremental timing signals very similar to the
pattern seen in the temporal order memory task. In addition, we also identified incremental timing signals that also
provided information about release type (early vs. late) as
well as particular object-place combinations. These findings
suggest that timing is a common signal conveyed by the
hippocampus even in situations where memory for relative
timing is not required.

MEMORY AND TIME CELLS IN THE HIPPOCAMPUS
Howard Eichenbaum, Boston University
Episodic memory is characterized by the temporal organization of events that constitute distinct experiences, and episodic memory depends on the hippocampus. Until recently,
little has been known about how the hippocampus supports
the temporal organization of memories. However, there are
now descriptions of hippocampal ‘time cells’, principal neurons of the hippocampus that encode successive moments
during an empty temporal gap between the key events.
Time cells form qualitatively different representations
(“re-time”) when the main temporal parameter is altered.
Distinct ensembles of time cells encode the key events and
disambiguate different sequences of events to compose
unique, temporally-organized representations of specific
experiences. Time cells also encode spatial information and
behavioral events to differing extents, but temporal signals
are observed even when spatial and behavioral influences
are eliminated. Finally, temporal information for hippocam-

Invited-Symposium Sessions

pal time cells may arise in the medial entrorhinal cortex,
already known for its representations of spatial contexts.
These findings suggest that the hippocampus segments temporally organized memories into events that occur at each
moment within a temporally defined context much the same
as they represent important events that occur in particular
locations in spatially defined environmental contexts.

Invited-Symposium Session 4
FUNCTIONAL SPECIFICITY IN THE VISUAL
SYSTEM
Monday, April 15, 3:00 – 4:30 pm, Grand Ballroom
Chair: Nancy Kanwisher, McGovern Institute, MIT
Speakers: James Haxby, Doris Tsao, David Pitcher, Josef
Parvizi.
The visual system has been a primary battleground for one
of the central debates in cognitive neuroscience: are some
regions of the brain engaged selectively in a particular highlevel mental process, or are all brain regions outside primary
sensory and perceptual regions broadly engaged in many
different mental processes? To address this question we will
invite some of the major contributors to each of these views.

DISTRIBUTED REPRESENTATION IN THE HUMAN VISUAL
SYSTEM
James Haxby, Dartmouth College
Visual cortical fields can be modeled as high-dimensional
representational spaces. We model these spaces using a new
algorithm, hyperalignment, that affords transformation
of individual brains’ voxel spaces into common, high-dimensional model spaces. Projecting individual data into
common model spaces affords between-subject multivariate pattern (MVP) classification of fine distinctions among
brain responses to faces, animals, and objects that equals or
exceeds within-subject classification. Data in common model
space coordinates can be projected back into the cortical
topography of an individual’s brain using the transpose of
the transformation matrix for that subject. Building models
with general validity across stimuli and across experiments
requires broad sampling of visual stimuli, which we demonstrate using responses measured while subjects watch a
full-length action movie. Models based on responses to still
images from a moderate number of categories do not have
general validity. Thus, category perception experiments do
not provide adequate data for modeling the representational
space in ventral temporal visual cortex. Category-selective
regions are preserved in the model as single dimensions
that reflect the relevant category contrast. The topographies associated with these dimensions agree well with the
boundaries of individual-specific category-selective regions.
The high-dimensional model, however, also shows that
these regions have finer-scale topographies within them that
afford fine distinctions among stimulus representations that
are not accounted for by models based on category-selective regions. Thus, although category-selective regions are

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

19

Invited-Symposium Sessions

significant features of the high-dimensional model, they are
only subspaces that provide an insufficient basis for models
of visual stimulus representation in ventral temporal visual
cortex.

SYSTEMS FOR CATEGORY-SELECTIVE PROCESSING IN
THE MACAQUE
Doris Tsao, CalTech
fMRI studies in the mid and late 1990s described an area in
the human brain that showed strongly increased blood flow
in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiments when people viewed pictures of faces compared to
pictures of objects (1). This seemed to offer an ideal potential preparation for tackling the problem of how the brain
extracts global visual form: a small piece of brain specialized
to encode a single visual form. Thus, 12 years ago, Winrich
Freiwald and I began a journey into exploring the neural
basis of face processing. We decided to look for a face-selective area in macaque monkeys, reasoning that it would
not be unreasonable to find such a region in monkeys, since
face recognition is also integral to macaques—and most
importantly, if we did find such a region, then we could
target an electrode to the region (something not possible in
humans) and directly record from individual neurons to ask
how they are encoding faces. In my talk, I will discuss the
anatomical and functional organization of the macaque face
processing system, as well as the more recently discovered
macaque scene processing system. How are regions within
these two systems system connected to each other and the
rest of the brain? What representations are used in face and
scene-selective regions? What is the contribution of different regions to behavior? What information is communicated
between regions?

TMS EVIDENCE FOR CATEGORY-SELECTIVE CORTICAL
REGIONS IN HUMAN EXTRASTRIATE CORTEX
David Pitcher, Brain and Cognition, National Institute of Mental
Health
Neuropsychological patients exhibiting category-selective
visual agnosias have provided unique insights into the cognitive functions of the human brain but such case studies
are exceptionally rare. To overcome the paucity of patients
exhibiting category-selective deficits I have been using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to transiently disrupt
face, object and human body perception in neurologically
normal experimental subjects. Results support a modular
account of cortical organization in which category-selective
brain regions contribute solely to discrimination of their
preferred category. Follow-up studies, that exploited the
temporal precision of TMS, reveal the temporal dynamics
underlying visual object perception in human occipitotemporal cortex.

HUMAN VISUAL NUMERAL AREA
Josef Parvizi, Stanford University
Is there an area within the human visual system that has
a preferential response to numerals as there are for faces,
20

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

words, and scenes? We addressed this question using
intracranial electrophysiological recordings and observed
significantly higher response in the high-frequency broadband range to visually presented numerals, compared
to orthographically similar (i.e., letters and false fonts)
or semantically and phonologically similar stimuli (i.e.,
number-words and non-number words). This preferential
response had anatomically consistent location in the inferior
temporal gyrus (ITG) and anterior to the temporo-occipital
incisure. This region lies within or close to the functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) signal-dropout zone
caused by the nearby petrous bone and venous sinuses –
an observation that explains prior negative findings in the
fMRI studies of preferential response to numerals. Since
visual numerals are culturally dependent symbols that are
only learned through education, our novel finding of anatomically localized preferential response to such symbols
provides yet another example of acquired category specific
responses in the human visual system.

Invited-Symposium Session 5
NETWORKING ATTENTION
Tuesday, April 16, 10:15 am – 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom
Chair: Anna Nobre, University of Oxford
Speakers: Michael I Posner, Sabine Kastner, Anna C Nobre,
Earl K Miller.
Attention is a core aspect of our mental life, at the centre
stage of cognitive neuroscience. This symposium brings
together scientists working with different methods and at
different levels of analysis to provide a contemporary view
of the scope and properties of attention-related functions,
and the mechanisms that make our cognition selective, flexible and adaptive.

ATTENTION NETWORKS PAST AND FUTURE
Michael I Posner, University of Oregon
Fifty years ago it was sufficient to show that attention
changed certain operations in the information-processing
stream between stimulus and response. Twenty years ago
it became possible to implicate specific brain areas. Today
papers examine putative brain networks that carry out some
of the functions ascribed to attention and trace their activation and synchrony in real time. These networks are present in infancy but a long developmental process involving
changes in connectivity is required to reach their adult state.
Individual children and adults differ in the efficiency of
attention networks in part due to different genetic polymorphisms that operate in interaction with environmental influences. The efficiency of attention networks can be improved
by practice, and by changing the brain state in which they
operate. Looking to the future, we should be able to foster
the development of these networks, locate aspects that may
be deficient in certain people and test methods designed to
improve or eliminate the deficiencies.

2013 Annual Meeting

NEURAL MECHANISMS OF ATTENTION CONTROL IN THE
PRIMATE BRAIN
Sabine Kastner, Princeton University
Selective attention mechanisms route behaviorally relevant
information through large-scale cortical networks. While
there is evidence that populations of cortical neurons synchronize their activity to preferentially transmit information about attentional priorities, it is unclear how cortical
synchrony across a network is accomplished. Based on its
anatomical connectivity with the cortex, we hypothesized
that the pulvinar, a thalamic nucleus, regulates cortical
synchrony. To test this idea, we mapped pulvino-cortical
networks within the visual system using diffusion tensor
imaging and simultaneously recorded spikes and field
potentials from these interconnected network sites in monkeys performing a visuo-spatial attention task. Here we
show that the pulvinar synchronized activity between two
interconnected cortical areas according to attentional allocation, suggesting not only a critical role for the thalamus
in attentional selection, but more generally in regulating
information transmission across visual cortex.

ATTENTION AT THE INTERFACE BETWEEN MEMORY AND
PERCEPTION
Anna C Nobre, University of Oxford
Top-down biases that prioritise the selection and integration of some events over others in the information-processing stream are a hallmark of selective attention. In most
empirical work and theoretical models, biases are derived
from the sensory environment and operate upon incoming
sensory signals. However, arguably, the most prevalent
source of predictive biases about relevant events to unfold
is past experience stored as long-term memories. Building
on the contextual-cueing and spatial orienting paradigms,
we developed tasks to investigate whether and how longterm memories bias perception. Behavioural evidence
confirms that memories significantly enhance perceptual
discrimination and response speeds for target items occurring within remembered spatial contexts. Brain imaging
suggests the involvement of the hippocampus, as well as
the fronto-parietal network in mediating spatial contextual
memory biases, and electrophysiological recordings reveal
modulation of oscillatory activity regulating visual excitability in anticipation of target events. Overall, the findings
cast long-term memories as proactive mental functions
flexibly and dynamically adapting our interactions with the
environment from early perceptual stages.

ATTENTION IS RHYTHMIC
Earl K Miller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
How are some thoughts favored over others? A wealth of
data at the level of single neurons has yielded candidate
brain areas and mechanisms for our best understood model:
visual attention. Recent work has naturally evolved toward
efforts at a more integrative, network, understanding. It
suggests that focusing attention arises from interactions

Invited-Symposium Sessions

between widespread cortical and subcortical networks
that may be regulated via their rhythmic synchronization.
This could extend to all cognitive processes, suggesting our
brain does not operate continuously, but rather discretely,
with pulses of activity routing packets of information. Such
discrete cycles would provide a backbone for coordinating
computations (and their results) across disparate networks.
However, it comes at a cost: it’s naturally limited in bandwidth; only so many things can be computed or carried in
a single oscillatory cycle. This can explain the most fundamental property of conscious thought, its limited capacity,
which is the reason why we evolved attention in the first
place.

Invited-Symposium Session 6
EMERGING MODELS OF HUMAN AND ANIMAL
DECISION-MAKING
Tuesday, April 16, 3:00 – 4:30 pm, Grand Ballroom
Chair: Paul Glimcher, NYU
Speakers: Michael Platt, Matthew Rushworth, Antonio Rangel,
Elizabeth Phelps.
Over the course of the last 25 years cognitive neuroscientist have gone from knowing next to nothing about how
humans and animals make simple decisions to having a
fairly comprehensive understanding of what is coded and
where when decisions are being made. From these insights
a number of powerful models of how the brain makes decisions has emerged. We propose to survey what is known
and to identify the frontiers that will be engaged in the next
25 years.

NEURONAL MECHANISMS OF DECISION MAKING IN
THE PRIMATE BRAIN
Michael Platt, Duke University
Neuronal Mechanisms of Decision Making in the Primate
Brain Abstract. A major challenge for neuroeconomics is
to provide biological explanations of decision making that
cohere across systems, circuit, cellular, and molecular levels
of neural structure and function. This talk will review neurophysiological evidence for the computation of basic economic variables, such as value, utility, and risk, by single
neurons in the primate brain. This evidence will be situated
within a broader set of basic neurobiological mechanisms
that appear to subserve a wide array of functions. The existence of similar mechanisms in a wide array of animals will
be marshaled to endorse the idea that basic mechanisms are
conserved and repurposed by evolution to generate adaptive behavior and cognition.

NEURAL MECHANISMS FOR FORAGING
Matthew Rushworth, University of Oxford
Often when we design experiments to look at decision-making we ask our subjects to choose between limited numbers
of options that are all presented simultaneously. When
animals are foraging it is thought that they usually only

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

21

Invited-Symposium Sessions

encounter a single option at a time. The key decision is,
therefore, whether or not this option is sufficiently valuable
that it is worth engaging with or whether the environment is
sufficiently rich that it would be better to continue searching
for something better. The effort involved in making these
different choices must also be considered. The anterior cingulate cortex carries three signals that are needed for such
decisions – a representation of the value of any option that
might be engaged with, a representation of the average
value of alternatives in the current environment, and a representation of the cost of the actions. Considering the ecological context in which decisions arise also provides a new
perspective on other signals in the anterior cingulate cortex,
for example signals that are related to the encoding of risk.

THE NEUROECONOMICS OF SIMPLE CHOICE
Antonio Rangel, CalTech
Neuroeconomics seeks to characterize the computational
and neurobiological basis of different types of decisions.
This talk will discuss a series of studies designed to understand how the brain makes simple choices, such as whether
to choose and apple or an orange, as well as the quality of
the resulting decision. This includes understanding how
the brain assigns value to stimuli at the time of choice, how
values are compared to make a choice, how they induce the
motor movements necessary to implement the choices, and
how these basic processes extend to more complex choice
situations.

THE NEUROECONOMICS OF EMOTION AND DECISIONS
Elizabeth Phelps, New York University
One popular theory of emotion and decision-making suggests that there are competing systems of emotion and
reason that may drive choices. In contrast to this view,
recent research in affective neuroscience has highlighted a
modulatory role for emotion’s influence on a range of cognitive functions, including perception, attention and memory.
In this talk, I will outline how emotion’s influence on decision-making may also best be captured as a modulation of
the value computation. Specifically, I will present data suggesting that the emotional reaction to decision options or
outcomes is linked to choice behavior, and how modifying
emotional responses may change the choice. Finally, I will
discuss the overlap in the neural systems of emotion and
decision-making with circuits typically implicated in affective learning and emotion regulation.

22

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

Mini-Symposium Sessions
#

Title

Date

Time

Location

1

Analyzing patterns of brain activity to understand human
vision and cognition

Sunday, April 14

3:00 - 4:30 pm

Bayview Room

2

The role of concepts in affect and emotion: Contributions
from affective neuroscience

Sunday, April 14

3:00 - 4:30 pm

Seacliff Room

3

The effects of working memory training on brain and
behavior

Monday, April 15

1:30 - 3:00 pm

Garden Room

4

Where memory meets language

Monday, April 15

1:30 - 3:00 pm

Grand Ballroom B

5

Neuroscience and Law: Promise and Perils

Tuesday April 16

1:30 - 3:00 pm

Grand Ballroom B

Mini-Symposium Session 1
ANALYZING PATTERNS OF BRAIN ACTIVITY TO
UNDERSTAND HUMAN VISION AND COGNITION
Sunday, April 14, 3:00 - 4:30 pm, Bayview Room
Chair: Frank Tong, Vanderbilt University
Speakers: Frank Tong, John Serences, Jack Gallant
Although the spatiotemporal resolution of the BOLD
response provides a rather coarse measure of brain activity,
recent studies have demonstrated that a wealth of information can be obtained by analyzing the signals contained in
detailed fMRI activity patterns. These studies have revealed
selective cortical responses to basic visual features, complex
objects, real world scenes and natural movies, allowing for
prediction of the viewed stimulus or semantic category with
remarkable accuracy. The ability to isolate visually selective responses in the human brain has opened the way to
investigations of the cortical mechanisms underlying visual
perception, selective attention and working memory. This
symposium will focus on recent advances in the study of
human vision and cognition, describing how computational
approaches can be used to characterize the information
contained in the responses of individual voxels and cortical activity patterns. Central themes to be discussed will
include the functional organization of visual and semantic
selectivity in the human cortex, and how the visual specificity of top-down feedback can lead to adaptive changes to
optimize task performance. Specific results will inform current theories of cortical organization, visual attention and
working memory.

THE ROLE OF EARLY VISUAL AREAS IN HIGH-LEVEL
VISUAL COGNITION
Frank Tong, Vanderbilt University
What cortical processes underlie people’s ability to perceive,
attend to, or remember, basic visual features or complex
objects? To what extent might high-level processes of atten-

tion or memory depend on accessing relevant information
in early visual areas? Using functional MRI and pattern classification methods, my lab has found that it is possible to
decode what item a person is seeing, attending to, or remembering, from activity patterns in early visual areas (V1-V4).
Our perceptual studies have revealed dynamic changes in
cortical responses to orientation, based on task relevance, as
well as cortical changes that occur after extensive perceptual
training with specific orientation stimuli. When observers
must attend to one of two overlapping objects, we observe
a strong functional relationship between the attentional bias
signals found in high-level object areas and those in early
visual areas. Interestingly, object knowledge facilitates the
efficacy of object-based selection in early visual areas. In
studies of visual working memory, we find that information
about simple and complex stimuli is actively maintained in
the detailed activity patterns of the visual cortex, even after
the overall BOLD response has fallen to baseline levels.
Taken together, these results support an interactive model
of visual processing, in which feedback signals to early
visual areas are important for the top-down selection and
maintenance of information needed to perform demanding
cognitive tasks.

EVALUATING OPTIMAL MODELS OF INFORMATION
PROCESSING IN VISUAL CORTEX
John Serences, University of California, San Diego
Current behavioral goals and motivational drives play a
critical role in shaping and refining information processing
so that only the most relevant external stimuli are perceived,
represented in working memory, and allowed to influence
decision making. Traditional accounts hold that such ‘topdown’ attentional factors are critically important in information processing precisely because attention enhances
the gain of the sensory neurons that are selectively tuned
to relevant stimulus features. These models are intuitively
appealing, and suggest that attention effectively increases
the intensity of important stimuli so that they are easier to
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

23

Mini-Symposium Sessions

perceive, remember, and act upon. Using the early visual
system as a model, recent work in my lab reexamines this
traditional framework by showing that the ultimate role for
attention is to modulate the gain of the most informative
sensory neurons given whatever specific perceptual task
confronts the observer. Counterintuitively, enhancing the
gain of the most informative sensory neurons often means
biasing patterns of neural activity away from the pattern
that is evoked by the sensory stimulus. Guided by a simple
model of information processing, we exploit multivariate
activation patterns in early visual cortex, as measured with
functional magnetic resonance imaging, to argue that the
primary function of attention is not just to enhance the gain
of stimulus-driven responses, but to optimize performance
on the current perceptual task.

BEYOND LOCALIZATION: MAPPING PERCEPTUAL AND
COGNITIVE FUNCTIONS IN THE HUMAN BRAIN
Jack Gallant, University of California, Berkeley
Most functional MRI studies focus on coarse localization of
perceptual and cognitive processes. However, neurophysiological experiments suggest that many perceptual and cognitive processes are organized in systematic maps arranged
across the cortical surface. One rapidly developing approach,
voxel-wise modeling and decoding (VWMD), can recover
these detailed maps. VWMD quantifies the transformation
between stimulus or task features and BOLD responses.
Different feature spaces are tested by comparing model predictions. Voxel-based receptive fields can be recovered, and
tuning patterns can be assessed across voxels and across different individuals. VWMD also provides a principled and
very sensitive method for decoding. When applied to brain
activity evoked by natural movies, VWMD reveals highly
detailed and systematic maps of structural and semantic
information across the human brain. These patterns are consistent with the coarse parcellations provided by previous
techniques, but provide much more detailed information
and extend well beyond areas identified in earlier studies.
Furthermore, VWMD shows that voxels throughout the
brain shift their tuning toward an attended category. These
widespread category tuning shifts expand the representation of the semantic space near the attended category, and
compress the representation of the semantic space far from
the attended category. Taken together these results show
that the human brain contains multiple, complex maps of
visual information, and that attention dynamically alters
visual representations to optimize processing of behaviorally relevant objects during natural vision.

24

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

Mini-Symposium Session 2
THE ROLE OF CONCEPTS IN AFFECT AND
EMOTION: CONTRIBUTIONS FROM AFFECTIVE
NEUROSCIENCE
Sunday, April 14, 3:00 - 4:30 pm, Seacliff Room
Chair: Ajay Satpute, Northeastern University
Co-Chair: Kevin Ochsner, Columbia University
Speakers: Kevin Labar, Matt Lieberman, Kristin Lindquist, Ajay
Satpute
Emerging research in cognitive and affective neuroscience is
beginning to uncover the many ways in which concepts are
central to generalizing, attenuating, constituting, and shaping our emotional and affective responses. In this mini-symposium session, each speaker will present findings that
highlight one of these roles. The first speaker, Kevin Labar,
examines how people generalize their fearful responses
across conceptual categories. He presents findings from a
novel fear conditioning paradigm which examines the generalization of fear to conceptually-related stimuli, and discusses how this may play an important role in understanding disorders of fear and anxiety in clinical settings. The
second talk by Lisa Burklund and Matt Lieberman examines
how concepts attenuate affective responses. They present
studies showing that labeling affective responses with emotion words attenuates activity in the amygdala and extend
these benefits to clinical settings involving phobia. The third
speaker, Kristin Lindquist, shows that concepts play a constitutive role in generating emotional experiences. She presents findings from a meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies showing that manipulations of affect routinely engage
regions associated with processing concepts, and results
from patients with semantic dementia showing that they are
unable to perceive emotion in faces. And the final talk by
Ajay Satpute, Jochen Weber, and Kevin Ochsner, suggests
that concepts may further shape affective responses. They
present neuroimaging findings from a study showing that
categorizing affective responses on the boundary between
concepts shapes them to be more consistent with the selected
concept.

CONCEPTUAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO FEAR LEARNING
Kevin Labar, Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University
While the neural systems that mediate simple expressions
of fear learning are well delineated, how fears generalize
to other stimuli on the basis of conceptual relationships
remains unclear. Here, we used a novel fear-conditioning
paradigm to examine how healthy adults acquire and generalize fears based on conceptual similarity. Subjects were presented with exemplars from two different object categories
(animals and tools). Some of the exemplars from one of the
categories were paired with shock, whereas exemplars from
the other category were never paired with shock. Fear learning was quantified as increased skin conductance responses

2013 Annual Meeting

and subjective shock expectancy ratings to exemplars from
the ‘threat’ category compared to the ‘safe’ category. The
results showed that fear learning to a conceptual category
was mediated first by canonical conditioning-related brain
regions, such as the amygdala and insula, but also by category-selective brain areas in occipital-temporal cortex. We
also discovered a mechanistic account for the spread of fear
across category exemplars based on hippocampal signaling
of object typicality, which was reflected in greater functional
coupling with the amygdala early in learning. Finally, multivariate statistical analyses showed experience-dependent
alterations in the cortical and amygdalar representations of
the object categories. An additional behavioral study using
a sensory preconditioning procedure further showed that
categorical boundaries thwart generalization on the basis of
conceptual relationships. These studies reveal how conceptual factors contribute to conditioned learning and provide
new insights to neurobiologically-based models of human
anxiety disorders characterized by overgeneralization of
fear, particularly based on conceptual relationships.

AFFECT LABELING AS IMPLICIT EMOTION REGULATION
Matt Lieberman, University of California, Los Angeles
Spinoza wrote that “Emotion, which is a passion, ceases to
be a passion as soon as we form a clear and distinct idea,
thereof.” This talk will explore why it is that putting feelings
into words (‘affect labeling’) can help to calm our emotional
responses. This talk will examine the ways in which affect
labeling serves as a form of self-control in general and as a
form of implicit emotion regulation more specifically. Neurally, I will focus on the overlap during affect labeling, reappraisal, and motor self-control. Multiple studies focusing on
the experiential and physiological responses during implicit
and explicit emotion regulation also point to convergence.
Finally, I will present clinical extensions of this work on
treating phobias and on mindfulness meditation effects.

CONCEPTUALIZATION SUPPORTS EMOTION
Kristin Lindquist, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
Growing evidence suggests that conceptual processes are
an important component that help give rise to emotion
experiences and perceptions. In particular, constructionist
approaches to emotion hypothesize that emotions are emergent products that occur when conceptual knowledge about
emotion is used to make meaning of basic affective states
in context. In this talk, I present evidence from neuroimaging and neuropsychology suggesting that brain regions
involved in conceptual processing play an important role in
the experience and perception of emotions. I begin by presenting meta-analytic evidence from the neuroimaging literature on emotion demonstrating that brain areas involved
in semantic knowledge representation and retrieval, such
as the anterior temporal lobe and ventrolateral prefrontal
cortex, routinely show increased activation during emotion
experiences and perceptions. I next present a neuroimaging
study demonstrating that anterior temporal lobe activity
increases when participants experience an unpleasant state

Mini-Symposium Sessions

as an instance of a discrete emotion. I close by presenting
neuropsychological evidence that neurodegeneration in the
anterior temporal lobes due to Frontotemporal Dementia
impairs patients’ ability to perceive discrete emotions on
faces. Patients are unable to perceive discrete emotions on
faces, although they have the maintained ability to perceive
positive, negative and neutral affect. Together, these findings suggest that conceptual processing is indeed an important component, that along with basic affective processing,
helps give rise to emotions. I discuss the implications of
these findings for the science of emotion and a constructionist approach to the mind, more generally.

THE NEURAL DIALOGUE BETWEEN CONCEPTS AND
AFFECTIVE RESPONSES
Ajay Satpute1, Jochen Weber2, Kevin Ochsner2; 1Northeastern
University, 2Columbia University
Affective experiences are considered to be continuous and
free-flowing, but conceptualizing them requires that people
categorize their affective responses into discrete concepts. In
this talk, we present studies that examine how continuously
varying affective responses are placed into discrete categories and the consequences that this may have for how people
make sense of their affective experiences. In the beginning, I
describe a study which shows that putting affective feelings
into statements such as “I feel bad” engages three systems:
one associated with attributing mental states to affective
responses that includes the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, a
second associated with categorizing affective responses into
semantic concepts that includes the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, and a third associated with the intensity of the
affective response that includes the amygdala and anterior
insula. I then present emerging findings which show that
concepts may in turn shape affective responses. Specifically,
we investigated the “category boundary effect” for affective
responses. We observed that when having to categorize
affective feelings that are on the boundary between available
concepts (e.g. labeling a mildly negative affective response
as either “neutral” or “bad”), that this situation elicits conflict and is associated activity in the dorsal anterior cingulate
cortex, and that resolving this conflict leads to increasing or
decreasing activity in the anterior insula to be more congruent with the selected concept. These findings contribute to
delineating the functional architecture involved in putting
affective feelings into words, and further outline a neural
mechanism for how concepts may in turn shape affective
responses.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

25

Mini-Symposium Sessions

Mini-Symposium Session 3
THE EFFECTS OF WORKING MEMORY TRAINING
ON BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR
Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 3:00 pm, Garden Room
Chair: Bornali Kundu, University of Wisconsin - Madison
Co-Chair: Bradley R. Postle, University of Wisconsin - Madison
Speakers: Susanne M. Jaeggi, Christos Constantinidis, Torkel
Klingberg, Bornali Kundu
The past decade has witnessed an explosion of interest
in working memory training, largely because successful
demonstrations have refuted the long-held assumption that
working memory capacity is an inherent trait, insensitive to
environmental influence. Cognitive training has also shown
the potential to treat neurological and psychiatric disorders.
Of late, however, progress has been slowed by questions of
how, or even whether, working memory training may transfer to untrained tasks. This mini-symposium will directly
address this by bringing together four perspectives from
which working memory training has been studied. Jaeggi
will address the theoretical (and practical) bases for predicting the transfer of working memory training to untrained
tasks. Constantinidis will characterize the effects of working
memory training on single-neuron responses and neuronal
population dynamics, as measured in the non-human primate. Klingberg will consider genetic and developmental
factors that influence variation in working memory training
effects, and their neural correlates as measured through
human brain imaging. Finally, Kundu will present evidence
that a causal factor underlying working memory training
effects is training-related changes in effective connectivity
within task-relevant networks. Collectively, these talks will
provide a broad foundation from which to evaluate the
training literature. Emergent from it will be a principled
understanding of what factors determine the success, or otherwise, of a training protocol. Thus, this mini-symposium
will bring timely attention to a domain of cognitive neuroscience that is simultaneously among the most exciting and
most controversial, and one that holds great potential for
translation to the clinic, the classroom, and beyond.

TRANSFER OF WORKING MEMORY TRAINING:
THEORETICAL AND PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Susanne M. Jaeggi, University of Maryland - College Park
Working memory training and the study of transfer and
plasticity are among the current hot topics in cognitive
neuroscience. While some have argued that there is no evidence for transfer as a function of cognitive training, we and
others have pointed out that working memory training can
be, indeed, effective, but that there are important mediating and moderating factors that might determine training
success. In this talk, I will provide evidence for the efficacy
of several working memory interventions developed in our
laboratories, and review the emerging literature coming
from other groups. I will show data that demonstrate transfer to non-trained tasks throughout the lifespan, that is, in
26

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

young adults, in old adults, in typically developing children, as well as children with ADHD. I will also discuss the
neural correlates that accompany working memory training
as observed with our interventions. However, I will also
point out that transfer effects can be elusive, and that some
of the effects do not seem to be easily replicated. I will argue
that instead of taking inconsistencies as a proof for a lack of
efficacy, researchers need to develop innovative approaches
to move the cognitive training literature beyond the simple
question of whether or not training is effective, and to
address questions of underlying mechanisms, individual
differences, and training features and parameters that might
mediate and moderate the efficacy of training.

EFFECTS OF WORKING MEMORY TRAINING AT THE
NEURONAL LEVEL
Christos Constantinidis1, Xue-Lian Qi1, 1Wake Forest School of
Medicine
Neurons in the lateral prefrontal cortex are active during the
execution of cognitive tasks that require working memory.
Prior studies suggest that the activity of single neurons is
shaped by learning, though much is unknown about how
training alters neural activity and cortical organization. To
address this question, we performed neurophysiological
recordings in non-human primates before and after they
were trained to perform working memory tasks. Prior to any
training, prefrontal neurons responded to stimuli, exhibited persistent activity after their offset, and differentiated
between matching and non-matching stimuli presented in
sequence. After training, more neurons were recruited by
the stimuli and exhibited higher firing rates, particularly
during the delay periods of the task. Operant stimuli that
needed to be recognized in order to perform the task elicited
higher overall rates of responses, while the variability of
individual discharges and correlation of discharges between
neurons decreased after training. New information was
incorporated in the activity of a small population of neurons
highly specialized for the task and in a larger population
of neurons that exhibited modest task related information,
while information about other aspects of stimuli remained
present in neuronal activity. Despite such changes, the relative selectivity of the dorsal and ventral aspect of the lateral
prefrontal cortex was not altered with regard to spatial and
non-spatial stimuli. These results indicate the nature of neuronal changes induced by training and the limits of plasticity
of cortical areas mediating cognitive tasks.

TRAINING OF WORKING MEMORY
Torkel Klingberg, Karolinska Institute
Impaired working memory is associated with low academic
performance and with distractability and inattention in
clinically defined groups, such as in ADHD, but the same
associations are also relevant in the general population.
Klingberg and collaborators have developed and tested a
computerized method for training working memory (Klingberg et al. 2002, 2005, Klingberg 2010), which showed, for the
first time, that working memory capacity can be enhanced.

2013 Annual Meeting

Moreover, improving working memory also decreases the
symptoms of inattention in everyday life. This has now been
confirmed by several independent research groups using
the same method, which also allows comparison of effect
sizes across different ages and patient groups. The method
can be used as an instrument for studying brain plasticity.
Klingberg and collegues have shown that training of working memory changes brain activity in frontal and parietal
regions, and is associated with changes in the density of
dopamine D1-receptors in the cortex. Polymorphisms of the
DAT-1 gene affect the relative benefit of cognitive training,
which is consistent with a key role of dopamine for training-related plasticity. Questions for future research include:
which tasks are more effective, what training paradigms are
more effective and what are the factors promoting plasticity?

CHANGES IN CORTICAL EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY
UNDERLIE WORKING MEMORY TRAINING
Bornali Kundu1, Bradley R. Postle1, 1University of Wisconsin Madison
Although long considered a natively endowed and fixed
trait, working memory ability has recently been shown to
improve with intensive training. What remains controversial and poorly understood, however, are the factors underlying this improvement, and the extent to which working
memory training gains transfer to other cognitive tasks.
To explore these questions, we trained subjects on either
an adaptive n-back working memory task or a control task
(Tetris) for five hours per day, five days per week, for five
weeks. Pre- and post-training measures assessed individual
performance on visuospatial short-term memory (VSTM),
selective attention, interference control, and several psychometric tasks. Here we will present evidence from electrophysiology (EEG) and simultaneous transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) and EEG that both near and far transfer
of working memory training to other cognitive tasks is supported by changes in task-related effective connectivity in
frontoparietal and extrastriate networks that are engaged by
both the trained and transfer tasks. One consequence of this
is greater efficiency of stimulus processing, as evidenced by
training-related changes in the ‘contralateral delay activity’, an EEG index of individual differences in short-term
memory capacity and visual search performance. These patterns of training and transfer highlight the role of common
neural systems in determining individual differences in
many aspects of visuospatial cognition.

Mini-Symposium Session 4
WHERE MEMORY MEETS LANGUAGE
Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 3:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B
Chair: Tamara Y. Swaab, UC Davis
Speakers: Sharon L. Thompson-Schill, Tamara Y. Swaab, Melissa C. Duff, Gina Kuperberg
The idea that language is a modular system, which is relatively insulated from other neurocognitive systems, has

Mini-Symposium Sessions

been seriously challenged by our growing knowledge of
the brain’s functional architecture. In this mini-symposium,
we will explore the extent to which language processing
and production engage the same neurocognitive mechanisms, representations and circuitry that support long-term
memory, working memory, declarative memory and executive function. Our speakers will discuss studies using multiple complementary methods––fMRI, ERPs, MEG, eye-tracking, and neuropsychological work in patient populations.
We will present evidence suggesting that language processing and production draw upon: 1) frontally-mediated control mechanisms that act to select the correct linguistic representation from competing alternatives to resolve linguistic
ambiguity (Thompson-Schill), 2) fronto-parietal-temporal
circuits that maintain higher-level representations within
working memory, allowing spoken language comprehension to be guided by discourse context, rather than associations between individual words (Swaab), 3) hippocampal
circuits that establish, recover, maintain and use declarative
memory representations to process discourse (Duff), and
4) highly distributed semantic representations that interact with a context to generate semantic predictions, which
can directly influence the neural circuits that are recruited
to integrate incoming words into this context (Kuperberg).
Together, we will examine which of these neural circuits
are necessary for language processing, how they influence
individual differences in language comprehension, and the
consequences of their breakdown in patient populations
(neuropsychiatric disorders and amnesia patients.

THE ROLE OF COGNITIVE CONTROL IN LANGUAGE
PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION
Sharon L. Thompson-Schill, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia PA USA
For over a century, the relationship between left prefrontal
cortex and language processing has been accepted, yet the
precise characterization of this link remains controversial.
Recent advances in both the psycholinguistic study of language processing and the neuroscientific study of frontal
lobe function have converged on an intriguing possibility:
The demands to resolve competition between incompatible
characterizations of a linguistic stimulus may recruit topdown cognitive control processes mediated by prefrontal
cortex. Under this account, the brain region traditionally
known as “Broca’s area” – one of the principle language
centers in classical models of language dysfunction – may
be better described in attentional than linguistic terms.
This hypothesis draws on a large body of research into the
function of prefrontal cortex, and contrasts with other more
domain-specific accounts of the function of Broca’s region. I
will present recent evidence from a number of methodologies that demonstrate the link between frontally-mediated
control processes and language production and comprehension. Evidence of shared regulatory mechanisms across
domains has implications for the psychological and neural
architecture of language and may broadly inform the study
of both linguistic and nonlinguistic cognitive processes.
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

27

Mini-Symposium Sessions

SPEECH AND SPAN: THE ROLE OF WORKING MEMORY
IN SPOKEN LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION
Tamara Y. Swaab, University of California, Davis CA USA
Spoken language comprehension involves managing a
set of interrelated cognitive tasks, including activation of
stored phonological and semantic representations of words,
activation or construction of syntactic structure representations, determination of how newly activated words relate to
previously introduced information, and ultimately the construction of a representation of the meaning of the message.
Whereas the processing of individual words and syntactic
structures in isolation can proceed relatively automatically,
the construction of a coherent representation of the overall
message may rely more on controlled processing, requiring
maintenance of previous context and rapid integration of
incoming input in Working Memory (WM). This is especially the case for spoken language comprehension since
listeners have no control over the rate of input, nor can they
‘‘re-experience’’ parts of the speech signal. I will present
evidence from healthy adults and schizophrenia patients
indicating that individual differences or impairments in the
controlled maintenance of context predict which kind of language information is prioritized or processed during spoken
language comprehension: the meanings of individual words
or the integrated representation of the language context. I
propose that processing of individual word meanings or
scenarios is supported by a ventral pathway in the temporal lobes and that controlled maintenance of the language
context is supported by a dorsal pathway that connects
prefrontal cortex with temporal cortex via the parietal lobes.
The degree to which these pathways are activated not only
depends on the language task at hand, but also on language
processing differences between individuals as a function of
WM.

THE ROLE OF DECLARATIVE MEMORY IN LANGUAGE USE
AND PROCESSING
Melissa C. Duff, University of Iowa
Language use requires the creative (re)combination and
integration of mental representations and the rapid and
incremental processing of flexible and contextually defined
mappings. How this is accomplished in the brain, however,
is an open question. Attempts to link aspects of memory
(e.g., working memory) to specific properties of language
are longstanding. The hippocampal declarative memory
system, however, has not received serious consideration
as a neural/cognitive system involved in language use
and processing. I propose that the hallmark characteristics
of the hippocampal declarative memory system including
its relational binding and representational flexibility, along
with recent findings stretching the scope of hippocampus-dependent processes to include functions that operate
in-the-moment, position this memory system as a key contributor to language. That is, the same processes by which
the hippocampal declarative memory system creates and
flexibly integrates representations across diverse sources in

28

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

the formation of new memories, and maintains representations on-line, are the same processes necessary for the use
and processing of language. Combining discourse analysis, eye-tracking, and neuropsychological methods I will
present evidence of disruptions across various aspects of
language use and real-time language processing in patients
with hippocampal amnesia suggesting difficulty establishing, recovering, maintaining and using declarative memory
representations in service of language use and processing.
Linking disruptions in language to the declarative memory
system demonstrates how promiscuously the hallmark
processing features of the hippocampus are called upon
by a variety of cognitive domains, including language, and
expands the network of neural and cognitive systems that
support language use.

WHERE MEMORY MEETS LANGUAGE: A DYNAMIC
NEURAL ARCHITECTURE OF LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION
Gina Kuperberg1,2,3; 1Tufts University, 2Mass. General Hospital,
3
Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging
Our semantic and real-world knowledge is highly distributed across the brain. How much of this stored knowledge
can we draw upon to make sense of language? And how
quickly can we mobilize it during real-time comprehension?
I will discuss ERP, MEG and fMRI studies suggesting that,
through connections to the left anterior temporal cortex, all
our stored semantic knowledge is potentially available to
facilitate our access to the semantic features of an incoming
word within only 250ms of its onset. Moreover, in a locally
constraining context, a pre-activated semantic representation can be linked to its stored orthographic, phonological
and syntactic representation(s) to generate a lexical prediction within the left posterior lateral temporal cortex. I
propose that we actually begin to integrate these lexical predictions into their context, ahead of any bottom-up input.
This means that if an incoming word matches a prediction,
it is very easily integrated. If, however, there is a prediction
error at any level of representation (semantic, syntactic,
phonological or orthographic), we recruit left inferior frontal, inferior parietal and sometimes dorsolateral prefrontal
cortices in additional, and sometimes prolonged, attempts
to combinatorially integrate that word into its context. Thus,
direct neural links between semantic memory, the lexicon
and domain-general control regions allow for a highly
dynamic language comprehension system. This Bayesian
framework helps us understand how we use our semantic
and real-world knowledge to resolve ambiguity, protect
us from misinterpretations in noisy environments, flexibly
allocate resources in response to environmental demands,
and learn new linguistic and non-linguistic information.

2013 Annual Meeting

Mini-Symposium Session 5
NEUROSCIENCE AND LAW: PROMISE AND
PERILS
Tuesday, April 16, 1:30 - 3:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B
Chair: Francis Shen, University of Minnesota Law School,
MacArthur Foundation Research Network on Law and Neuroscience
Co-Chair: Anthony Wagner, Stanford University
Speakers: Martha J. Farah, BJ Casey, Anthony Wagner, Francis
Shen
This mini-symposium will introduce recent and exciting
developments at the intersection of cognitive neuroscience
and law. Recent years have seen tremendous growth in neuroscience evidence in courts and legislatures. These recent
developments include: the first hearing on admissibility of
fMRI lie detection evidence; the first admission of qEEG
evidence for a reduced sentence in a homicide case; and
the U.S. Supreme Court citing brain development research
in multiple cases. International developments are also in
progress. France has established a national Neuroscience
and Public Policy program; U.K. policymakers have been
briefed on developmental neuroscience; and courts in India
have considered brain-based memory evidence in criminal
cases. These and other developments create a pressing need
for increased dialogue between neuroscience and law. This
CNS mini-symposium is an excellent opportunity to foster
such dialogue, and to introduce the science community to
some of the ways in which (for better or worse) their work is
being used in legal settings. The four scholars in the proposed
panel are contributing to this interdisciplinary field, participating in the MacArthur Foundation Research Network on
Law and Neuroscience. In so doing, they have wrestled with
the often difficult translation of scientific research into legal
doctrine and policy. Panelists will speak both to the general
challenges of this interdisciplinary enterprise, as well as to
specific insights gleaned from their scholarship on topics
such as brain-based memory and lie detection; adolescent
brain development and criminal responsibility; neuroethics;
and the evidentiary challenges faced by courts and legislatures in evaluating neuroscientific data.

NEUROSCIENCE, RESPONSIBILITY, AND THE LAW
Martha J. Farah, University of Pennsylvania
The issue of neuroscience and responsibility has drawn
significant academic interest, as well as media coverage. In
this first talk, Dr. Farah, Director of the Center for Neuroscience and Society at the University of Pennsylvania, will
discuss the fundamental distinction between: (1) the use
of neuroscience to question the very idea of free will and
thus challenge the foundations of law, and (2) the use of
neuroscience, working within existing legal frameworks,
to help establish relevant legal facts such as capacity for
self-control or memory of a crime scene. By establishing this
distinction at the start of the panel, Dr. Farah will lay the
groundwork for the subsequent panel talks on developmen-

Mini-Symposium Sessions

tal neuroscience, and on memory detection. Neuroscientific
evidence of cognitive impairment is already being used in
courts to support arguments for diminished legal responsibility. Focusing on the issues of self-control and addiction,
Farah will assess whether this trend is likely to continue and
whether such developments should be welcomed. As the
public learns more about advances in the neuroscience of
decision-making, antisocial behavior and so forth, will these
changing societal intuitions produce a shift in the system of
legal punishment? Will cognitive neuroscience shed new
and useful light on the mental states and abilities that the
law deems relevant in assessing responsibility? Farah will
address these questions, as she explores the present and
future potential of neuroscience to provide useful information to legal actors.

DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE AND CRIMINAL
RESPONSIBILITY
BJ Casey, Cornell University
The criminal justice system continues to debate how best to
respond to and to help prevent adolescent criminal behavior. Increasingly, cognitive neuroscience is contributing to
these debates. In the 2012 U.S. Supreme Court case, Miller v.
Alabama, for instance, which “forbids a sentencing scheme
that mandates life in prison without possibility of parole for
juvenile offenders,” Justice Elana Kagan noted that “developments in psychology and brain science continue to show
fundamental differences between juvenile and adult minds”
in “parts of the brain involved in behavior control.” As the
Supreme Court, as well as lower courts and legislatures,
increasingly look to neuroscience to inform their judgments,
new questions arise about how this science is (and should
be) used by judges and policymakers. In this talk, Dr. Casey
will discuss the potential legal relevance of our growing
understanding of the developmental influences on adolescent decision-making and risk-taking. Although adolescents
are quite capable of making informed decisions, in the heat
of the moment, their decisions are often suboptimal. Casey
will highlight her work and others showing that these poor
decisions may be due to enhanced activity of deep structure
in the brain (ventral striatum) to appetitive cues in adolescents in the absence of a mature top down control from
slower developing prefrontal regions. Casey will consider
the promises, and limitations, of the current knowledge base
for informing legal decision making and discuss the ways
in which the research has been influenced by collaborative
work with legal scholars.

FMRI-BASED MEMORY AND LIE DECTION
Anthony Wagner, Stanford University
Decisions at many stages of the legal process are frequently
informed by testimonial evidence. Relevant legal decision makers––e.g., jurors, judges, attorneys, and parole
board members––are frequently faced with the challenge
of deciding whether testimonial evidence is accurate or
inaccurate. For instance, legal decision makers often must
decide whether they believe an eye witness’s memory to be
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

29

Mini-Symposium Sessions

accurate or mistaken; at other times, decision makers must
decide whether they believe testimony to be honest or dishonest. How these decisions are made often dramatically
affects whether a fair and just legal outcome is reached.
Development of methods capable of detecting deception
and memory with high sensitivity and specificity, while
being robust to countermeasures, could greatly improve the
legal system. On the other hand, premature or improper use
of brain-based detection techniques could do serious harm.
These possibilities are no longer purely academic speculation, as attempts to introduce brain-based lie detection and
memory detection evidence in the courts have increased in
recent years. In light of these legal developments, this talk
will provide an assessment of the current and future feasibility of using fMRI to identify and characterize the neural
processes associated with lying and remembering in legally
relevant contexts. The talk will consider what is known and
not known about fMRI-based lie detection, and will discuss on-going research examining whether memories can
be detected at the individual-subject and individual-event
levels, as is often required by the legal system.

THE FUTURE OF NEUROSCIENCE AND LAW
Francis Shen1,2; 1University of Minnesota Law School, 2MacArthur Foundation Research Network on Law and Neuroscience
In this final talk, Dr. Shen, the Executive Director of Education and Outreach for the MacArthur Foundation Research
Network on Law and Neuroscience, and co-author of the
first law coursebook on Law and Neuroscience, will discuss
how neuroscience is likely to be at times adopted, and at
times rejected, across different legal contexts. The talk will
emphasize the distinction between scientific certainty versus
legal certainty, and how this difference animates much of
the debate about whether, and how, neuroscience should
be used in law. The talk will provide context, by summarizing (beyond the other three talks) the many ways in which
neuroscience is already being contemplated by law. The
talk will then discuss law’s rules governing admissibility of
expert evidence in court, and why, in the criminal law, this
evidence has appeared primarily for sentencing rather than
guilt determinations. The talk will next discuss the possible
constitutional limitations on the collection and use of certain
neuroimaging evidence. Finally, the talk will discuss ways
in which neuroscience experiments might be made more
legally relevant. The talk will highlight emerging research
on the neural correlates of criminal mental states as one
example of a successful collaboration between legal scholars
and cognitive neuroscientists. The talk will conclude by discussing the rise of: new funding sources as the MacArthur
Law and Neuroscience Network; interdisciplinary neurolaw conferences; cross-listed Law and Neuroscience courses
for students; and outreach efforts to disseminate law and
neuroscience materials to the public.

30

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

Poster Schedule
Poster sessions are scheduled for Saturday-Tuesday in the Pacific Concourse Exhibit Hall of the San Francisco Hyatt
Regency Hotel. All attendees must present their CNS 2013 name badge to enter the exhibit hall. Do not leave personal items
in the poster room.
The presenting author must be present during the assigned session. You may post your materials on the board assigned to
you at any time after the “Set-up Begins” time (listed below), but before the beginning of the assigned poster session. You
must remove your poster promptly no later than the time listed above in “Take-down Complete.” Any posters left up after
the “Take-down Complete” time may be discarded.
Only registered poster presenters, wearing a CNS 2013 meeting badge, for the current session and exhibitors will be allowed
in the exhibit hall during set up and take-down hours. All other attendees will be turned away at the door.
No attendee or exhibitor will be allowed to enter the exhibit hall after the Closed for the Day- No Entry hours.
Poster
Session Date

Setup
Begins

Session
Begins

Session
Ends

Take-Down
Completed

A

Saturday, April 13

3:00 pm*

3:30 pm

6:30 pm

7:00 pm

B

Sunday, April 14

7:30 am*

8:00 am

11:00 am

11:30 am

C

Sunday, April 14

1:00 pm*

1:30 pm

4:30 pm

5:00 pm

D

Monday, April 15

7:30 am*

8:00 am

11:00 am

11:30 am

E

Monday, April 15

1:00 pm*

1:30 pm

4:30 pm

4:35 pm

F

Monday, April 15

4:35 pm

5:00 pm

8:00 pm

8:15 pm

G

Tuesday April 16

7:30 am*

8:00 am

11:00 am

11:30 am

H

Tuesday April 16

1:00 pm*

1:30 pm

4:30 pm

4:35 pm

* Please note that only scheduled registered poster presenters may enter the exhibit hall during the half hour set-up time.
All other attendees may only enter when the exhibit hall opens.
** Please remove your poster promptly at take down complete time, so that the next presenter may set up their poster.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

31

Poster Session A
A1
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SELECTIVE ATTENTION TO SOUND
OBJECT REPRESENTATIONS Kristina C. Backer1,2, Claude Alain1,2;
1
Rotman Research Institute, 2University of Toronto — The object-based account
of auditory attention postulates that we can selectively attend to one of
several sound object representations in short-term memory (STM) even in
the absence of relevant external stimuli, through top-down, reflective processing. The present study aimed to test this hypothesis using EEG and to
assess whether attention to a sound object representation is domain-general
(i.e., unspecific to a particular feature) and/or domain-specific (i.e., attention to semantic (what) or spatial (where) feature modulates the neural
responses). Participants were presented with four different sounds from
four possible locations simultaneously (i.e., memory array), followed by
either an informative or neutral retro-cue during the retention interval,
and then a single-item memory probe. Participants indicated whether or
not the probe’s location matched its original location within the memory
array. Informative Semantic and Spatial retro-cues led to faster reaction
times compared to Neutral retro-cues. Informative Semantic and Spatial
retro-cues generated a larger sustained potential than Neutral cues over
the left frontocentral scalp region from about 500 to 1500 ms post-retro-cue
onset; this sustained potential’s amplitude was similar across informative
Semantic and Spatial retro-cue trials. A time-frequency analysis showed
that both Semantic and Spatial retro-cues led to greater alpha suppression
at parietal sites than Neutral trials for the duration of the sustained potential (i.e., ~500 to 1500 ms post-cue onset). These findings provide novel
evidence for a domain-general mechanism of attentional orienting to an
auditory representation held within STM.

A2
EFFECTS OF MONAURAL VERSUS BINAURAL STIMULUS PRESENTATION ON THE NOVELTY P3 Adithya Chandregowda1, Yael Arbel1,
Emanuel Donchin1; 1University of South Florida — We investigated the effects
of monaural (right or left ear) and binaural stimulus presentation on Novelty P3 and the P300. Healthy young adults were presented with stimuli
via circumaural headphones either to their right ear (group-A), their left
ear (group-B), or to both ears (group-C). The stimuli consisted of: frequent
tones (200 Hz) which were presented on 80% of the trials, rare tones (650
Hz) which were presented on 10% of the trials, and novel (bizarre) sounds
which were presented on 10% of the trials. A practice block was used to
familiarize participants with the three types of auditory stimuli. During the
experiment, participants were instructed to count the number of bizarre
sounds. It is important to note that in all three groups (A, B & C) novel stimuli elicited both the Novelty P3 and the P300, supporting previous findings
that “task irrelevancy” is not a mandatory condition for the elicitation of the
Novelty P3. Our results indicated that the binaural stimulus presentation
(group-C) had a suppressive effect on the amplitude of the Novelty P3 as
compared to monaural stimulus presentation (groups-A and B). Such suppressive effects were not seen for the P300. These results suggest that the
neural activity that gives rise to the novelty P3, which is viewed as an orientation related response, is sensitive to the part of auditory-pathway that is
being stimulated (right, left or both). Additional research is needed to elucidate whether a similar pattern can be found in free field sound localization.

A3
INVARIANCE OF THE EARLY BILATERAL NEGATIVITY IN AUDITORY
TARGET IDENTIFICATION Marissa L. Gamble1, Andrew H. Pilling1, Marty
G. Woldorff1; 1Duke University — Previously (Gamble & Woldorff, under
review), using a rapid, temporally distributed, auditory stimulus paradigm
(10 stimuli in 500 ms), we found a differential early bilateral negativity
(EBN) beginning at 60 ms for pitch-deviant targets relative to pitch-deviant nontargets, indicating nonlateralized target identification. This was
followed by the lateralized N2ac ERP component (Gamble & Luck, 2011),
reflecting the focusing of attention to the targets. It is unclear whether the
rapid stimulus presentation or the large pitch differences is the catalyst for
this EBN effect. Mismatch negativity (MMN) paradigms with much slower

32

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

(250 ms) SOAs have not shown this early target-specific effect, suggesting
that longer SOAs may reduce or eliminate the need for an early target identification mechanism. Here, 10 sounds were presented (half to each ear) on
each trial at three SOAs (50, 150, 250 ms, separate blocks). These 10 stimuli consisted of one high, one low, and eight standard tones presented in
pseudo-random order, with high and low deviants to opposing ears. One
deviant was designated the target in each block, which participants had
to identify and discriminate if it was amplitude modulated. The contralateral-minus-ipsilateral difference waveforms for targets versus nontargets,
indexing the focusing of attention (the N2ac), was present across SOAs. In
addition, the absolute value of the target-related enhancement of the EBN
was consistent across all SOAs, but was multiplicatively larger at the short
SOAs. These results indicate that presentation rate does not fully explain
this early target-specific enhancement, although faster SOAs seem to augment this effect.

A4
VISUAL WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY PREDICTS AUDITORY
SELECTIVE ATTENTION IN MULTIPLE CONTEXTS Ryan Giuliano1,
Christina Karns1, Helen Neville1; 1University of Oregon — Individual differences in working memory capacity are a powerful measure of variation in
intellectual ability, predicting fluid intelligence and real-world outcomes
such as SAT scores and GPA. However, much research suggests that variations in capacity do not arise from the amount of available storage space
per se but rather from the ability to control attention, with models of working memory stipulating this as a domain-general attention resource. This
relationship has been demonstrated directly in low-level attention tasks as
reduced capture associated with larger working memory capacities. Yet, to
our knowledge there is little research demonstrating a relationship between
attention and working memory across sensory modalities, drawing into
question the assumption of a domain-general attentional resource. We
directly tested this by examining ERP indices of auditory selective attention
and individual estimates of visual working memory capacity in entirely
separate tasks. We report findings from three separate experiments: each
demonstrate that individual differences in visually-measured working
memory capacity predict the magnitude of attention-related modulation in
auditory ERPs. In two non-linguistic tasks, memory capacity predicted both
spatial and temporal auditory capture behaviorally and was mirrored by
changes in ERPs during each experiment. In a linguistic attention task, we
observed a novel, early-latency P1 attentional modulation of auditory ERPs
for linguistic stimuli, and this effect was predicted by individual estimates
of capacity. These findings provide strong support for the domain-generality of the attentional control mechanism implicated in the wide variation of
working memory capacity across individuals.

A5
HAPPY HOUR IN YOUR HEAD: UN-MIXING THE COCKTAIL PARTY
IN YOUR BRAIN Dillon A. Hambrook1, Matthew S. Tata1; 1University of Leth-

bridge — Your brain can select one auditory stream from a complex mixture. This is the classic cocktail party effect. Attentional selection gives that
stream access to a network of brain areas that do different jobs but work on
the same input. One theory suggests that endogenous neural oscillations
allow activity in these different subsystems to be bound together. However, recent evidence shows that neural oscillations respond to exogenous
signals as well. Theta band (3-7 Hz) electroencephalogram (EEG) tracks the
dynamic envelope of rhythmic stimuli such as speech. It is possible that
by selectively entraining neuroelectric dynamics to acoustic dynamics, the
selected speech envelope gains privileged access to a synchronized network
that performs tasks including: memory encoding, decision making, and
response planning. Unsynchronized input is excluded from this network.
The brain might solve the cocktail party problem by selective theta-band
coherence with a single acoustic envelope. We tested this theory using a
selective listening task with target and distractor speech presented at different locations. We recorded neuroelectric dynamics with dense-array EEG.
By convolving the EEG response with a signal derived from the individual acoustic dynamics of target and distractor streams, we effectively filter

2013 Annual Meeting
and un-mix the EEG response and identify phase-locked activity unique to
each stream. We show an attentional effect in this evoked response lagging
the speech signal by 100-200ms and a sustained difference in the evoked
potential lagging the speech signal by 200-500ms. These data are consistent
with the theory that phase tracking offers a solution to the cocktail-party
problem.

A6
LATERALITY IN ORIENTING ‘WHAT’ AND ‘WHERE’ AUDITORY
ATTENTION: A BIMODAL BRAIN IMAGING STUDY WITH FUNCTIONAL NEAR-INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY AND ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY Masamitsu Harasawa1, Junji Ohyama2, Masanori
Nambu3, Michiteru Kitazaki3; 1Japan Broadcasting Corporation, 2National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Japan, 3Toyohashi
University of Technology — In these years evidence of separate ‘what’ and
‘where’ auditory systems is increasing. However, neural network involved
in orienting object and spatial auditory attention is little known. Here we
investigated the mechanisms of orienting auditory attention by a bimodal
brain imaging technique. Methods: Experimental task was detecting target
sound items among dichotically presented sound sequences (25 seconds)
consisted of about 30 short (200 ms) pure tones including 15% targets (pure
tone with a 40 ms gap). In half trials high (1200 Hz) and low (600 Hz) tones
were presented to left and right ears respectively and in the other half vice
versa. Targets appeared only in one side cued at 10 seconds before the stimulus onset by a pitch of sound (‘what’) or a visual arrow (‘where’). The two
modalities of cerebral activities were measured simultaneously, a change of
oxy-hemoglobin concentration with functional near-infrared spectroscopy
and an alpha oscillation (8-12 Hz) with electroencephalography. We analyzed the correlation between them. Results: In ‘what’ condition, attending
the left induced significant negative correlation several seconds after the
stimulus onset. In ‘where’ condition, attending the right induced significant
positive correlation during cue-lead time. The both significant correlations
were salient in bilateral temporal cortices. Conclusions: The combination of
the direction of attention and the type of attention indicated the clear laterality in regulation of attention network and that alpha rhythm is involved
in suppression of sensory input when attending feature of sound but not
when attending ‘location’ of sound.

A7
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN COGNITIVE AND NEURAL ACTIVITY IN TARGET PROCESSING: UTILIZING PCA TO INVESTIGATE
THE SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF THE P3B Brittany Alperin1, Katherine
Mott1, Tatyana Zhuravleva1, Phillip Holcomb2, Dorene Rentz1, Kirk Daffner1;
Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 2Tufts University —
The neural underpinnings of age-related changes in the processing of designated targets remain uncertain. In young adults, research using grand
average ERPs has identified a posteriorly-distributed P3b component,
interpreted as an index of categorization/memory updating, and an anteriorly-distributed P3a component, interpreted as an index of orienting/
executive control. One of the most common observations in the ERP literature is that the P3b component becomes more anteriorly distributed as
a function of age. Does this finding represent an age-related shift in the
neural processors that mediate categorization/updating, or is it a reflection of overlapping components that index different cognitive operations?
This question was investigated using temporospatial principal component
analysis (PCA). ERPs were measured in 12 young and 15 old well-matched
adults during a task in which they responded to designated target letters.
Consistent with other reports, grand average ERPs suggested that old subjects generated a more anteriorly-distributed target P3b that encompassed
a larger portion of the scalp. However, temporospatial PCA revealed two
spatially distinct factors: an anterior P3a and a centro-posterior P3b. For
the old subjects, the P3a and P3b did not differ in amplitude. For the young
subjects, the P3b was substantially larger than the P3a. In summary, PCA
revealed that rather than having a more widely/frontally distributed target
P3b, older subjects had a large P3a and P3b overlapping during the same
temporal interval. Age-related increase in P3a amplitude may be due to
older subject’s increased reliance on executive control operations that provide extra scaffolding for carrying out the categorization process.
1

Poster Session A

A8
SPATIAL ATTENTION CONTROL AS A FUNCTION OF NORMAL
AGING AND WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY Danielle Charney1, Edward
Golob1; 1Tulane University — Individual differences in attentional control are
implicated in both cognitive aging and working memory capacity (WMC).
However, direct comparisons of attention control in aging and WMC are
just emerging and little is known about their neural correlates. Here we
examined attention control in a spatial attention task as a function of age
and WMC. Auditory event-related potentials (ERPs) previously shown to
indicate spatial attention gradients (P3a, slow wave) were recorded to test
the hypothesis that attentional gradients are more shallow in aging and
lower WMC. Young (n=20, 19±1 yrs.) and Older adults (n=11, 72±7) performed two WMC tasks (operation and symmetry span). In the attention
task subjects heard random sequences of white noise drawn from five horizontal locations (180° range, 45° intervals; 4 non-targets and 1 target). Left
or right targets (±90°) were tested in separate blocks. P3a amplitudes to
non-targets had linear increases with greater distance from the attended
location for both age groups (p<.001). Older adults overall had a shallow
slope in P3a amplitude (T±90°, p<.001), and low WMC older adults had the
shallow gradient compared with high WMC adults (p<.05). Older adults
also had smaller slow wave amplitudes (600-800 ms latency) compared to
younger adults (p<.004). Older adults with low WMC exhibited the shallowest slow-wave gradient compared to high WMC adults (p<.03). The
results suggest that spatial attention control is less focused in older adults
with low WMC, and supports the idea that attention control is a major
factor underlying WMC.

A9
VISUAL SEARCH AND THE N2PC IN CHILDREN

Jane Couperus1,
Colin Quirk1; 1Hampshire College — While there is growing understanding
of visual selective attention in children, some aspects such as selection in
the presence of distractors are not well understood. Adult studies suggest
that when presented with a visual search task, an enhanced negativity is
seen beginning around 200ms (the N2pc) that reflects selection of a target
item among distractors (Eimer, Kiss, and Nicholas, 2011). However, as to
date this effect has only been examined in adults, this study was designed
to investigate the presence of the N2pc in children. Fifteen children (ages
10-12) and 18 adults (ages 18-22) completed a visual search task in which
they were asked to attend to a fixation surrounded by 7 grey and 2 colored
(red, green, or blue) letters and numbers. Participants were asked to attend
to one of the three colors and indicate (when present), if it was a letter or
number, leaving the other colored item as a distractor. Three types of displays were analyzed at parietal electrodes P7 and P8; lateral target/lateral
distractor (LT/LD), lateral target/midline distractor (LT/MD); and midline target/lateral distractor (MT/LD). Both adults and children showed
a significant increased negativity contralateral as compared to ispsilateral
to the target (reflected in the N2pc) in both displays with a lateral target
(LT/LD F(1,32)=14.49, p=.001 and LT/MD F(1,32)=7.15, p=.012) while no
such effect was seen in displays with a midline target (MT/LD and NT,
p>.05). This suggests that children, like adults, utilized additional resources
to select a target item when distractors are present.

A10
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN MULTITASKING UNDER WORKING MEMORY LOAD Joey Ka-Yee Essoe1, Camarin Rolle1, Jason Samaha1,
Kayla Bowen1, Joaquin Anguera1, Adam Gazzaley1; 1University of California at
San Francisco — Cognitive aging research has demonstrated that aging
negatively impacts multitasking abilities. In the present experiment, we
examined how perceptual discrimination performance in the setting of
another task (visuo- motor tracking) changes as a function of age and
working memory load. Perceptual discrimination abilities were tested in 21
younger (22.9yrs ± 3.1) and 18 older adults (67.1yrs ± 5.9) while engaging
in a custom-designed video game (“NeuroRacer”). A 2x2 design was used
to assess discrimination abilities across the two age groups with the following manipulations: (1) Working memory (WM) load: remember either
0 or 2 items, (2) Visuomotor tracking (Drive): keep the car at the center of
the road or have the car on auto-pilot. Analyses revealed a 3-way interaction of perceptual discrimination for response time (RT) between WM,
Drive, and age group (p=.03). Interrogation of this interaction involved
splitting by multitasking vs. non-multitasking, which revealed a significant
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

33

Poster Session A
2-way interaction of age and WM load only in the multitasking condition
(p=.006). Interrogating that 2-way interaction revealed that older adults
show a significant increase in RT in the presence of WM load (p<.01), while
RT in younger adults is not impacted significantly by load (p=.41). When
controlling for RT, there were no differences in accuracy between younger
and older adults suggesting the observed effects were not influenced by
a speed-accuracy trade-off. Thus, the present findings indicate that only
older adult’s multitasking abilities are negatively impacted by the presence
of a working memory load.

A11
TWO ALLELES OF THE DOPAMINE D4 RECEPTOR GENE RELATE
TO EXECUTIVE ATTENTION IN THE ATTENTION NETWORK TEST
IN YOUNG AND OLD ADULTS Katherine R. Gamble1, Halley G. Feldman1,
James H. Howard, Jr.1,2,3, Darlene V. Howard1; 1Georgetown University, 2The
Catholic University of America, 3Georgetown University Medical Center — The
present study investigated how two alleles of the dopamine D4 receptor
(DRD4) gene relate to executive attention as assessed by the Attention
Network Test (ANT). DRD4 primarily influences neurotransmission in
the prefrontal cortex, and has effects on cognition (Savitz et al., 2006), with
particular implications in conflict, error detection and response (Frank and
Fossella, 2011), suggesting that some DRD4 genotypes might influence
executive attention in the ANT, which involves conflict detection and inhibition. We genotyped 32 older adults and 35 college-aged adults for a -1217
guanine insertion/deletion polymorphism and a 120 base pair repeat allele
in DRD4. The design for the -1217 insertion/deletion was 2 (Age: Young
vs. Old) x 3 (Genotype: GG/GG vs. G/GG vs. G/G), and for the 120 base
pair repeat was 2 (Age) x 2 (Genotype: long/short vs. long/long). For the
-1217G insertion/deletion, we found a significant main effect of age and an
age x genotype interaction, such that older adults with two guanine deletions had significantly worse executive attention than the heterozygous
insertion/deletion or the insertion class, while there were no significant
genotype effects in the young group. For the 120 base pair repeat, there was
a significant main effect of genotype, and despite there being no interaction
with age, for the older, but not young adults, the heterozygous (long/short)
group had significantly better executive attention than the homozygous
long group. These results suggest that genetic effects of DRD4 on executive
attention become more pronounced with age.

A12
ATTENTION AND LONG-TERM MEMORY PROBLEMS IN CHILDREN
WITH BRAIN TUMORS BEFORE AND AFTER MEDICAL INTERVENTION Theda Heinks1,2, Maja Steinlin1,2, Kurt Leibundgut1; 1University Children’s
Hospital Berne, Switzerland, 2Center for Cognition, Learning and Memory, University of Berne, Switzerland — Extensive research has shown that survivors
of childhood cancer often demonstrate neurocognitive deficits especially
when the malignancies and/or the treatments (surgery, chemotherapy,
radiation therapy) involve the Central Nervous System (CNS). Goal of this
study was to monitor cognitive abilities over the course of treatment with a
standardized comprehensive neuropsychological test battery. All children
(ages 3-18; n=61) hospitalized at the University Children’s Hospital Berne
for treatment of malignancies underwent their first comprehensive neuropsychological assessment (T1) in the days following initial diagnosis. The
second neuropsychological assessment (T2) was performed 8 weeks after
the end of chemo- and/or radiation therapy, the third assessment (T3) 1
year after the end of treatment. Results show that immediately after diagnosis children with brain tumors show significantly worse performance
on tests of verbal learning, long-term memory and attention compared to
children with non-CNS malignancies. At this point the two groups do not
differ, however, in other cognitive areas (FSIQ, performance speed, executive functions, working memory). Immediately and one year after the end
of medical treatment the differences between the two groups are still evident and in measures of attention and memory grow even more significant.
This shows that even before any medical treatment verbal memory and
attention are cognitive areas especially vulnerable to malignancies involving the CNS. Chemo- and/or radiation therapy then further contribute to
cognitive decline that continues even after treatment is completed. Future
steps of this study will include implementation and evaluation of a cognitive training program for affected children.

34

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

A13
5-HTT AS A FACTOR OF RISK AND RESILIENCE IN YOUNG CHILDREN Elif Isbell1, Theodore Bell1, Helen Neville1; 1University of Oregon — Carrying either one or two copies of the short allele of the serotonin transporter linked polymorphic region (5-HTTLPR) has been associated with
susceptibility for psychopathology in interaction with adverse life events
(e.g. Caspi et al., 2003; Cicchetti, Rogosch, & Sturge-Apple, 2007). However,
carriers of the short allele (S-carriers) have also been observed to perform
better than individuals homozygous for the long allele in various aspects
of cognition, such as working memory and cognitive control (e.g. Anderson, Bell, & Awh, 2012; Strobel et al., 2007). To our best knowledge, how
the polymorphisms of 5-HTTLPR relate to the development of socio-emotional, and cognitive skills has not been investigated among the same
group of participants. Using a sample of one hundred and sixty-eight 3- to
5-year-old children from lower socioeconomic backgrounds, we examined
the relationship between the polymorphisms of 5-HTTLPR and individual differences observed in problem behaviors and social skills, as well as
in language, non-verbal intelligence, and neural indices of attention. The
teachers reported the S-carrier children to display more problem behaviors
than children homozygous for the long allele. Furthermore, teachers rated
the S-carriers as children with poorer social skills. In contrast, S-carriers
outperformed the children homozygous for the long allele in measures of
receptive language and nonverbal IQ. Moreover, S-carriers showed more
pronounced selective attention effects as measured by event-related potentials (ERPs). These findings suggest that while 5-HTT can be a factor of risk
for psychopathology, it can also promote resilience for cognitive abilities in
the face of early life adversity.

A14
AGING, EMPATHY, AND PROSOCIALITY

Janelle Beadle1, Alexander
Sheehan1, Brian Dahlben1, Angela H. Gutchess1; 1Brandeis University —
GOALS. In younger adults, experiencing emotional empathy (e.g., compassion) increases prosocial behaviors (e.g., charitable donation), but this
relationship has been rarely investigated in older adults. Separate lines of
research have shown that a majority of older adults engage in prosocial
behaviors, and there is preliminary evidence for increased emotional empathy with age. Thus, we investigated the degree to which age-related differences in emotional empathy may be associated with prosocial behavior.
METHODS. Fourty-eight neurologically and psychiatrically healthy adults
participated in the study, including 24 younger (age: M=19.8, SD=2 years)
and 24 older (age: M=77.9, SD= 7.7 years) adults. Participants believed they
were playing an economic game (Dictator Game) against a series of two
opponents and read a note from each “opponent” (a pre-prepared note)
prior to playing the game against them in order to induce an empathetic
or neutral state. After each induction, emotional empathy was measured
through self-report ratings and behavior on the Dictator Game. RESULTS.
There were no age-related differences in empathy ratings. However, older
adults showed greater prosocial behavior than younger adults, giving more
money to their opponent after undergoing the empathy induction than the
neutral induction. CONCLUSIONS. This study demonstrates that experiencing empathy may produce greater prosocial behavior in older than
younger adults. Furthermore, older adults were not simply more generous at baseline, but instead only after empathy had been induced. Future
research may consider factors that may mediate the relationship between
empathy and prosocial behavior in aging such as changes in executive
function ability.

A15
MIND YOUR ELDERS, UNLESS THEY ARE WRONG: ERP EVIDENCE FOR AN EARLY DEVELOPMENTAL SHIFT IN RESISTANCE
TO FALSE NEGATIVE FEEDBACK Grace Berman1, Elvira Zobel1, Joel
Voss1, Margaret Briggs-Gowan2, Lauren Wakschlag1; 1Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, 2University of Connecticut School of Medicine —
Evidence suggests that young children are especially influenced by adult
feedback even when contrary to objective reality, yet little is known about
causes of this heightened susceptibility to false feedback or why it becomes
less influential with age. We therefore sought mechanistic information by
examining changes in neural correlates of false feedback within a narrow
developmental window. ERP correlates of correct performance in a developmentally adapted Go/No-Go paradigm were identified in 19 children

2013 Annual Meeting
(49-78months). The paradigm included a rigged block in which false negative feedback was given, and we compared behavior and ERPs for younger
(mean=55mo.) to older (mean=68mo.) children to identify developmental
shifts in susceptibility to negative feedback. For younger children only,
correct responses during the rigged block were associated with significantly reduced amplitude of ERP correlates of response evaluation (the
Correct-Response Negativity; CRN) relative to correct responses during
standard blocks. This ERP correlate of disrupted evaluation following false
feedback onset rapidly after correct responses (<100ms). Older children did
not show this effect, despite equivalent self-reported frustration by the false
negative feedback. Overall, CRN amplitudes were higher in older versus
younger children, suggesting possible differences in response evaluation
confidence. These findings indicate that false negative feedback interferes
with rapid, potentially automatic, response evaluation in younger children.
Strikingly, these rapid and substantial reductions in susceptibility occurred
across a mere 13-month period. These findings help identify critical early
periods during which neurocognitive processing is especially sensitive to
modification by feedback, which could be used to guide developmental
timing of preventive interventions.

A16
DEVELOPMENTAL PATTERNS OF NEURAL RESPONSES TO
REWARDS DIFFER FOR SELF AND FRIENDS Barbara R. Braams1,
Berna Güroglu1, Jiska S. Peper1, Eveline A. Crone1,2; 1Leiden University, The
Netherlands, 2University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands — In adolescence
increased risk-taking is observed, possibly related to an imbalance between
an earlier developing reward system and later developing fronto-parietal
regions (Somerville, Jones & Casey, 2010). Also, in adolescence peer relations become more important. Peers influence risk-taking, although the
exact mechanism is not yet clear. The aim of this study was to shed light on
this interaction. In this study, 249 participants aged 8-26, performed a gambling task in the scanner, in which they could win or lose money. Participants played for themselves, their best friend, or another (disliked) person.
On stimulus onset, when the outcome of the trial has not been revealed, striatum activation was highest when playing for Self, then Friend and playing
for Other resulted in lowest striatum activation. Developmentally, a peak
in striatum activation when playing for Self was identified in mid-adolescence. Whereas playing for Friend showed a linear increasing pattern. On
feedback onset a Person x Outcome interaction was located in the striatum.
Winning for Self and Friend resulted in striatum activation, whereas losing
for Self and Friend resulted in deactivation. The pattern for the other player
is reversed. The peak in striatum activation when playing for Self is consistent with predictions from the Somerville et al (2010) model. However,
a linear increase of striatum activation when playing for Friend shows that
striatum activation is dependent on contextual factors rather than a pure
signal for reward. Possibly, striatum activation is dependent on social brain
regions that are still developing in adolescence.

A17
NEURAL CORRELATES OF THE OWN-AGE BIAS IN YOUNGER AND
OLDER ADULTS Jeffrey Brooks1, Simon Davis2, Jessica Komes3, Roberto
Cabeza1; 1Duke University, 2University of Cambridge, 3Friedrich Schiller University of Jena — Although humans are often considered to be experts in face
processing, recognition of different classes of faces differs substantially. For
example, humans reliably exhibit the “own-race bias”, a memory deficit for
faces of a race different from one’s own. Similarly, several studies suggest
better recognition for faces of the viewer’s own age group - an “own-age
bias” (OAB). Studies of older adults have shown that they exhibit deficiencies in early stages of face processing, leading to recruitment of new
functional networks to support face perception. However, it is unclear
whether these age-related differences represent a meaningful response to
the perceptual demands associated with face processing. To test the effects
of age and visual complexity on face processing, we scanned younger and
older adults using fMRI while subjects performed a similarity judgment
on matched pairs of faces. We varied the complexity of the task by morphing one of the two faces. While we observed a main effect of similarity on both RT and accuracy for all subjects; there was no main effect of
face type (young, old faces). fMRI analyses revealed a neural basis for the
OAB in ventral temporal and frontal cortices, such that left fusiform and
left frontal cortex responded selectively to own-age faces. Older adults
showed decreases in activity in fusiform cortex with increasing difficulty,

Poster Session A
but increases in frontal activity. These results suggest that older adults may
rely on a broader frontotemporal network to perform face discrimination,
especially as this operation becomes more perceptually demanding.

A18
COOPERATIVE INVESTMENT IN ADOLESCENT SOCIAL NETWORKS Stephanie Burnett Heyes1, Yeou-Rong Jih1, Per Block1, Jennifer Y
Lau1; 1University of Oxford — A multitude of changes in social attitudes and
behaviour occur during adolescence. One notable change is the development of nuanced prosociality, with age-associated increases in prosocial
moral reasoning and strategic cooperation. The current study investigated
cooperation in two established UK school-based adolescent networks.
Social ties were mapped exhaustively in a Year 9 (13-14yrs) and a Year 12
(16-17yrs) class using a social network questionnaire that assessed relationship duration, perceived nature (e.g. best friend, close friend), trust/confiding and companionship; a modified Dictator Game played with all other
network members yielded a behavioural measure of cooperation. We used
an analytic technique that takes into account statistical interdependence
among observations to assess the relationship between bidirectional social
ties and cooperative investment. In both networks, out-link strength (social
ties reported by a participant toward peers) predicted investment – that
is, adolescents invested more in individuals to whom they reported stronger ties. However, in only the older adolescent group did the difference
between out- and in-link strength predict investment – that is, only older
adolescents invested more in individuals who reciprocated strong ties. This
is consistent with the notion that nuanced prosociality develops throughout adolescence. In the Year 12 network, but not in the Year 9 network,
cooperative investment takes into account the extent to which authentic
social ties are reciprocated. This ecologically valid experimental paradigm
accounts for the strength of social ties within authentic social networks
and has potential to further the understanding of adolescent cooperative
dynamics and the development of nuanced prosociality.

A19
WHITE MATTER TRACT INTEGRITY IN LATE-LIFE DEPRESSION:
ASSOCIATIONS WITH SEVERITY AND COGNITION Rebecca Charlton1,2, Melissa Lamar1, Olusola Ajilore1, Aifeng Zhang1, Shaolin Yang1, Anand
Kumar1; 1Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago,
IL., 2Department of Psychology, Goldsmiths University, London, UK — Although
significant changes in both grey and white matter have been noted in Latelife Depression, the pathophysiology of implicated white matter tracts has
not been fully described. Furthermore, associations with known cognitive
deficits in Late-life Depression remain unclear. We examine the integrity of
specific white matter tracts in Late-life Depression versus Health Controls.
Participants aged over 60 years old were recruited from the community.
The sample included 23 clinically diagnosed individuals with Late-life
Depression and 23 Health Controls. White matter integrity metrics (fractional anisotropy, mean diffusivity, axial diffusivity, radial diffusivity)
were calculated in bilateral Cingulum and Uncinate Fasciculus. Depression severity was measured using the Center for Epidemiological Studies
Depression scale. Composite scores for Learning and Memory and Executive Function were created using standardized neuropsychological assessments. White matter integrity was lower in Late-life Depression versus
Controls in Bilateral Cingulum and Right Uncinate Fasciculus (p≤.05). In
the whole sample, depression severity correlated with integrity in Bilateral
Cingulum and Right Uncinate Fasciculus (p≤.05). In patients, depression
severity correlated with integrity of Left Uncinate Fasciculus (p=.03), this
tract also correlated with Executive Function (p=.02). Among Controls,
tract integrity did not correlate with depression scores; however Learning
and Memory correlated with integrity of Bilateral Uncinate Fasciculus and
Bilateral Cingulum; Executive Function correlated with Right Uncinate
and Left Cingulum (p≤.05). White matter tract-integrity was lower in Latelife Depression compared to Controls and was associated with depression
severity across all participants. Tract-integrity was associated with cognition in both groups but more robustly among healthy controls.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

35

Poster Session A

A20
MINDFULNESS TRAINING FOR PATIENTS WITH EARLY-STAGE
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE AND THEIR CAREGIVERS Jessica D.
Creery1, Michael Maslar1, Jessica Kiragu1, Paul J. Reber1, Kathryn L. Gigler1,
Susan M. Florczak1, Sandra Weintraub1, M.-Marsel Mesulam1, Ken A. Paller1;
1
Northwestern University — Mindfulness-based therapies can improve cognitive and emotional functioning in diverse clinical populations. People
with neurodegenerative disorders need new strategies to help them cope
with these challenges, as do their caregivers. Caregivers shoulder relentless
pressure and responsibility, and are prone to depression and other disorders. We therefore tested an 8-week program in mindfulness tailored for
combined groups of patients and their caregivers. The hope was to decrease
stress, improve moods, and lessen the tendency to react in habitual but
maladaptive ways. We hypothesized that practice with attention and
coping skills in this intervention could produce cognitive and emotional
benefits. Although the needs of patients and caregivers differ, keeping
them together has some advantages. For example, caregivers worked with
patients between sessions to help them practice the new skills. We acquired
a set of cognitive, behavioral, and emotional measures both before and after
the training period. We also tested an active control group to determine
the extent to which mindfulness is specifically helpful. The control group
engaged in repeated testing with an adaptive working-memory test in
weekly group sessions over 8 weeks. Results showed that participants who
received mindfulness training benefited in several distinct ways. Improvements were observed on a questionnaire-based quality-of-life measure in
both patients and caregivers. Furthermore, depression symptoms lessened,
and processing speed was faster on several cognitive tests. This research
thus suggests that mindfulness practice represents a novel way to produce
positive change in patients and caregivers, and that it should be applied
more widely in elders.

A21
PRIOR EXPERIENCES IN ONLINE GAME MODULATE NEURAL
REACTIVITY TO GAME-RELATED SCENES Hyeon Min Ahn1, Shin Ah
Kim1, Sang Hee Kim1; 1Korea University — Excessive online gaming has been
associated with increased neural activity to game-related images in dopaminergic neural systems including the striatum and orbitofrontal cortex.
We wanted to examine whether this modulation is closely linked to prior
experiences in online games. Eighteen healthy men (24.16 yrs ± 2.30) and
nine women (23.88 yrs ± 2.31) with little or no past experiences with online
games were recruited in this study. Participants were randomly assigned
to one of the three groups. The game group played Diablo III 2 hrs/day for
5 days. The drama group watched a fantasy drama “Legend of the Seeker
(LOS)” with the same schedule as the game group. The control group was
free of any treatment. All participants completed two brain scanning sessions before and after the treatment. They viewed Diablo III images, LOS
images and neutral images during scanning. Prior to the treatment, participants showed increased activation in the left striatum for the game images
in contrast to neutral images. After the treatment we found that the game
group showed greater activation for game images, in contrast to neutral
images, in the right caudate, right amygdala, and left lateral orbitofrontal
cortex as compared to the control group. Whereas the drama group showed
greater activation for game images only in the parietal regions. Our results
suggest that experience with online games may induce altered neural sensitivity to game-related cues in emotion and reward-related brain regions
and help us to better understand the cognitive and neural pathology of
online gaming addiction.

A22
SOCIAL AND NON-SOCIAL LEARNING OF FMRI-BASED NEUROFEEDBACK OF THE ACC: EFFECTS ON COGNITIVE INTERFERENCE Eliza M. Alawi1,2, Krystyna A. Mathiak1,2, Yury Koush4,5, Miriam Dyck1,2,
Julia Cordes1,2, Saurabh Bhavsar1,2, Tilman Gaber1, Florian Zepf1, Mikhail Zvyagintsev1,2, Klaus Mathiak1,2,3; 1RWTH Aachen University, Germany, 2JARA-Translational Brain Research, Germany, 3INM-1, Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH,
4
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland, 5CIBM, University of
Geneva, Switzerland — Neurofeedback based on rt-fMRI trains subjects to
regulate localized brain activity. Typically subjects see a visual display in
form of a bar that indicates the level of activity in a selected brain region.

36

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
We developed a new paradigm, in which social feedback is provided. We
studied the effectiveness of social feedback on anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) activity and tested the psychological effects on cognitive interference. Healthy volunteers (n=18), trained on 3 days, were divided into 2
different learning groups; in one group social feedback was provided to
learn to regulate ACC activity, the other group learned through standard
non-social feedback. During social feedback, an avatar provided a positive
facial expression (smile) when the level of activity in the ACC increased
and it gradually became neutral when the activity decreased. During standard non-social feedback a moving green bar indicated the ACC activity.
We conducted this study to test if social reinforcement can train control of
localized ACC activity, if a transfer to sessions without feedback emerged
and if a generalization of the training to a cognitive interference task takes
place. Our preliminary results indicate that regulation of localized ACC
activation was learned and transfer of learned ACC control to sessions
without feedback emerged. This effect was stronger with social neurofeedback. Thus, social feedback improved learning to control localized ACC
activity compared to standard feedback. Networks underlying the Simon
effect were modulated at the ACC after neurofeedback training. Localized
neurofeedback can selectively and specifically modulate networks underlying cognitive interference processes.

A23
A PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS OF AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR UNDER
OXYTOCIN DOSE Joe Alcorn1,3, Nadeeka Dias1,3, F. Gerald Moeller2,3,
Scott Lane1,2,3; 1Neuroscience Program at the Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 2Menninger Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
3
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston. — Acute administration of oxytocin in human subjects has been shown to promote prosocial
behaviors such as trust, generosity, and cooperation. Prosocial behaviors
stand in contrast to antisocial behavior such as aggression. Aggression
is an enduring problematic social behavior often resulting in deleterious
consequences to criminal justice and public health systems. Aggression is
prominent in antisocial personality disorder (ASPD), and exacerbated by
the presence of a substance use disorder (SUD). The goal of this project is
to investigate the acute effects of oxytocin (across three dose levels: 12IU,
24IU, and 48IU) on aggression in adult human subjects at high risk for
aggression: those with ASPD and SUD. We measured subject’s aggressive
responding using the Point Subtraction Aggression Paradigm (PSAP), a
well-validated laboratory measure of aggression, using a within-subjects
counterbalanced design. The hypothesis is that OT administration will
decrease human aggressive behavior compared to placebo. Preliminary
data suggest that aggressive responding has differential effects, based on
subject’s baseline (pre-dose) level of aggressive responding. Specifically,
subjects with low levels of baseline aggressive behavior show an increase
in aggressive behavior at the 24IU dose followed by decreased responding
at 48IU. Changes in aggressive behavior did not correspond with increased
physiological arousal or mood.

A24
ANXIETY RELATED PERSONALITY TRAITS AND EMOTION REGULATION STRATEGIES PREDICT NUMBER AND INTEGRITY OF
PROBABILISTICALLY TRACKED PATHWAYS BETWEEN THE AMYGDALA AND PREFRONTAL CORTEX REGIONS Annuschka Eden1, Jan
Schreiber2, Katharina Keuper1, Inga Laeger3, Peter Zwanzger3, Christian Dobel1;
1
Institute for Biomagnetism and Biosignalanalysis, University Hospital Muenster, 2Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig,
3
Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital Muenster — Functional connectivity between the amygdala and the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is inversely
correlated with anxiety, indicating greater connectivity in low-anxious
persons (i.e. Kim et al., 2011; Pezawas et al., 2005). On the basis of this, a
framework was adopted that assumes medial PFC regions to actively regulate the amygdala (i.e. Bishop, 2007; Hare et al., 2008; Hariri et al., 2003).
Investigating analog connections in white matter, Kim and Whalen (2009)
applied Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and found that trait anxiety predicted the structural integrity of an amygdala-PFC pathway. However, the
authors did not calculate the tracts on their sample but relied on a depression-specific pathway defined by another independent study. Critically,
this tract merely connected the amygdala and the perigenual anterior cingulated cortex. Here, we collected and analyzed DTI-data and measures

2013 Annual Meeting
of anxiety related personality traits (neuroticism, trait anxiety) as well as
emotion regulation strategies of 48 female persons. By use of probabilistic
tractography we individually calculated pathways between the amygdala
and PFC regions that have consistently been associated with emotion/anxiety related functioning. We hypothesized anxious persons and persons
with ineffective emotion regulation strategies to dispose of lesser/weaker
pathways. Results confirm that anxious personality traits are associated
with lesser pathways and lower fractional anisotropy between amygdala
and the dorsolateral as well as the ventromedial PFC. Ineffective emotion
regulation strategies are associated with lesser pathways between amygdala and the dorsolateral as well as the dorsomedial PFC. These data can
be interpreted as a structural complement to functional top-down emotion
regulation processes.

A25
EFFECTS OF VALENCE CONTEXT ON SLEEP DEPENDENT CONSOLIDATION OF EMOTIONAL MEMORIES Bengi Baran1, Rebecca M.C.
Spencer1; 1University of Massachusetts Amherst — Over three experiments
we investigated the effects of sleep on memory and emotional reactivity
for picture stimuli in varying emotional contexts. Participants provided
valence and arousal ratings for picture stimuli before and after intervals (12
hrs) containing sleep or wake. Recognition of the stimuli from session 1 was
also probed 12 hrs later. In Experiment 1, in which stimuli were negative or
neutral in valence, we found that overnight sleep was associated with better
memory for negative [F(1,79)= 5.53, p= .02] and neutral pictures [F(1,79)=
8.51, p= .004] relative to wake. Furthermore, the initial negative emotional
reactivity was relatively preserved over sleep, an effect that correlated with
more time spent in late-night REM sleep. However, when the same neutral
pictures were paired with positive pictures in Experiment 2, we found that
sleep did not benefit neutral pictures (p=.61) but memory for positive pictures tended to be greater following sleep relative to wake[F(1,68)= 3.76,
p=.06]. Emotional reactivity for positive pictures was attenuated (towards
neutral) in both sleep and wake groups but the magnitude tended to be
greater in the sleep group [F(1,68)= 3.09, p= .08]. Finally, in Experiment 3,
when positive, negative and neutral pictures were combined, sleep again
enhanced memory for neutral pictures [F(1,33)= 7.27, p=.01]. Thus, neutral memories encoded in the presence of negative items were consolidated
over sleep but not when encoded in the presence of positive items alone.
These results support a role of sleep in selectively enhancing memories but
only in restricted emotional contexts.

A26
EMBODIMENT AND MEMORY

Jenny-Charlotte Baumeister1, Raffaella I.
Rumiati1, Francesco Foroni1; 1SISSA - Trieste — According to the theories
of embodied cognition, the processing of emotional content strongly relies
on a re-experience of the emotional information in one’ self (embodied
simulations), which, amongst other bodily reactions, is reflected in spontaneous facial expressions that occur in accordance to the relevant emotion.
That is, recognizing and interpreting emotional information (e.g., about
happiness) involves spontaneous facial muscle resonance, like a spontaneous facial expressions of happiness. No research, so far, has investigated
whether embodied simulations have any role beyond initial processing/
recognition, helping memory retrieval of emotional information. In the
present study we test whether embodied simulations (during encoding
and/or retrieval) play a role in memory for emotional material. Eighty-one
participants underwent a memory task involving emotional and neutral
words consisting of an encoding and retrieval phase. Depending on the
experimental condition, facial muscles were blocked by a hardening facial
mask either during encoding, or during retrieval, or during both encoding
and retrieval, or never (control). Results show, that memory for emotional
words significantly decreased if embodiment was blocked at either point
in time during the experiment (during encoding, retrieval or during both)
in comparison to the control group (i.e., no blocking during the complete
experiment). In summary, embodied simulations play a crucial role also in
memory retrieval, in line with what embodied theories of emotion processing would suggest

Poster Session A

A27
THE INFLUENCE OF RESTING CORTISOL ON SUBSEQUENT
REMEMBERING AND FORGETTING OF EMOTIONAL OBJECTS Kelly
Bennion1, Jessica Payne2, Katherine Mickley Steinmetz3, Elizabeth Kensinger1;
1
Boston College, 2The University of Notre Dame, 3Wofford College — While
research has investigated neural activity during successful encoding of
emotional stimuli, processes engaged during encoding can also predict
subsequent forgetting. The first goal of the present study was to examine
the neural correlates of subsequent remembering and subsequent forgetting of emotional objects. The second goal was to explore the effect of
resting cortisol levels on these processes. Stress-related cortisol rises are
known to affect encoding processes, but the influence of resting cortisol
levels is less clear. Participants gave cortisol samples via oral swab prior
to an encoding and retrieval task during fMRI. They were presented with
images composed of a negative or neutral object superimposed on a neutral background. After a twenty-minute delay, participants underwent a
recognition task in which they viewed negative and neutral objects and
backgrounds separately, distinguishing new objects and backgrounds from
those previously studied. Neural activity during encoding of subsequently
remembered (remembered > forgotten) and subsequently forgotten (forgotten > remembered) negative objects was analyzed. As expected, when
not controlling for cortisol levels, regions within the medial temporal lobe
and orbitofrontal cortex were activated during successful encoding and
regions throughout the default network were associated with subsequent
forgetting. However, including pre-encoding cortisol levels as a covariate
restricted the set of regions revealed by these contrasts. Moreover, cortisol levels were related to increased activity in the cingulate gyrus during
subsequent remembering and visual activity during subsequent forgetting,
suggesting that resting cortisol levels modulate activity in regions associated with subsequent remembering and forgetting.

A28
AFFECTIVE MODULATION OF COGNITIVE CONTROL VARIES WITH
PERFORMANCE-CONTINGENCY Senne Braem1, Joseph King2, Franziska Korb2, Ruth Krebs1, Wim Notebaert1, Tobias Egner2; 1Ghent University,
Duke University — Cognitive control describes the ability to flexibly adapt
behaviour in line with internal goals. One important question is how cognitive control mechanisms are influenced by motivational processes, but
recent studies have produced equivocal results on how positive or negative
affective stimuli modulate control. Here, we sought to clarify this issue by
disentangling effects of stimulus valence from whether affective stimuli
were performance-contingent or not. As a metric of cognitive control, we
employed the “Goschke effect”, i.e., the observation that task-switch costs
are increased after incongruent, as opposed to congruent trials (Goschke,
2000). Specifically, using a parity/magnitude task-switching fMRI paradigm, we contrasted the effects of presenting positive or negative IAPS
pictures either following each response (“mood condition” – not performance-contingent), or following correct responses only (“reward condition” – performance-contingent). Overall, the Goschke effect was associated
with recruitment of a cognitive control network involving the dorsal striatum and lateral frontal and parietal regions. However, both the behavioural
and neural expressions of the Goschke effect were modulated by stimulus
valence and response-contingency: In the mood condition, the effect was
present following positive pictures but absent following negative pictures,
whereas the opposite pattern was found in the reward condition. Moreover,
this behavioural interaction effect was mirrored by activity modulations in
the medial prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, and right parietal
lobe. Our results demonstrate that the affective modulation of behavioural
signatures and neural mechanisms of cognitive control strongly depend on
whether affective stimuli act as potential teaching signals (i.e, they are performance-contingent) or not.

2

A29
PERCEPTUAL PROCESSING ENHANCES THE EFFECT OF EMOTION ON RETRIEVAL: AN FMRI STUDY Nadia Brashier1, Ilana Dew1,
Maureen Ritchey1,2, Kevin LaBar1, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke University, 2University of California-Davis — Memory is typically better for emotional relative to
neutral stimuli, and for stimuli encoded under conceptual relative to perceptual processing conditions. However, there is relatively little informa-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

37

Poster Session A
tion as to how emotion and encoding operations interact to affect memory
retrieval. A question of particular interest is how neural activations associated with retrieving emotional information are differentially influenced by
conceptual versus perceptual processing during encoding. In the current
fMRI study, participants (N = 19) viewed positive, negative, and neutral
images in two encoding conditions: a shallow, perceptually-focused condition and a deep, semantically-focused condition. Recognition memory
was tested two days later. As reported in a previous study (Ritchey, LaBar
& Cabeza, 2010), memory was more accurate for negative relative to neutral images, as well as for the deep compared to the shallow encoding condition. The memory-enhancing effects of emotion were enhanced under
shallow conditions, thus demonstrating an interaction between emotion
and levels of processing on memory. The fMRI data showed that during
successful memory retrieval (hits>misses) amygdala activity was greater
in the negative shallow condition relative to both: a) negative deep and b)
neutral shallow conditions. This pattern suggests that arousal-based amygdala activation, specific to negative valence, determines successful retrieval
when other encoding strategies are minimized (i.e., shallow processing
conditions).

A30
BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL RESPONSES TO DECEPTION IN ADOLESCENTS AND ADULTS Kaitlyn Breiner1, Adriana Galvan1,2; 1Department
of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, 2Brain Research Institute,
University of California, Los Angeles — Trust and cooperation are advantageous at all stages of development to forge and maintain social relationships (Lahno, 1995; van den Bos et al., 2011). This is particularly important during adolescence when individuals are navigating an increasingly
complex social world. Violation of these behaviors can have harmful social
repercussions; however behavioral and neural responses to peer deceit
in adolescents remain elusive. In this study, we addressed this question
using a modified version of the Prisoner’s Dilemma game that included
deceit trials while participants received a functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) scan. Participants played the game with a close friend who
accompanied them to the lab, an age and sex-matched stranger (confederate), and with the computer (control), in each of three rounds. Violation of
social expectations was assessed by examining participants’ behavioral and
neural responses following trials in which the opponent deceived the target
participant. There was a significant developmental difference in responses
to deceit [F (1, 39)= 4.272, p < .05], such that adolescents (M= 47.04%) were
less likely than adults (M= 64.51%) to cooperate with their friends following deceit. This result was paralleled by greater medial prefrontal activation in adolescents in preliminary fMRI analyses. There were no developmental differences in response to deceit by strangers or computer. These
data suggest that compared to adults, adolescents are more behaviorally
and neurobiologically sensitive to violation of social expectations, particularly when the deceit is by a close friend.

A31
PAIN PERCEPTION AND RISK-AVERSION IN FINANCIAL DECISION-MAKING Janaina Brizante1,2, Marcus Vinicius C Baldo1; 1Biomedical
Sciences Institute, University of São Paulo, 2Center for Cognitive Neuroscience,
Duke University — Introduction: Physical and social pain share neural substrates and have both been shown to influence decision-making. These
areas may embody part of an adaptive system involved in the processing
of salient information to choices. Therefore, pain perception could be an
important component of decision-making. We explored the relationship
between pain perception (nociception and social exclusion) and financial
risk-aversion. Methods: Fifteen male subjects completed three tasks assessing risk preferences and physical and social pain tolerances. In the risk task,
participants bet $5 in $0.10 or $0.90 increments on a roulette with probabilities of 60% and 80%. Physical pain tolerance was assessed using a nociception/cold pressor task (cold water: 35.6 F). Immediately after, they rated the
pain felt. To measure social pain tolerance, participants played the cyberball
game, then completing the Need-and-Threat-Scale (NTS). Results: A trendlevel negative correlation was observed between total amount spent on the
roulette and physical pain scores (r=-0.529, p=0.052). There was also a suggestion of a relationship with NTS scores (r=-0.425, p=0.130), such that the
greater the pain, the smaller the bets. Time in ice water inversely correlated
with pain rating (r=-0.533, p=0.050), indicating that individuals who tolerated more physical pain also reported experiencing less pain. Conclusion:

38

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
We have found preliminary evidence that there is a relationship between
sensitivity to physical and social pain and risk-aversion. Specifically, the
more sensitive to pain in these two domains, the more risk-aversive the
individual. These results highlight sensitivity to pain (physical and social)
as an important player in the decision-making process.

A32
MANUAL MOTOR ASYMMETRIES PREDICT NEURAL ORGANIZATION OF EMOTION Geoffrey Brookshire1, Daniel Casasanto1,2; 1The New
School for Social Research, 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, & Behaviour,
Radboud University — According to decades of work in affective neuroscience, approach motivational states are primarily supported by the left
hemisphere, and avoidance motivational states by the right hemisphere.
Yet the cause of this lateralization has remained unknown. The Sword and
Shield Hypothesis (SSH) proposes that the cortical organization of motivation depends on the neural locus of motor control for the dominant hand
(the ‘‘sword hand,’’ used preferentially to perform approach actions) and
the nondominant hand (the ‘‘shield hand,’’ used preferentially to perform
avoidance actions). The SSH predicts that people whose brains are differently organized for manual motor control should show corresponding differences in the cortical organization of emotions. To test this prediction we
applied transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) bilaterally to participants’ dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, over 5 sessions. Participants’ manual
motor asymmetries and emotional states were measured before and after
this course of stimulation. Results showed that the effects of stimulation
on mood were parametrically related to manual motor asymmetries. Positive emotions increased in right-handers who received left-excitatory/
right-inhibitory (L+/R-) stimulation, but decreased in those who received
left-inhibitory/right-excitatory (L-/R+) stimulation. By contrast, positive
emotions decreased in non-right-handers following L+/R- stimulation, but
increased following L-/R+ stimulation. The observed covariation between
neural systems for action and emotion supports the SSH. These findings
also have clinical implications. To treat major depressive disorder, clinicians use tDCS and transcranial magnetic stimulation to increase left-hemisphere activity. Our results suggest that treatments developed for righthanders may be harmful for non-right-handers.

A33
INDEPENDENT EFFECTS OF DISTINCTIVENESS AND EMOTIONAL
AROUSAL IN SELECTIVE MEMORY FOR EMOTIONAL STIMULI Carolina Campanella1, Stephan Hamann1; 1Emory University, Atlanta GA — Episodic memory for emotional stimuli is usually enhanced relative to neutral
stimuli, but this enhancement for salient stimuli is also associated with
memory costs to background, neutral information, a phenomenon known
as the emotional memory trade-off effect. This phenomenon may reflect
attentional capture by emotion, reducing resources available to encode
background information. Previously, we have demonstrated that distinctive but non-emotional stimuli can also elicit trade-offs. However, the
relative roles of distinctiveness and emotional arousal in producing such
trade-offs has been relatively unexplored. To examine these questions, we
conducted a combined memory and eyetracking study. At encoding, subjects viewed scenes consisting of a central item (either negative, positive,
neutral, or visually distinctive but emotionally neutral) against neutral
backgrounds. Memory trade-offs occurred for both distinctive and emotional objects. Emotionally arousing items are also typically more distinctive than neutral items. Therefore, selecting relatively distinctive neutral
stimuli and less distinctive positive emotional stimuli, allowed us to disentangle these factors. Though less distinctive than neutral items, positive items elicited trade-off effects. Conversely, distinctive items matched
with neutral items on arousal also elicited trade-offs, suggesting that distinctiveness is sufficient to induce tradeoffs, independently from arousal.
Only eye-movements to distinctive and neutral objects predicted subsequent memory, suggesting that overt shifts in visual attention may play a
lesser role in emotional memory enhancement than has been hypothesized
previously. These findings suggest distinctiveness and emotional arousal
can independently elicit memory trade-offs, highlighting the importance
of examining multiple factors in determining the enhancing vs. impairing
effect of emotion on memory.

2013 Annual Meeting

A34
ERROR-FEEDBACK ENHANCES INSULA ACTIVATION AND
IMPROVES PERFORMANCE IN INDIVIDUALS WITH NEGATIVE
SELF-ASSOCIATIONS Alva Appelgren1, Sara L Bengtsson1; 1Karolinska

Institutet — Human perception and actions are influenced by anticipations
on upcoming stimuli, such as perceived ability to perform a task (Bandura,
1977). We have previously found that when primed with associations to
‘Clever’ errors take on a different meaning than when primed ‘Stupid’ on a
2-back task: ‘Stupid’-associations lead to greater uncertainty as to whether
errors had occurred (Bengtsson et al., 2010). This finding lead us to hypothesize that external error-feedback, but not feedback on corrects, would
support performance after ‘Stupid’-priming, but not after ‘Clever’-priming. Here we investigate behavioural and neural effects of the interaction
between feedback and prime dependent performance. Thirteen healthy
participants (mean age 24±2.4 yrs) took part in this functional magnetic
resonance imaging study, approved by the ethics committee in Stockholm.
They performed the scrambled sentence task (Bargh and Chartrand, 2000)
where synonyms to clever and stupid served as primes. They then performed a 2-back task where external auditory feedback (74 Hz error-beep;
740 Hz correct-beep) was either present or not during errors and the subsequent correct response. The 2x2x2 factorial design systematically combines feedback, phase and prime. The brain imaging data was analyzed in
SPM (UCL, UK). Performance was significantly better for ‘Stupid’-associations when external feedback was given on errors followed by silence on
the subsequent correct, when compared to ‘Clever’-associations. This was
reflected in increased error-related insula activation followed by enhanced
activation in frontoparietal areas on the subsequent correct. Thus, external
error-feedback, and internal feedback on corrects, is more beneficial to individuals with active negative trait-associations.

A35
FRONTOSTRIATAL CONNECTIVITY UNDERLIES INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN TRAIT SELF-ESTEEM Robert Chavez1, Todd Heatherton1;
1
Dartmouth College — The medial prefrontal cortex’s (mPFC) involvement
in processing information about the self has been well established. However, there is a growing body of research implicating a role for the ventral
striatum in self-referential cognition, particularly in the context of rewarding aspects of self. To the extent that positive self-regard reflects aspects
of rewarding self-relevance, there seems to be an important role for the
integration of information between the ventral striatum and mPFC. In the
current study of N=48, the mPFC and ventral striatum were used as seed
regions for diffusion tenor imaging (DTI) probabilistic tractography. We
found that white matter coherence (as measured by fractional anisotropy)
in tracts connecting ventral striatum and mPFC was positively correlated
with trait self-esteem but not state self-esteem. DTI has the advantage of
being able to reflect stable aspects of the brain’s anatomical connectivity,
independent of any task demands, current mood, or idle thoughts. The
results from our analysis suggest that greater white matter coherence
between these regions may contribute to stable individual differences in
self-esteem maintenance.

A36
KNOWING YOUR HEART AND YOUR MIND: INTEROCEPTIVE
ACCURACY CORRELATES WITH METAMEMORY ACCURACY Elizabeth Chua1,2, Suzanne Mayers1, Eliza Bliss-Moreau3; 1Brooklyn College of the
City University of New York, 2The Graduate Center of the City of New York,
3
University of California, Davis — We have the ability to monitor and sense
our bodily states (i.e., interoception) and our cognitive states (e.g., metamemory awareness), but little is known about whether these abilities represent a unified process or separate but related capacities. Results from previous functional MRI studies raise the possibility that the mechanisms for
monitoring bodily and cognitive states may share neural substrates. The
anterior insula has been shown to be involved in interoceptive monitoring,
and although this has not been highlighted in the literature, several metamemory studies report insula activation when subjects make confidence
judgments about the content of their memories. The goal of this study was
to provide an initial test of the hypothesis that there are shared mechanisms
for interoceptive and metamemory monitoring. Participants completed a
heartbeat detection task in which they had to count their number of heart-

Poster Session A
beats in a given interval without touching their heart or feeling their pulse.
Interoceptive accuracy was calculated by comparing the reported number
of beats to the number of beats recorded by a pulse transducer (perfect
interoception = 1). Participants also completed a face-name associative recognition memory task in which they gave retrospective confidence ratings.
Metamemory accuracy was calculated by examining confidence-accuracy
calibration (perfect calibration= 0). Individuals with better interoceptive
accuracy also showed better metamemory calibration (r=-.47, p<0.05). This
raises the possibility that there may be a general mechanism for monitoring
internal states, likely relying on the insula.

A37
OWNERSHIP, ERPS AND THE SELF-REFERENTIAL ENCODING
EFFECT Philip Collard1, Olav Krigolson2, Todd Handy3, David Turk1; 1University
of Bristol, 2Dalhousie University, 3University of British Columbia — Items owned
by self are remembered better than items owned by others. This self-referential encoding effect is present even in hypothetical situations where
ownership is newly established. We previously reported that differences
in ERP components associated with early visual/perceptual processing
and attention for self- and other-owned objects. These findings were presented as indicative of a positive relationship between these neural markers
and memory bias. The current inquiry was designed to explore this relationship. We recorded EEG while participants engaged in an ownership
task. They sorted common objects into shopping baskets on the basis of a
colour cue indicating item ownership (self/other). Self/other differences
were observed in N1, P2, N2 and P300 ERP components. Latency and voltage measures from these effects were utilized in a correlational analysis
exploring this relationship between memory bias and electrophysiological
response. This analysis indicated negative relationship a between electrophysiological differences and memory bias, especially with regards to the
P2. However, due to the high level of intercorrelations between the ERP
effects we tested the relationship further by performing a regression to
extract a single factor for the ERP components that accounted for 65% of
their variance. This factor reflected a general positive shift in all the components and was highly predictive of memory bias. This result indicates that
the relationship between electrophysiological response and memory bias
may be more complex than we had initially proposed.

A38
DECIDING WHETHER OR NOT A SOCIAL ROLE FITS US: AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY OF THE TIMING OF ROLE PROCESSING A. L. Fernandez Cruz1, I. Walpola1, O. Mohamed Ali1, R. Rahgoshai, J. B.
Debruille1; 1McGill University — Social roles are understood as the various
roles one could play within a social environment. Although being a teacher,
a basketball player or a parent constitute very different roles, one still has
the capacity to imagine and consider oneself playing different roles. This
capacity indicates that one has memorized representations of the roles one
may or may not be willing to play. Neural indexes of such complex representations are so far unknown. To start exploring them, event-related
potentials (ERPs) were recorded while 18 participants were presented with
names of social roles and were asked to decide whether or not they could
consider themselves representing those roles at any moment in their lives.
Roles were divided into categories depending on whether they were favorable (e.g., coach) or unfavorable (e.g., beggar) and whether these were ordinary (e.g., doctor) or extraordinary (e.g., superman). ERP analysis revealed
significant differences between the categories in the N400 (250-550 ms) time
window. In keeping with the hypothesis that the N400 provides an index of
inhibition processes which are triggered by processing at the highest associative level, we suggest that these effects might reflect the inhibition of a
representation of ourselves playing a role. The early latency of the beginning of the effect is surprising for such a higher order process but in line
with the theoretical framework in which the N400 inhibition hypothesis is
included.

A39
CONVERGENT FINDINGS IN PASSIVE AND ACTIVE PROCESSING
OF THE DOMINANCE DIMENSION OF EMOTION Matthew Jerram1,
Alyson Negreira1, David Gansler1; 1Suffolk University — Emotional dominance
is the level to which the individual feels they have influence or control of
the external environment during the emotional experience. Our laboratory
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

39

Poster Session A
examined brain activity in response to high and low dominance stimuli in
two studies. In Study 1, functional MRI (fMRI) was performed on seventeen right-handed men while they viewed images from the International
Affective Picture System (IAPS), chosen based on normative dominance
ratings. Participants viewed high and low dominance images in a block
design; they were not asked to respond to the images other than to press
a button when they observed the picture change. In Study 2, eight righthanded men also underwent fMRI as they viewed images from the IAPS
in an event-related design. Participants viewed neutral dominance images;
they were asked to interpret the images in such a way that they experienced
low dominance in relation to the image (DECREASE). Data for both Study
1 and 2 were analyzed using Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM8) and
freesurfer respectively. For Study 1, contrasts for low>high dominance and
high>low dominance were performed. Significant activation for low>high
was observed in the right precuneus and in the bilateral insula for the
high>low contrast. For Study 2, significant activation was observed in the
DECREASE condition in the precuneus bilaterally. Results of Study 1 and
2 show convergence of processing of low dominance in the precuneus, a
region already understood to be involved in self-reflection. These results
offer insight into neural correlates of emotional dimensions.

A40
NEURAL CORRELATES OF INTEROCEPTIVE ATTENTION AND
INTEROCEPTIVE ACCURACY Ian R. Kleckner1,2, Jason A. Avery2, Karen S.
Quigley1, W. Kyle Simmons2,3, Lisa Feldman Barrett1,4; 1Interdisciplinary Affective Science Lab; Northeastern University; Boston, MA, USA, 2Laureate Institute
for Brain Research; Tulsa, OK, USA, 3Faculty of Community Medicine; The University of Tulsa; Tulsa, OK, USA, 4Massachussetts General Hospital; Boston, MA,
USA — Embodied theories of emotion posit that visceral sensations are integral to affective experience. The perception of visceral sensations (termed
interoception) involves at least two elements – attention (towards or away
from internal sensations) and accuracy in detecting those sensations; each
of which may play distinct roles in affective experience. To better understand these phenomena, we mapped the neural correlates of interoceptive
attention and interoceptive accuracy. To assess interoceptive accuracy,
participants completed a heartbeat detection discrimination task outside
the MRI scanner. Next, to assess interoceptive attention, participants performed two fMRI tasks: (i) thinking about their heartbeats (interoception),
and (ii) detecting luminance changes in a target stimulus (exteroception).
In accord with previous neuroanatomical and neuroimaging studies,
we observed greater activity during interoceptive attention compared
to exteroceptive attention bilaterally within the dorsal mid-insula and in
other regions involved in limbic functions. We next identified brain regions
where interoceptive accuracy related to interoceptive attention by examining the correlation between activity during the interoception fMRI task
and interoceptive accuracy assessed by heartbeat detection. Importantly,
we observed that activity within the dorsal mid-insula was positively correlated with interoceptive accuracy. This finding is particularly noteworthy because the interoceptive accuracy task was performed the day before
the MRI scan and was therefore independent of the interoceptive attention
fMRI task. These findings demonstrate the relationship between activity in
the neural systems underlying interoceptive attention and the accuracy of
interoceptive perceptions, and will likely have important implications for
theories positing a role for visceral sensations in affective experience.

A41
THE REFLEXIVE IMAGERY TASK: A NEW, ROBUST PARADIGM
FOR NEUROIMAGING Allison K. Allen1, Kevin Wilkins2, Christina Merrick1, Ezequiel Morsella1,3; 1San Francisco State University, 2Boston College,
3
University of California, San Francisco — Advances in neuroimaging have
illuminated the subjective aspects of action production (Haggard & Chambon, 2012), primarily ‘the sense of agency’ and action-related urges. Less
research has focused on the subjective aspects of action sets. Sets can
operate without influencing conscious content, as in ‘imageless thought.’
Often, however, sets do influence the contents of consciousness, as when
holding action intentions in mind. To investigate this phenomenon, we
developed the Reflexive Imagery Task (RIT), in which, as a function of
both set and action-related stimuli, participants experience unintended
action-related imagery: When instructed to not subvocalize the name of
a presented stimulus object, participants invariably fail to suppress the

40

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
set-related imagery, perhaps because of ‘ironic processing’ (Wegner, 1994).
Based in part on Wegner (1994), the RIT is motivated by the theorizing that,
though action-related inclinations can be ‘behaviorally-suppressible,’ they
are often not ‘mentally-suppressible’ (Bargh & Morsella, 2008). In Study
1 (N = 5), non-naive participants were unable to suppress subvocalizing
(speech-related imagery; Levelt, 1989) an object’s name when presented
with that object (e.g., a triangle) on an average of 97% (SD = .04) of the
trials, although object names are arbitrarily related to objects (Levelt, 1989)
and one seldom utters object names unintentionally (though this occurs in
certain neurological conditions). We replicated the effect with naive participants in Study 2 (N = 20), in which the modal reflexive imagery rate per
subject was over 90%. The RIT provides a robust and potentially fecund
paradigm for neuroimaging research on action and consciousness.

A42
VARIABILITY CAN BE YOUR FRIEND: INTRAINDIVIDUAL BEHAVIORAL VARIABILITY IS DIFFERENTIALLY ASSOCIATED WITH THE
NEURAL CORRELATES OF COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY AND STABILITY Diana J.N. Armbruster1,2, Kai Ueltzhoeffer1,2, Ulrike Basten1, Christian J.
Fiebach1,2,3,4; 1Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 2Bernstein
Center for Computational Neuroscience, University of Heidelberg, Germany,
3
IDeA Center for Individual Development and Adaptive Education, Frankfurt am
Main, Germany, 4Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud
University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands — This study investigates the neural
correlates of intraindividual variability (IIV) in behavioral performance,
specifically whether the relation between behavioral IIV and the efficiency
of neural processing might depend on the specific task requirements.
Behavioral IIV in response times (RT), i.e. IIV-RT, was assessed in a baseline
condition of an fMRI paradigm requiring both cognitive flexibility (i.e., task
switching) and cognitive stability (i.e., distractor inhibition; Armbruster et
al., 2012), in a large sample of healthy human subjects. Behavioral analyses
show that subjects with higher IIV-RT have higher RT costs during distractor inhibition, but at the same time commit significantly less errors during
task-switching. Furthermore, fMRI results show that subjects with higher
IIV-RT activate task-relevant relevant areas, such as the supplementary
motor area and the inferior frontal junction, less during task-switching. In
contrast, for distractor inhibition, these subjects show higher activation in
visual areas. Taken together, these findings suggest that IIV-RT is not necessarily an indicator of poor performance or less efficient processing: High
IIV-RT goes along with better performance and more efficient neural processing during task demands requiring cognitive flexibility. When the task
requires cognitive stability, however, high IIV-RT persons are not efficient
in inhibiting task-irrelevant percepts. Thus, depending on task demands,
IIV-RT can be considered as an either advantageous or detrimental processing characteristic.

A43
CREATIVITY TRAINING ENHANCES SELF-DIRECTED ATTENTION
AND INFORMATION PROCESSING Nicholas Bott1,2, Eliza Kienitz1,2,
Eve-Marie Quintin1, Manish Saggar1, Grace Hawthorne1, Adam Royalty1, Allan
Reiss1; 1Stanford University, 2Palo Alto University — Creativity is considered
to be among the most valued of human cognitive abilities. Previous studies
suggest that individuals with greater creative potential have an enhanced
ability to attend to tasks and process information. In this study, we tested
the hypothesis that a creativity training intervention would increase specific
aspects of executive function such as self-directed or focused attention and
information processing speed. A 5-week long creativity-training program
(CTP) was conducted in collaboration with the Hasso Plattner Institute of
Design at Stanford University, and a 5-week long language-training program (LTP) was designed as a control intervention. Thirty-one participants
took part in this study, of which 16 (Mean-age(S.D.)=28.9years(5.9); 8F)
were randomly assigned to the CTP and the other 15 (Mean-age(S.D.)=28.
5years(5.6); 8F) were assigned to the LTP. Self-directed attention and processing speed were measured with the D-KEFS color-word interference test
(CWIT), pre- and post-intervention. ANCOVA, with pre-training CWIT
as a covariate, revealed higher scores at post-training assessment for CTP
compared to LTP on the primary measure of combined completion time
for color-naming and word-reading conditions (F(1, 31)=11.262, p=.002) but
not for the inhibition and switching conditions. Our results indicate that,
relative to LTP, CTP lead to improved performance on a specific measure

2013 Annual Meeting
of executive functioning. Improved performance suggests accelerated processing speed and increase in the capacity to self direct attention. Further,
this improvement was found to be specific to executive functioning tasks
with little cognitive interference. Our findings provide new information
about how interventions to enhance creativity affect specific components of
neurocognitive functioning.

A44
THE ROLE OF TASK SET STRUCTURE IN THE MECHANISMS OF
COGNITIVE CONTROL Savannah Cookson1, Erin McPherson1, Zain Sultan1,
Eliot Hazeltine2, Eric Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2University of Iowa — Humans show a remarkable ability to control their behavior
and perform complex, novel tasks with relative ease. The present research
investigates the cognitive mechanisms for this ability. We hypothesize that
control operates on a functional framework of task set representations. Task
sets in the context of control refer to learned associations between stimuli,
responses, and the internalized goals that drive behavior. To investigate
this, we conducted a behavioral study that used a precuing procedure.
Subjects made manual responses to the identity of face or place stimuli.
Prior to the presentation of the target stimulus, a cue indicating the identity
of the upcoming stimulus or response (or a neutral cue) was presented.
We manipulated task set structure between subjects such that two task sets
were represented in one group and one in the other. We hypothesized that
participants in the two-task set group would be able to group the stimulus-response mappings into two distinct groups while those in the one-task
group would be unable to do so. Precue benefit, calculated as reaction time
of the informative cue minus that of the neutral cue, was analyzed using
a two-way ANOVA. Behavioral results showed that only the two-task set
group was able to use the cue effectively; i.e., they were faster and more
accurate when the stimulus and/or response was cued. The one task set
group showed little benefit from the cue. These data suggest that humans
dynamically create task set representations that guide and control their
behavior.

A45
FRONTAL SYSTEMS SUPPORTING THE HIERARCHICAL CONTROL
OF TASK SEQUENCES Theresa Desrochers1, David Badre1; 1Brown University — In everyday life, we often accomplish goals by conducting sequences
of simple tasks, each with its own sub-goal. For example, the general task
of making coffee, involves a sequence of sub-tasks, like pouring water
and grinding beans. In these circumstances, hierarchical cognitive control
may be required to guide action selection based on an overall abstract goal
(“make coffee”), as well as the immediate sub-goals (“grind beans”). Recent
research has suggested that hierarchical cognitive control is supported by
a rostro-caudal organization of fronto-striatal circuits. However, though it
is often assumed that this functional organization extends to hierarchical
control over task sequences, the evidence has largely come from studies
using non-sequential tasks. Thus, it is not known if the same frontal cortical
network supports hierarchical control over task sequences. To address this
question, we scanned participants while they performed short, memorized
sequences of simple categorization tasks. For example, a task sequence
might be AABB, where task A is a color categorization (e.g., red or blue)
and task B a shape categorization (e.g., circle or square). Behavioral evidence supported the contribution of a hierarchical control process at the
beginnings of sequences, as a function of sequence complexity. In fMRI,
effects of sequence complexity and sequence position (beginning versus
middle) located similar rostral frontal and parietal activations as have been
previously observed for non-sequential hierarchical control tasks. Thus,
sequential control of behavior may be supported by a similar fronto-striatal
organization as has been observed during higher-order control of non-sequential tasks.

A46
EXAMINING THE ROSTRO-CAUDAL FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION
OF MULTIPLE FRONTAL CORTEX REGIONS RELATED TO GOAL-DIRECTED BEHAVIOR Matt Dixon1, Kiearn Fox1, Kalina Christoff1,2; 1Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, 2Department of Psychiatry,
University of British Columbia — Goal-directed behavior relies on several
regions within the frontal cortex including the lateral prefrontal cortex
(LPFC), cingulate cortex, medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), and insula.

Poster Session A
Recent work has begun to map the precise functional organization of these
areas, with evidence accruing for rostro-caudal gradients. Prior work has
typically examined the organization of these regions in isolation with different tasks and theoretical frameworks. In order to better understand the
comparative organization and function of these regions, we used fMRI and
an anatomical ROI approach to examine their putative rostro-caudal functional organization simultaneously within a single study. Human subjects
performed a task composed of several events: (1) rule retrieval; (2) rule
maintenance; (3) response execution; (4) monitoring progress towards an
overall motivational goal. Our results demonstrated a striking differentiation between rostral and caudal ROIs during response execution and goal
monitoring. Response selection activity increased whereas goal monitoring
activity decreased along a rostro-caudal axis in the LPFC, cingulate cortex,
and MPFC, whereas the opposite pattern was observed in the insula. Linear
rostro-caudal functional gradients were frequently observed, suggesting gradual functional transitions between architectonically neighboring
regions. Finally, the strongest goal monitoring activity was observed in
the dorsal LPFC, consistent with a role in promoting behaviors that maximize long-term rewards. These findings provide evidence for rostro-caudal functional gradients that directly map onto anatomical organization in
multiple frontal regions.

A47
REPRESENTATION OF RESPONSE ALTERNATIVES IN MEDIAL
FRONTAL CORTEX: MULTI-VOXEL PATTERN ANALYSIS OF THE
HUMAN PRESMA IN A GO/NO-GO TASK John Fedota1, Jillian E.
Hardee2, Koraly Perez-Edgar3, James C. Thompson1; 1George Mason University, 2University of Michigan, 3The Pennsylvania State University — A debate
exists as to the exact role of the pre-supplementary motor area (preSMA), in
cognitive control. Recent findings suggest that the preSMA plays a central
role in conflict resolution and encodes response alternatives as opposed to
simply the presence of conflict. Evidence of neuronal heterogeneity within
the preSMA of non-human primates suggests that univariate analysis of
functional MRI data may not provide adequate resolution to fully characterize cognitive control-related responses. Here, we use multi-voxel
pattern analysis (MVPA) to examine the distributed patterns of activity
associated with both successful Go and No-go responses in the preSMA. In
a Go/No-go task, univariate analysis showed undifferentiated activation
of preSMA in response to both Go and No-go stimuli. However, when an
anatomically-defined preSMA ROI was subjected to MVPA, a significant
difference in the activation pattern encoded by Go as compared to No-go
stimuli was observed. These differences in preSMA activation are consistent with the ongoing maintenance and manipulation of stimulus-action
representations as opposed to conflict monitoring.

A48
TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION EXERTS
SELECTIVE BENEFITS ON EXECUTIVE CONTROL IN A COMPLEX
TASK WHETHER PREFRONTAL OR MOTOR CORTEX IS STIMULATED. Melissa Scheldrup1, Jon Strohl1, Jessica Vance1, Danielle Walker1,
Pamela Greenwood1, Raja Parasuraman1; 1George Mason University — Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) facilitates learning and retention
of certain cognitive tasks (Falcone et al., 2012). We hypothesized that in
a complex executive task with strong motor demands (Space Fortress,
Gopher et al., 1989), prefrontal cortex (PFC) stimulation would selectively
heighten executive control while motor cortex stimulation would selectively heighten motor control. Participants (n=65) were randomly assigned
to: (a) .2 mA sham stimulation; (b) 2 mA stimulation of R PFC; (c) 2 mA
of stimulation of right motor cortex (RM1); or (d) Left motor cortex (LM1)
(cathode on contralateral arm). To achieve the highest total score, players
must control a ship using a sensitive joystick (Right hand) while shooting
accurately, avoiding targets, and maintaining assets. Participants underwent 1.5 total hours of training, including 30 minutes tDCS stimulation
during 4 “emphasis change” trials followed by 5 “total score” trials. Next,
tDCS was stopped and performance assessed, both immediately and again
after a 1 hour delay. PFC and RM1 tDCS groups improved in two measures of ship control over trials (avoiding large adjustments causing loss of
control in the game’s frictionless environment), while the sham and LM1
groups did not improve (p<.015). Speed, points, and number of missiles
fired improved, but not differentially. Conclusions: (a) An executive control
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

41

Poster Session A
task was learned in 1.5 hours, but only with tDCS stimulation; (b) Effects
of tDCS were exerted selectively on executive control; (c) Benefits of tDCS
on executive control were seen with stimulation of right but not left hemisphere.

A49
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS REFLECT WORKING MEMORY
LIMITATIONS IN POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER UNDER
DUAL-TASK CONDITIONS Nikki Honzel1, Timothy Justus2, Diane Swick1,3;
1
Medical Research Service, VA Northern California Health Care System, Martinez, CA, 2Department of Psychology, Pitzer College, Claremont, CA, 3Department of Neurology, University of California Davis, Davis, CA — The current
experiment examined the extent of central executive impairments in
patients with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). A dual-task design
was used to determine if impairment in working memory was linked to
executive control limitations by examining performance on a memory task
alone and in conjunction with a secondary attention task presented during
the maintenance period. Participants performed a Sternberg task presenting either one or four items. After a delay, participants indicated whether
or not the probe was a member of the previous memory set. In a single-task
condition, the Sternberg task was performed on its own. In a dual-task condition, the delay was filled with an arrow flanker task in which participants responded to a central arrow surrounded by distractors. Behavioral
analysis found a significant group by task interaction, indicating that PTSD
patients were less accurate on the working memory task than the controls,
especially in the dual-task condition. Electrophysiological results indicated
that both the PTSD group and the controls showed similar brain patterns
from 300 ms to 500 ms when discriminating old and new probes in the
single-task condition. However, when taxed with the additional flanker
task during the maintenance period, the ERPs of the PTSD group no longer
differentiated old and new probes. The lack of differentiation in the ERP
reflects impaired WM performance under more difficult dual-task conditions. Exacerbated difficulty in performing a WM task with concurrent task
demands suggests limited executive control resources in PTSD.

A50
DISSOCIATING SERIAL-RESPONSE AND PARALLEL-ATTENTION
COSTS IN TASK SWITCHING Koki Ikeda1, Toshikazu Hasegawa1; 1The Uni-

versity of Tokyo — The task switching paradigm has been used to investigate
our cognitive inflexibility, measuring the post-switch behavioral impairment called the switch cost. For decades, researchers have been hypothesizing that the cost is caused by two reasons, that is, delayed activation of the
new task set and interference from the previous task, and at two loci, attention focusing and response selection. However, a clear dissociation of these
factors is difficult and therefore it is largely unknown how they interact
and contribute to the overall cost. The present study investigated this problem by recording ERP components indexing attention focusing (the N2pc)
and response preparation and execution (the LRP) as a function of stimulus
interference and trial numbers after switching. We successfully separated
the cost related to attention from that linked to response, and found a stark
contrast between them. The cost at the attention level perseverated across
multiple trials after switch, and was solely caused by stimulus-based interference. On the other hand, the response-level cost was restricted to the
first trial after switch and occurred regardless of interference, suggesting it
is a consequence of novel task activation. These results provide a clear picture of the switch cost generation and underlying mechanisms of cognitive
flexibility. That is, the shift between two attentional sets occurs quickly, but
both sets are maintained in a parallel manner and therefore relatively susceptible to stimulus-driven interference. In contrast, the switching between
response sets is only slowly accomplished but discretely controlled, and
therefore quite robust against the interference.

A51
RESPONSE CONFLICT AS A MECHANISM FOR MONITORING IN
SPEECH PRODUCTION Daniel Acheson1,2, Peter Hagoort1,2; 1Neurobiology
of Language Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands — Recent work suggests that monitoring in
speech production may occur via domain-general mechanisms responsible for detecting response conflict. To test this hypothesis, we measured

42

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
EEG as people engaged in both non-verbal (flanker) and verbal (tongue
twisters) tasks designed to elicit response conflict and errors. In the flanker
task, people pressed a button corresponding to whether a center arrow
was facing left or right, and response conflict was induced with flanking
arrows pointing in the same (congruent; >>>>>) or a different (incongruent >><>>) direction. In the tongue twister task, people read sequences of
four nonwords three times in which rhymes alternated in an ABAB pattern while onset speech sounds alternated in an ABBA (tongue twister) or
an ABAB (non-tongue twister) pattern (e.g., tif deev dif teev vs. tif teev
dif deef). Results in the flanker task showed standard markers of response
conflict in the form of an increased N2 for incongruent relative to congruent trials as well as an error-related negativity (ERN) for incorrect trials.
Behaviourally, more errors were elicited for tongue twisters relative to nontongue twister trials, and an ERN was observed on incorrect responses.
Correlations between the magnitude of the N2 and ERN in the flanker task
with the magnitude of the ERN and error rates in the tongue twister task
are consistent with a common underlying locus. Adaptation effects preceding and following erroneous trials in production are also presented. These
results are consistent with response conflict serving as a cue to monitoring
in speech production.

A52
A GENERAL ROLE FOR ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX IN PREDICTING TASK-RELATED EVENTS William Alexander1, Joshua Brown1;
Indiana University, Bloomington — Medial prefrontal cortex, especially
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), has been widely implicated in error
processing and cognitive control. A recent computational model, the predicted response-outcome (PRO) model, interprets ACC activity as reflecting predictions of the likely consequences of actions, and indicating the
surprising non-occurrence of a predicted outcome. While the PRO model
is able to account for a wide range of effects observed within ACC related
to the anticipation and evaluation of task-related feedback, a number of
studies have observed ACC activity corresponding to the presentation of
task-related stimuli, independent of eventual responses or outcomes indicated by those stimuli. Effects in ACC related to stimulus presentation
include increased activity for infrequent tasks, increased activity for cues
that reliably predict which of two tasks a subject will perform, as well as a
negative ERP component (the mismatch-related negativity) observed when
a repeating stimulus pattern is interrupted. Additionally, individual neurons have been observed whose activity increases prior to the presentation
of a task cue, as well as single units that respond to cues indicating future
rewards. In a new series of simulations, we show that, by extending our
interpretation of “outcome” to include any event that can be reliably predicted by preceding cues, the PRO model can account for stimulus-related
effects at both the single-unit and systems level.
1

A53
INHIBITORY CONTROL IS NECESSARY TO SUCCEED NUMBER
CONSERVATION: AN FMRI STUDY OF A PIAGETIAN TASK Gregoire
Borst1,2,3, Nicolas Poirel1,2,3,4, Gregory Simon1,2,3, Sandrine Rossi1,2,3, Arlette
Pineau1,2,3, Olivier Houdé1,2,3; 1University Paris Descartes and Caen, 2Laboratory for the Psychology of Child Development and Education, CNRS Unit 3521,
3
PRES Sorbonne Paris Cite, 4Intitut Universitaire de France — Although young
children can accurately determine that two rows contain the same number
of coins when they are placed in a one-to-one correspondence, children
younger than 7 years of age erroneously think that the longer row contains
more coins when the coins in one of the rows are spread apart. To demonstrate that prefrontal inhibitory control is necessary to succeed at this task
(Piaget’s number conservation task), we studied the relationship between
the percentage of blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal changes in
the brain areas activated in this developmental task and behavioral performance on a Stroop task and a Backward Digit Span task. The level of activation of the 9 years old children (i.e., the children who succeed the task) in
the right insula/inferior frontal gyrus was selectively related to inhibitory
control efficiency (i.e., the Stroop task), whereas the activation in the left
intraparietal sulcus (IPS) was selectively related to the ability to manipulate
numerical information in working memory (i.e., the Backward Digit Span
task). On the other hand, no correlation was found between these brain
regions and the behavioral performances for the 6 years old children (i.e.,
the children who were unable to perform the number-length interference

2013 Annual Meeting
items). Taken together, these results indicate that to acquire the number
conservation, children’s brains must not only activate the reversibility of
cognitive operations (supported by the IPS) but also inhibit a misleading
length-equal-number strategy (supported by the right insula/inferior frontal gyrus).

A54
N2 AS AN INDEX OF IMPAIRED INHIBITORY CONTROL IN SMOKERS George Buzzell1, Daniel Roberts1, John Fedota1, Craig McDonald1; 1George
Mason University — Impaired inhibitory control has been proposed as a hallmark of nicotine dependence and is thought to arise, in part, from synaptic alterations in anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), a primary component
of the dopamine reward pathway. The N2 component of the event-related
potential (ERP) appears to index an inhibitory control process in paradigms
such as the visual go/no-go task. Moreover, as dipole-modeling has suggested that the neural generator of the N2 component can be localized to
the ACC, this component may prove useful for investigating impairments
of inhibitory control in smokers. Given conflicting reports of whether the
N2 is reduced in smokers (as compared to nonsmoker controls), we set
out to further examine the suitability of this component as a biomarker
for impaired cognitive control in smokers. In the present study, smokers
and non-smokers performed a visual go/no-go task while Electroencephalogram (EEG) was recorded. As predicted, the no-go N2 of smokers was
significantly smaller than that of nonsmoker controls, while the no-go P3
did not differ between groups. Importantly, behavioral performance (reaction time and accuracy) did not differ between smokers and nonsmokers,
which likely reflects the low levels of nicotine dependence (assessed by
the Fagerstrom test) in our sample. The observed N2 modulation in the
absence of behavioral impairments is unique to the present study and provides evidence for the utility of the N2 component as a sensitive measure
of impaired cognitive control in smokers, even in those with low levels of
nicotine dependence.

A55
DIFFERENCES IN EXECUTIVE CONTROL EFFICIENCY IN PRESCHOOL CHILDREN IS PREDICTED BY DIFFERENCES IN ACC
MORPHOLOGY Arnaud Cachia1,2, Grégoire Borst1,2, Julie Vidal1,2, Clara
Fischer3, Arlette Pineau4, Jean-François Mangin3, Olivier Houdé1,2,5; 1CNRS
U3521, Laboratory for the Psychology of Child Development and Education,
Sorbonne, Paris, France, 2Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
Paris, France, 3Computer-Assisted Neuroimaging Laboratory, Neurospin, I2BM,
CEA, Gif/Yvette, France, 4Université Caen Basse Normandie, Caen, France,
5
Institut Universitaire de France, Paris, France — A number of qualities (e.g.,
self-control, creativity and reasoning) needed by children to be successful
in school and later in life are supported by executive control (EC). The prefrontal cortex plays a major role in EC, particularly the anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC), which underlies the ability to overcome cognitive conflicts
and inhibit a dominant response. Genes, environment (including school
curricula) and neuroplasticity affect EC. However, the contribution of
early anatomical pre-existing factors to child EC efficiency remains largely
unknown. Using anatomical magnetic resonance imaging, we studied
whether early neurodevelopmental constraints predicted preschoolers’
EC efficiency by investigating the effect of ACC morphology, a stable feature of the brain determined in utero, on a classical behavioral index of
EC efficiency (i.e., the Stroop interference score). The ACC morphology of
nineteen 5-year-old right-handed preschoolers was classified as ‘single’ or
‘double parallel’ type based on the presence or absence of the paracingulate sulcus. Children were then divided into two groups (matched for age,
gender and Oldfield handedness score): 8 children with symmetrical ACC
morphology (same type in both hemispheres) and 11 children with asymmetrical ACC morphology. The preschoolers’ EC efficiency was measured
using the ‘Animal Stroop task’, an adaptation of the Stroop task for preschoolers. Stroop interference scores were significantly lower, and thus EC
efficiency was higher, in children with asymmetrical ACC; ACC morphology explained 21% of Stroop interference score variability. Such findings
might ultimately shape individualized educational interventions designed
to help children overcome their EC deficits, particularly those with symmetrical ACC.

Poster Session A

A56
COGNITIVE CONFLICT BY HEALTHY INDIVIDUALS OF HIGH OR
LOW IMPULSIVITY: PRELIMINARY RESULTS OF AN FMRI STUDY
Yu Chen1,2, Zude Zhu1,2, Shihua Huang1,2, Wei Zhang1,2; 1Center for the Study
of Applied Psychology, South China Normal University, China, 2Department of
Psychology, South China Normal University, China — Individuals with higher
impulsivity showed poorer executive function control. To further investigate the neural mechanisms by which the brain detects and resolves cognitive conflict in impulsive young adults, twenty-four participants (ages
19-24, M=20.88 years) with higher or lower impulsivity were recruited in
the present fMRI study. They were selected from a tested subject pool with
318 subjects with either shorter or longer stop signal response times (SSRT)
than one standard deviation from the mean of the subject pool in the stop
signal task, a widely used paradigm to assess impulsivity. The lower (12, 7
male, mean SSRT = 125 ms) and higher impulsivity (12, 6 male, mean SSRT
= 333 ms) groups completed the Stroop task, a task which was widely used
to dissociate cognitive conflict detection and resolution. For conflict detection and resolution, we separately defined regions of interest (ROIs) across
groups to avoid group bias. For conflict resolution, no significant group
differences were found. For conflict detection, we found that, the higher
impulsivity group showed decreased activity in dorsal anterior cingulate
cortex (dACC) and left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (L.DLPFC) compared
with the lower impulsivity group. Furthermore, brain activity negatively
correlated with SSRT: the lower brain activity in dACC and L.DLPFC the
longer SSRT. Our study suggested that the impulsivity may due to altered
conflict detection.

A57
PLASTICITY FOLLOWING VISUAL SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY
TRAINING: EVIDENCE FROM AN UNTRAINED VISUAL SPATIAL
WORKING MEMORY TASK. Sharona M. Atkins1, Michael R. Dougherty1,
Michael F. Bunting1, Donald J. Bolger1; 1University of Maryland, College Park
— Working-memory (WM), the ability to maintain and manipulate information, is a core cognitive function important for everyday life. Recent
research suggests that WM is malleable and can be improved through cognitive training. Training-induced improvements have at times been shown
to transfer to untrained cognitive tasks, and have long lasting benefits. Neuronal changes following WM training have been found on training specific
tasks, localized to regions activated by in-task performance. Previously, we
showed that visual spatial WM (vsWM) training, relative to active-control
(AC) training, led to decreased activation in the cognitive control network
and increased activation in the default mode network, during the training
task. These patterns of activation suggest that the brain is more efficient at
performing the trained task following training. In the present study, we
examined the neural response on an untrained vsWM task (delayed-matchto-sample task) before and after 10 hours of either vsWM training or AC
training (composed of math and sentence reading tasks). Post-minus-Pre
training for the high load arrays (5,6,7dots) minus control arrays, revealed
greater activation for the AC>vsWM in right frontal and cingulate regions,
and the left inferior-parietal, whereas vsWM>AC resulted in greater activation in bilateral striatal regions and left inferior-frontal. These results are
consistent with our previous findings, but further illustrate that training
related changes in neural efficiency generalize to non-trained tasks. The
results support the view that WM training can improve cognitive processing on tasks that engage the same neural networks that are targeted by the
training tasks.

A58
INTER-HEMISPHERIC FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN THE
INTRAPARIETAL SULCUS SUPPORTS MENTAL MANIPULATION
OF SPATIAL INFORMATION Signe Bray1, Ramsha Almas1, Aiden Arnold1,
Giuseppe Iaria1, Glenda MacQueen1; 1University of Calgary — The intraparietal
sulcus (IPS) is recruited during tasks requiring focused attention, maintenance and manipulation of information in working memory. Working
memory paradigms typically show diffuse bilateral IPS engagement, while
spatial attention shows a relatively fine topography of visual attention along
the IPS, similar to retinotopic maps in visual cortex. In the present study we
asked whether overlapping regions are involved in the maintenance and
manipulation of information in spatial working memory. Visuotopic map-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

43

Poster Session A
ping was performed in 26 participants to define regions of interest along
the IPS, corresponding to previously described IPS regions 0-4. In a separate task, we showed that while attending to a briefly flashed target location
preferentially engages contralateral IPS, manipulation of spatial information by mentally rotating the target around a circle preferentially engaged
ipsilateral IPS. IPS2- 3 were most strongly engaged during the attention
task. Activity shifted posteriorly during the manipulation task, during
which IPS1 showed the strongest engagement. Additionally, we found
that increased activity in ipsilateral IPS during manipulation was related
to increased functional connectivity with the contralateral IPS. Consistent
with previous reports, some hemispheric asymmetries were also observed:
left-IPS showed a stronger contralateral bias during attention, while rightIPS showed a stronger ipsilateral bias during manipulation. These findings
elucidate the role of IPS within the working memory network by providing
novel evidence for inter-hemispheric interactions supporting the manipulation of spatial information in working memory.

A59
RAPID FLUCTUATIONS IN THE CORTICAL NETWORKS SUPPORTING WORKING MEMORY FOR COLOR AND LOCATION: AN EEG
SOURCE LOCALIZATION STUDY. Daniel Caggiano1, Alexandra Geyer1,
Jenn Lewis2, Colin Davey2, Joseph Cohn3, Phan Luu2; 1Aptima, Inc., 2Electrical
Geodesics, Inc., 3Ofﬁce of Naval Research — It is well known that working
memory capacity is limited by both the quantity and the representational
modality of information held in memory (e.g. Fukuda, Awh, & Vogel,
2010). More recently, Hampson and colleagues (2006) demonstrated that
activity within the default network, which is observed in perceptual-motor
tasks with widely different parameters, is also a limiting factor on WM performance. While all of these elements are known to limit task performance,
the way in which their neural correlates interact rapidly during WM has
not been investigated. To address this critical question, participants performed a variant of an n-back task with a 2 (WM load, 1- vs. 2-back) by 2
(WM type, color vs. location) within-subjects design. All conditions were
perceptually identical. EEG was recorded continuously using a 256-channel
HydroCel Geodesic Sensor Net (EGI, Eugene, OR). Epoched EEG data were
subject to temperal-spatial decomposition. Source localization of significant
principal components using LORETA revealed six distinct, correlated networks active during the task that were significantly affected by WM load.
Three of these six networks – including a network active throughout the
200ms pre-stimulus interval – involved activity within the posterior cingulate (PCC), a key node in the default network. Interestingly, the only
component indicating a significant WM load X WM type interaction, which
reached maximal amplitude at approximately 350ms post-stimulus, was
one of these three components that included PCC activity. The results suggest a complex interchange among neural networks supporting different
aspects of the task that evolves rapidly to support WM decisions.

A60
INVOLVEMENT OF SPEARMAN’S G IN CONCEPTUALISATION
VERSUS EXECUTION OF COMPLEX TASKS Ellen Carroll1, Peter
Bright1; 1Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge, UK — Recent research suggests
that general intelligence or Spearman’s g may be explained on the basis
of individual differences in the ability to generate an efficient conceptualisation or “task model” of behavioural goals, rather than real time processing demands associated with execution of those goals (Duncan et al.,
2008; 2012). We explore the relative contribution of task conceptualisation
versus execution to the recruitment of g in task performance. Initially, we
correlated performance on a novel speeded response task requiring inhibition of a prepotent response tendency with a measure of fluid intelligence
in healthy and neurologically impaired participant groups. Performance
was highly sensitive to measured intelligence, with those at the lower end
of the g distribution unable to successfully inhibit the task inappropriate
response. The only robust effect of neurological impairment was to increase
the proportion of participants at the lower end of the g distribution, and
this effect was disproportionately associated with frontal lesions. In subsequent experiments the same task-relevant information was presented in
either two-rule or four-rule formats to encourage the application of efficient and inefficient task models to performance respectively. Systematic
manipulation of task requirements revealed enhanced performance-g correlations in trials requiring inhibition (relative to no inhibition), but only

44

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
when instructions were presented as four rules. Actual task performance
did not differ across two-rule and four-rule conditions. A further experiment provided confirmatory evidence that the way in which task-relevant
information is conceptualised is crucial to the recruitment of g, rather than
actual processing and storage demands per se.

A61
ELUCIDATING THE RELATIONSHIPS AMONG WORKING MEMORY,
SEQUENCE LEARNING, AND CLINICAL SYMPTOMS OF NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS Alison Colbert1, Jin Bo1; 1Department
of Psychology, Eastern Michigan University — Children with neurodevelopmental disorders often show motor learning deficits (e.g. Barnes, 2010), and
recent studies suggest the importance of working memory (WM) to motor
sequence learning (Bo et al., 2011). Other studies claim WM relates to phenotypic features of neurodevelopmental disorders such as hyperactivity,
impulsivity, and inattention (Rapport et al., 2001). The current pilot study
examined the relationships among clinical symptoms of neurodevelopmental disorders, WM, and sequence learning in 14 children (8 – 12 years
of age). A series of clinical assessments (e.g., Conners 3, Social Responsiveness Scale, Social Skills Rating System), computerized change detection
visuospatial (VSWM) and verbal WM (VWM) tasks, and a serial reaction
time task (SRT) were employed. We hypothesized that WM would predict
learning, and the scales on phenotypic features would correlate with WM
and learning performance. Preliminary analyses showed marginal contributions of WM on sequence learning (VWM, p = .10; VSWM p = .08). Correlations between WM and peer relationships (both p <= .10) approached
significance. Surprisingly, WM measures were not related to hyperactivity
(both p > .40) or inattention (both p > .40). These results indicate that the
influence of WM on social ability and other clinical symptoms, as well as
their relationship to motor learning must be further examined. Additional
samples and behavioral measures will also be added to better interpret the
results. Understanding the relationships among WM, learning, and clinical
symptoms of neurodevelopmental disorders is critical to further understand children with neurodevelopmental disorders.

A62
EFFECTS OF PERCEPTUAL GROUPING VARIABLES ON CONTRA-LATERAL DELAY ACTIVITY (CDA) DURING VISUAL WORKING
MEMORY TASK PERFORMANCE Shriradha Sengupta1, Haoxiang Yang1,
Gregory Colﬂesh2, Paul Verhaeghen1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2University of Maryland Center for Advanced Study of Language — Our study explored
how perceptual similarity of colors within a set of objects as well as the distance between these objects influence contra-lateral delay activity (CDA) an ERP-derived marker of the number of objects retained in visual working
memory. Participants remembered a set of either 2 or 4 colored squares;
within a set, the squares were either identical (high similarity condition)
or different (low similarity condition) in color. Additionally, the squares in
each set could be presented adjacent to (high proximity condition) or at a
distance (low proximity) from one another. During test, participants were
presented with an identical set, or a set in which one of the squares changed
color, and indicated match or mismatch with the memory set. Analysis of
accuracy showed that participants could detect 4 objects in the high-similarity condition and 2 objects in the low-similarity condition equally well.
This effect of similarity of colors was also observed in the corresponding
CDA: Retention of 4 objects with 2 colors among them corresponded to
lower amplitudes of CDA than retention of 4 objects with 4 different colors.
Proximity of the colored squares did not affect behavioral performance for
2 or 4 memory objects. However, CDA was modulated by proximity when
there were 2 objects: Lower proximity yielded higher CDA amplitudes. In
sum, our results show an important effect of both similarity and proximity
on the electrophysiological signature of the number of objects maintained
in visual working memory.

A63
CORTICAL CONTROL OF NATIVE LANGUAGE PHONOLOGICAL
COMPETITION IN MONOLINGUALS AND BILINGUALS Kailyn Bradley1, James Bartolotti2, Sarah Chabal2, Arturo E. Hernandez1, Viorica Marian2;
1
University of Houston, 2Northwestern University — Previous research has
explored the neural mechanisms underlying the resolution of phonological competition in monolinguals (Righi, Blumstein, Mertus, & Worden,

2013 Annual Meeting
2009); however, the effects of language experience on the cortical control
of competition have yet to be explored. Eighteen English-speaking monolinguals and seventeen early Spanish-English bilinguals participated in
a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study designed to elicit
phonological competition. Participants heard the auditory presentation of
a target word in their native language and were asked to select that object
from an array of four images. Monolinguals’ search display contained an
object that overlapped phonologically with the target word in English (e.g.,
“wig”/”witch”); bilinguals’ display contained an object that overlapped
phonologically with the target word in Spanish (e.g., “bolsa”/”boca”).
Both groups received a Control condition, in which no objects in the array
overlapped phonologically. Results revealed that monolinguals and bilinguals showed different neural activation patterns in response to phonological competition in their native language. Monolinguals activated bilateral
medial frontal cortex and the head of the left caudate; bilinguals showed
more focused activation in the tail of the caudate bilaterally. The distributed activation pattern in monolinguals suggests a greater demand on
executive processes to resolve competition. Bilinguals’ localized subcortical activation suggests that both language selection and the resolution of
phonological interference are more implicit processes and tax the executive
system less. These results suggest that experience with a second language
may influence native language processing at the neural level.

A64
COMBINATORIAL EFFECTS WITHIN COMPOUND WORDS
DURING VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION Teon Brooks1, Daniela Cid de
Garcia1,2, Alec Marantz1, Liina Pylkkänen1; 1New York University, 2Universidade
Federal do Rio de Janeiro — Convergent evidence from visual word recognition studies supports an early stage of automatic and obligatory decomposition for all morphologically complex words (Rastle et al, 2004; Solomyak
& Marantz, 2010). However, there is still little evidence for an obligatory
re-composition stage in cognition as proposed by full decomposition
models. Studies on basic composition of word phrases suggest activity in
the ventromedial prefrontal cortex indexes semantic composition of words
(Bemis & Pylkkänen, 2011). The same mechanisms involved in composing between words may be responsible for composing morphemes within
words semantically, leading to the prediction of activity in the vmPFC
during complex word recognition modulated by the semantic relations
between morphemes. Since English compounds vary along a dimension
of semantic transparency (transparent: roadside, opaque: hogwash), full
decomposition models predict a contrast between transparent and opaque
compounds at the composition stage, indexed by activity at the vmPFC,
while whole word models would not predict a difference between existing
compounds, or between compounds and monomorphemic words in this
ROI. In addition, on decomposition models, transparent compounds should
pattern with novel compounds (e.g. ladyfork), that must be composed on
any model. We use magneto-encephalography while subjects performed a
word-naming task on four word types: opaque, transparent and novel compounds and simple orthographic control words (e.g. brothel). The results
support predictions of the full decomposition model: transparent and novel
compounds showed significantly more activity than orthographic controls
between 400-500ms in the vmPFC, while opaque compounds patterned
between the other compounds and the controls.

A65
EVALUATING THE IMPACT OF TASK DEMANDS ON EARLY STAGES
OF WRITTEN WORD RECOGNITION Haydee Carrasco-Ortiz1, Katherine J.
Midgley1, Jonathan Grainger2,3, Phillip Holcomb1; 1Tufts University, 2Aix-Marseille
University, 3Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque — Previous research
has identified word frequency and word length as important variables
impacting early stages of visual word processing. To better understand
the temporal dynamics of these variables and whether their influence is
modulated by differences in task demands we orthogonally manipulated
three variables: word frequency (low vs. medium vs. high), word length
(4 to 8 letters) and task (lexical decision vs. semantic categorization) using
a large corpus of a thousand words presented to 30 participants. Results
showed effects of both word frequency and length emerging within the
first 200-300ms after stimulus onset over occipital areas. Shorter and lower
frequency words elicited larger negativities compared to longer and higher
frequency words. Additionally, ERP amplitudes in the N400 latency range
increased as word frequency and length decreased. Critically, there were

Poster Session A
no early ERP effects of the task variable either as a main effect or in its interaction with length or frequency. This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that initial word recognition processes are relatively impervious to topdown influences resulting from differences in task demands.

A66
LANGUAGE SWITCHING IN MULTILINGUAL READING: IT’S ALL
ABOUT BIGRAMS! Aina Casaponsa1, Manuel Carreiras1,2,3, Jon Andoni
Duñabeitia1; 1Basque Center on Cognition Brain and Language, 2Ikerbasque,
Basque Foundation for Science, 3Universidad del País Vasco — How do
multilinguals detect the language of a word that they are reading? Recent
electrophysiological research has shown that bilingual readers identify the
language in 200 milliseconds, as shown in masked priming experiments
testing the switch cost effect. The main goal of this study is to understand
the underlying mechanisms of this effect, investigating the extent to which
multilinguals rely in sub-lexical orthographic regularities of the words to
predict the language. In a first ERP experiment, we manipulated the bigrams
of the words in the second language (Basque) as a function of their legality
in the first language (Spanish). Spanish targets were preceded by unrelated
words either in Spanish or Basque. Unrelated Basque words could contain
bigram combinations that were either legal or illegal in the target language.
Results were clear-cut, showing an astonishingly clear long-lasting switch
cost effect in the N250 component for words in the non-target language
containing illegal bigrams as measured in the target language, and a clear
lack of such an effect for Basque words whose bigrams did also exist in
Spanish. A second ERP experiment using the same language combination
with a different set of materials and participants completely replicated
these findings, and additional behavioral data extended them to single
(unprimed) word reading. These pieces of evidence support the hypothesis
that multilinguals rely on statistical regularities of the words in order to
detect their language. Thus, basic orthographic features of the words guide
multilingual language detection, and consequently multilingual visual
word recognition processes.

A67
RAPID LANGUAGE ACQUISITION FOR ABSTRACT AND CONCRETE WORDS FROM SENTENTIAL CONTEXT – AN MEG STUDY
Vera Dehmelt1, Kati Keuper1,2, Antoni Rodríguez Fornells3,4, Pienie Zwitserlood5,
Christian Dobel1,2; 1Institute for Biomagnetism and Biosignalanalysis, University
of Münster, 2Otto Creutzfeldt Center for Cognitive and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of Münster, 3Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats
(ICREA), Barcelona, 4Department of Basic Psychology, University of Barcelona,
L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, 5Department of Psychology, University of
Münster — The present study used whole-head magnetoencephalography
(MEG) to investigate word learning. Event-related fields to single presentations of new words (i.e. pseudowords) before and after meaning derivation
from congruent versus incongruent sentential contexts (learning session)
were analyzed to examine processes of mapping new word forms to existing concepts, and how this is modulated by a concept’s concreteness. Each
mapping occurred only three times. German speakers silently read single
presented existing German words (real words) and pseudowords before
(pretest) and after (posttest) the learning session. Attenuated responses in
the N400m (as magnetoencephalographic counterpart of the N400) from
pre- to posttest were seen as indicating integration processes. Using distributed source modeling a main effect of learning was observed in a left
temporal region within the N400m time window (380 ms to 500 ms) with
a processing advantage for new words presented in congruent contexts,
reflecting semantic integration. Real concrete words elicited attenuated
N400m’s (320 ms to 380 ms), supported by two right hemispheric regions,
one more occipito-parietal and one more frontal. Within the same regions
an interaction between learning and concreteness for new words was
found. New words that gained concrete meaning through presentation in
congruent sentence contexts evoked more attenuated N400ms (320 ms to
420 ms) from pre- to posttest than abstract new words. Thus, the process
of mapping new word forms to existing conceptual knowledge is fast and
modulated by concreteness.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

45

Poster Session A

A68
ON THE SAME WAVELENGTH: PREDICTABILITY AFFECTS SPEAKER-LISTENER ALIGNMENT. Suzanne Dikker1,3, Lauren Silbert2, Uri
Hasson2, Jason Zevin3; 1New York University, 2Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, 3Princeton University — What brings people “on the
same wavelength” in some situations but not others? In this study, we used
an inter-subject correlation approach in fMRI[1] to ask whether the ability
to infer, or predict, a speaker’s intentions might increase neural alignment
between a speaker and her listeners’ brain activity[2], a possible index
of ‘mutual understanding’. Methods— For each of 45 trials, one speaker
viewed and then described an image. In subsequent sessions, nine listeners
saw the images and listened to the speaker’s description. Images varied in
predictiveness: Some images were highly predictive (HP) of one particular sentence, some allowed multiple descriptions (LP), as assessed through
an offline questionnaire (N=54). Whole-brain, voxel-by-voxel correlations
between the speaker and listeners’ timeseries (36sec/24TRs) were conducted for HP vs. LP items respectively. Results—Speaker-listener correlations were significantly higher for HP items than LP items in brain regions
implicated in auditory language processing and lexical-semantic prediction
(left-posterior superior temporal gyrus[3]). Inspection of the speaker and
listeners’ timecourses of activity in pSTG suggests that this difference was
due to a combination of factors: (1) a smaller temporal lag between speech
planning and language processing for HP items and (2) increased BOLD
activity in the listeners for LP items, corroborating prior research on prediction in language comprehension[3]. Based on these results, we argue
that prediction not only aids rapid and successful processing of the world
around us[4], it also helps to synchronize social behavior, one of the primary goals of human communication. References 1.Hasson-etal.2012.TiCS
2.Stephens-etal.2010.PNAS 3.Friederici.2012.TiCS 4.Bar.2007.TiCS

A69
ARE FREQUENCY AND REGULARITY EFFECTS TASK-DEPENDENT? EVIDENCE FROM ERPS Simon Fischer-Baum1, Danielle S. Dickson2, Kara D. Federmeier2; 1Rice University, 2University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign — Both meaning and sounds can be generated from letter strings.
Many theories of visual word processing assume automatic semantic access
and phonological recoding whenever a written word is encountered. However, the relative importance of different reading processes depends on task.
For example, generating pronunciations is more important when reading
aloud than when reading for meaning. The current study uses event related
potentials (ERPs) to investigate whether task-dependent strategic control
modulates how visually-presented words are processed. Participants were
presented written words in the context of two tasks, delayed reading aloud
and proper-name detection. Stimuli varied factorally on word frequency,
a measure critical for processing words along the semantic reading route,
and on regularity, a measure of the ease of generating the word’s pronunciation, controlling for other variables, like orthographic neighborhood and
bigram frequency. The effects of frequency (on N400 amplitude) and regularity (on LPC size) were modulated by task. For frequency, differences in
N400 amplitude were observed only in the reading aloud task, such that
low frequency words elicited a higher amplitude N400. Frequency is often
assumed to be an intrinsic property of the semantic reading route; these
findings indicate that the role of frequency in reading is task-dependent.
For regularity, low frequency, irregular words showed a larger LPC than
the other three conditions only in the reading aloud task. This suggests that
top-down control plays a role in the phonological processing of written
words as well. Taken together, these results demonstrate that task demands
affect how written words are processed.

A70
PROCESSING EMOTION AND TABOONESS IN A NATIVE VS. A
SECOND LANGUAGE: AN ERP STUDY Allison R. Fogel1,2, Katherine J.
Midgley1, Nate Delaney-Busch1, Phillip J. Holcomb1; 1Tufts University, 2University
of Maryland — Bilinguals frequently report that words in a second language
(L2) have less of an emotional impact than words in a native language (L1)
and that it is easier to swear in L2. This intuition has been corroborated
experimentally, most reliably by studies examining skin conductance
responses (SCRs), but the processing differences underlying this disparity
remain unclear. In monolinguals, the late positive component (LPC) has

46

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
been shown to be responsive to a word’s level of arousal (intensity) but
not to its valence (pleasantness). The present study investigated how these
dual aspects of a word’s emotionality are processed in L2. In Experiment 1,
participants performed a semantic categorization task as they read single
words that were crossed in levels of valence and arousal. As predicted,
highly arousing words evoked a larger LPC than low arousal words in
native English speakers but not in L2 English speakers, and no main effect
of valence was observed in either group. Experiment 2 added taboo words
to the same design. As with the arousal effects seen in Experiment 1, taboo
words elicited a robust LPC compared to neutral words in native speakers, while the taboo effect was restricted in distribution in L2 speakers.
However, no arousal effects were observed to highly arousing nontaboo
words in either group when taboo words were present in the paradigm.
These results suggest that L2 words are experienced as less arousing than
L1 words and that arousal is processed relative to the surrounding context.

A71
DIFFERENCES IN CORTICAL THICKNESS AMONG DEAF SIGNERS, HEARING NATIVE SIGNERS, AND HEARING NONSIGNERS
Stephen McCullough1, Karen Emmorey1; 1San Diego State University — Both
deafness and life-long experience with sign language may alter the neuroanatomical structure of the human brain. We analyzed cortical thickness
throughout the brain in deaf users of American Sign Language (ASL),
hearing native ASL signers, and matched hearing nonsigners (N = 22 in
each group; all right-handed). For each individual, two 3D structural MRI
scans were obtained using a 3-Tesla GE Signa Excite MR scanner and then
processed using FreeSurfer software to reconstruct white matter and pial
cortical surfaces. Cortical thickness measurements from each individual
were registered to a standard surface-based coordinate system to compare
cortical thickness across groups and to visualize the statistical results. The
contrasts between the deaf group and each of the hearing groups suggest
that deafness is associated with increased cortical thickness in three left
hemisphere regions: the insula, occipital cortex, superior parietal lobule;
and two right hemisphere regions: the superior temporal sulcus and the
fusiform gyrus. Increased gray matter in these cortical regions may be associated with different attention strategies and visual processing demands for
deaf individuals. Compared to hearing nonsigners, hearing signers showed
more gray matter in the right postcentral gyrus (near the arm/hand area).
Surprisingly, hearing signers had less gray matter than both nonsigners
and deaf signers in right MT and right superior temporal gyrus. The reason
for decreased gray matter for hearing signers is unclear but may reflect a
more distributed network for language processing in sign-speech (bimodal)
bilinguals due to more distributed reliance on auditory and visual cortices.

A72
NEURAL CORRELATES OF INTENSIVE NON-NATIVE PHONETIC
CATEGORY TRAINING Laura Mesite1, Stephanie N. Del Tufo2, Emily
Myers1,2,3; 1Brown University, 2University of Connecticut, 3Haskins Laboratories
— While non-native phonetic category learning is difficult in adulthood,
with sufficient training, many adults can discriminate non-native speech
contrasts, with selective improvement on between-category compared to
within-category contrasts. Previous work suggests that left inferior frontal
regions may play an important role in rapid non-native contrast learning,
suggesting a role for attention and/or decision processes in short-term
gains in sensitivity. What is unknown is whether extensive training leads
to increased sensitivity in temporal areas as well. In the current study,
adult participants were trained for ten days to categorize non-native phonemes taken from a dental-retroflex continuum. Categorization training
led to improvements in discrimination of between-category contrasts for
all participants, while behavioral sensitivity to within-category contrasts
remained stable. Neural responses to the phonetic contrasts were measured
using a short-interval habituation fMRI design before and after training.
Before training, no neural areas differentiated between- and within-category trials. After training, right temporal, bilateral inferior frontal, and
bilateral inferior parietal clusters responded significantly more for within-category than between-category trials. No regions exhibited the opposite pattern. This stands in contrast to previous studies, which illustrate
that between-category trials exhibit more activation than within-category trials for native phonemes (Joanisse et al., 2006; Myers et al., 2009).
Taken together, these results suggest that long-term training results in the

2013 Annual Meeting
involvement of both frontal and temporal areas known to be involved in
the perception of native phonetic category structure, albeit with a distinct
pattern of activation.

A73
LESION SITES ASSOCIATED WITH PAST-TENSE PRODUCTION
DEFICITS IN APHASIA Lotte Meteyard1, Cathy J. Price2, Anna M. Woollams3, Jennifer Aydelott4; 1School of Psychology & Clinical Language Sciences,
University of Reading, 2Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, Institute of
Neurology, University College London, 3School of Psychological Sciences, University of Manchester, 4Birkbeck College, University of London — Determining
the neural bases of our ability to generate the past-tense forms of English
verbs has proven controversial. The goal of this study was to isolate specific
cortical regions that, when damaged, are consistently and persistently associated with the impaired production of the past tense. Twelve patients with
a heterogeneous mix of lesion sites in the left hemisphere were asked to
generate regular and irregular past-tense forms in response to isolated verb
stems and stems presented within a sentence context. In six of these individuals, past-tense production was significantly less accurate for regulars
than irregulars. Lesion overlap analysis showed that all six had damage to
the left pars opercularis, in the inferior frontal cortex. A seventh patient had
difficulty producing both regular and irregular verbs, but was significantly
less accurate for irregulars. This was the only patient in our sample where
the lesion extended into the left anterior and inferior temporal lobe. Differential performance on regular or irregular verbs was not explained by the
presence of articulatory impairments (verbal dyspraxia). The lesion overlap
analysis adds to existing data by providing a focal frontal lobe region (the
pars opercularis) that is essential for the production of regular verbs; this
region has previously been associated with articulatory and phonological
processing in fMRI studies of healthy participants. The single patient with
temporal lesions who showed a relative impairment for irregular verbs
adds to evidence that temporal regions (particularly anterior and inferior)
are necessary for the successful production of irregular verbs.

A74
SPEECH PREPARATION IN ADULTS WHO STUTTER Jeffrey Mock1,2,3,
Anne Foundas2, Edward Golob3; 1Lousiana State University Health Sciences
Center, 2Children’s Hospital of New Orleans, 3Tulane University — Functional
neuroimaging studies suggest compromised speech preparation in adults
who stutter (AWS). We previously found that sounds delivered during
speech preparation elicited an ERP slow wave relative to a control condition. This study tested the hypotheses that slow wave amplitudes and EEG
power during speech preparation are attenuated in AWS and are proportional to stuttering severity. Adult subjects (12 AWS, 12 fluent) performed
a cue-target delayed naming paradigm under two conditions (speech,
control). During the speech condition participants viewed a cue word to
prepare their vocal response to a subsequent target picture, which usually
matched the cue (90% trials). The control condition was identical except
cues were uninformative and vocal responses were infrequent. Between
the cue and target a sound (tone, consonant-vowel) was presented at one
of two time points (early, late). The main measures were vocal reaction
times, auditory ERPs, and EEG power between the cue and target. Reaction
times in AWS vs. fluent were comparable to match trials but AWS were
longer when targets did not match the cue (p = 0.002), suggesting difficultly
in updating speech plans. In the fluent group auditory slow waves were
more negative in the speech vs. control condition, but were comparable
in AWS (p = 0.029). Stuttering frequency was correlated to early auditory
ERP amplitude (p < 0.001) and alpha-beta EEG power (p < 0.04) immediately after cue presentation. Overall, results suggest AWS exhibit atypical
modulation of auditory cortical activity during speech preparation that is
quantitatively related to the degree of impairment.

A75
LONG DISTANCE HARMONY GUIDES PREDICTION IN SPEECH
PERCEPTION: ERP EVIDENCE FROM BASQUE SIBILANT HARMONY Philip Monahan1; 1Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language
(BCBL), Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain — Our native language phonology
impacts both behavioral and neurophysiological responses to the speech
signal; however, whether we use predictable phonological patterns to facilitate parsing the signal remains poorly understood. We use Basque sibilant

Poster Session A
harmony as a test case to better understand the underlying mechanisms
of phonological prediction. Basque has three contrastive places of articulation (PoA) for sibilant consonants (fricatives s,z,x; affricates ts,tz,tx), and
morpheme-internal sibilants agree in their PoA. Thus, given one sibilant,
we hypothesize that speakers can reliably predict the PoA of an upcoming
sibilant. In a behavioral phoneme-monitoring task, participants (n=30) listened to Basque pseudowords and responded when they heard the sound
for which they were monitoring (three conditions: match (same PoA, e.g.,
usatsu), mismatch (different PoA, e.g., uzatsu) and control (non-sibilant
/f/, e.g., ufatsu)). We find a main effect of condition: mismatch items
showed longer reaction times than control and match items. To determine
the temporal dynamics of phonological prediction, we conducted an ERP
experiment. Participants (n=15) passively listened to the same Basque
pseudowords. From 100-200 ms post-onset of the second sibilant, we find a
main effect of condition. Match items elicited a larger negativity than mismatch items. These results suggest that listeners use their knowledge of
the phonological patterns of their language to generate predictions about
the content of the incoming speech signal and that these predictions are
reflected relatively early in the neurophysiological response.

A76
NEUROCOGNITIVE MECHANISMS OF LEARNING TO READ: PREDICTING PRINT TUNING BY BEHAVIORAL LANGUAGE MEASURES
Aleksandra K. Moscicka1,2, Lea B. Jost1,2, Margit Raith1, Urs Maurer1,2; 1Department of Psychology, University of Zurich, 2Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Switzerland — Neural tuning for print is
reflected by an increased N1 component of the event-related potential (ERP)
for visual words compared to control stimuli. Previous studies showed
that print tuning emerged within the first 2 years of reading training in
school and was reduced in dysfluent readers. However, several questions
have remained. Here, we investigated 1) whether print tuning has already
developed by the end of 1st grade, 2) whether word reading fluency predicts print tuning across children with a wide range of reading skills, and
3) whether other behavioral language measures explain additional variance
in print tuning beyond word reading fluency alone. A 128-channel EEG
was recorded while 68 (Swiss-)German-speaking, monolingual children in
1st grade, performed an immediate repetition detection task with German
words and false-font strings. Print tuning was indexed by the N1 difference
in the ERPs between German words and false-font strings. In an additional
behavioral session we measured word and pseudoword reading fluency,
rapid naming, phonological processing, auditory memory span, reading
comprehension, and vocabulary. We found print tuning to be highly significant at fronto-central and occipito-temporal electrodes suggesting that
it emerged during the first year of reading instruction. More fluent reading
was associated with larger print tuning and explained 7.6% of its variance.
The most variance of print tuning, however, was explained by word reading fluency and vocabulary together (15%). This indicates that not only
reading fluency, but also vocabulary contributed to the development of
print tuning, even though the overall explained variance was rather low.

A77
LETTER-STRING-SPECIFIC N170 BROADLY DISTRIBUTES UNDER
RAPID PRESENTATION Yasuko Okumura1, Tetsuko Kasai1, Harumitsu Murohashi1; 1Hokkaido University — Extensive reading experience develops specialized neural activities for letter string perception. N170 component of
event-related potentials (ERPs) is a robust marker of such specialization
that typically shows left-lateralized enhancement for letter strings against
non-linguistic visual controls. However, considering the normal reading,
the N170 has been examined with much slower input rate. In this study,
we examined letter-string-specific activities under near-normal reading
speed to clarify automaticity and efficiency of such activities. ERPs were
recorded from 11 native Japanese speakers. Stimuli were Hiragana words,
nonwords, and alphanumeric symbols, consisted of four characters/symbols, with varied space between characters (dense/sparse). This was to
examine spatial variance of the above activities. Participants attended to
central fixation and detected infrequent blue fixation among rapid stream
of the stimuli (100 ms duration with 300-650 ms inter-stimulus interval).
As a result, words and nonwords elicited larger N1 (160-220 ms) than symbols at occipito-temporal (P7/8) and parietal (P3/4) sites bilaterally. For
word and nonwords, the N1 amplitude was equivalent between dense and
sparse conditions, while it was significantly larger in the sparse condition
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

47

Poster Session A
for symbols. Letter-symbol contrast under rapid presentation was revealed
similarly to previous studies but with broader distribution. This suggests
that letter-string-specific tuning can take place in various visual-related
regions, including dorsal regions and the right hemisphere, and those areas
may automatically be employed under perceptually demanding circumstance. An additional finding was that N1 response to character strings was
not affected by spatial arrangement of characters, which supports spatial
invariance of this specialized activities.

A78
IN THERE A RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CEREBELLAR VOLUME
AND MORPHOLOGICAL PROCESSING IN SECOND LANGUAGE
LEARNERS? Christos Pliatsikas1, Tom Johnstone1, Theodoros Marinis1; 1Uni-

versity of Reading — There is increasing evidence that learning a second
language (L2) affects the structure of the adult brain, even in late learners of
an L2 (Mechelli et al., 2004). For instance, research demonstrates increased
grey matter (GM) volume for L2 learners in brain areas associated with
learning and retrieval of new words (Lee et al., 2007). However, to date no
studies have investigated whether learning and processing the L2 grammar
affects the brain volume. In this study, we obtained high-resolution anatomical scans from 22 English native speakers (NS) and 17 late Greek-English
learners. The participants also performed a behavioural task including regular inflections (e.g. played), which require rule-based decomposition, and
irregular inflections (e.g. kept), which are processed as whole forms. An
analysis of brain morphology (Voxel-Based Morphometry-VBM) revealed
that, compared to the NS, L2 learners had significantly greater GM volume
in the cerebellum, an area linked to implicit grammatical processing in a
first language (Paradis, 2004). Additionally, the cerebellar volume of the L2
learners correlated negatively to the reading times for the morphological
words only, revealing that the larger the cerebellum, the faster the learners
read the words. Our results suggest that learning and processing of grammatical rules in a second language could lead to structural changes in the
cerebellum. Lee et al. (2007). Anatomical traces of vocabulary acquisition in
the adolescent brain. The Journal of Neuroscience, 27(5),1184–1189. Mechelli et al. (2004). Structural plasticity in the bilingual brain. Nature, 431,757.
Paradis, M. (2004). A Neurolinguistic Theory of Bilingualism. Amsterdam:
Benjamins.

A79
METAPHOR AND CONCRETENESS: AN ERP STUDY Megan

D. Bardolph1, Bálint Forgács1,2, Katherine A. DeLong1, Ben D. Amsel1, Marta Kutas1;
1
University of California San Diego, 2Budapest University of Technology and Economics — We conducted an event-related brain potential (ERP) experiment
to investigate the role of metaphor in processing concrete and abstract language. Participants read two-word phrases and then judged their meaning
relative to a filler word. The two-word phrases were classified as Physical,
able to be physically experienced (e.g., “written schedule”); Abstract (e.g.,
“conditional schedule”); or Metaphorical, meaning that the adjective-noun
pair creates a metaphorical (non-physical) phrase from a physical adjective and a noun (e.g., “thin schedule”). Across participants, each noun
appeared in each of the three adjective-noun pair conditions. Between 300
and 600 ms, the ERP to the adjective at posterior sites was less negative for
the Abstract condition than the Physical and Metaphoric conditions, which
did not differ from each other. This confirms known concrete-abstract ERP
differences. The ERP pattern for nouns, however, varied with hemisphere:
over posterior left hemisphere sites, the ERP to the noun shows the same
pattern as for adjectives with greater negativity for Physical and Metaphorical compared to the Abstract conditions. By contrast, over posterior
right hemisphere sites only nouns in the Physical condition show a greater
negativity relative to the Abstract and Metaphorical conditions, which are
indistinguishable. These results suggest that in some area of the brain, a
noun appearing in the Metaphorical condition is processed similarly to that
in the Abstract condition, despite its pairing with a concrete adjective. The
perceived “concreteness” of any particular noun thus appears to be a function of the overall meaning of the adjective noun pairing.

48

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

A80
DISCOURSE CONTEXT ATTENUATES ANIMACY VIOLATIONS, BUT
NOT OF GENDER-SPECIFIC PRONOUNS. Adam Blalock1, Megan
Boudewyn1, Tamara Swaab1; 1University of California, Davis — Previous
research has shown that discourse context rapidly constrains semantic
processing of incoming words. For example, given cartoon-like stories in
which inanimate characters perform animate acts, effects of animacy violations are attenuated (Nieuwland and van Berkum, 2006). Less is known
about the build-up of discourse representations over time; namely, at what
point do listeners rely more on whether an incoming word fits well with the
preceding context than on the meaning of the word itself? It is also unclear
if cartoon-like context can override referential animacy violations when
gender-specific pronouns refer to inanimate antecedents. In this study we
manipulated two types of animacy violations in four sentence stories: 1)
Critical words were either animacy-consistent or animacy-inconsistent, and
either discourse-consistent or discourse-inconsistent (e.g., “The peach/man
was upset… following a context featuring a man or a cartoon-like peach
character); 2) gender-specific pronouns were used to refer either to animate
or inanimate antecedents . Results showed that cartoon-like discourse context quickly attenuates the N400 amplitude to animacy-violating words,
with effects emerging early in the stories. However, discourse context did
not attenuate the N400 animacy violation effect when gender-specific pronouns were used to refer to the inanimate character. Therefore, discourse
context may have a less robust influence on referential processing than on
lexical-semantic processing. In short, these results suggest that lexical-semantic processing of incoming words in discourse is quickly facilitated by
context, whereas the establishment of co-reference between a gender-specific pronoun and a non-canonical (inanimate) antecedent may be less
easily accomplished.

A81
GENDER DIFFERENCES ON EYE-TRACKING DURING AN IRONY
COMPREHENSION TASK Nathalia Baptista1, Olivia Lapenta1, Elizeu
Coutinho1, Paulo Boggio1; 1Mackenzie Presbyterian University — Irony is a specific figurative language. Impaired pragmatic abilities might result in deficits of interpretation leading to socialization difficulties and miscommunication. Gender differences are usually reported for many linguistic aspects.
However, the literature showing sex differences on irony comprehension
are scarce. Previous studies used written sentences or auditory stimuli to
present the scenario and the ironic statement. In real live, irony come along
with facial expressions and visual cues. We aimed to investigate the visual
strategies used to comprehend irony as well as to verify gender differences
on it. A professional cartoonist drew two-panel cartoon strips illustrating
people in daily situations which had two endings – ironic or literal. 30
undergraduate students had to judge these stories as ironic or literal. The
task was performed using an eye-tracking system. Fixation duration and
number of fixations were analyzed considering Area of Interest (AOI) (face
expression, context cue, written sentence), Statement (ironic or literal) and
gender. We found a significant effect of Gender for the number of fixations;
i.e women presented more fixations than men. Also we found a significant
effect for the interaction Gender*AOI; i.e men presented a reduced duration
time of fixation on the written sentences as compared to women. We did
not find significant effects on behavioral performance. Our findings show
that the irony comprehension is processed by different strategies between
sexes – women scan different details of the scenarios while men drive less
attention to the written sentences as compared to the other details.

A82
EFFECTS OF WORKING MEMORY SPAN ON PROCESSING OF
LEXICAL ASSOCIATIONS AND CONGRUENCE IN SPOKEN DISCOURSE Megan A. Boudewyn1, Debra L. Long1, Tamara Y. Swaab1; 1University of California, Davis — The goal of this study was to determine whether
variability in working-memory capacity and cognitive control affects the
processing of global discourse congruence and local associations among
words when participants (n = 26) listened to short discourse passages. The
final word of each passage was either associated or unassociated with a
preceding prime word (e.g. “He was not prepared for the fame and fortune/praise”). These critical words were also either congruent or incongruent with respect to the preceding discourse context (e.g. a context in

2013 Annual Meeting
which a prestigious prize was won (congruent) or in which the protagonist
had been arrested (incongruent)). We used multiple regression to assess the
unique contributions of suppression ability (our measure of cognitive control) and working memory capacity on the amplitude of individual N400
effects of congruence and association. Our measure of suppression ability
did not predict the size of the N400 effects of association or congruence.
But, as expected, the results showed that high working-memory capacity individuals were less sensitive to the presence of lexical associations
(showed smaller N400 association effects) (p<0.05). Furthermore, differences in working memory capacity were related to differences in the topographic distribution of the N400 effects of discourse congruence (p<0.05).
The topographic differences in the global congruence effects indicate differences in the underlying neural generators of the N400 effects, as a function
of working memory. This suggests additional, or at a minimum, distinct,
processing on the part of higher capacity individuals when tasked with
integrating incoming words into the developing discourse representation.

A83
CHOOSING FIGURATIVENESS: METAPHOR COMPREHENSION
AFTER BRAIN INJURY Eileen Cardillo1, Marguerite McQuire1, Ianni Geena1,
Chatterjee Anjan1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Despite the naturalness and
prevalence of metaphor in everyday language, the neural basis of this powerful communication device remains poorly understood. The purpose of
this study was to test the hypothesis that traditional aphasia assessments
are not sensitive to deficits in metaphor comprehension. Stimuli consisted
of moderately novel metaphors of three different types: predicate metaphors based on action verbs (The divorcee sashayed through the paperwork), nominal metaphors based on event nouns (The divorce was a hard
fall), and nominal metaphors based on entity nouns (The coffee was a caffeine bullet). For each metaphor (n = 60), a closely matched literal sentence
with the same base term was also generated. Sentences were presented
visually in a randomized order, followed by four adjective-noun answer
choices (target + three foil types). Participants were instructed to select the
phrase that best matched the meaning of the sentence. Results with healthy
adults indicated comparable accuracy across conditions. By contrast, focal
lesion patients all scoring within normal limits on the Western Aphasia
Battery (Kertesz, 1982) showed different comprehension profiles, including
good comprehension on all conditions, a pervasive metaphor comprehension impairment, and selective impairment with particular types of metaphor. We conclude our task captures deficits and subjective difficulties in
figurative language comprehension not captured by traditional language
assessments and, as such, allows for critical testing of neural hypotheses
about metaphor.

A84
PREDICTING DISSOCIATIONS IN BRAIN ACTIVATION PATTERNS
DURING LEXICAL DECISION IN THE CONTEXT OF PSEUDOWORD
OR CONSONANT STRING FOILS Ya-Ning Chang1, Matthew Lambon
Ralph1, Steve Furber2, Stephen Welbourne1; 1School of Psychological Sciences,
University of Manchester, 2School of Computer Science, University of Manchester — Computational modelling of visual word recognition has successfully
simulated a wide range of behavioral data serving as a powerful tool to
help the understanding of human cognitive processes. However, relatively
little research has been done to account for data from neuroimaging studies of printed word processing. Most of what exists models electrophysiological rather than fMRI derived data (e.g., Laszlo & Plaut, 2012). Recent
neuroimaging studies show that left anterior temporal activation, which
has been associated with semantic processing (e.g., Rogers et al., 2004),
increases when lexical decisions are made more difficult in the context of
pseudohomophones (Woollams et al., 2011). This suggests that the extent
of the involvement of semantics in lexical decision depends on the nature of
nonword foils. To explore this computationally we developed a recurrent
connectionist model of single word reading including visual/orthographic
processing, phonological and semantic processing. The model could perform naming tasks as well as lexical decision tasks, capturing a number of
standard reading effects. The model could also differentiate words from
nonwords by integrating measures of polarity across visual/orthographic,
phonological and semantic layers. More importantly, the relative contribution of these layers depended on the type of nonword foils. The model
was more reliant on semantic information when the nonword foils were

Poster Session A
pseudowords rather than consonant strings. These results resemble the
differential brain activation seen in left anterior temporal lobe for lexical
decision tasks. The results support the view that semantic involvement in
lexical decision is graded by the difficulty of the decision task.

A85
THE CONSTRAINING AND CLOZE PROBABILITY EFFECTS OF CHINESE CLASSIFIER-NOUN AGREEMENT IN HEALTHY ELDERS AND
YOUNG ADULTS Chia-Ju Chou1, Hsin-Chi Wu2,3, Ke-Jui Lin1, Chia-Ying Lee1,4;
1
Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, 2Department of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Buddhist Tzu Chi General Hospital, Taipei
branch, Taipei, Taiwan, 3School of Medicine, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan,
4
Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, Taiwan — Language comprehension
involves at least two types of processing. One is the bottom up integrative
process which achieves reading comprehension by retrieving and integrating the meaning of individual words that embedded in the sentences. The
other one is the top-down predictive processing which emphasizes the
usage of the contextual information in predicting the upcoming words.
Studies have suggested that older adults remain intact in retrieve the lexical knowledge from the semantic memory but make less effective use of
context information for top-down prediction. This study aims to utilize the
unique characteristic of Chinese classifier-noun agreement to dissociate
the two types of contextual effects, namely the contextual constrain and
cloze probability, and to examine whether the aging may exert differential
effects on these two processes. Participants, included 24 healthy elders and
18 young adults, perceived a highly expected (high cloze probability), an
unexpected (low cloze probability), or an implausible noun followed by
either a strongly constrained or a weakly constrained classifier in a plausibility judgment task. The data demonstrated a constraining effect on classifiers in the time window of N400 in young adults, but not in elders. For
the following nouns, the young adults showed a graded cloze probability
effect on N400 (implausible > low cloze > high cloze), whereas the elders
showed a different pattern of cloze probability effect (implausible = low
cloze > high cloze). The data supports that the ability to use the contextual
information is compromised with age.

A86
AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF REVISING DISCOURSE MODELS
DURING READING Tristan S. Davenport1,2, Seana Coulson1,2; 1University of
California, San Diego, 2Center for Research in Language — An event-related
potential (ERP) experiment investigated the temporal dynamics of discourse model construction during reading. ERPs were recorded as healthy
adults read two-sentence stories that varied in plausibility. Critical sentences such as “Without warning, the cowboy was BITTEN by a SNAKE,
and cried out for help,” were preceded either by a sentence that rendered
the event Plausible (“The cowboy was walking through the tall grass,”) or
Implausible (“The cowboy was driving through the tall grass,”). Verbs (e.g.
“bitten”) elicited larger N400 in the Implausible contexts than the Plausible ones, but plausibility did not affect N400 responses to the nouns (e.g.
“snake”). This result suggests that in the Implausible condition, not only
did participants recognize the discourse incongruity at the earliest possible
opportunity, but they rapidly revised their discourse models such that the
real time processing difficulty of the noun (“snake”) was similar in both
contexts. After the sentence-reading experiment, participants were given
an old/new word recognition test for the critical nouns. During this recognition test, critical nouns (“snake”) previously encountered in the Implausible contexts elicited smaller amplitude N400 than nouns seen in Plausible
contexts. We suggest that the verbs (“bitten”) in our Implausible contexts
triggered the rapid revision of participants’ discourse models, rendering
the real time processing of critical nouns “snake” unproblematic, and leading to lasting ERP memory effects for those nouns.

A87
THE DEMAND FOR COGNITIVE CONTROL IN THE FORMATION
OF SOURCE MEMORY: A ROLE OF THE HIPPOCAMPUS Cheryl
Abellanoza1, Fernando Leal, Karen Garrett, Heekyeong Park; 1University of
Texas at Arlington — Memory and cognitive control are inherently intertwined. Previous fMRI studies have suggested that successful encoding of
item-context associations often recruits activity in the hippocampus and
the parahippocampus. Here, we investigated whether the demand for cogCognitive Neuroscience Society

49

Poster Session A
nitive control modulates encoding activity for source memory. Subjects
were scanned while they engaged in a semantic encoding task for a list of
line-drawing pictures that were presented in one of four different colors.
In each study trial, a picture on a colored background was presented in
one of three different ways: (1) with no irrelevant stimuli (Picture-Only);
(2) with a superimposed letter string (Picture-Letter); or (3) with a superimposed word (Picture-Word). In a subsequent test phase, subjects made
recognition judgments on test items and indicated context color for studied
items. In accordance with previous findings, studied items accompanied
with correct source judgments elicited greater activity in the left inferior
prefrontal cortex, the bilateral fusiform regions and the left anterior hippocampus than did items with incorrect judgments. Subsequent source
memory effects selective for Picture-Only items recruited activity in the left
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex. Importantly, encoding activity for source
memory selective for Picture-Letter and Picture-Word items was identified
in the left posterior hippocampus, the left parahippocampal cortex, the
right putamen, and the left middle occipital gyrus. These findings suggest
that the formation of item-context associations embedded in irrelevant
stimuli may evoke the demand for cognitive control and that the hippocampus plays a role in source encoding under such demand.

A88
PRE-STIMULUS SUBSEQUENT MEMORY EFFECTS AND THE
ENCODING OF ASSOCIATIVE MEMORIES Richard James Addante1,
Marianne De Chastelaine1, Michael D Rugg1; 1University of Texas at Dallas,
School of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, Center for Vital Longevity — There
have been several reports that pre-stimulus neural activity modulates
episodic memory encoding. Here, we investigated pre-stimulus activity during the encoding of item-item associations, using fMRI to identify
neural regions demonstrating pre-stimulus associative memory effects.
While undergoing scanning, subjects studied a series of word-word and
picture-picture pairs. Prior to the presentation of each study pair, a cue
appeared signaling whether the upcoming pair comprised words or pictures. The cue-pair interval varied between 1 and 5 sec, permitting preand post-stimulus activity to be separately estimated. The study task was
to judge which of the two denoted objects would fit inside the other. Test
items comprised item pairs that were either presented in the same (intact)
or different (rearranged) pairings, along with pairs comprised of new
items. Subjects indicated if each test pair was intact, rearranged, or new.
The critical fMRI contrast was between study activity associated with pairs
that went on to be correctly judged intact and those which were incorrectly
judged as rearranged. Material-independent pre-stimulus subsequent
memory effects were evident in several cortical regions, most notably in
those belonging to the ‘dorsal attention network’, namely, right intra parietal sulcus and lateral prefrontal cortex. These findings indicate that, as in
the case of single-item encoding, successful encoding of item-item associations is modulated by pre-stimulus neural activity. The loci of the present
effects suggest that they reflect the benefit to encoding accruing from the
engagement of controlled attention in anticipation of an upcoming stimulus event.

A89
DIMENSIONS OF CONTENT UNDERLYING STIMULUS-INDEPENDENT THOUGHT AND RELATIONSHIPS TO RESTING-STATE CONNECTIVITY Jessica Andrews-Hanna1, Andrew Reineberg1, Amy Turner1, David
Howett1, Marie Banich1,2; 1University of Colorado Boulder, 2University of Colorado Denver — Humans spend a remarkable amount of time engaged in
thoughts unrelated to the immediate perceptual environment. Despite the
significance of these “stimulus-independent thoughts” (SITs), the dimensions of content characterizing SITs, and their relationship to resting-state
functional connectivity (rs-fcMRI) remain poorly understood. To seek
insight into these questions, we developed a novel thought sampling paradigm during which 77 adults generated numerous SITs and rated each
SIT along several dimensions of content. Exploratory principle components
and cluster analyses revealed four distinct content dimensions: 1) personal
significance, 2) episodic specificity, 3) social orientation, and 4) valence. On
average, participants reported SITs that were highly personally-significant,
moderately specific, somewhat socially-oriented, and positive in valence. To
determine how these content dimensions influence patterns of connectivity
during the “resting state” (a context promoting the occurrence of SITs), 50

50

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
of the 77 participants were scanned in a separate 6-minute resting-state session. Across participants, SIT content was correlated with patterns of rs-fcMRI between brain regions comprising the default network (DN) and the
adjacent limbic system. Results revealed relationships between the content
of one’s SITs and his/her patterns of rs-fcMRI. For example, individuals
who reported more episodic/specific thoughts exhibited greater rs-fcMRI
between the medial temporal lobe (MTL) subsystem and the midline core
of the DN. Conversely, individuals who reported more socially-oriented
thoughts exhibited heightened rs-fcMRI between the dorsal medial PFC
and the MTL subsystem. These results implicate SIT as an active internal
mode of cognition comprised of multiple content dimensions that relate to
patterns of rs-fcMRI in content-specific ways.

A90
DISTINCT PROFILES OF IMPAIRED ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY AND
UNDERLYING CEREBRAL NETWORKS IN ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
Christine Bastin1, Mohamed Ali Bahri1, Fabienne Collette1, Sarah Genon1,
Jessica Simon1, Bénédicte Guillaume2, Rachel Diana3, Andrew P. Yonelinas4,
Eric Salmon1,5; 1University of Liege, Belgium, 2Centre Hospitalier du Bois de
l’Abbaye et de Hesbaye, Belgium, 3Virginia Tech, USA, 4University of California
Davis, USA, 5CHU Liege, Belgium — Binding allows the integration of features within stimuli and the encoding of relations between distinct stimuli
into complex memories. The current study investigated the impact of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) on conjunctive and relational binding in long-term
episodic memory. Thirty patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and
24 healthy older adults performed a source memory task where items were
associated to a background color. In one condition, relational binding was
promoted by the instruction to associate the item with another object of
the same color as the background. In the other condition, color had to be
integrated as an item feature (conjunctive binding). In the patients, performance in each condition was correlated with cerebral metabolism measured
by fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography. The results showed
that AD patients had an impaired capacity to remember the color associated to each item, with disproportionate deficit in conjunctive memory.
Performance in each condition correlated with metabolic activity in distinct
regions. Poor conjunctive memory was related to hypometabolism along
the collateral sulcus. Functional connectivity analyses of resting-state functional magnetic resonance images in a subset of patients confirmed that
these regions belong to an anterior medial temporal lobe-ventral visual
network. In contrast, there was a correlation between relational memory
scores and metabolism in the anterior medial prefrontal cortex, which was
functionally connected to the posterior cingulate cortex in the default mode
network. These findings point to heterogeneous alteration of relational and
conjunctive long-term binding in Alzheimer’s disease associated to the dysfunction of regions within distinct functional networks.

A91
EPISODIC MEMORY, ELEMENTAL SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL
BINDING, AND THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE. Christopher Benjamin1,2,3, Michael M. Saling3,4, Amanda G. Wood5, David C. Reutens6; 1Semel
Institute, University of California Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA, 3University of Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 4Austin Health, VIC,
Australia, 5University of Birmingham, England, 6Centre for Advanced Imaging,
The University of Queensland, Australia — Associative processing is a central process in episodic memory relying heavily upon mesial temporal lobe
(MTL) structures. Recent research has suggested the MTL may support a
number of other higher cognitive functions that tax associative processing
such as navigation and imagination. In this study we examined the neural
correlates of two key types of associative processing common to these tasks,
spatial and temporal binding, and the influence of MTL damage associated
with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE). This was accomplished using
fMRI and a novel task requiring participants to hold simple visual stimuli in memory over short periods of time. Participants included 14 typical
adults (mean age 36.4 years [sd. 10.5 years]) and a group of 14 patients
with a clinical diagnosis of left temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) and left hippocampal atrophy on MRI (mean age 34.3 years [sd. 6.6 years]). In the typical group, spatial binding was associated with bilateral parahippocampal
activation (right > left) and joint spatial-temporal binding with relative left
hippocampal/parahippocampal deactivation. In the left TLE group this
relationship was disturbed so that participants used right hemisphere and

2013 Annual Meeting
extra-MTL regions to a greater extent. Results are discussed with reference
to models of parahippocampal specialization and the potentially hierarchical organization of the MTL.

A92
RIGHT-HEMISPHERE MEMORY: LATERALISATION EFFECTS OF
MATERIAL, MODALITY, NOVELTY, VERBALISATION AND SEX Adam
Bentvelzen1, Genevieve McArthur1, Nicholas Badcock1, Blake Johnson1, Megan
Willis3, Stuart Lee4, Greg Savage1,2; 1ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and
its Disorders (CCD), Macquarie University, 2School of Psychology, Macquarie
University, 3Australian College of Applied Psychology, 4Monash Alfred Psychiatry Research Centre, Monash University — Neuropsychological measures
of verbal memory appear to characterise the impact of left temporal lobe
damage, but nonverbal measures do not reflect right temporal lobe damage
reliably, possibly due to their ability to be verbalised. Cognitive neuroscience models of right hemisphere processing in the healthy brain could usefully inform development of clinical memory tests of lateralised functions.
We measured event-related EEG during encoding and recognition memory
in two experiments. In Study 1 it was found that learning spatial patterns
was related to greater right hemisphere bias (RHB) in event-related desynchronisation, while auditory nonwords demonstrated a left hemisphere
bias (LHB). Surprisingly, RHB was shown by visual nonwords and LHB
by auditory melodies, suggesting that the modality (visual or auditory) of
novel materials has a stronger effect on hemispheric lateralisation than the
material (verbal or nonverbal). Focusing on visual tasks, Study 2 compared
effects of memory task (verbal versus spatial) to task-irrelevant visual form
processing (letter strings, novel characters, and hybrid letters-in-spatial-patterns) on hemispheric biases. Spatial learning resulted in greater RHB than
verbal learning, despite identical visual forms. However, novel visual form
also increased RHB for spatial memory, while spatial form decreased RHB
for verbal memory. There were sex differences in the strength of hemispheric biases and in use of verbal labels to aid memory, although label use
did not predict hemispheric biases. These findings are consistent with the
view that multiple factors contribute to RHB in memory and hold promise
for the development of reliable clinical measures to assess right hemisphere
impairment.

A93
ASSOCIATIVE RECOGNITION IN AMNESIA: CROSSING STIMULUS DOMAINS MATTERS, TEMPORAL SEPARATION DOES NOT
Alyssa Borders1, Mariam Aly1, Andrew Yonelinas1; 1University of California, Davis
— It is well established that the hippocampus plays a critical role in binding different aspects of an event to form episodic memories. Previous studies have suggested that the hippocampus may be preferentially involved
in binding information from different domains (e.g., visual and auditory
stimuli) or binding temporally discontiguous information (e.g. sequentially presented objects). In the current study, we examined whether the
role of the medial temporal lobe in associative recognition memory varies
depending on domain (within or across domain associations) and temporal
separation (simultaneous or sequential presentation). Patients with either
selective hippocampal lesions or more extensive MTL lesions were tested
on three associative recognition tasks. In the within-domain condition, participants studied fractal-fractal pairs that were simultaneously presented.
In the across-domain conditions, participants studied fractal-sound pairs
that were presented simultaneously in one condition and sequentially in
the other. At test, participants made recognition judgments on intact and
rearranged pairs. The patients were impaired in all of the conditions relative to controls; however, they were significantly more impaired in the
across-domain conditions than in the within-domain condition. There was
no significant difference in performance between sequentially and simultaneously presented across-domain associations. The same overall pattern
of results was apparent in both the hippocampal and MTL patient groups.
These findings suggest that the MTL, and specifically the hippocampus,
is particularly important in binding information across sensory domains.
There was no evidence that increasing the temporal separation increased
hippocampal dependence.

Poster Session A

A94
RECOGNITION MEMORY FOR CONCRETE AND ABSTRACT PICTURES: AN ERP STUDY WITH SCHOOL-AGED CHILDREN Olivier
Boucher1, Matthew J. Burden2, Gina Muckle3, Sandra W. Jacobson2, Joseph
L. Jacobson2; 1Université de Montréal, 2Wayne State University, 3Université
Laval — Recognition memory for concrete, nameable pictures is typically
faster and more accurate than for abstract pictures. A dual-coding account
for these findings suggests that concrete pictures are processed into verbal
and image codes, whereas abstract pictures are primarily encoded in image
codes. Recognition memory relies on two successive and distinct processes,
namely familiarity and recollection. Whether these two processes are similarly or differently affected by stimulus concreteness remains unknown.
This study examined the effect of picture concreteness on visual recognition
memory processes using event-related potentials (ERPs). In a convenience
sample of school-aged children involved in a study on child development,
participants (N = 96; mean age = 11.3 years; all right-handed) were assessed
on a continuous visual recognition memory task in which half the pictures
were easily nameable, everyday concrete objects, and the other half were
three-dimensional abstract, sculpture-like objects. Behavioral performance
and ERP correlates of familiarity and recollection (respectively, the FN400
and P600 repetition effects) were measured. Behavioral results indicated
faster and more accurate identification of concrete pictures as new or
repeated in comparison to abstract pictures. ERPs were characterised by
a larger repetition effect on P600 amplitude for concrete than for abstract
images, suggesting increased brain activity during the active recollection
of concrete pictures in memory. Hemispheric differences were observed
over anterior inferior electrodes within the FN400 latency interval, with
the repetition effect more pronounced over the left hemisphere for concrete
stimuli, which may reflect a facilitating effect from early verbal/semantic
processing.

A95
CONCEPT FAMILIARITY, FREQUENCY JUDGMENTS, AND SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE AFTER ANTERIOR TEMPORAL LOBE RESECTION
THAT SPARES THE HIPPOCAMPUS Stefan Köhler1,2, Ben Bowles1,2, Ken
McRae1,2; 1Department of Psychology, Western University, 2Brain and Mind Institute, Western University — In dual-process models of recognition memory,
the perirhinal cortex plays a specific role in familiarity assessment during
recognition, which is distinguished from the selective contributions of
the hippocampus to the recollection of episodic detail. Bowles and colleagues (2007) observed selective impairments in familiarity assessment for
verbal stimuli in an individual ( NB) who had undergone a rare surgical
resection of left anterior temporal lobe structures, with partial removal of
perirhinal cortex but sparing of the hippocampus. Here, we investigated
whether NB’s impairments extend to situations in which familiarity must
be assessed with reference to experience accumulated over the life-time,
rather than with respect to a specific laboratory episode (as is typically done
in studies of recognition memory). In familiarity ratings obtained for 541
living and non-living basic-level concepts, NB’s expressed familiarity levels
clearly differed from those of matched control participants; they were also
less consistent when examined again in a second session. We sought further
insight into this impairment by assessing her ability to make other types
of semantic judgments on the same concepts, and by testing her ability to
make frequency judgments based on varying numbers of exposure in a laboratory setting. We found only limited evidence for impairments in other
semantic tasks, including in graded judgments of typicality. However,
NB was impaired in making frequency judgments for repeated laboratory
exposures. The reported pattern of impairments suggests that judgements
of familiarity are particularly sensitive to the perturbations in conceptual
knowledge that result from unilateral anterior temporal-lobe lesions.

A96
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL AND BEHAVIOURAL MARKERS MAY
EXPLAIN SOURCE MEMORY DECLINE ASSOCIATED WITH OLDER
ADULTS Noeleen Brady1, Richard Roche1; 1Department of Psychology, National
University of Ireland, Maynooth. — Source Memory is a person’s ability to
remember any aspects of context which may be associated with an event.
When placing events into the appropriate context, older adults have more
difficulty than younger, suggesting that ageing causes a natural decline

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

51

Poster Session A
in source memory. The current study examined source memory retrieval
between young (18-30 years, n=14) and older (55+ years, n=14) adults at
computer-based source memory tasks including the Opposition task, the
Where-Who-What task (WWW) and a Source Modality task. During the
Opposition task participants learned a list of words. In the test, new and old
words are repeated at different stages (lags). In the WWW task, locations,
faces and words were paired. During the test, two of the elements were
paired correctly and incorrectly. In the Source Modality task, pictures and
auditory words were presented. In the test, the presented stimuli change
modality. Electrical brain activity was measured with an electroencephalogram (EEG) while participants completed the tasks. The data from the
memory tasks were analysed regarding accuracy and response times when
giving a correct or incorrect response. The groups were compared with the
young showing higher accuracies and faster response times. In addition,
key components of the event-related potentials (ERPs) were analysed, and
compared, to identify differences in processing between the groups. ERP
components for Source Memory tasks include a P100 at electrodes P7 and
P8 with young adults showing larger amplitudes. Future implications will
include an intervention to reduce the effects of source memory decline in
ageing.

A97
AGE-RELATED IMPAIRMENTS IN ACTIVE LEARNING STRATEGIES
THAT DEPEND ON ANTERIOR HIPPOCAMPAL-CORTICAL NETWORK FUNCTION Kelly Brandstatt1, Joel Voss1; 1Northwestern University

— Age-related memory deficits could stem partly from reduced engagement of learning strategies that are more prevalent in younger individuals. We tested this hypothesis by manipulating the ability for younger and
older individuals to engage in self-directed strategies when learning objects
and their locations. Subjects viewed object collections through a viewing
window that was self-controlled in an active-learning condition, thus
permitting self-directed learning strategies. In contrast, subjects watched
window movements in a passive condition that were recorded from the
active viewing of other subjects. Two experiments involving 40 older
(50-70 years) and 20 younger (18-30 years) subjects differed according to
whether the passive condition was yoked to the active viewing of younger
versus older subjects. In both experiments, passive study led to similar
subsequent recognition and recall performance for older and younger
subjects, suggesting that younger and older subjects perform alike when
learning strategies were limited via passive study. Older and younger
subjects benefitted from active learning. However, recognition and recall
were improved for younger subjects, but only recognition was improved
for older subjects. Our previous fMRI findings indicate that active-learning
enhancements of recall versus recognition differentially involve hippocampal-prefrontal versus posterior hippocampal-cortical networks, suggesting
that learning strategies are impaired by age-related neuropathology of hippocampal-prefrontal networks. Likewise, older adults less frequently used
strategies observed in the viewing behavior of younger subjects and that
were linked to hippocampal-prefrontal networks. These findings suggest
that age-related memory decline could result from decreased strategy use,
and that age-related hippocampal-prefrontal neuropathology changes the
nature of learning strategies.

A98
ACTIVELY UPDATING MEMORY VIA RETRIEVAL OVERRIDES ORIGINAL EVENT MEMORY EVEN WHEN CONTEXT IS REINSTATED
Donna J Bridge1, Joel L Voss1; 1Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine — Event memory changes due to retrieval (retrieval-induced
distortion, RID), either because (1) retrieval alters the original memory, or
(2) new and dominant traces are formed without modification of the original memory. We examined neural processing using a RID paradigm to
test these two possible mechanisms. Participants studied objects at specific
locations within a scene. Then, we manipulated RID during an updating
phase. Participants actively retrieved object locations or passively studied
predetermined locations during updating. Active and passive locations
diverged from originally studied locations, providing the opportunity
for RID. Moreover, updating occurred with different scenes than original
study, thus allowing us to determine retention versus modification of original event information. Memory for object locations was tested, whereby
participants chose among the original location, the updated location, and
an equidistant lure location, with objects presented in either the original

52

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
or updated context. Retrieved locations were often selected in favor of the
original locations, indicating RID. Remarkably, active updating caused RID
even when memory was tested with the original scene background, indicating that retrieval modified memory even when the original context was
reinstated. This was not the case for passive study, indicating that active
retrieval is key for updating. We previously observed electrophysiological distinctions during retrieval for objects that were subject to RID versus
those that were not, suggesting that RID stems from neural processing
during retrieval. fMRI findings from the current paradigm will be discussed with respect to influences of active retrieval on modification versus
retention of original event information.

A99
REPRESENTATIONAL SIMILARITY ANALYSIS REVEALS COMMONALITIES AND DIFFERENCES IN THE SEMANTIC PROCESSING OF WORDS AND OBJECTS Barry Devereux1, Alex Clarke1, Andreas
Marouchos1, Lorraine K. Tyler1; 1University of Cambridge — Understanding
the meanings of words and objects (e.g. “apple”) requires the activation of
underlying conceptual representations. Such representations are assumed
to be coded such that meaning can be evoked regardless of the input
modality. However, the extent to which meaning is coded in modality-independent or amodal systems has not been fully explored. We address this
issue in an MVPA fMRI study investigating the neural processing of 60
concepts, presented separately as words and pictures. For both modalities,
participants gave a category-level name for each stimulus. Activation maps
for each word and picture were extracted and used as input for multivariate searchlight-based representational similarity analyses (RSA). Three representational dissimilarity matrices (RDMs) were computed capturing (a)
low-level visual properties of the words, (b) images, and (c) the semantic
category structure common to both. We found strong correlations between
the visual RDM and dissimilarity patterns in early visual cortex for both
words and objects. For the category RDM, there was an extensive left-lateralized network of significant correlations with the object data, including the
left fusiform and lingual gyri, lateral occipital cortex, left posterior middle
temporal cortex (LpMTG) and left angular gyrus (LAngG). The word data
showed significant correlations more anteriorly into left MTG, as well as
in the left inferior parietal lobule, but no significant correlations in the
fusiform. As with the object data, there were also significant correlations
in LpMTG and LAngG, suggesting these regions may form part of a core
semantic network activated for semantic representations of both words and
objects.

A100
INCREASING GLUTAMATE EFFICACY AT THE NMDA RECEPTOR
ENHANCES THE CONSOLIDATION OF DECLARATIVE MEMORY
DURING SLEEP BUT NOT DURING WAKEFULNESS Gordon B Feld1,2,
Susanne Diekelmann1,2, Jan Born1,2; 1University of Tuebingen, 2University of Luebeck — Consolidating newly encoded information is facilitated by sleep,
but so far the neurochemical mechanisms involved in this process are only
poorly understood. Plastic changes, such as NMDA-receptor-mediated
long term potentiation, play a key role in virtually all forms of learning.
Consolidation of memory traces is accomplished through plastic processes
that are triggered by repeated reactivation of learning-related neuronal
firing patterns during sleep. In two placebo-controlled counterbalanced
within-subject experiments, differing in that the retention interval either
contained sleep before wakefulness or only wakefulness, we increased efficacy of glutamate-transmission at the NMDA-receptor by administering
d-cycloserine (DCS) and studied the role of glutamate signaling related
plasticity for consolidation of memories. Before receiving 175 mg of DCS
or placebo, the participants performed a finger-sequence-tapping task (procedural memory) and a word-pair-association task (declarative memory).
When receiving DCS, memory performance compared to placebo was significantly increased for the declarative task only if the participants were
allowed to sleep after learning, but not if they stayed awake. There was no
differential effect of DCS on procedural memory. Thus, we can conclude
that NMDA-receptor-related plastic processes play an important role specifically for the sleep-dependent consolidation of declarative memory.

2013 Annual Meeting

A101
THE CRITICAL ROLE OF POSTERIOR TEMPORAL CORTEX IN
THEMATIC OBJECT KNOWLEDGE: EVIDENCE FROM LEFT HEMISPHERE STROKE. Solène Kalénine1, Alexis Kington2, Laurel Buxbaum2;
1

Univ Lille Nord de France, F-59000 Lille, France, 2Moss Rehabilitation Research
Institute, Philadelphia, USA — Recent neuroimaging data indicate that identification of thematic relationships between object pictures, such as spoon–
yogurt or dog-leash, selectively activates the posterior temporo-parietal
cortex, compared to the identification of taxonomic relationships, such as
spoon-knife or dog-bear (Kalénine, Peyrin, Pichat, Segebarth, Bonthoux,
et al., 2009). However, whether the posterior temporo-parietal cortex is
critical for (versus simply associated with) the retrieval of thematic knowledge from visually-presented objects is still an open question. To resolve
this issue, performance in thematic and taxonomic object categorization
was tested in 33 left hemisphere stroke participants using the object picture-matching task from Kalénine et al. (2009). Regression and voxel-based
lesion-symptom mapping analyses of thematic categorization scores, controlling for taxonomic performance, revealed that the posterior temporal
cortex (Brodmann Area 37) is critically involved in thematic knowledge
retrieval from object pictures. This finding is consistent with recent data
from aphasic patients showing a critical involvement of the posterior temporo-parietal cortex in thematic knowledge retrieval from auditory nouns
(Mirman and Graziano, 2012), and provides further evidence in favor of
neuroanatomically and functionally distinct thematic and taxonomic
semantic systems (Schwartz, Kimberg, Walker, Brecher, Faseyitan, et al.,
2011).

A102
ERPS REVEAL FASTER ACTIVATION OF GRASP THAN SKILLED
USE INFORMATION DURING OBJECT PROCESSING Chia-lin Lee1,4,
Hsu-Wen Huang2,3, Kara Federmeier3, Laurel Buxbaum4; 1National Taiwan University, 2National Taiwan Normal University, 3University of Illinois, 4Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute — Recent evidence suggests incidental activation
of action manipulation information during passive viewing of objects. For
example, an event-related potential (ERP) study by Kiefer and colleagues
(2011) found that object perception and recognition, indexed by effects on
early sensory responses and the N400, were facilitated by prior presentation of an object affording similar actions. Data from our lab and others
support a distinction between two action subtypes. Whereas grasp-to-move
actions based on object structural attributes become active rapidly but transiently upon sight of an object, skilled use actions dependent on knowledge
of object identity and function show slower activation and decay (Lee et al.,
2012). It is thus possible that these action types contribute differentially to
early and late action-related facilitation of object processing. To test this, we
measured ERPs to manipulable objects (e.g., calculator) preceded by objects
grasped similarly but used differently (e.g., bar of soap), used similarly but
grasped differently (e.g., keyboard), or manipulated with completely different actions (e.g., earring). We found priming effects over anterior regions
of the scalp during an early time window (100-300ms) driven by ‘grasp’
primes only and a reliable N400 priming effect for both ‘use’ and ‘grasp’
primes. Our results are consistent with prior findings showing that object
processing is facilitated when action features are primed. Furthermore,
our findings extend embodied theories of cognition by demonstrating
that although both action types modulate object recognition, only structure-based information important for grasping affects the early perceptual
processing of objects.

A103
A NEURAL SIMILARITY SPACE FOR BELIEFS Anna Leshinskaya1, Juan
Manuel Contreras1, Alfonso Caramazza1,2, Jason P. Mitchell1; 1Harvard University, 2University of Trento — Knowledge of the world includes concepts that
lack sensory referents—for instance, the mental attributes of people. The
aim of the present project was to locate brain regions which can encode
such concepts, specifically of belief systems. During functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) scanning, participants viewed names of social
groups (e.g., Atheists, Evangelicals, Economists) and compared their
mental attributes: either their level of Spiritualism (spiritual to materialist)
or their Political Orientation (liberal to conservative). Behavioral piloting
was used to pre-determine the position of each group on each dimension,

Poster Session A
and to ensure the two dimensions were orthogonal. Using multivoxel
pattern analysis in a wholebrain searchlight, we identified brain regions
whose activation patterns were similar when thinking about groups with
similar beliefs, and different when thinking about groups with different
beliefs, depending on the attended dimension. This type of response would
be expected for brain regions that carry information about types of belief
traits. Such a pattern was found in portions of dorsomedial prefrontal
cortex, precuneus, and right temporoparietal junction. These regions were
adjacent to regions involved in theory of mind, as localized in the same
participants. The findings imply that this set of brain regions can represent
conceptual knowledge of mental attributes. Because mental attributes are
not perceived by the senses or given by any sensory property, the representations in these regions must be highly abstract. More generally, these
regions may contribute to our ability to represent abstract, conceptual
information about the world.

A104
DIFFUSION SPECTRUM IMAGING EVIDENCE OF DISTINCT WHITE
MATTER PATHWAYS IN VENTROLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX
Jennifer Barredo1, David Badre1; 1Brown University — Left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) supports the cognitive control of memory retrieval.
Univariate and functional connectivity evidence from fMRI suggests that
different subregions of VLPFC may participate in distinct cortical networks
that support separable cognitive control functions. Specifically, midVLPFC
(inferior frontal gyrus [IFG] pars triangularis) correlates with a dorsal fronto-parietal network, whereas anterior VLPFC (IFG pars orbitalis) correlates
with a ventral fronto-temporal network. However, it remains open whether
the subregional differences suggested by these distinct functional networks
are supported by the underlying white matter connectivity. We used
high-angular resolution diffusion spectrum imaging to address whether the
microstructural organization of white matter connectivity differs between
subregions of VLPFC. First, a seed-based analysis tested gross differences
in connectivity between aVLPFC, midVLPFC, and posterior VLPFC (pars
opercularis). Though all VLPFC subregions connected to similar target
regions, we found that aVLPFC was more densely connected to temporal
cortex while mid- and posterior VLPFC connections were more prevalent
to parietal targets. Next, we conducted a connectivity-based parcellation of
VLPFC using parietal and temporal seed regions. This secondary analysis
identified several smaller zones within mid-VLPFC: an anterior and ventral
zone that projects to temporal cortex through the uncinate fasciculus along
with fibers from proximal aVLPFC, and a medial and dorsal zone where
parietal projections are the most dense. These results generally support
models of functional heterogeneity within VLPFC, while revising the specificity of putative functional boundaries beyond gross anatomical divisions.

A105
BUILDING CONNECTOMES FROM THE COCOMAC DATABASE
USING COCOTOOLS Robert Blumenfeld1, Daniel Bliss1, Fernando Perez1,
Mark D’Esposito1; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley — Neuroanatomical tracer studies in non-human primate
macaque monkey are a valuable resource in the cognitive neurosciences.
These data serve to ground theories of cognitive function in plausible anatomy and, with the emergence of graph-theoretical analyses in the neurosciences, there is high demand for these data to be synthesized into large-scale
“connectomes”. However, properly reviewing this literature is difficult,
time-consuming and error-prone and computational and database solutions are needed to construct connectomes for graph-theory analysis. We
have developed an open-source Python toolbox, called “CoCoTools” which
gives users the ability to easily gather, compile and synthesize annotated
connectivity data from macaque neuroanatomy for making plots and for
performing graph-theory analyses. To do this, CoCoTools seamlessly interfaces with the CoCoMac database, which houses an annotated record of
nearly the entire macaque corpus (1905-2005) and implements tested coordinate-free registration algorithms, which allow for studies with different
parcellation/labeling schemes from across the literature to be synthesized
and translated onto a single graph. For making plots, CoCoTools contains
flexible graph utilities and for graph-theory analyses, CoCoTools can integrate with NetworkX, which is a powerful and freely-available Python
graph-theory library. Here, we demonstrate the capabilities of CoCoTools
and show that using CoCoTools to translate all of the data stored in
CoCoMac produces reasonable end-stage connectomes. Additionally, we
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

53

Poster Session A
describe the creation of a hybrid connectome that leverages data from the
most informative cases in CoCoMac and we compare the topological properties of this graph to other “single-space” graphs derived from CoCoTools.

A106
A WHOLE-BRAIN ANALYSIS OF CORTICAL ASYMMETRIES Christine
Chiarello1, David Vazquez1, Adam Daily1, Adam Felton1, Christiana Leonard2;
University of California, Riverside, 2University of Florida, Gainesville — Functional brain asymmetries are numerous, but, aside from a few areas such
as the planum temporale, there is limited knowledge about the extent to
which the cerebral cortex is structurally asymmetrical. The goal of this
study was to examine structural asymmetries across the entire cortex
and to identify which anatomical features of the cortex display the greatest left/right asymmetries. Asymmetry in cortical surface area, volume,
thickness, and curvature (secondary and tertiary folding) was computed
for each FreeSurfer cortical parcellation in a sample of 200 healthy young
adults. Asymmetries for surface area and volume were robust and strongly
correlated (r = .72), and were statistically significant for over 85% of the
regions: large leftward asymmetries were observed for superior temporal,
frontal and central opercular, ventral occipital-temporal, and superior parietal regions, and large rightward asymmetries were obtained for the anterior cingulate, angular gyrus, and posterior occipital areas. Asymmetries
for thickness were considerably smaller, and greater right than left cortical
thickness was observed for 70% of brain regions. Thickness asymmetry
was positively correlated with volume (r = .47), and weakly negatively correlated with surface area (r = -.17), asymmetries. Curvature asymmetries
were also very small, and significant for only 48% of regions. Curvature
was weakly correlated with both surface area (r = .15) and volume (r = .14)
asymmetries. These data suggest that most regions of the cortex are reliably
asymmetrical, with asymmetry manifested by increased surface area and
volume, but not increased secondary/tertiary folding.
1

A107
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CARDIORESPIRATORY FITNESS AND
HIPPOCAMPAL SUBFIELDS ANATOMY IN HEALTHY OLDER
ADULTS Mark Fletcher1, Rachel Boyd1, Kathy Low1, Nils Schneider-Garces1,
Andrew Freeman1, Edward Northrup1, Rachel Hopman1, Christine Ventrella1,
Benjamin Zimmerman1, Chin Hong Tan1, Gabriele Gratton1, Monica Fabiani1;
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — There is substantial evidence
indicating that both aging and fitness influence hippocampal size (Erickson et al. 2011). In a previous study, we (Fletcher et al., 2012) employed
Free-Surfer® to examine brain anatomy in a sample of 55 older adults (ages
55-87), and showed general effects of age and fitness in sub-cortical gray
matter regions, including the medial temporal lobe, basal ganglia, and
hippocampus. Our data also indicated an association between fitness and
scores on the modified mini-mental status examination. The current study
analyzes our data further to determine which subfields of the hippocampus
are affected by aging, fitness, and education. Although there were several
subfields whose normalized volumes correlated with age and fitness, when
all three of these parameters were entered in a multiple regression model,
age but not fitness effects remained significant. In addition, raw correlations of age and fitness with hippocampal subfield volumes were strongly
correlated across areas (r=-.55). Interestingly, there was also an area (the
fimbria) showing effects of education independent of age and fitness. These
data suggest that fitness and aging may have largely overlapping and difficult to distinguish effects on the hippocampus.

A108
3D ANATOMY OF THE CORPUS CALLOSUM IN EARLY- AND
LATE-BLIND SUBJECTS FROM SURFACE MULTIVARIATE TENSOR-BASED MORPHOMETRY Liang Xu1, Olivier Collignon4, Gang Wang1,
Yue Kang2,3, Franco Lepore5, Jie Shi1, Yi Lao2,3, Anand Joshi3, Yalin Wang*1,
Natasha Lepore*(* = equal last author contribution)2,3; 1Arizona State University ,Tempe, 2Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, CA, USA, 3University of Southern California, 4University of Trento, 5University of Montreal — Studying the
respective impact of congenitally (CB) versus lately acquired blindness (LB)
on the anatomy of the corpus callosum (CC) provides a unique model to
probe how experience at different developmental periods shapes the structural organization of the brain. We used a new framework that we recently

54

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
developed to understand shape change of the corpus callosum in blind
adults from T1-weighted MRI. Our data set consists of 14 early-blind, 11
late blind and 20 sighted control subjects. While other studies have looked
at surface differences in the mid-sagittal cross-section of the CC, we use its
full 3D shape. We manually trace the CCs, generate a conformal grid on
their surface and automatically segment them into superior and inferior
patches. We estimate the thickness at each vertex between the two patches
using a harmonic field. All CCs are fluidly registered to a common template. The deformation tensors from the registration give the direction and
size of the changes in surface area at each vertex of the grid between the
template and each subject. We combine the area changes and thickness
information into a vector at each vertex to be used as a metric for the statistical analysis. Results revealed significant differences in several regions
of the CCs between both blind groups and the sighted group, although to
a lesser extend in LB when compared to CB. These results demonstrate the
crucial role of the developmental period of visual deprivation in re-shaping
the structural architecture of the CC.

A109
POST-CHEMOTHERAPY BRAIN MATTER CHANGES IN FEMALE
BREAST CANCER PATIENTS Chris Lepage1, Carole Scherling2, Nancy
Wallis1, Rocio A. López Zunini1, Joyce MacKenzie3, Barbara Collins3, Andra M.
Smith1; 1University of Ottawa, 2University of California, 3Ottawa Civic Hospital
— Cognitive decline is a common complaint of breast cancer survivors following adherence to adjuvant chemotherapy regimens. The authenticity of
this purported sequela remains to be unanimously accepted in the scientific
community and its interaction with brain structure remains largely unexplored. This study aimed to examine neurophysiological changes attributable to chemotherapy exposure by investigating brain matter volumes
before and after chemotherapy treatment while also examining neuropsychological performance over time. Female breast cancer patients (n = 20)
and matched cancer-free controls (n = 20) underwent structural imaging
and completed neuropsychological tests before the patients underwent
chemotherapy and again following regimen completion. Structural images
were acquired using a 1.5 Tesla Siemens Magnetom Symphony magnetic
resonance scanner. VBM8 was used to conduct voxel-based morphometry
to compare white matter and grey matter volume differences both within
and between groups. Independent samples t-tests were used to compare
the domain scores between groups on the neuropsychological battery.
Compared to the healthy control group, the breast cancer group showed
reduced volumes in the left anterior cingulum, in the left middle occipital
lobe, in the left superior parietal lobe, and bilaterally in the caudate. Consistent with other studies of neuropsychological functioning in breast cancer
survivors exposed to chemotherapy, analysis of the neuropsychological
data revealed that the patient group performed more poorly compared to
the control group, specifically in measures of executive functioning and
working memory. The results of this study afford credence to the authenticity of ‘chemo-fog’.

A110
DISTURBED CORPUS CALLOSUM MICROSTRUCTURE IN THE
PRESENCE OF NORMAL VOLUME CHARACTERIZES PATIENTS
WITH ADULT ADHD A. Marten H. Onnink1, Marcel P. Zwiers2, Martine Hoogman2,3, Jeanette C. Mostert2,4, Cornelis C. Kan4, Jan Buitelaar1,5, Barbara
Franke1,4; 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Donders Institute for
Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Radboud University
Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands, 3Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 5Karakter Child and Adolescent Psychiatric University Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands — Background: Microstructural changes and volume
reductions in the corpus callosum (CC) are implicated in childhood ADHD.
There are however indications that, in adulthood ADHD, reduced white
matter integrity is persistent whereas CC volume normalizes. Our goal was
to investigate this in a relatively large adult ADHD sample. In addition to
commonly used fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD), we
calculated parallel (axial diffusion; AD) and perpendicular (radial diffusion; RD) diffusivities to white matter tracts which may offer additional
information regarding tissue microstructure. Methods: White matter integrity and volume of the CC were investigated in 87 adult ADHD patients

2013 Annual Meeting
and 98 matched controls. We used diffusion tensor imaging in conjunction
with tract-based spatial statistics to examine FA, MD, AD and RD within
the genu, body and splenium of the CC. Volumetrics of the CC and its subdivisions were determined using FreeSurfer software. Results: The body
of the CC showed lower FA (p = .005) and higher MD (p = .019) and RD
(p = .008) values in ADHD patients, compared to controls. Volume of the
CC did not differ between the groups (p = .633). Conclusions: Our findings
show that callosal volume becomes normal while disturbed white matter
integrity of the CC is persistent in adult ADHD. Abnormalities in the body
of the CC, the subdivision that contains the commissural fibers connecting
the somatosensory, auditory and motor areas may play an important role
in the pathophysiology of ADHD.

A111
COMPLEX REGIONAL PAIN SYNDROME (CRPS) CAUSES FINGER
AGNOSIA AND DYSCALCULIA VS Ramachandran1, Baland Jalal1; 1Center

for Brain and Cognition, University of California at San Diego — We report a
striking example of peripheral nerve injury possibly causing brain (CNS)
changes that result in cognitive/perceptual deficits. Following a small
injury to a finger (e.g., metacarpal bone fracture) there is inflammation,
swelling, redness (hyperemia), pain and reflex immobilization (“paralysis”) of the finger. After the fracture heals in a few weeks all changes
reverse in 95% of cases. But in some cases pain persists unabated; pain,
swelling, redness and paralysis then spread to involve the whole hand;
indeed sometimes the whole arm (CRPS). Based on a suggestion we made
in the 90’s it has been shown by several groups that mirror visual feedback (MVF) can be used to create “false” feedback that the “paralyzed”
hand can be moved with impunity. This partially alleviates the pain and
even reverses the paralysis, swelling and temperature permanently. These
effects suggest that CRPS involves a strong CNS component (e.g., McCabe,
2003). We report data on two patients with CRPS in their right hands. Upon
conducting several tests we found strong indications of finger agnosia and
dyscalculia (their medications did not affect other cognitive skills) and mild
apraxia in these patients. We suggest that the painful immobilization retrogradely produces a functional lesion in the inferior parietal lobule (long
implicated in apraxia). This lesion “spreads” into adjacent cortical regions
disrupting finger representation and even higher “cognitive” capacities like
arithmetic and judgment of chirality of ears, eyes, and feet etc. If these preliminary findings are confirmed they would represent a powerful example
of body/mind interactions.

A112
TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION PROVIDES CAUSAL
EVIDENCE FOR “WHAT” AND “WHERE” PATHWAYS IN HUMAN
AUDITORY CORTEX Jyrki Ahveninen1, Samantha Huang1, Aapo Nummenmaa1, John W. Belliveau1, An-Yi Hung1, Iiro P. Jääskeläinen2, Josef P. Rauschecker3, Stephanie Rossi1, Hannu Tiitinen2, Tommi Raij1; 1Harvard Medical
School – Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department
of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 2Department of Biomedical
Engineering and Computational Science (BECS), Aalto University, Espoo, FINLAND, 3Laboratory of Integrative Neuroscience and Cognition, Department of
Neuroscience, Georgetown University Medical Center — Although evidence
for distinct activations of object-identity and audiospatial features is accumulating, the existence of parallel “what” and “where” pathways in the
human auditory cortex (AC) has been questioned due to inconsistent
neuroimaging evidence. Here, in a full factorial design, we utilized MRIguided paired-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS, 2.5 ms interval) to induce transient deactivations of AC during sound localization and
identification tasks. Subjects were presented with Reference/Probe sound
pairs. In the localization task, subjects discriminated whether Probe arrived
from 5º to the left or 5º to the right relative to Reference (25º to the right). In
the identification task, subjects discriminated whether the amplitude-modulation frequency of Probe (1/6 octaves±40 Hz) was higher or lower than
that of Reference (40 Hz). Fifty percent of the trials did not include TMS
and therefore provided baseline reaction time (RT) data. For the other 50%
of trials, bilateral TMS was delivered 55–145 ms after the Probes, at either
the anterior or posterior non-primary ACs. TMS targeting was confirmed
with electromagnetic forward computations on each individual’s cortical
surface. The results showed a significant interaction between the task (location vs. identity) and TMS target (anterior vs. posterior): TMS to posterior

Poster Session A
ACs delayed RTs significantly more during localization than identification
performance, whereas TMS to anterior ACs delayed RTs more during identification than localization. This double dissociation provides direct causal
support for the dual pathway model of human non-primary AC.

A113
COMPLEX INPUT CREATES COMPLEX NETWORKS Michael Andric1,
Uri Hasson1; 1University of Trento — Continuous auditory inputs can vary
on multiple dimensions. Whether there exists a stable functional network
arrangement that processes inputs with different properties, or, alternatively, if the network arrangement itself dynamically changes in response
to an input property is unknown. Our current investigation targets this
question. We show that the brain’s network arrangement demonstrates
significant systematic re-organization as a function of a pivotal feature of
the input – its regularity. To examine whether network organization tracks
input regularity we presented participants (N=21) with four types of auditory series, while recording fMRI signals at 4T. The auditory series (150
s each) consisted of rapidly presented tones (3.3Hz). The series varied in
their regularity, formalized here by conditional entropy determining transitions between tones. To assess changes in network topography across the
four conditions, we analyzed every voxel’s connection to every other voxel
(connection thresholded at Pearson’s r > 0.5). From these per-condition
connectivity matrices we identified network modularity (“Q”, Newman &
Girvan, 2004), a measure of the network’s arrangement into modules, or
densely intra-connected communities. A group level analysis showed that
network modularity was highest for the most random series and lowest for
the most ordered series. Thus, the brain’s modular arrangement simplifies
when input regularity increases. This simplification is seen in the brain’s
arrangement into fewer, but more globally connected, networks. In other
words, complex input creates complex networks.

A114
ORTHOGONAL ACOUSTIC DIMENSIONS DEFINE AUDITORY
FIELD MAPS IN HUMAN CORTEX Brian Barton1, Jonathan H. Venezia1,
Kourosh Saberi1, Gregory Hickok1, Alyssa A. Brewer1; 1University of California,
Irvine — Introduction: To date, human tonotopy studies have not agreed
on the organization of core auditory cortical areas. Recently, an orthogonal dimension to tonotopy, known as periodicity, has been observed in cat
primary auditory cortex (Langner et al. 2009) and the primate midbrain
(Baumann et al. 2011). Periodicity refers to the preferred temporal receptive field over which an auditory neuron integrates, measured by presenting broadband noise to the auditory system at different modulation
rates. Methods: Tonotopy and periodicity were measured independently
in humans, using the fMRI travelling wave method that is the field standard in visual field mapping studies, modified into a sparse-sampling paradigm. Subjects were asked to attend to 5s of narrow- or broadband noise
at 60dB on each trial and indicate whether a change of 3dB at the midpoint
of stimulus presentation was up or down. Tonotopy was measured using
narrowband noise centered on frequencies of 400, 800, 1600, 3200, and 6400
Hz with a bandwidth of 100Hz, amplitude modulated with a frequency
of 8Hz. Periodicity was measured using broadband noise at modulation
frequencies of 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128 and 256 Hz, with a bandwidth spanning
our narrowband noise range (300-6500Hz). Results: Our findings extend
previous work done in cat and monkey to human, and we evaluate organizational models that were developed in these model species. Our findings
match human cytoarchitecture and provide an organizational framework
that not only clarifies the auditory core, but may apply throughout the hierarchy of the human auditory system.

A115
EFFECTS OF DECODED-EEG NEUROFEEDBACK ON AUDITORY
PERCEPTUAL LEARNING Alex Brandmeyer1, Makiko Sadakata1, Loukianos Spyrou1, James McQueen1,2,3, Peter Desain1; 1Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, 2Behavioural Sciences
Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 3Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics — Multivariate pattern classification methods are increasingly utilized
in cognitive neuroimaging research to analyze high-dimensional data at the
single-trial level. The present study made use of decoded EEG signals to
provide participants with online feedback regarding ongoing passive auditory perception of tone stimuli presented in oddball sequences. Ten par-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

55

Poster Session A
ticipants completed behavioral pre- and post-tests which measured their
individual frequency discrimination threshold at 500 Hz. Following initial
threshold measurements, participants viewed silent movies while EEG was
measured during passive listening to oddball sequences containing a 500
Hz standard stimulus and a deviant stimulus presented at the individually
measured threshold. The deviant trials in these sequences are known to
elicit the mismatch negativity (MMN) component of the auditory evoked
potential, which reflects ongoing pre-attentive sensory memory processes.
Data collected during initial EEG measurements was used to train a linear
logistic regression classifier, which was subsequently employed to decode
ongoing brain responses in four online-feedback blocks. Feedback was presented as a continuous gaussian blurring of the films viewed by participants
on the basis of classifier output for the previous ten deviant trials. Results
indicated an overall reduction in individual thresholds between pre- and
post-test measurements. An analysis of classifier performance revealed differences in MMN response amplitudes in deviant trials belonging to data
subsets split on the basis of the classifier’s online binary decisions. The
results suggest that decoding of evoked responses can track ongoing fluctuations in sensory memory processes, and can induce perceptual learning
effects in a passive listening setting when utilized for feedback.

A116
CROSS-SENSORY ACTIVATION OF ‘CLOVER LEAF’ CLUSTERS
IN HUMAN AUDITORY AND VISUAL CORTEX Alyssa Brewer1, Brian
Barton1, Jonathan H. Venezia1, Kourosh Saberi1, Gregory Hickok1; 1University
of California, Irvine — A primary organizing principle of visual cortical organization is the visual field map: neurons with visual receptive fields next
to one another in visual space are located next to one another in cortex,
forming one complete representation of visual space. Similarly, we have
shown that auditory cortex is organized into auditory field maps: neurons
with auditory receptive fields that prefer a unique combination of spectral
and temporal acoustic dimensions lie next to similarly specialized neurons.
Here we investigate the cross-sensory activation of visual field mapping
stimuli within auditory field maps and vice versa. We first defined visual
field maps V1-hV4 using fMRI and population receptive field (pRF) modeling (Dumoulin & Wandell, 2008). Eleven auditory field maps were defined
independently in these same subjects, using tonotopic and periodotopic
stimuli with the fMRI travelling wave method modified into a sparse-sampling paradigm (Barton et al, 2012). We then measured activation of visual
field maps V1-hV4 by the auditory stimuli and activation of the 11 auditory
field maps by the visual stimuli. We find significant activation by auditory
stimuli in visual field maps V1-hV4 and significant visual activation of the
11 core and belt auditory field maps. Such similar, efficient organization
may be ideal for combining visual and auditory information into a single
percept.

A117
CHOICE PROBABILITY ACROSS AUDITORY CORTEX

Joshua
Downer1, Jessica Verhein1, Kevin O’Connor1, Mitchell Sutter1; 1University of
California, Davis — Recent evidence suggests that the function of auditory
cortex extends beyond that of a simple feature extractor (e.g. Kilian-Hütten
et al 2011; Jaramillo & Zador 2011). Recent work in our lab has linked the
activity of single neurons in primary auditory cortex to the perceptual decisions of rhesus macaques (Niwa et al 2012). In order to address whether
and to what extent such a correlation might be explained by somatosensory, motor or cognitive influences, we trained a single rhesus macaque in
a choice task to discriminate between a standard and test noise stimulus
based on the presence of amplitude modulation (AM). The animal indicates
detection of AM with an upward joystick movement after stimulus offset,
and the absence of AM with a downward movement. Our preliminary
analysis using a “choice probability” measure (Britten et al 1996) reveals
an effect of the animal’s choice on firing rate in both core and belt auditory
cortex. At the population level, neurons are significantly more active on
AM detection trials, during the test, standard and response periods. At the
multi-unit level, a significant proportion of “units” show higher activity on
detection trials during the test stimulus and response period only. Effect
sizes appear largest during the response period. These results contribute
to the evolving view of auditory cortex as involved in, not only auditory
sensation, but also decision making.

56

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

A118
THE COMPENSATORY MECHANISM OF AUDITORY-MOTOR INTEGRATION IN SPEECH PERCEPTION Yi Du1,2, Bradley Buchsbaum1,
Cheryl Grady1, Claude Alain1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Centre
for Geriatric Care, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2University of Toronto, Ontario,
Canada — The motor speech system which is recruited in speech production is also implicated in speech perception as a compensatory mechanism.
However, how the involvement of motor speech system is influenced by
perceptual difficulty in identifying speech sound is still unclear. This study
used event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to measure brain activities in auditory-motor integration areas when young participants listened to speech syllables masked by broadband noise at different signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs). We found that participants’ accuracy
of identifying syllables increased linearly with the chosen SNRs. Both the
General Linear Model (GLM) analysis and the whole-brain multivariate
pattern-based analysis (MVPA) revealed different activity patterns in the
left premotor cortex by either silently speaking or listening to syllables
with different articulatory features (bilabial/lip-related /ba/ and /ma/ vs.
alveolar/tongue-related /da/ and /ta/). The MVPA also yielded articulation-feature-specific (lip vs. tongue) patterns in the Broca’s area, the left
inferior parietal lobule and the left superior temporal gyrus during speech
perception task. More importantly, the activities in all those areas increased
with declining recognition accuracy and decreasing syllable SNR with an
articulation feature specificity. The results support the articulation feature
account in categorical speech recognition and provide evidence for adaptive recruitment of the auditory-motor integration function as a compensatory mechanism in achieving successful speech perception.

A119
RELATING AUDITORY PERCEPTUAL ABILITIES TO DEGRADED
SENTENCE COMPREHENSION IN CHRONIC STROKE Paul Fillmore1,
Sigridur Magnusdottir2, Helga Thors1, Taylor Hanayik1, Daniel Fogerty1, Julius
Fridriksson1; 1University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, 2University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland — There has been a long-standing effort in auditory
brain research to relate patterns of hemispheric dominance for language
and musical stimuli to a dependence on the spectral and temporal components inherent in these stimulus classes. Despite a great body of work on
the topic, many contradictory results exist in the literature, and the picture
is still far from clear. Much recent work has focused on functional neuroimaging methods in healthy individuals; however neuropsychological
methods which relate brain damage to behavior can also play a key role
in identifying brain areas crucial for particular cognitive operations. In the
present study, we tested chronic stroke patients with both left and right
hemisphere damage on a set of non-linguistic auditory perceptual tasks,
as well as on sentence comprehension tasks in several degraded listening
conditions. Tasks were presented in an adaptive thresholding context, so as
to ascertain patients’ true level of within-task competence. We found that
both spectral and temporal task performance was highly correlated with
sentence comprehension abilities, both for speech in noise (in which primarily spectral cues are degraded) and time-compressed speech (in which
primarily temporal cues are degraded); double dissociations in task type
and sentence type were not observed. All patients had elevated thresholds,
but few differences between left and right hemisphere patients were noted.
In terms of localizing neural modules associated with task performance,
we found that impaired sentence comprehension was generally associated
with left posterior parieto-temporal lesions, while patterns for the non-linguistic tasks were more variable.

A120
DIFFERENCES IN REPETITION SUPPRESSION ACROSS SENSORY SYSTEMS IN 6-MONTH-OLDS: USING NIRS TO COMPARE
INFANT AND ADULT NEURAL FUNCTION Lauren Emberson1, Holly
Palmeri1, Grace Cannon1, Richard Aslin1; 1University of Rochester — Near
infrared-spectroscopy (NIRS) is uniquely poised to facilitate investigations
into the neural systems supporting infant functional neural organization by
providing many of the benefits afforded by fMRI (e.g., unambiguous spatial location of neural responses) without the same methodological hurdles
(e.g., rigid head stabilization). We aim to use established paradigms from
the cognitive neuroscientific literature to probe functional neural activity

2013 Annual Meeting
in 6-month-old infants. These paradigms provide strong hypotheses for
neural function, allowing a clear comparison between infants and adults.
Here, we investigate repetition suppression (RS) in 6-month-olds. We compared responses in temporal and occipital cortices (determined using a
database of infant structural MRIs) to auditory (familiar words) or visual
(smiling faces) stimuli (1sec SOA). Uni-modal blocks were either repeated
(a single stimulus presented 8 times) or variable (8 different stimuli). In two
experiments (N = 27), we found that, consistent with previous results in
adults: 1-Auditory stimuli produce responses in temporal cortex and repetition produces an attenuated response; 2-Visual stimuli produce responses
in occipital cortex. However, diverging from established patterns in adults:
3-Repetition does not modulate visual responses in occipital cortex; 4-In
Experiment 2, we increased the perceptual difference between visual stimuli but replicated identical responses in occipital cortex to repeated and
variable conditions; 5-While there is crossmodal activation (e.g. occipital
responses to auditory stimuli), the magnitudes are inconsistent across the
two experiments. These results suggest that, unlike adults, the infant auditory and visual systems respond differently to repetition and the visual
system is less easily modulated by repetition.

A121
NON-SYMBOLIC NUMBER REPRESENTATIONS PREDICT ARITHMETICAL ABILITY IN YOUNG, PRE-MATH CHILDREN Linda P.M.
Essers1, Lisa M. Jonkman, Erik van Loosbroek; 1Maastricht University —
Number representations can be measured by using the Distance Effect
(DE): When comparing two numbers, we respond slower if they are
numerically close together than if they are far apart. Relationships between
the behavioral DE and arithmetical ability have been found for children
as young as six years. Our goals were twofold: (1) We tested whether we
could replicate this relationship at a younger age, before formal math teaching; (2) using EEG, we examined the sequence of cortical number processes
in children and what role they play in arithmetic. Thirty-nine five-year-old
children performed number comparisons on Arabic digits and dots below
10 while behavioral responses and EEG were measured. Behaviorally,
DEs were found for dots and digits. Smaller reaction time increases with
decreasing number distance went along with better arithmetic, but only for
dots (r>.37). DEs were found in EEG event-related potentials on the amplitudes of the early peak P1 (~125ms), on the following N1 (~220ms) for dots
and digits, and on the late P2p (~340ms) for dots only. A relationship with
arithmetical ability was only found for the non-symbolic-P2p-DE: Smaller
P2p-amplitude increases with decreasing dot number distance were accompanied by better arithmetic. While studies with older children found a relationship between symbolic DE for digits and arithmetic, our study found a
non-symbolic basis for arithmetical ability that seems to involve relatively
late brain processes that may include access to number representations. The
absence of a clear symbolic relationship in five-year-olds may imply that
symbolic number representations are still developing.

A122
SHORT-TERM MUSICAL TRAINING ENHANCES PRE-ATTENTIVE
AUDITORY PROCESSING IN OLDER ADULTS Gavin Bidelman1, Sylvain
Moreno2,3, Yunjo Lee2, Aline Moussard2, Claude Alain2,3; 1University of Memphis,
Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Centre, 3University of Toronto — Psychophysiological studies demonstrate that long-term music experience refines
brain-behavioral mechanisms and provide robust enhancements to auditory function. The hearing advantages gained during musicianship afford
the possibility that music training might serve as an effective remediation
and/or training tool to strengthen declining listening abilities later in life.
To date, studies documenting music-induced auditory benefits have been
restricted almost entirely to examinations of young adults with decades of
music experience. Here, we aimed to determine whether or not short-term
music training could positively influence auditory processing in older listeners. Older adults (age: 58-82 years) matched in age, education, and IQ
assigned to either a music or a visual art (i.e., active control) training group.
Each cohort received classroom instruction in their respective activity by
a professional teacher over a period of three months. Pre-attentive auditory processing was assessed before and after training using two oddball
sequences consisting of a either music or speech sound contrast. Relative
to controls, music students showed increased mismatch negativity (MMN)
peaking with shorter latency when evoked by musical stimuli suggesting
that short-term music training enhances the automatic differentiation of

2

Poster Session A
trained auditory sounds. In response to speech contrasts, decreased MMN
activity was observed but only in the music group which may indicate
a down regulation in underlying neural mechanisms when processing
auditory information not practiced during the course of training. Results
demonstrate that experience-dependent auditory plasticity can persist late
into life and that intense short-term music training may offer a viable way
to improve listening abilities in older adults.

A123
REMOTE ODOR MEMORY IN GENETICALLY AT RISK APOE Ε3/4
AND Ε4/4 INDIVIDUALS WITH ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Stephanie
Oleson1, Claire Murphy1,2; 1San Diego State University, 2University of California, San Diego — Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder
characterized by progressive memory impairment and presence of amyloid
plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. The associated neuropathology originates in brain areas responsible for olfaction, which suggests olfactory tasks
as useful predictors of early pathology. A strong genetic risk factor for AD
is the ε4 allele of the apolipoprotein E (ApoE) that has been associated with
increased cognitive and olfactory deficits. Furthermore, homozygous ApoE
ε4/4 individuals diagnosed with AD are known to have heightened amyloid burden and a more rapid rate of cognitive decline. Deficits in remote
memory retrieval for odors have been demonstrated in patients with AD,
but no published studies have examined remote odor memory in genetically at risk AD patients. Remote odor memory was assessed for 32 ε4/4
and ε3/e4 age-gender matched AD patients through familiarity ratings
of common odor stimuli given as part of a larger task. Homozygous ε4/4
individuals produced significantly lower odor familiarity ratings (p=.009),
compared to the heterozygous group, while the two groups did not differ
significantly in MMSE scores (p>.88). The current findings suggest that
remote odor memory may be more impaired in AD ε4/4 homozygotes relative to other AD patients. This deficit may be indicative of unique neuropathology associated with ε4/4 individuals and suggests the usefulness
and sensitivity of odor tasks in detecting those at risk for AD. Supported
by NIH grant AG004085-25 to CM. We gratefully acknowledge the UCSD
ADRC for subject recruitment (P50 AG005131-28) and the SDSU Lifespan
Human Senses Laboratory for patient testing.

A124
ENHANCED AUDITORY CHANGE DETECTION IN MUSICALLY
TRAINED SCHOOL-AGED CHILDREN: A LONGITUDINAL
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Vesa Putkinen1, Katri Saarikivi1,
Pauliina Ojala1, Mari Tervaniemi1,2, Minna Huotilainen1; 1University of Helsinki,
2
University of Jyväskylä — Adult musicians show enhanced auditory
event-related potentials (ERPs) reflecting their highly tuned auditory discrimination skills. We investigated longitudinally how this enhancement
emerges during school-age by comparing the mismatch negativity (MMN)
and P3a responses of children who play a musical instrument to those of
age-matched children with no musical training. ERPs were recorded from
133 children at ages 7, 9, 11, and 13 to various changes in both physical and
more musical auditory features. The musically trained children showed
larger increase in MMN and P3a amplitudes with age than the control children especially for the musical sounds. No group differences in response
amplitudes were seen at the early stages of the training. Therefore, our
results strongly indicate that the superior neural auditory discrimination
and attention reflected by the enhanced MMN and P3a in musically trained
individuals are due to training and not pre-existing differences between
musicians and non-musicians.

A125
DISOCCIATING AGE-RELATED PATTERNS OF NEURAL ACTIVITY ALONG THE VENTRAL VISUAL STREAM DURING FACE AND
OBJECT PROCESSING Jenny Rieck1, Derek Beaton1, Ian McDonough1,
Hervé Abdi1, Denise Park1; 1University of Texas at Dallas — The ventral-visual
pathway is responsible for identification and recognition of visual stimuli. It extends from primary occipital cortex (which processes of low-level
perceptual information) to ventral-temporal cortex (which parses information into high-level semantic representations). Young adults show highly
specialized patterns in ventral-temporal cortex when viewing images of
faces and houses, but older adults show less specialized (i.e., “dedifferentiated”) patterns. Currently, it is unclear where this age-related dedifferCognitive Neuroscience Society

57

Poster Session A
entiation begins in the ventral-visual pathway. In the present study, we
used functional magnetic resonance imaging to characterize patterns of
neural dedifferention along several anatomically defined regions of the
ventral-visual pathway. While in-scanner, younger (N=35) and older adults
(N = 35) from the Dallas Lifespan Brain Study passively viewed grayscale
images of human faces, primate faces, cat faces, houses, chairs, and scrambled images. We used a derivative of partial least squares to investigate
regional differences in the patterns of neural activity associated with the six
image categories. Results revealed regional and age differences in neural
patterns associated with viewing each image category. Neural patterns in
younger adults discriminated between face categories earlier in the visual
pathway (i.e., inferior occipital) than in older adults. Additionally, older
adults showed a trend towards less specialized neural patterns in low-level
occipital regions (i.e., calcarine and lingual). These data suggest that neural
dedifferentiation found in the ventral-visual pathway begins early in the
processing stream and affects both early sensory processing and higher-level semantic regions.

A126
THE EFFECTS OF HEALTHY AGING ON MENTAL IMAGERY AS
REVEALED BY EGOCENTRIC AND ALLOCENTRIC MENTAL SPATIAL TRANSFORMATIONS Raffaella Rumiati1, Luca De Simone1, Nela
Marusic1, Roberto Eleopra2, Barbara Tomasino3; 1SISSA - International School
for Advanced Studies, 2”S. Maria della misericordia” Udine, 3”E. Medea” — Previous studies have suggested that mental rotation can be accomplished by
using different mental spatial transformations. When adopting the allocentric transformation individuals imagine the stimulus rotating in the picture plane, while when adopting the egocentric transformation they rely
on sensorimotor mechanisms. How these mental transformations evolve
during healthy aging has received little attention to date. Here we aimed
at investigating how visual (i.e., allocentric) and sensorimotor (i.e., egocentric) imagery abilities change with normal aging. Fifteen elderly and 15
young participants were prompted to solve two different laterality tasks
using either an allocentric or an egocentric frame of reference. Participants
had to judge either the handedness of a visual hand (egocentric task) or the
location of a marker to be either on the left or right side of the same visual
hand (allocentric task). When performing the egocentric task, elderly participants were less accurate and slower for biomechanically awkward hand
postures (i.e., lateral hand orientation). The findings revealed that healthy
aging is associated with a specific degradation of the brain sensorimotor
mechanisms necessary to accomplish egocentric mental transformations.
Moreover, failure to find a difference in mentally rotating left or right
hands suggests that aging does not necessarily evolve to impair non-dominant hand sensorimotor programs.

A127
HOLISTIC FACE PROCESSING OF OWN- AND OTHER-AGE FACES
IN YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS: EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL
EVIDENCE FROM THE COMPOSITE FACE TASK Holger Wiese1, Ulrike
Kachel1, Stefan R. Schweinberger1; 1University of Jena — Participants more
accurately remember own-age relative to other-age faces (own-age bias,
OAB). The present study tested whether this effect is related to more efficient holistic processing of own-age faces. Young adult and older participants performed a composite face task with young and old faces, in which
they indicated whether the upper half of two subsequent composite faces
was identical or not. The lower half of the second face was always different,
and face halves were horizontally misaligned in 50% of the trials. Both participant groups were more efficient to correctly identify same upper halves
in the misaligned relative to the aligned condition, and this composite face
effect (CFE), a marker of holistic face processing, was stronger for young
faces. Analysis of event-related potentials revealed strong misalignment
effects in the N170, which were more pronounced for young faces in both
groups. Critically, in the subsequent N250r a stronger misalignment effect
for young faces was detected in young participants only. Since N250r may
reflect the facilitated access of a perceptual representation of a previously
presented face, this finding is interpreted to reflect young participants’
more efficient representation of own-age faces as a whole, which may contribute to their OAB in memory.

58

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

A128
ANTERIOR-POSTERIOR AND LATERAL-MEDIAL CHANGES IN
P200 AMPLITUDE DURING A SELF-EVALUATION TASK Joel Alexander1, Tesalee Sensibaugh1, Justin Karr2, Eric Serres1, Tyler Grindstaff1, Ronald
Alexander3; 1Western Oregon University, 2University of Victoria, 3Wartburg College — The current study differentiated the influence of a self-evaluation
task on anterior and posterior cortical regions by comparing latencies and
amplitudes of the p200 event-related potential.The current study included
32 participants (xage=21.71, sage=3.08; 50% female) all of whom completed
three stages. An ERP auditory oddball discrimination task between a target
(15% occurrence) and standard (85% occurrence) was included across all
stages. The stages included 1) the standard oddball task, 2) the oddball
task with a secondary counting task, and 3) the oddball task with a secondary self-evaluation task (i.e., participants indicated if they were surprised by the occurrence of the target tone in the series). Previous research
has explored the impact of a self-evaluation task on the p300 component
of the event-related potential (ERP), observing an increase in amplitude
towards the cortical midline (Alexander et al., 2005; Grindstaff et al., 2011).
The heightened level of cortical resource allocation at the central brain may
indicate increased parietal involvement in a self-evaluation task compared
to other lobes. In contrast, the current study found the p200 amplitude was
similarly more responsive to the self-evaluation task, yet with a different
pattern involving not just anterior- posterior, but lateral-medial aspects,
F(6.95, 208.34) = 3.27, p = .003, η2 = .10. In contrast to the p300 study data,
the p200 did not show increased latency effects with the increased demands
of self-evaluation. The higher-order perceptual processing, modulated by
attention that the P200 is purported to represent, clearly has a unique precursor response compared to the P300.

A129
THE GENETICS OF MORAL JUDGMENT: INFLUENCES OF THE OXYTOCIN RECEPTOR AND ARGININE VASOPRESSIN RECEPTOR 1A
GENES Regan Bernhard1, Jonathan Chaponis2, Richie Siburian2, Patience Gallagher2, Roy Perlis2, Joshua Greene1; 1Harvard University, 2Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital — Two studies examine the relationship between common variation in the Oxytocin
Receptor and Arginine Vasopressin Receptor genes (OXTR and AVPR1a)
and patterns of moral judgment. Subjects responded to a standard set of
moral dilemmas pitting the rights of the individual against the greater
good. Previous research has shown that judgments favoring individual
rights (deontological judgments) are preferentially supported by automatic
emotional responses while judgments favoring the greater good (utilitarian
judgments) are preferentially supported by controlled cognition. Because
the above genes have been implicated in social decision-making, trust, affiliation, and pair bonding, we hypothesized that they may also modulate the
emotional processes that promote deontological judgment over utilitarian
judgment. In Study 1, 239 subjects were genotyped for 62 SNPs in 12 genes,
tagging common variation in OXTR and AVPR1a. We identified associations between OXTR SNP rs237889 and AVPR1a SNP rs1042615 and moral
judgment such that each additional copy of the minor allele of each of these
SNPs resulted in a reduction of utilitarian judgments (beta = -.05077, uncorrected p < .05 and beta = -.05536, uncorrected p < .01, respectively). Study
2 attempts to replicate the Study 1 results, which would not survive correction for multiple comparisons. A preliminary analysis of Study 2 data (N =
192) suggests effects consistent with Study 1’s results for both target SNPs.
These findings provide preliminary evidence that variants of the Oxytocin
Receptor and Arginine Vasopressin Receptor genes moderate moral judgment.

A130
NEURAL MARKERS OF DECISION CONFIDENCE Annika Boldt1, Nick
Yeung1; 1University of Oxford — Empirical evidence has accrued suggesting
that we are able to evaluate our own thoughts and actions by means of
both error detection and confidence judgements. This study investigates
the neurocognitive foundations of these metacognitive judgements, specifically in the context of perceptual decision making. Electroencephalography
(EEG) studies have identified the error positivity (Pe) as a measure indicating whether or not human subjects are aware of having made an error in
simple decision tasks. Error detection, we believe, can also be interpreted as

2013 Annual Meeting
a binary confidence judgement with reversed polarity. If this holds, the Pe
should provide an inverse index of confidence. Our study used a dot count
perceptual decision task with two difficulty levels. After indicating their
decision, participants signalled their confidence on a 6-point scale. There
was a clear modulation of the error positivity (Pe) by confidence. This effect
was independent of objective accuracy. Furthermore, we suggest ways to
predict confidence on a single-trial level, using Pe amplitude as a proxy.
The rationale of this approach is to measure confidence without explicitly
asking participants for their confidence rating, which could be useful in
future research as an efficient and unobtrusive index of metacognitive confidence.

A131
EFFECTS OF ACUTE STRESS ON ECONOMIC DECISION MAKING
UNDER UNCERTAINTY Magdalena Buckert1,2, Christiane Schwieren2, Brigitte Kudielka3, Christian Fiebach1,4,5; 1Goethe University Frankfurt; Frankfurt
am Main, Germany, 2University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 3University
of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 4IDeA Center for Individual Development
and Adaptive Education, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 5Donders Institute for
Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands
— Many decisions have financial implications and economic theory provides a good framework for studying decision making processes. Economic
decisions are often made in stressful situations, e.g., at the stock market,
but the effects of stress on economic decision making have not been systematically investigated so far. The present study examines how acute
stress influences economic decision making under risk using financially
incentivized lotteries. We varied the domain of decision making (gains
only, losses only, or mixed) as well as the advantageousness of the risky
prospect. Importantly, no feedback was provided to isolate risk taking
from learning processes. In a sample of 74 healthy young participants, 55
of whom underwent a stress induction protocol (Trier Social Stress Test for
groups), we observed increased risk seeking for gains in those reacting to
the stressor with a marked endocrine stress response (i.e., cortisol responders). This result shows that acute psychosocial stress affects economic decision making under risk independent of learning processes and points to the
importance of cortisol as a mediator of this effect.

A132
THE C957T DRD2 POLYMORPHISM PREDICTS DECISION-MAKING PERFORMANCE IN THE IOWA GAMBLING TASK Kaileigh A.
Byrne1, Darrell A. Worthy1, Jessica A. Cooper2, Alex Kline2, John E. McGeary3,
Christopher G. Beevers2, W. Todd Maddox2; 1Texas A&M University, 2University of
Texas at Austin, 3Brown University — Our study assesses the role of the DRD2
gene C957T single nucleotide polymorphism on performance in the Iowa
Gambling Task (IGT). Allelic variation in DRD2, a striatal D2 receptor gene,
has been linked to individual differences in avoidance learning. Specifically, individuals with the T/T genotype exhibit greater avoidance learning
than individuals with C/T and C/C genotypes. The IGT detects differences
in individuals’ responsiveness to losses and gains in decision-making. Participants repeatedly choose a card from four different decks on 100 trials.
Two decks (A& B) offer low probability, high value rewards while the
other two decks (C&D) give high probability, low value rewards. The high
probability reward decks also give larger losses and are disadvantageous
long-term. To maximize earnings, participants must evaluate the gains and
losses over the course of each draw. Genetic and IGT performance analyses
reveal that individuals with the T/T genotype outperform both C/C and
C/T genotypes. Modeling analyses indicate enhanced loss aversion in T/T
genotypes. These analyses demonstrate that T/T carriers avoid the highloss decks more that individuals with a DRD2 C allele suggesting that the
DRD2T/T genotype predicts heightened sensitivity to negative outcomes.
Because T/T carriers have increased D2 receptor density in the striatum,
they are more sensitive to learning when dopamine levels are low. Thus, it
appears that striatal dopamine levels directly influence avoidance learning.
Moreover, this learning enhances their decision-making performance in situations that require the identification and avoidance of losses.

Poster Session A

A133
IDENTIFYING SYMBOLS OF THE CONSUMER MARKETPLACE
FROM HUMAN BRAIN ACTIVITY Yu-Ping Chen1, Leif Nelson1, Ming Hsu1;
University of California, Berkeley — Recent research, guided by formal economic models, has made rapid progress in understanding the neural basis
of value representation. These idealized models, however, rely on well-defined and stable preferences in a human population that is famously fickle,
and prone to influence from subtle signals like brands, which may be unrelated to intrinsic value. Here we investigate the neural basis of brand perception by building on the well established semantic associations related
to brands, widely known as “brand personality.” During functional imaging, participants thought about the characteristics and personalities of 44
well-known brands (e.g., McDonald’s, Louis Vuitton, Apple). Post-scanning, they characterized each brand on the brand personality scale, which
describes each brand as a set of five orthogonal personality dimensions.
We used multi-voxel pattern analysis to predict the cognitive states of the
participant using their neural responses to the brands and their latent associations. To train the model, we reconstruct the relationship between the
personality dimensions and the brain activation. With those we were able
to predict the brain activations associated with the brands outside the training set. Once trained, we evaluated our model by comparing the predicted
fMRI images and the actual data. Our model successfully distinguished
pairs of previously unseen brands with accuracies significantly higher than
chance. With this paper, we take a first step to understanding how abstract
entities like brands influence our preferences and decisions.

1

A134
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN NUMERACY PREDICT NEURAL
ACTIVATION DURING FRAMING EFFECTS Christina Chick1, Valerie
Reyna1; 1Cornell University — Framing effects illustrate inconsistency in
decision making. When choosing between two options of equal expected
value, people tend to prefer the sure option when options are described
as gains, but the risky option when options are described as losses. In this
study, 29 fMRI participants completed a risky choice framing task . Framing problems were presented with three variations on the risky option:
The standard version (e.g., “1/3 chance 600 saved or 2/3 chance no one
saved”), the quantitative complement only (e.g., “1/3 chance 600 saved”),
or the qualitative complement only (e.g., “2/3 chance no one saved”). These
three versions of the risky option are predicted to cue different cognitive
processes, resulting in different framing decisions. Individual differences
in numeracy (ability to apply numerical concepts) were measured using
the cognitive reflection test (CRT; Frederick, 2005) and subjective numeracy
scale (SNS; Fagerlin, 2008). We used a multivariate approach to identify
interactions between numeracy and brain activity during framing decisions. Participants who scored higher on CRT and SNS showed increased
activation in DLPFC and inferior parietal lobule when making decisions
counter to their general tendency (i.e., non-framing decisions). However,
those effects occurred only when the risky option was phrased as “1/3
chance 600 saved.” When the risky option was phrased in the standard version or as “2/3 chance no one saved,” these participants showed increased
caudate activation when making non-framing decisions. These results support a cognitive process model for the framing effect and show how individual differences in numeracy modulate this process.

A135
FUNCTIONAL SIMILARITY BETWEEN PERCEPTUALLY DISCRETE
OBJECTS IS MODULATED BY DISTINCT CORTICAL NETWORKS
Evangelia G. Chrysikou1, Gavin K. Hanson1, William O. Wright1; 1University of
Kansas — Neuroimaging studies exploring the cortical organization of
semantic knowledge have revealed distributed networks in ventrotemporal and inferior parietal cortex that support the representation of different
properties of object concepts (e.g., color, shape, mode of manipulation).
Studies with healthy adults and semantic dementia patients have further
implicated anterior temporal cortex in the representation of object function. Although research has shown that ventrotemporal and inferior parietal regions support object similarity judgments on the basis of perceptual
properties (e.g., shape), the neural mechanisms that support functional
similarity of objects, particularly in the context of specific goals, have not
been fully explored. Here, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) to examine whether decisions about object functional similarity are
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

59

Poster Session A
modulated by the presence of impromptu goals and supported by ventral
temporal networks. Participants read a series of goals (e.g., to start a fire),
followed by an object that could be used to satisfy this goal (e.g., newspaper). They then selected which of two target objects (e.g., pen or pencil)
matched the first object in the context of the presented goal (e.g., a pencil
[made of wood] and a newspaper [made of paper] can be used to start a
fire). Target objects varied in how typically they were associated with a
given goal. Analysis of regions of interest as determined by independent
task localizers revealed contributions of frontotemporal networks in determining functional similarity for objects, particularly in low-typicality trials.
These results extend past research implicating this region in the representation of object function.

A136
HANDEDNESS AND CREATIVITY: MIXED HANDEDERS MORE
CREATIVE Adam Felton1, Thomas Holtgraves2, David Vazquez1; 1University
of California Riverside, 2Ball State University — The cognitive and behavioral
consequences of (consistent and mixed, not left and right) handedness are
still unclear. The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship
between consistent and mixed handedness and creativity. It was hypothesized that mixed handers would perform better than consistent handers,
presumably due to increased hemispheric connectivity. Handedness was
assessed with the Edinburgh handedness inventory. Participants completed two convergent creativity tasks, which differed on level of difficulty.
A median split was performed on the absolute values of handedness scores
to create separate consistent (N=46) and mixed (N=44) groups. Mixed
handers performed significantly (p = .019, η=.246) better on the composite
creativity task overall (M=6.36, SD=3.17) compared to consistent handers
(M=4.87, SD=3.05). Creativity differed as a function of degree of handedness and task difficulty. There was a significant (p=.003, η=.310) difference
between mixed (M=3.7, SD=2.23) and consistent (M=2.41, SD=1.76) handers
on the less difficult creativity task and no significant difference between the
groups on the more difficult task. The results suggest that handedness may
reflect an underlying neurological difference that may be related to semantic organization and creativity.

A137
NORMALIZATION OF BRAIN FUNCTION FOLLOWING EIGHT
WEEKS OF MATH TRAINING IN CHILDREN WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DYSCALCULIA Teresa Iuculano1, Miriam Rosenberg-Lee1, Jennifer
Richardson1, Caitlin Tenison1, Lynn Fuchs2, Vinod Menon1,3,4; 1Department of
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine,
2
Department of Special Education, Vanderbilt University, 3Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine,
4
Program in Neuroscience, Stanford University School of Medicine — Developmental Dyscalculia (DD) is a learning disability characterized by a specific
difficulty in acquiring mathematical skills in the context of normal intelligence and age-appropriate school education, strongly impacting academic
and professional success. Here we investigate the behavioral and neural
correlates of mathematical training in 15 children with DD and 15 typically
developing children (TD), matched on age, IQ, and reading abilities. All
children completed an 8-week one-on-one behavioral math training program with functional brain imaging data collected before and after training. During fMRI scanning children verified addition equations (e.g. 2+3
= 5). Training improved performance, especially in the DD group: prior
to training children with DD were significantly less accurate than their
TD peers (mean accuracies 73% and 83% respectively; p < .05), but did not
differ after training (87% and 91%; p = .4). Across time points, both groups
activated brain areas commonly associated with numerical tasks including
the bilateral anterior intraparietal sulci and the left fusiform gyrus, as well
as brain regions involved in domain-general cognitive control including
the superior frontal gyrus and the insular cortex. Prior to training, children
with DD showed hyper-activation in the left angular gyrus extending to the
intraparietal sulcus, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and superior frontal
gyrus, while after training activation levels in these regions did not differ
from TD children. These results suggest that 8-weeks of math training can
normalize brain function in regions important for math problem solving,
attention and working memory.

60

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

A138
NEUROBEHAVIORAL INFLUENCE OF CONTROL ON THE EXPRESSION OF INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN PROBLEM SOLVING
CAPACITY Kenneth Kishida1,2, Eun Joo Kim3, Ann Harvey1,2, P. Read Montague1,2,4,5; 1Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute, 2Virginia Tech, 3Yonsei University, 4Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, 5University College London
— Autonomy is highly valued in American culture. The ability to make
choices and determine one’s own fate is a defining feature in many democratic societies and is a value that percolates throughout our educational
and workplace environments. However, the neurobehavioral impact of
choice and the feeling of control is unknown. Here, we designed a cognitive
performance experiment with the purpose of determining the impact of
control and choice on the expression of individuals’ problem solving capacity. During each trial of a 92-trial functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) task – the “Choice-IQ Task” – participants were asked to choose
between two problem sets (e.g., set A or set B) with prior knowledge of
the likelihood that their choice would be executed. The likelihood that the
participant would control the question set was parameterized (probability:
{0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0}) and signaled to the participant on each trial with a
visual cue. In the event that the participant would not control the situation
the participants were instructed that the computer would determine the
question set to be solved. During the fMRI-scanned Choice-IQ Task, participants answered questions from Catell’s Culture Fair Intelligence (CCFI)
Test Scales 2A and 2B. Prior to scanning, participants performed CCFI Test
Scale 3A using paper and pencil with standardized testing procedures for
an estimate of their Intelligence Quotient and thus an estimate of their
expected performance on scales 2A and 2B. 103 participants performed the
fMRI-scanned Choice-IQ Task. Behavioral analyses suggest control is beneficial to some while harmful to others.

A139
BEYOND ALPHA: THE BETA BANDS INDEX ORIGINALITY DURING
DIVERGENT THINKING Timothy George1, Henk Haarmann1, Kristin
Grunewald1, Joseph Dien1, Polly O’Rourke1; 1University of Maryland, Center
for the Advanced Study of Language — While research in the neural signature of originality as indexed by EEG spectral power has established a
connection between increased power in the alpha band (often limited to the
right hemisphere or frontal lobes) and greater originality during divergent
thinking, little evidence of an association between beta band activity and
originality has been found. In the current experiment, EEG was recorded
while participants performed the insight problem task in which they are
presented with a brief scenario (“a light in the darkness”) and asked to generate as many explanations as possible within three minutes. Event-related
synchrony (ERS) was calculated with a pre-task eyes-open baseline as the
reference period and a 1-second interval ending 250ms before each button
press signaling a new idea as the activation period. Responses were categorized as high or low originality based on participants’ self-ratings. Results
in the low alpha band showed that high originality was associated with
greater ERS in the frontal lobe which confirms the importance of frontal
alpha in verbal creativity. In the mid beta band, high originality responses
were associated with increased ERS in the left hemisphere only. In the high
beta band, ERS was greater for low originality responses. These results are
consistent with previous findings suggesting the mid and high beta bands
are sensitive to different aspects of lexico-semantic processing that would
necessarily come into play during the generation and production of ideas.
These findings provide a new neural signature of originality and underscore the linguistic component of divergent thinking.

A140
NEURAL PREDICTORS OF INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN MATHEMATICAL KNOWLEDGE ACQUISITION IN EARLY GRADE SCHOOL
CHILDREN Anna Swigart1, Kaustubh Supekar1, Dietsje Jolles1, Miriam Rosenberg-Lee1, Caitlin Tennison2, Lynn Fuchs3, Vinod Menon1; 1Stanford University,
Carnegie Mellon University, 3Vanderbilt University — The ability to acquire
mathematical skills quickly is critical for academic and professional success. In early grade school, developing a thorough knowledge of simple
arithmetic facts provides a foundation upon which to build more complex
math skills. However, little is known about the neural mechanisms that
drive some children to acquire these skills faster than others. Here we use
2

2013 Annual Meeting

Poster Session A

a cognitive training paradigm to investigate whether pre-training behavioral and brain measures can predict training-induced performance gains
in arithmetic skills. Twenty-four third-grade children (ages 7-9) underwent
structural and resting-state functional MRI prior to an intensive one-on-one
eight week math training program. A significant shift in problem solving
strategy use from counting to fact retrieval was observed with training.
After training, performance (speed and accuracy) on a math verification
task increased significantly, with some children showing much greater
improvement than others. No behavioral measures, including standardized measures of IQ or mathematical abilities, predicted performance gains
with training. In contrast, pre-training hippocampal volume predicted
greater improvements in math performance. Furthermore, higher intrinsic
functional connectivity between the hippocampus and several brain areas,
including left dorsolateral and ventrolateral prefrontal cortices and basal
ganglia, also predicted performance gains. These novel findings suggest
that individual differences in the gray matter volume and connectivity of
brain regions associated with memory formation are associated with math
learning outcomes in children. Moreover, measures of neural structure and
function may provide a more accurate prediction of response to intervention than behavioral measures.

A141
OBJECTIVE AND SUBJECTIVE NUMBER REPRESENTATIONS IN
THE DORSAL AND VENTRAL STREAMS Vy A. Vo1, Courtney Lussier1,
Jessica F. Cantlon1; 1University of Rochester — Neuroimaging, neuropsychological, and neurophysiological studies have localized the “number sense”
to the intraparietal sulcus (IPS). Here, we test how the brain transforms
visual information into a subjective number representation. Specifically,
we test for a dissociation between actual (objective) and perceived (subjective) number in the dorsal and ventral streams. Subjects performed a rapid
event-related number naming task in the scanner, alternating between
runs of naming digits and naming the number of dots in a visual array. To
identify the regions of interest, each subject also completed a localizer scan.
In the localizer, subjects performed a matching task that required them to
compare the numerical value of dot arrays to digits, and a baseline condition in which they identified whether a scrambled stimulus appeared to the
left or right of fixation. The localizer yielded a neural response pattern that
included regions of the ventral stream (e.g., lateral occipital cortex, or LOC)
and the IPS. We tested neural responses to the number naming task within
the LOC and the IPS. In the IPS, the amplitudes of the neural responses to
dot arrays were best predicted by a combination of the subjective (named)
numbers and the objective numerical values of the dot arrays. In contrast,
neural responses in LOC to the dot arrays were only predicted by objective
numerical value. The data implicate a hierarchical model of number coding
wherein object-processing regions in the ventral stream pass information to
dorsal regions (the IPS) which then compute a subjective number estimate.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

61

Poster Session B
B1
RESTING STATE EEG IN CHILDREN AGES 3 TO 7 WITH AND WITHOUT ADHD Kelly Kehm1, Katrina Bridgman1, Margaret Sheridan1,2; 1Boston
Children’s Hospital, 2Harvard Medical School — Previous studies have utilized
resting state EEG to characterize adults and children who meet criteria for
ADHD. However, these studies have not examined children under the age
of 8 years, a time period in development which appears important for the
emergence of a stable ADHD diagnosis. This study aims to establish an
EEG signature for young children who meet diagnostic criteria for ADHD.
Comparing children between the ages 3 to 7 who meet criteria for ADHD
(N=18) to age and gender matched controls (N=18), we found significant
differences in resting state EEG. When controlling for Verbal and Performance IQ, results indicate a significant main effect of age in electrodes over
parietal cortex for power in high frequency bands, with ADHD children
exhibiting significantly greater relative beta power (F=5.43, p= .026) and
marginally greater gamma power than controls (F=3.05, p=.091). This main
effect of diagnosis was moderated by an age x diagnosis interaction. Across
the span of 3-7 years of age, children with ADHD exhibit more relative beta
(F= 5.8, p= .02) and gamma (F=3.2, p= .082) power contributing to total
power, whereas controls have the opposite pattern (decreasing contributions of high frequency across this age range). These findings are in contrast
with observations from previous studies where decreased contributions for
higher frequency bands for older children with ADHD were observed and
may indicate that there are non-linearities in EEG across early and middle
childhood. This study is an ongoing effort to identify diagnostic neural
markers in young children with ADHD.

B2
DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES IN NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF SPATIOTEMPORAL PROCESSING IN ADULTS AND CHILDREN WITH
THE FRAGILE X PREMUTATION So-Yeon Kim1, Ryu-ichiro Hashimoto2,
Tony J. Simon1, Susan M. Rivera1; 1University of California, Davis, 2Tokyo Metropolitan University, Tokyo — Mutations of the fragile X mental retardation 1
(FMR1) gene are the genetic cause of fragile X syndrome. Expanded CGG
repeats (> 200) result in methylation of the FMR1 gene, causing cognitive impairments. Although carriers of premutation alleles (55–200 CGG
repeats) have been regarded as cognitively unaffected, mouse models of
the premutation have demonstrated that the carriers reveal atypical spatiotemporal processing. To date, no studies have investigated developmental
changes in neural substrates of spatiotemporal processing in individuals
with the premutation. Using fMRI and a multiple object tracking task, we
examined neural correlates of spatiotemporal attention in children (age:
8-12) and adults (age: 20-40) with the premutation and age-matched neurotypical controls. Participants were asked to actively track moving targets in an array of distractors (“tracking”) or to passively look at the array
(“passive viewing”). To identify neural correlates of spatiotemporal attention, we contrasted neural response of tracking to that of passive viewing.
Consistent with previous findings, fronto-parietal areas, including SPL,
precuneus, and FEF, were involved in tracking versus passive viewing in
all groups. However, we found a significant interaction between age and
diagnostic group in activation of parietal areas associated with tracking.
Specifically, while no difference was found between control and premutation adults, children with the premutation showed significantly reduced
activity in left SPL and precuneus. These results suggest that early developmental differences in spatiotemporal processing are present in individuals
with the premutation, and underscore the importance of studying children
to understand the natural history of neurocognitive impairments in this
population.

B3
WHITE MATTER INJURY IS ASSOCIATED WITH VISUAL SEARCH
BEHAVIOR INDEPENDENT OF GENERALIZED SLOWING IN AGING
Samuel N. Lockhart1, Alexandra E. Roach1, Steven J. Luck1, Joy Geng1, Laurel
Beckett1, Owen Carmichael1, Charles DeCarli1; 1University of California, Davis
— A fundamental controversy is whether cognitive decline in aging can

62

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

be explained entirely by decreased processing speed, or whether specific
neural changes are responsible for some aspects of cognitive decline, independent of slowing. Advancing age is also associated with asymptomatic
cerebrovascular disease. We investigated whether age- and vascular-related
differences in white matter injury (white matter hyperintensities [WMH])
mediate age-related differences in visual attentional control, hypothesizing
that WMH exert effects on complex attentional control beyond just cognitive processing speed differences. We tested young and cognitively healthy
older adults on visuospatial search tasks indexing top-down and bottom-up
attentional control. Aging was associated with increased slowing and with
impaired search; white matter injury was independently associated with
visual attention impairments. Consistent with models that attribute cognitive aging to reduced brain network connectivity, these results conclusively
demonstrate that clinically silent white matter injury contributes to declines
in cognitive performance, independent of global cognitive slowing.

B4
LARGE SCALE SEARCH: INHIBITION, ATTENTION, AND SPATIAL
WORKING MEMORY Kate Longstaffe1, Bruce Hood1, Iain Gilchrist1; 1Uni-

versity of Bristol — Developing the ability to perform complex tasks such
as navigation requires executive functions of inhibition, attention and
memory. To study the development of these processes during large scale
search, we tested 80 adults and 140 children (aged 6-12) in a search laboratory with a large array of LED light switches embedded in the floor.
Participant’s task was to press the green light switches to locate a pre-selected target that turned red when pressed. Visual search literature shows
salient events capture attention (Yantis & Jonides, 1984, Theeuwes, 1994).
The salience of search locations was manipulated by having some switches
flashing and some static. Children were more likely to search at flashing
locations, even when explicitly informed that the target was equally likely
to be at any location. Participant’s attention was captured by perceptual
salience, leading to an automatic bias to explore these targets, and the magnitude of this effect did not vary with age. However, there was a strong
developmental trend in the number of times children revisited previously
examined locations. This body of work shows that both adult and child participants attend to salient targets more frequently during large scale search,
and that this attention toward salient targets can be mediated by tasks that
reduce or increase spatial memory load. The developmental trajectory for
ability to remember previously visited locations and limit revisits shows a
development in spatial working memory occurring separately from perceptual inhibition. This suggests individual executive sub-processes may
play different roles during search, with different developmental trajectories.

B5
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN THE FUNCTIONAL NEUROANATOMY OF TOP-DOWN ATTENTIONAL CONTROL DURING VISUAL
SEARCH David Madden1, Simon Davis2, Roberto Cabeza3; 1Duke University
Medical Center, 2University of Cambridge, 3Duke University — Neuroimaging
studies of younger adults have established that a network of frontoparietal
cortical regions is critical for visual search performance, particularly when
target detection is vulnerable to distraction. Behavioral studies have indicated that although some aspects of search performance undergo decline
during human aging, other aspects such as top-down control remain stable.
The goal of this study was to investigate adult age-related differences in
top-down attentional control during visual search, measured by functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Participants were 21 healthy, older
adults (60-87 years of age) and 21 younger adults (19-29 years of age). The
task was a highly efficient form of visual search, in which the target was
always a shape singleton (e.g., a vertical bar target among circle distractors). Both younger and older adults were successful in using top-down
attention (target predictability) to improve search performance. However,
the older adults exhibited a disproportionate vulnerability to distraction
from a highly salient distractor (color singleton), and target predictability did not provide any protection from distraction for either age group.
Analyses of the fMRI data yielded two distinct but overlapping cortical

2013 Annual Meeting
networks related, respectively, to detection of the target and distraction
from the color singleton. Variation in activation within these networks,
particularly in superior parietal cortex, suggests that a salient distractor
engages response competition mechanisms that are vulnerable to age-related decline. Although top-down attentional guidance remains available
to support target detection, during later adulthood, a highly salient distractor may engage response competition mechanisms that are less amenable
to attentional control.

B6
CONFLICT ADAPTATION AND CUEING EFFECTS IN YOUNG, MIDDLE-AGED, AND OLDER ADULTS ON THE SIMON TASK Paula M.
McLaughlin1, Susan J. E. Murtha1; 1York University — Conflict adaptation is
the ability to adjust conflict resolution based on previously experienced
conflict (a trial sequencing effect). Although few studies have examined
age-related changes in conflict adaptation, previous research has shown
that older adults are less efficient at task-switching (dynamically shifting
between tasks that require distinct cognitive processes) relative to younger
controls. As such, older adults should be more sensitive to trial sequencing
effects and show increased conflict adaptation. The present study explored
conflict adaption in young (ages 18-25), middle-aged (ages 40-54), and older
(ages 65-82) adults, and examined whether age-related changes can be mitigated with auditory cues. Participants were administered a cued Simon
task and were required to indicated the color of a target presented on the
left/right of a fixation point by pressing a left/right response key. The
target location was either congruent or incongruent with the response key,
with the Simon effect referring to faster reaction times on congruent relative to incongruent trials. Our results showed an age-related increase in the
Simon effect when the previous trial was congruent (no conflict resolution
required). Consistent with previous research, a reverse Simon effect was
observed when the previous trial was incongruent and conflict resolution
was required. This conflict adaptation effect was exaggerated with increasing age. Interestingly, these age-related increases in trial sequencing effects
were reduced when participants were provided with informative auditory
cues that oriented attention. Our findings support the frontal hypothesis of
aging, and suggest that age-related deficiencies in mental flexibility can be
mitigated with exogenous support.

B7
HOW DOES EXOGENOUS ORIENTING OF ATTENTION MODULATE
VISUAL CONSCIOUSNESS? Dimitri Bayle1, Antoni Valero-Cabre1, Ana
Chica2, Catherine Tallon-Baudry3, Paolo Bartolomeo1,4; 1CRICM and Université
Pierre et Marie Curie (UPMC), Paris, France, 2Department of Experimental Psychology. University of Granada, Spain., 3Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives, INSERM-ENS U960, Paris, France, 4Department of Psychology, Catholic
University, Milan, Italy — The relationship between attention and consciousness is highly debated. If endogenous attention has been widely studied,
the role of exogenous orienting of attention has been less explored. Recent
studies demonstrate that exogenous attention is important for conscious
perception modulation. However, it remains unknown whether exogenous
attention alone is sufficient to triggered conscious perception and what
are the neurophysiological mechanisms implicated. We explore here the
neural correlates of exogenous attention and consciousness during visual
processing. We recorded magneto-encephalographic (MEG) signals while
subjects were engaged in the detection/discrimination of near-threshold
stimuli presented in peripheral visual field. A non-informative peripheral
cue was briefly presented; follows by a near-threshold grating presented
for 16ms in one hemifield. Subjects were asked to discriminate the grating orientation and to subjectively determine if the target was absent or
present. Cued target was more often reported as seen(59%) than uncued
target(50%). However, signal detection theory analysis showed no d’ difference between cued and uncued targets, thus suggesting that visual
sensitivity was not enhanced by non-predictive cues. On the other hand,
response criterion was more liberal for cued targets (lower c criterion) than
for uncued targets. Preliminary MEG analyses show that beta and gamma
oscillations responses over the motor cortex were increased for seen than
for unseen target, before the subjects’ response. Taken together, our results
indicate that exogenous attention alone is not sufficient for enhancing

Poster Session B
visual sensitivity. It can, however, modify our subjective reports by making
our criterion choice more liberal, perhaps by modifying brain activity in
motor-related regions.

B8
THE OSCILLATORY DYNAMICS OF WILLED ATTENTION. Jesse Bengson1,2, Todd Kelley1,2, Ron Mangun1,2; 1Center for Mind and Brain, 2UC-Davis
— A fundamental question for understanding voluntary attention is how
the brain willfully allocates attention (Taylor et al., 2008; Hopfinger et al.,
2010). In the present study, participants engaged in a trial-by-trial spatial
attention paradigm in which the neural correlates of instructed (cued)
attention were directly compared with willed (choice) attention, where
subjects chose where to attend. For willed attention, we observed that a
choice to attend to the left or right was predicted by the laterality of alpha
power over the occipital cortex prior to the attentional choice. In the postcue interval, we observed a significant increase in frontal theta power and
a reduction in occipital alpha power for the choice trials relative to cued
trials. Across participants, we also observed that the degree to which the
pre-choice alpha laterality predicted subsequent decisions, covaried with
the post-choice specific reduction of occipital alpha power. Furthermore the
fMRI contrast of choice versus cued trials revealed a network of activation
for willed attention that included the left and right Anterior Insula (aINS),
left Middle Frontal Gyrus (MFG), and the Anterior Cingulate Cortex
(ACC). Interestingly, the only site of choice-trial specific BOLD activation
that covaried with the effect of pre-choice alpha power on decisions was
the right aINS. These findings illustrate the oscillatory dynamics of willed
attention and provide a functional link between pre-choice alpha laterality,
post-choice alpha power and the right aINS.

B9
THE VISUAL BINDING PROBLEM AND THE EFFECTS OF ORIENTING ATTENIONAL CUES IN VISUAL SHORT TERM MEMORY Joshua
Chauvin1, Nick Myers1, Kia Nobre1, Glyn Humphreys1; 1University of Oxford —
An ongoing problem in cognitive neuroscience relates to the way in which
visual features are processed, bound, and maintained as unified percepts
in Visual Short Term Memory (VSTM). In particular, it remains unclear to
which extent focused or unfocused attention modifies the maintenance of
feature bindings on change detection tasks in VSTM. The following study
examined the effects of orienting attention to a VSTM representation and
the degree to which different types of attentional cues (invalid, neutral,
and valid retro-cues) affect the binding of visual information. Participants
decided if a probe image was previously presented to them as an object in a
memory display. Each probe either carried one feature from an item in the
display (the feature condition) or it contained two features from different
stimuli (the form-colour conjunction condition). It was found that validly
cueing attention to the location of an item in memory selectively reduced
errors in the conjunction condition. The results suggest a positive role for
attention in maintaining feature binding.

B10
SPATIAL AND NON-SPATIAL PROCESSING OF FEATURE CONJUNCTIONS: AN EVENT -RELATED FMRI STUDY Emma Cheetham1,
John Evans1, Chris Chambers1; 1Cardiff University — Feature binding is crucial
for cohesive perception. Spatial attention has been traditionally regarded as
integral for successful binding, however the role of temporal selection is
less clear. Using event-related fMRI, we explored the different processing
streams engaged when subjects explicitly perform temporal, spatial and
feature-based visual judgements. In particular, we asked whether there is a
unique neural signature associated with spatial or temporal attention over
and above that of a feature conjunction task. We also sought to test the existence of a ‘when’ pathway that is functionally separate from the well-characterized dorsal and ventral routes of the visual system. Critically, and
unlike previous studies, we held the task difficulty and stimuli constant
throughout all conditions. Whole brain analysis and retinotopic mapping
during spatial attention revealed an expected neural network including V1,
bilateral intraparietal sulci, and bilateral inferior frontal gyri. We found no
evidence, however, of an anatomically specialized mechanism for temporal
attention relative to spatial attention, nor did we observe any unique neural
signature for resolving feature conjunctions relative to spatial or temporal

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

63

Poster Session B
attention. Taken together, these findings provide no evidence for a unique,
anatomically distinct system for feature binding, which may instead be
coordinated by networks that control visuospatial attention.

B11
TRUNK-RIGHT ORIENTATION IMPROVES FOCUSED ATTENTION
TASK PERFORMANCE AT FAR-ECCENTRIC LOCATIONS OF THE
VISUAL FIELD Jiaqing Chen1, Sohaib Mohammad1, Matthias Niemeier1,2;
University of Toronto, 2Center for Vision Research, York University — Body
schema is indispensable for sensorimotor control and learning, but it
remains unclear whether it is associated with cognitive functions. Data
from patients with spatial neglect support this view; yet observations in
healthy participants are inconsistent. Here we conducted 3 sets of experiments examining influences of trunk position (30° left, straight ahead,
30° right) on different forms of spatial cognition. The first set (Experiment 1A and 1B) probed spatial attention which required participants to
detect Gabors appearing at random intervals and locations. The second
set examined spatial working memory using a change-detection paradigm
(Experiment 2A) and a two-back paradigm (Experiment 2B). The third set
(Experiment 3A, 3B, and 3C) examined the effects of valid or invalid cues
on spatial shifts of focused attention: Participants quickly responded to a
target that appeared left or right of the fixation point, preceded by a cue
on the same or opposite side. In none of the experiments did trunk turns
alter performance in the left vs. right visual field in an ipsiversive fashion as expected based on reports in neglect patients. However, trunk-right
position improved performance at far-eccentric locations of the visual field
in one spatial attention experiment (1A) and one working memory experiment (2B). Our results demonstrated that proprioceptive manipulations of
the body schema did not modulate spatial cognition in the same fashion as
reported in neglect patients, probably because spatial neglect reflects a state
of the lesioned brain that is importantly different from that of the normally
functioning brain.

1

B12
VISUAL WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY MEDIATES THE SPEED
OF ATTENTIONAL REDEPLOYMENT Gregory Christie1, John McDonald1;
Simon Fraser University — According to the theory of automatic attentional capture the most salient item in a scene will always attract attention first, even if the item is a task-irrelevant distractor. However, three
lines of evidence complicate this theory: (i) recent ERP results from studies
investigating the N2pc, a neuro-electric index of attentional selection, have
demonstrated that observers can prevent capture by salient distractors if
the features of the distractor are fixed over trials; (ii) when task relevant,
salient items elicit an earlier N2pc than less-salient items; (iii) individuals
with greater visual working memory capacity (K) can override capture by
salient distractors. Here, we asked if salience would influence the order
of attentional selection when two items – one more salient than the other
– we equally task relevant. Participants completed a visual search task in
which they evaluated the contents of both a highly salient color singleton
(typically used as a distractor) and a less salient shape singleton. Although
not specifically instructed to do so, attention, as indexed by the N2pc, was
reliably deployed first to the more salient color target and subsequently
to the less salient shape target. Importantly, high-K observers were faster
to disengage attention from the salient target and redirect it towards the
less salient target. These results confirm: (i) that visual salience does indeed
dictate the order of attentional selection, all other things equal; and (ii) that
the relative importance of physical salience towards selection is mediated
by innate differences in visual working memory capacity.

1

B13
REDUCED CORTICAL MEG ACTIVITY ASSOCIATED WITH RE-ORIENTING VISUOSPATIAL ATTENTION IN PATIENTS WITH TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Corby L. Dale1,2, Tracy L. Luks1, Leighton Hinkley1,
Anne M. Findlay1, Phiroz E. Tarapore1, Shelly R. Cooper1, Sara C. LaHue1,
Hana A. Lee1, Suzanne M. Honma1, Danielle Mizuiri1, Srikantan S. Nagarajan1,
Pratik Mukherjee1; 1University of California, San Francisco, 2Northern California Institute for Research and Education — Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI)
often produces chronic deficits in cognitive function that affect patients’
quality of life. To investigate attention-related neural activity differences

64

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
associated with TBI, we measured whole-head magnetoencephalography
(MEG) signals during a cued visuospatial attention task. MEG data from
nineteen patients with mild-to-moderate symptomatic TBI and eighteen
healthy control participants were analyzed using an adaptive spatial filtering technique (NUTMEG, http://bil.ucsf.edu/nutmeg), and co-registered to individual brain anatomy prior to normalizing images for withinand between-group comparisons. We examine high gamma band activity
(63-117 Hz) arising from Incongruently- versus Congruently-cued target
stimuli. Using Family-wise Error (FWE) correction for comparisons across
voxels, in healthy participants we observe activations in Left Middle Frontal Gyrus (LMFG) from 100 to 175 ms, followed by largely-concurrent Right
hemisphere activity from 175 to 300 ms in areas of Inferior Parietal Sulcus
(RIPS), Insula, Putamen, and Superior Temporal Cortex and, subsequently,
at ~325ms Left Inferior Frontal Cortex for a 50 ms period. In these regions,
TBI patients exhibited reduced activity relative to healthy participants and,
as a group, showed no alternate compensatory pattern of activity that survived the FWE correction threshold. Linear discriminant analyses revealed
that activity levels in just 2 of these 5 regions, LMFG and RIPS, reliably
predicted injury status. Furthermore, activity in LMFG showed negative
correlation with both the Head Injury Symptom Checklist for post-concussive syndrome (HISC-PCS) and a measure of Cognitive Failures. These
results suggest reduced activation due to TBI within a frontotemporal highgamma oscillatory network subserving spatial attention.

B14
AMYGDALO – PREFRONTAL CONNECTIVITY PREDICTS NONCONSCIOUS ATTENTION BIAS TO THREAT Joshua Carlson1, Jiook Cha1,
Eddie Harmon-Jones2, Lillianne Mujica-Parodi1, Greg Hajcak1; 1Stony Brook
University, 2University of New South Wales — Increased attentional bias to
threat is gaining recognition as a causal factor in the development anxiety.
Yet, little is known about the anatomical pathway by which threat biases
attentional processing and the influence of genetics on this relationship.
Here, we reconstructed the entire amygdalo–prefrontal white matter tract
(i.e., uncinate fasciculus; N=40) using diffusion tensor weighted MRI to test
the hypothesis that greater fiber integrity correlates with greater nonconscious attentional bias to threat as measured by a backward masked dotprobe task. Structural equation modeling was used to test the relationship
between amygdala–prefrontal track integrity, brain-derived nerve growth
factor genotype (BDNF–Val66Met), and attentional bias to nonconscious
threat. Greater structural integrity within the amygdala–prefrontal tract is
associated with a greater bias in attention to nonconscious threat. Further,
the results suggest that the BDNF-Val66Met polymorphism influences the
integrity of the amygdala–prefrontal pathway and, in turn, attentional bias
to nonconscious threat. In a separate sample (N=15), we then addressed the
extent to which nonconscious attentional bias to threat is associated with
amygdala –anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) intrinsic functional connectivity. Additionally, we explored the relationship between functional and
structural amygdala–ACC connectivity. Within the uncinate fasciculus, we
found significant foci, near the ACC, in which fiber integrity predicted both
facilitated attentional bias to nonconscious threat and enhanced amygdala–
ACC functional connectivity. Collectively, our structural and functional
results suggest that, in high bias individuals, prefrontal cognition and
attentional processing is “biased” by nonconscious threat signals relayed
from the amygdala via the uncinate fasciculus.

B15
EFFECTS OF AUDITORY EMOTIONAL DISTRACTION WHILE DRIVING: AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL APPROACH Michelle Chan1,
Anthony Singhal1; 1University of Alberta — Roadside billboards containing
negative and positive emotional content have been shown to influence
driving behavior by modulating attention; however, the impact of auditory
emotional distractions on driving has not been investigated. Our objective
was to examine the behavioral and event-related potential (ERP) effects
elicited by words of varied emotional valence during driving in a dualtask paradigm. ERPs were recorded while participants listened to sets of
neutral, negative, and positive words that were presented alone and while
participants operated a driving simulator. Negative distractions were
shown to impair driving performance to a greater extent than positive distractions. ERP amplitudes to the distractions were reduced during driving compared to non-driving, revealing a division of cognitive resources
under dual-task demands. Negative slow wave (NSW) amplitudes were

2013 Annual Meeting
reduced to emotional compared to neutral distractions, presumably reflecting less recruitment of working memory resources when processing emotion. These effects were more clear-cut over frontal compared to central
electrodes, suggesting at least two different neural generators of NSW.
This was accompanied by a larger late positive potential (LPP) elicited by
emotional compared to neutral distractions. Overall, these results indicate
that auditory emotional distractions are distinctly processed in the brain
and can differentially influence driving performance depending on valence
(negative versus positive). One implication of these findings is that driver
distraction can be mitigated by reducing auditory sources of distractions,
particularly those high in negative emotional content.

B16
TOWARDS A COMPUTATIONAL UNDERSTANDING OF HOW THE
BRAIN LEARNS TO PREDICT PAIN Luke Chang1, Marieke Jepma1, Tal
Yarkoni1, Tor Wager1; 1University of Colorado — Understanding the neural
computations underlying how expectancies are developed has received
surprisingly little attention despite their central role in theories of learning, behavior, and value. Although many studies have used reinforcement
learning models to localize brain regions that correlate with learned value,
they do not typically treat the brain as a learner and model the learning
process in different brain systems. Thus, they cannot capture differences
in learning rates across the brain. Here, we implemented a novel method
of estimating model parameters by treating brain regions as learners and
directly fitting reinforcement learning models to fMRI data. Twenty-seven
participants learned associations between visual cues and different levels
of heat pain applied to their left forearm. Each cue was associated with a
different distribution of noxious heat intensity. On each trial, participants
indicated which of two cues they believed was associated with the lowest
pain. Then, the computer selected one of the two cues, and participants
experienced the associated painful stimulation and rated the intensity of
the pain they experienced. We fit a Rescorla-Wagner reinforcement-learning model directly to each voxel’s activation at the time of pain administration, by training it on participants’ subjective pain ratings. Voxels
that encoded expected pain—with different learning rates depending on
the brain region—were identified using a model comparison procedure,
and included bilateral amygdalae, ventral striatum, and medial prefrontal cortex. Cross-validated support vector machine analyses showed that
activity in these ‘expectancy systems’ accurately predicted participants’
avoidance decisions.

B17
THE ROLE OF EMOTION AND ATTENTION IN SEMANTIC PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FROM N400 Dorothee Chwilla1, Johanne Tromp1;
1
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour — Does emotional state
affect language processing? Little yet is known about the interface between
language and emotion. With regard to semantic processing we have shown
that emotional state modulates the standard N400 effect. In particular, the
N400 cloze probability effect was strongly reduced in a sad mood compared
to a happy mood (Chwilla, Virgillito, & Vissers, 2011). In the present study
we explored the relation between emotion and attention in language comprehension. To this aim we combined an emotion manipulation (inducing
a sad mood versus a happy mood) with an attention manipulation (comparing a deep semantic processing task with a shallow processing task) and
studied the effects on the N400 cloze effect. The key question was whether
the effects of emotional state and attention are additive or interactive. The
main findings were as follows: The mood induction was successful. For
N400 a three-way interaction between emotional state, attention and cloze
probability was observed. For the happy mood condition a task by cloze
interaction reflected an N400 effect in the semantic task versus absence of
an N400 effect in the shallow processing task. Unexpectedly, for the sad
mood condition a clear N400 effect occurred across tasks. Follow up analyses confirmed that an N400 effect for the shallow task was present for the
sad mood but not for the happy mood condition. The present study reveals
different N400 patterns as a function of emotional state and attention, indicating that the effects of emotional state are not fixed but context-dependent.

Poster Session B

B18
IMPROVING SOCIAL COGNITION IN HEALTHY AGING VIA COMPUTERIZED COGNITIVE TRAINING Sawsan Dabit1, Mor Nahum1,2, Thomas
Van Vleet1,3; 1Brain Plasticity Institute, San Francisco CA, 2University of California, Berkeley, CA, 3Department of Veteran Affairs, Martinez CA — Declines in
multiple cognitive domains have been well documented in healthy aging.
Recently, it has been shown that a segment of this population also exhibits
declines in social cognition (e.g., affect recognition, theory of mind, social
perception; see Kemp et al. 2012). Since computerized cognitive training
has been efficacious in improving cognitive function in healthy aging (e.g.
Lussier et al. 2012), we reasoned that social cognition might also benefit
from similar methods. The goal of the investigation was to test feasibility
of a novel, Internet-based social cognition training program. Healthy aging
subjects (n=5; mean age: 78±8 years) completed 10-hours of training within
3 weeks. Participants were assessed before and after training using a standard battery of social cognition measures: Theory-of-Mind (Faux Pas test),
face perception (Penn Facial Recognition test) and emotion recognition and
management (MSCEIT battery). We found that subjects fully complied with
the training regimen, and made improvements on most exercises, including those targeting face recognition (p<.03), memory for faces (p<.02), and
gaze detection (p<.05). Following training, improvements were noted on
the delayed recall of faces (9% improvement on the Penn total scale, p<.03),
on the Faux Pas Theory-of-Mind test (p<.03), and on the ‘perceiving emotions’ subscale of the MSCEIT test (n.s.). No improvements were found on
the immediate recall of faces or on the ‘managing emotions’ MSCEIT subscale. We conclude that computerized social cognition training is feasible
in healthy aging individuals, and that as little as 10-hours of training shows
promising trends of improved social cognition abilities.

B19
FAIRNESS CONSIDERATIONS IN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS
WITH AND WITHOUT PSYCHOPATHY: INVESTIGATING THE ROLE
OF CONTEXT AND INTENTIONALITY USING A MODIFIED ULTIMATUM GAME Ellen de Bruijn1, Sina Radke2, Inti Brazil2,3, Inge Scheper3, Berend
Bulten3; 1Leiden University, the Netherlands, 2Radboud University Nijmegen,
the Netherlands, 3Pompestichting Nijmegen, the Netherlands — Incarcerated individuals with psychopathy have often committed violent crimes
against another person. Although these clear violations of social norms
may suggest a biased moral reasoning in psychopathy, findings on utilitarian decisions remain unclear. We assessed social decision-making based
on different aspects of fairness considerations in 18 criminal offenders with
psychopathy, 14 criminal offenders without psychopathy and 18 matched
healthy individuals who played the role of responder in a modified Ultimatum Game. Specifically, we focused on the effects of the context in
which a particular monetary offer was made and the role of intentionality
behind these offers. Selected offers were paired on each trial with a varying
unselected alternative, thus establishing the context in which the offer was
proposed. Also, all offers were either made intentional (i.e. the unknown
proposer selects one of the two available offers) or unintentional (i.e. the
computer randomly selected one alternative). As expected, unfair offers
were most often rejected when the alternative offer was fair and when the
unfair offer was made intentionally. Offenders without psychopathy did
not adjust their behavior based on the available unselected alternatives.
Importantly however, individuals with psychopathy did demonstrate a
similar rejection pattern to that of healthy individuals as both groups took
the context in which an offer was proposed into account. Therefore, social
decision-making seems to be specifically impaired in offenders without
psychopathy. The current outcomes are in line with some of the core features of psychopathy that require knowledge about social conduct and cognitive perspective-taking (e.g., manipulation or deception).

B20
ANGELS AND DEMONS IN SEMANTIC MEMORY: A FULLY
CROSSED ERP INVESTIGATION OF AFFECTIVE AND SEMANTIC
PRIMING Nathaniel Delaney-Busch1, Emily O’Carroll1, Phillip Teves1, Gina
Kuperberg1,2; 1Tufts University, 2Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Mass.
General Hospital — Semantic priming describes the faster response to target
words preceded by semantically associated versus unassociated words.
Affective priming describes the faster response to emotional words preCognitive Neuroscience Society

65

Poster Session B
ceded by words of the same versus opposite emotional valence. A large
event-related potential (ERP) literature suggests that semantic priming
results in facilitated lexico-semantic processing, reflected by an attenuation of the N400. The ERP signatures of affective priming, however, have
been more mixed, and most studies have not fully controlled for semantic relationships. We carried out an ERP study that fully crossed semantic (Associated vs. Unassociated) and affective (Same Valence vs. Opposite Valence) priming. Participants explicitly judged semantic association
of each word-pair (SOA: 250ms). If both affective and semantic priming
influence lexico-semantic processing, they should both lead to N400 modulation (with an additive interaction if they act through independent neurocognitive mechanisms, and a non-additive interaction if they act non-independently). If, however, affective priming has no independent influence
on lexico-semantic processing, this would predict no affective N400 effect
and no interaction between Association and Valence. Our findings support
the second hypothesis. We saw no N400 effect of affective priming, either
for associated emotional words (e.g. “devil…demon” vs. “angel…demon”)
or unassociated emotional words (e.g. “venom…demon” vs. “antidote…
demon”). Further, the magnitude of the N400 semantic priming effect on
neutral targets (e.g. “curved…bent” vs. “slick…bent”) was similar to that
on emotional targets (e.g. “angel…demon” vs. “antidote…demon”). These
results suggest that, at least under task and experimental conditions that
encourage semantic associative processing, affective priming does not
influence lexico-semantic processing.

B21
VALUE OF A MEMORY: POSITIVE AFFECT AND NEURAL
RESPONSES EVOKED BY AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORIES
Megan E. Speer1, Jamil P. Bhanji1, Mauricio R. Delgado1; 1Rutgers University
— The retrieval of an autobiographical memory can bring back emotions
tied to the original experience, such as the positive feelings brought back by
remembering grandma’s apple pie. The positive emotion evoked by such
memories may suggest a potential intrinsic value or reward in retrieving
positive experiences about the self. The goal of this study was to examine
whether positive autobiographical memories enhance positive emotions
and engage neural circuitry involved in reward processing. To test this,
19 healthy participants described and gave subjective emotion ratings for
specific episodic memories of positive (e.g., family vacation) and neutral
(e.g., commuting to work) content. Three days later, participants underwent an fMRI session where they received visual word cues (e.g., family
vacation) and were asked to retrieve the same episodic memories. They
also completed a gambling task where they earned monetary rewards.
Participants reported greater emotional arousal and positive affect associated with the recollection of positive compared to neutral memories. In
accordance, preliminary fMRI analysis suggested an enhanced response
for positive compared to neutral memory recollection in several regions
previously involved in affective processing, including the striatum, orbitofrontal cortex, and anterior cingulate. Further, voxels in the ventral striatum
that processed monetary rewards in the gambling task also distinguished
between positive and neutral memories. These findings suggest that an
abstract reward, reminiscing about positive past experiences, produces
internally generated positive emotions, which may be rewarding in and
of itself.

B22
WORKING MEMORY TRAINING IMPROVES ATTENTION CONTROL
IN DYSPHORIA Nazanin Derakhshan1,2, Max Owens1; 1Birkbeck University
of London, UK, 2St John’s Research Centre, St John’s College, University of
Oxford, UK — Impaired filtering of irrelevant information from working
memory is thought to underlie reduced working memory capacity for relevant information in dysphoria. The current study investigated whether
training related gains in working memory performance on the adaptive
dual n-back task could result in improved inhibitory function. Efficacy of
training was monitored in a change detection paradigm allowing measurement of a sustained event-related potential asymmetry sensitive to working memory capacity and the efficient filtering of irrelevant information.
Dysphoric participants in the training group showed training related gains
in working memory that were accompanied by gains in working memory
capacity and filtering efficiency compared to an active control group.

66

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
Results provide important initial evidence that behavioural performance
and neural function in dysphoria can be improved by facilitating greater
attentional control.

B23
NEURAL CORRELATES OF A REWARD SOURCE MEMORY ADVANTAGE IN HEALTHY VOLUNTEERS AND ITS ABSENCE IN MAJOR
DEPRESSIVE DISORDER Daniel Dillon1,2, Ian Dobbins3, Diego Pizzagalli1,2;
1
McLean Hospital, 2Harvard Medical School, 3Washington University in Saint
Louis — Healthy adults frequently show a positive memory bias that is
absent in depressed individuals, but the neural mechanisms underlying
this group difference are unclear. To illuminate this issue, 21 controls and
21 depressed adults completed a recognition memory experiment during
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). At encoding, drawings
were followed by reward or zero outcomes. During testing, old and new
drawings were presented under a reward cue or a zero cue. The controls
showed a reward source memory advantage, but this positive memory
bias was absent in the depressed group. Critically, the controls also generated stronger encoding responses to reward vs. zero outcomes in the left
ventral putamen, right parahippocampus, and left hippocampus, but the
depressed group did not. Moreover, right prefrontal cortex and left parietal
cortex showed stronger activation during successful remembering from
the reward vs. zero source in controls vs. depressed participants. Finally,
a reward cue-framing effect was observed: across the groups, recognition
decisions were rendered more quickly and accurately under the reward cue
vs. the zero cue, coinciding with potentiated activation of the hippocampus,
caudate, and putamen. These novel findings indicate that poorer explicit
memory for positive material in depression reflects blunted responses to
positive stimuli in the striatum and medial temporal lobes during encoding, which are accompanied by reduced fronto-parietal activation during
retrieval. Because the ability to form and retrieve pleasant memories contributes to the positive self-regard that sustains healthy individuals, these
results provide new insight into the neural mechanisms implicated in
depression.

B24
DIFFERENTIAL RELATIONSHIPS OF AFFECTIVE AND MOTIVATIONAL STYLES WITH FRONTAL LOBE GRAY MATTER VOLUMES
Sanda Dolcos1, Yifan Hu1, Alex Iordan1, Sarah Whoo1, Florin Dolcos1; 1University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Affective and motivational styles influence people’s expectations about the world and the most adaptive ways to
interact with it. For instance, positive affect (PA) leads to pleasurable, and
Negative Affect (NA) to unpleasurable engagement with the environment.
Related to this, a behavioral activation/approach system (BAS) has been
associated with increased sensitivity to rewarding and appetitive stimuli,
and a behavioural inhibition/avoidance system (BIS) with guiding behavior away from nonrewarding and aversive stimuli. At a higher level of integration, Promotion regulatory focus (RF) increases sensitivity to rewards,
and Prevention focus increases sensitivity to losses. Functional neuroimaging studies suggest a hemispheric lateralization of emotional valence and
approach /avoidance behaviors and goals in the frontal cortex, with the
left side being linked to positive, and the right side to negative valence. An
open question is whether similar relationships also exist at structural level.
We investigated this issue in 45 healthy adults who completed the BIS/
BAS, RF, and the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule questionnaires, and
underwent structural MRI scanning. Analyses focused on frontal regions
volume extracted using automated parcellation. The results showed positive correlations between PA and left frontal areas and between BAS-Drive
and bilateral frontal areas. Negative correlations were found between BIS
and right frontal and left fronto-polar areas. Preliminary analyses also
identified sex-related differences in the orbitofrontal cortex. Overall, these
findings partially fit the hemispheric asymmetry identified by functional
neuroimaging studies, and provide novel evidence linking larger cortical
volumes in dissociable frontal area with approach, and smaller volumes
with avoidance behavioral tendencies.

2013 Annual Meeting

B25
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF READING FACIAL EMOTIONS IN
YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS Natalie Ebner1, Marcia Johnson2, Håkan
Fischer3; 1University of Florida, 2Yale University, 3Stockholm University — The
ability to read and appropriately respond to emotions in others is central
for successful social interaction. Young and older adults are better at identifying positive than negative facial expressions and also expressions of
young rather than older faces. Little, however, is known about the neural
processes associated with reading different emotions, particularly in faces
of different ages, in samples of young and older adults. During fMRI, young
and older participants identified expressions in happy, neutral, and angry
young and older faces. The results suggest a functional dissociation of ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex
(dmPFC) in reading facial emotions that is largely comparable in young
and older adults: Both age groups showed greater vmPFC activity to happy
compared to angry or neutral faces, which was positively correlated with
expression identification for happy compared to angry faces. In contrast,
both age groups showed greater activity in dmPFC to neutral or angry than
happy faces which was negatively correlated with expression identification
for neutral compared to happy faces. A similar region of dmPFC showed
greater activity for older than young faces, but no brain-behavior correlations. Greater vmPFC activity in the present study may reflect greater affective processing involved in reading happy compared to neutral or angry
faces. Greater dmPFC activity may reflect more cognitive control involved
in decoding and/or regulating negative emotions associated with neutral
or angry than happy, and older than young, faces.

B26
DIFFERENTIAL NEURAL PROCESSING OF NEGATIVE STIMULI IN
INDIVIDUALS EXPERIENCING FACILITATION VS. INTERFERENCE
IN AN EMOTIONAL STROOP TASK Lesa K. Ellis1, Jaiya R. Choles1, Emilee
R. Naylor1,2, Danielle J. Green1, Russell E. Costa1, Jennifer Simonds1; 1Westminster College, 2University of Oregon — Emotional Stroop tasks are frequently
used to examine interference effects resulting from presentation of negative
stimuli, as measured via longer response times (RTs) compared to those for
neutral stimuli. However, some studies have reported that individuals may
display shorter RTs to emotional versus neutral stimuli, suggesting a facilitation effect of emotion in those individuals. Electrophysiological studies of
Emotional Stroop tasks have reported enhanced early posterior negativity
(EPN) effects for emotional versus neutral stimuli, indicative of automatic
processing of emotional stimuli, while also reporting larger late positive
potential (LPP) for negative versus neutral stimuli, suggesting sustained
attentional processing of negative stimuli. We compared event-related
potentials (ERPs) in individuals showing facilitation versus those showing
interference from emotional stimuli. Seventy-eight individuals completed
an Emotional and Counting Stroop task and conditional RTs were used to
divide participants into two groups: one that exhibited facilitation effects
(n = 42) and one that exhibited interference effects (n = 36) to negative emotional stimuli. ERP analyses revealed similar heightened EPN effects associated with emotional stimuli (both negative and positive) for both groups.
However, a significant emotion by group interaction was also observed
for LPP in both centro-parietal and right anterior electrode sites, such that
individuals experiencing interference effects to negative stimuli showed
greater LPPs for negative words compared to neutral words, while individuals experiencing facilitation effects did not. Results suggest that while
all participants experienced a degree of automatic processing of emotional
stimuli, only those experiencing interference effects exhibited sustained
processing of negative stimuli.

B27
ORAL CONTRACEPTIVE PILLS ALTER RESTING STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY Nicole Ertman1, Lisa Kilpatrick2, Azaadeh Goharzad3, Larry Cahill1; 1University of California, Irvine, 2University of California, Los
Angeles, 3California State University, Fullerton — At rest, brain activity can be
characterized not by an absence of organized activity but instead by spatially and temporally correlated patterns of activity. In this experiment, we
investigated whether and to what extent resting state functional connectivity is modulated by sex hormones in women. Sex hormones have been
shown to have important effects on task-related activity, but few studies

Poster Session B
have investigated the extent to which they can influence the behavior of
functional networks at rest. These hormones are dramatically altered by
the use of hormonal contraception, which is used by approximately 100
million women worldwide. However, potential cognitive side effects of
hormonal contraception have been given little attention. Here, we collected
resting state data for naturally-cycling women and women using combined
oral contraceptive pills (COCPs) and evaluated the differences in resting
state activity between these two groups using Independent Components
Analysis. We found that in an executive control network, the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) in naturally-cycling women showed higher functional
connectivity to the network as a whole when compared to the ACC in
women using COCPs. Because the ACC is important for some forms of
higher-order cognitive and emotional processing, changes in the relationship of this structure to the functional networks with which it interacts may
have important consequences for attention, affect, emotion regulation, and
a number of other processes the anterior cingulate cortex has been associated with.

B28
EYE TRACKING AND MEMORY FOR THREAT IN REPRESSIVE
COPING Lauren L. Alston1, Andrea T. Shafer1, Anthony Singhal1, Esther
Fujiwara1; 1University of Alberta — People with a repressive coping style
under-report physiological stress and display early vigilance followed by
attentional avoidance of threat. Repressors also show reduced memory for
threat. Unclear is how their attention patterns relate to later memory. To
test how early threat vigilance changes into avoidance and if both translate
into later memory, repressive (REP) or non-repressive (NREP) participants
were monitored with eye-tracking during incidental encoding of neutral
and negative pictures. To provide opportunity for attentional avoidance,
pictures were either presented alone or alongside scrambled pictures.
Memory was tested thereafter. Electrodermal responses to an acute stress
induction were acquired before the experiment, along with subjective
reports, to validate questionnaire-based coping styles. REP had similar
skin conductance responses to stress as NREP, but underreported negative
emotions (anger, frustration, helplessness). Overall viewing durations were
similar across groups. Negative images were fixated earlier and longer than
neutral pictures and images presented alone were fixated earlier and longer
than picture presented together with scrambled pictures. In REPs, this vigilance was strongest, but only emerged with solitary pictures. When presented with distractors, REPs were faster to look away than NREPs. That is,
we found vigilance as well as avoidance for threat in REP. While all participants showed an advantage in memory for negative over neutral pictures,
this effect was attenuated in REP. Viewing time predicted later memory for
negative pictures in NREPs but not REPs. Reductions in negative memories
in REP are likely not mediated by either vigilance or avoidance in visual
attention, but retrieval-based strategies.

B29
DECODING THE ANTICIPATION OF MONETARY AWARDS: A MULTIVARIATE PATTERN ANALYSIS Daniel F. Arteaga1, Gregory R. Samanez-Larkin2, Joshua W. Buckholtz2,3, Michael T. Treadway2, David H. Zald2;
1
School of Medicine, Vanderbilt University,, 2Vanderbilt University, 3Vanderbilt
Brain Institute, Vanderbilt University — The anticipation of potential rewards
or losses modulates broad neural networks involved in motivation and
task execution. To date, distinctions between the neural representations
underlying the motivational effects of potential monetary rewards and
losses have yet to be clearly elucidated using conventional univariate analyses of fMRI data. Here, we investigated the ability of multivariate pattern
analysis (MVPA) to discriminate between the anticipation (preparation to
respond for) and feedback of monetary gains and losses. Data was obtained
from twenty-five healthy subjects who performed a monetary incentive
delay (MID) task while undergoing fMRI. Whole-brain multivariate analyses were initially performed to establish the predictive capabilities of the
multivariate classifier. Multivariate searchlight maps were then computed
and compared with a parallel set of GLM-based univariate analyses. Our
results reveal that MVPA is capable of reliably decoding between an anticipated monetary gain and loss (accuracy=56.3%, p=3.33x10-4). While there
was overlap in significant voxel clusters detected by both univariate and
multivariate methods, the MVPA results were much more robust. Notably,
MVPA revealed the involvement of medial frontal and occipital regions
that were substantially more active under conditions of large potential
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

67

Poster Session B
rewards than large potential losses. By contrast, ventral striatal areas that
are robustly modulated when there are incentives showed little or no discrimination of the valence of monetary incentives. These data indicate that
specific cortical areas are differentially recruited in valence-dependent
reward processing. Our findings further demonstrate the potential utility
of a multivariate approach in affective neuroscience.

B30
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND NEURAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING
COMPASSIONATE THOUGHT AND BEHAVIOR Yoni Ashar1, Jessica
Andrews-Hanna1, Jenifer Sills1, Tal Yarkoni1, Sona Dimidjian1, Tor Wager1; 1University of Colorado, Boulder — Recent research has advanced our scientific
understanding of compassionate thought and emotion. However, the psychological factors and brain pathways underlying naturalistic compassion-eliciting situations, as well as compassionate action, have not been well
characterized. To investigate these phenomena, we conducted two studies,
one behavioral and one fMRI. In both studies, participants read or heard
biographies depicting the suffering of others, rated the biographies across
a number of dimensions, and chose whether to make a charitable donation from their experimental earnings. Study 1 (n=270) validated a theoretical model predicting compassionate action, operationalized as charitable
donation. We dissected the predictors of charitable donation into several
affective components, including a) ‘warm,’ empathic care and b) personal
distress, and several social cognitive components, including attributions of
c) responsibility and d) perceived instrumental value of the donation to
the recipient, and e) perceived similarity to the recipient. All of these factors explained unique variance in donation amounts, except for perceived
similarity, the effects of which were fully explained by the other factors. In
Study 2 (n=33), we mapped these factors onto their neural substrates using
fMRI. Consistent with its role in valuation, increased activity in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) was predictive of both empathic care
and personal distress. However, activity in secondary somatosensory area
(S2) increased with personal distress, but decreased with empathic care.
These results suggest that feelings of empathic care and personal distress at
others’ suffering are distinct at both the behavioral and neural levels, and
both make important contributions to compassionate behavior.

B31
ENDOGENOUS-DRIVEN AFFECTIVE PROCESSING: A META-ANALYSIS Shir Atzil1, Ajay Satpute1, Tor Wager2, Lisa Feldman Barrett1; 1Northeastern University, 2University of Colorado at Boulder — Affective experiences
are driven by a combination of both exogenous and endogenous inputs.
Research in affective neuroscience has focused a great deal on exogenously-driven responses. Much less is known about the neural regions associated with endogenously-driven affective processing. Progress in understanding the neural mechanisms for how endogenously-driven affective
processes occur has been stilted in part because a clear theoretical perspective and related pattern of findings has yet to be determined. We took a
data-driven approach and asked which regions are frequently associated
with endogenously driven affective responses. Specifically, we surveyed
the neuroimaging literature for studies that induced affect using imagery or
autobiographical memories. We then pooled across 53 contrasts and a performed a meta-analysis using the Multi-Kernel Density Analysis method to
examine which regions show consistent activation to endogenously driven
affective responses. The results pointed to several cortical regions, including the dorso-medial prefrontal cortex, inferior frontal gyrus, subgenual
anterior cingulate cortex, temporal poles, and anterior insula, and to several
subcortical regions including the amygdala, thalamus, striatum, and midbrain. While most of these studies have focused their interests on the amygdala and anterior insula, these results reveal that the endogenously-driven
affective processes also relies on certain mentalizing regions, more so than
endogenously-driven non-affective imagery and memory-recall processes.
We interpret these findings from a constructivist perspective, which suggests that these regions are key nodes in a set of intrinsic brain networks
that make up the functional architecture of the human brain.

2013 Annual Meeting

B32
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EMOTION CATEGORIZATION

Erin L.
Beatty1, Oshin Vartanian1, Alexandra Muller-Gass1, David R. Mandel1, Stergios
Stergiopoulos1; 1Defence R&D Canada - Toronto — Categorization is fundamental to cognition, and much evidence suggests that categorizing emotional stimuli holds a privileged position in human information processing.
Several different theoretical accounts have been proposed for explaining
the psychological and neural processes whereby emotional stimuli are
categorized. According to one influential theory the subjective emotional
feeling elicited by a stimulus plays a causal role in its categorization. In
other words, the emotional response evoked by a stimulus in the observer
serves as a cue for its emotional categorization. If this were true, then the
act of categorization should be accompanied by the activation of neural systems involved in the subjective experience of emotion. Alternatively, the
act of categorization should be accompanied exclusively by activation in
bilateral prefrontal regions involved in categorizing non-emotional stimuli.
We tested these two competing hypotheses by scanning 12 subjects using
functional magnetic resonance imaging. The experiment was administered
in three runs, involving 270 trials. On each trial a picture from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS) belonging to one of three emotional
categories (positive, negative, neutral) was presented, after which a second
IAPS picture appeared. Upon presentation of the second picture the participants’ task was to categorize the second picture as belonging to the same
or a different emotional category than the first picture. The results demonstrated that compared to rest, categorization activated a left-lateralized network including the lateral orbitofrontal cortex and medial temporal lobe.
These results suggest that categorizing emotional stimuli activates neural
structures known to underlie the subjective experience of emotion.

B33
NEURAL CORRELATES OF ANXIETY VULNERABILITY: CEREBELLAR REACTIVITY TO NOVEL FACES AND SCENES AND AT REST.
Meghan D. Caulﬁeld1,2, J. Devin McAuley1,3, David C. Zhu3,4, Richard J. Servatius1,2,5; 1Stress & Motivated Behavior Institute, 2Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Medicine & Dentistry of New Jersey, 3Department
of Psychology, Michigan State University, 4Department of Radiology, Michigan
State University, 5Department of Veterans Affairs, NJHCS, East Orange, New
Jersey — Behavioral inhibition is a risk factor for the development of anxiety disorders typified by extreme withdrawal when facing novel social
and nonsocial challenges. Previous research has revealed that individuals
scoring high on measures of anxiety vulnerability show faster acquisition
of cerebellar-dependent learning tasks, such as eyeblink classical conditioning. Here, we assess individual differences of cerebellar reactivity to the
presentation of familiar and novel social and nonsocial stimuli using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Twenty-six college students (M
= 20.7 years of age, 27% male) were given a battery of surveys that assessed
increased risk for anxiety, including the Adult & Retrospective Measures
of Behavioral Inhibition, the Concurrent and Retrospective Self Report of
Inhibition and the State Trait Anxiety Inventory. Participants were familiarized to 96 faces and scenes on day one and then underwent fMRI on day
two while making ‘old’ vs. ‘new’ recognition judgments about familiarized
and novel faces and scenes. Between-group voxel-based contrasts between
high risk and low risk individuals examining differences in BOLD response
to novel and familiar faces revealed three significant clusters in the cerebellum: left cerebellar lobule VI/Crus I, left lobule IV/V, and right lobule VIII/
IX. Furthermore, significant differences in BOLD response were observed
in the novel compared to familiar scenes in the cerebellum right lobule VII/
Crus II, indicating a general effect of novelty beyond social stimuli. In order
to assess individual differences of cerebellar functional connectivity participants also underwent a 7-minute resting state scan which will be evaluated
in future analyses.

B34
AMYGDALA RESPONSES TO IN-GROUP AND OUT-GROUP
MASKED FACIAL EXPRESSIONS IN NEWLY ARRIVED US CHINESE POPULATIONS Pin-Hao Chen1, James Taylor1, Todd Heatherton1, Paul
Whalen1; 1Dartmouth College — Previous studies have found an in-group
advantage effect for recognition of emotional expressions, and this effect is
inversely correlated with the exposure length to the out-group culture (Elf-

68

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
enbein & Ambady, 2003). Prior fMRI research also indicates that amygdala
activity was greater for in-group than for out-group fear expressions, but
only for explicit presentations of fear expressions (Chiao et al., 2008). An
open question is whether this same-race advantage will be found using an
implicit masking paradigm. The current study used a backward emotional
masking paradigm to explore whether amygdala activities were greater
for in-group than for our-group fear expressions in new arrivals to the US.
Twenty-three newly arrived native Chinese students were recruited, and
during three functional runs, were asked to passively view block-presented
masked same (Chinese) or different race (Caucasian) faces with one of
three emotional expressions (fear, surprised, or happy). Signal beta values
of the six conditions were extracted from an anatomical amygdala ROI for
further analysis. Results indicated that race main effects were significant
in right amygdala, and marginally significant in left amygdala. Post-hoc
analysis revealed that bilateral amygdala only showed significantly greater
responses for Chinese than for Caucasian masked facial expressions of happiness, but not for the masked fear and surprised facial expressions. One
possible explanation for the difference between this study and the Chiao et
al.’s study is that the prior study examined explicit emotional recognition
whereas this study used implicit measures.

B35
PSYCHOPATHIC TRAITS MODULATE ACTIVITY IN EMOTION-RELATED NEURAL REGIONS DURING AVERSIVE CONDITIONING
Mona Sobhani1,2, Michael E. Dawson3, Anne M. Schell4, Laura Baker3, Lisa
Aziz-Zadeh2,5; 1Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Southern California, 2Brain and Creativity Institute, University of Southern California, 3Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, 4Occidental College,
5
Department of Occupational Therapy, University of Southern California — Psychopathy is a personality disorder that is comprised of an array of personality traits, such as callousness, lack of remorse, and impulsiveness. Past
studies have shown that criminals with psychopathy display reduced fear
conditioning to aversive stimuli (Hare, 1970; Hare & Quinn, 1971). Neuroimaging studies of fear conditioning in criminals with psychopathy suggest
that the neural circuits involved in aversive conditioning display significantly reduced BOLD response patterns when compared to healthy controls (Birbaumer, 2005). However, whether psychopathic traits are related
to the neural correlates of aversive conditioning in a non-incarcerated
sample have not yet been examined. Here, we investigated whether psychopathic traits modulate functional activity in the amygdala and VMPFC
during an aversive conditioning task in a community sample. Preliminary
findings suggest that there is a negative correlation between psychopathic
traits and activity in emotion-related neural regions. The results support
previous findings of a negative relationship between psychopathic traits
and altered BOLD activity in emotion-related regions. This further supports the notion of altered neural functioning in individuals with higher
levels of psychopathic traits.

B36
WHAT OTHERS THINK OF ME: SELF-REFERENTIAL PROCESSING
IN THE POSTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX Jae-Yoon Lee1, Seok-Hwan
Ahn1, Do-Joon Yi1; 1Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea — It is well
established that self-referential processing employs cortical midline structures (CMS) including medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and posterior cingulate cortex (PCC). It remains to be seen what functional roles each region
in CMS plays in the representation of the self. Previous research demonstrated that PCC is selectively activated when participants think of their
duties and obligations - others’ expectations on them (Johnson et al., 2006).
Accordingly, we hypothesized that PCC plays a pivotal role in integrating
others’ viewpoints into one’s self-concept. To test this hypothesis, we conducted a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiment with
a modified version of self-reference paradigm. In each trial, participants
viewed an trait adjective and judged how well it described a given person
(referent: myself vs. president) from a given point of view (viewpoint: my
own view vs. my friend’s view). The results showed a significant two-way
interaction in bilateral PCC, left temporoparietal junction (TPJ), and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC). Specifically, these regions showed
a greater activation when participants thought of themselves from their
friends’ viewpoint (relative to their own viewpoint) but showed little or
no difference between the two viewpoint conditions when participants

Poster Session B
thought of the president. More interestingly, in bilateral PCC, this pattern
was strongly and positively correlated with individuals’ collectivism bias.
Overall, our findings imply that the PCC combines social perspective with
self-concept, reflecting individual sensitivity to others’ points of view.

B37
NEURAL OSCILLATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH SELF-FACE PHYSICAL PROPERTY AND SELF-FACE IDENTITY Yina MA1,2, Yan Mu2,
Shihui Han2; 1Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Dartmouth
College, 2Department of Psychology, Peking University — Self-awareness can
be induced by looking at one’s own face in a mirror. Functional MRI and
event-related potential studies have shown evidence for the involvement
of blood oxygen level dependent signals and phase-locked neural activity
in self-face recognition. The present study investigated whether non-phaselocked neural oscillations also engage in self-awareness during face recognition. Specifically, we assessed whether neural oscillations of different
frequencies are respectively involved in the processing of self-face physical
property and self-face identity. Subjects were presented with face stimuli
drawn from morph continua between self-face (Morph 100%) and a gender-matched friend’s face (Morph 0%) and had to make “self” or “friend”
judgment on each stimulus. Wavelet analysis was used to calculate nonphase-locked time-frequency power associated with (1) self-face specific
physical property by contrasting Morph 100% and Morph 60% that were
different in self-face physical properties but both induced self-identity
and (2) self-face identity by contrasting Morphs 50% that were recognized
as self vs. friend on different trials. We showed that low-frequency band
(14-21 Hz) activity over the right central/parietal electrodes at 700-1000 ms
were involved in the processing of self-face physical properties. In contrast,
self-face identity was associated with multi-frequency band (14-80 Hz)
modulations at 100-300 ms over the frontal/central/parietal areas. Moreover, the early gamma band (30-80 Hz) activity plays a key role in generating self-face identity, since it could predict how often subjects recognized
Morph 50% as the self. Our results revealed specific neural oscillations that
dissociated self-face specific physical properties and consciously perceived
self-identity.

B38
EXAMINING SOCIAL AND PHYSICAL SELF-KNOWLEDGE WITH
FMRI IN ANOREXIA NERVOSA AND BULIMIA NERVOSA. Carrie
McAdams1, Daniel Krawczyk1,2; 1UT Southwestern Medical Center, 2UT Dallas
— Eating disorders include bulimia nervosa (BN), an illness characterized
by both binging and purging eating behaviors and normal body weight,
and anorexia nervosa (AN), an illness characterized by restrictive eating
behaviors and low body weight. For both illnesses, self-evaluation that is
unduly dependent upon body shape and weight is part of the diagnostic
criteria. Understanding differences in the activation of neural regions associated with self-evaluation could help identify pathophysiological changes
related to eating disorders. We examined self-knowledge using two fMRI
appraisal tasks in 52 adult women (18 AN, 16 BN, and 18 control (CN)).
The Social Appraisal task asked subjects to evaluate the validity of personalized statements with social adjectives (ex. Social-Self statement, “I believe
I am kind”). The Physical Appraisal task presented similar statements with
physical phrases (ex. Physical-Friend statement, “I believe my friend’s hair
is frizzy”). Recently, using whole-brain voxel-wide comparisons of the AN
and CN groups, we found regions in the precuneus (PreC), dorsal anterior
cingulate (dACC), and a ventral portion of the dorsal anterior cingulate
(cc-dACC) that differed. Here, we report the neural activations in these
regions in the BN subjects. In all regions, the BN percent signal change
fell between the activation levels observed in the CN and AN groups. Statistically, the BN responses were not significantly different from the AN
responses in any regions but were different from the CN responses in
the PreC and dACC. These data suggest that neural activations related to
self-evaluation are similar in AN and BN.

B39
NEURAL OSCILLATIONS RELATED TO SELF-FACE PROCESSING:
AN EEG STUDY Yan Mu1, Shihui Han1; 1Peking University — Self face is

vitally important social information for our human being. Self-face recognition reflects higher-order self-awareness. Previous neuroimaging studies using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and event-related

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

69

Poster Session B
potentials (ERP) technology have found the dynamic neural mechanism
related to self-face process. However, there has been little research to examine whether non-phase locked neural activities are involved in differentiating self- from other-face processing. To address this issue, we recorded
fifteen subjects’ 62-channel electroencephalograph (EEG) signal when they
were performing implicit and explicit self-face tasks respectively. In the
implicit task, subjects needed to judge orientations of self-, friend- or scrambled-face. And in the explicit task, they were asked to judge whether a face
stimuli is a self- or friend- face. The results showed that explicit self-face
recognition evoked late theta desynchronization in the parieto-occipital
region, late gamma desynchronization in the mid-central region. Whereas
the implicit self-face task induced low-frequency delta, theta, and alpha
bands synchronous activities. Our findings provide evidence for non-phase
locked neural activities can differentiate between self- and friend-face in
attended and unattended conditions. Consistent low-frequency synchronous activities are involved in automatic self-recognition process, while
more late theta and gamma band desynchronous activities for self-face than
friend-face might be an index of increased self-awareness during explicit
self-face identification.

B40
BEING RIGHT IS REWARDING: RECEIVING CORRECT FEEDBACK
ENGAGES THE NUCLEUS ACCUMBENS Katherine Powers1, William M
Kelley1, Todd F Heatherton1; 1Dartmouth College — Trivia contests are popular, possibly in part because people enjoy being right. Here, we investigated
the intrinsic motivation underlying this desire. During fMRI scanning, participants (N = 33) answered multiple-choice questions relating to local college traditions and student life (e.g., “What is the best part of homecoming
weekend?”). Questions were created such that no correct answer actually
existed; that is, every answer choice was equally plausible. After each question, participants were presented with feedback indicating whether their
responses were correct or incorrect on a trial-by-trial basis. Although participants were told that the feedback reflected their knowledge, feedback
was actually pre-programmed prior to the experimental sessions, such
that participants received correct feedback on half of the trials, and incorrect feedback on the rest. After scanning, participants were given a surprise memory test examining memory for the different types of feedback.
Receiving correct feedback recruited the nucleus accumbens (NAcc), a central component of the brain’s reward circuitry. NAcc activity also predicted
performance on the post-scan memory test. Taken together, our results
demonstrate that humans find being right intrinsically rewarding, and as
a result, preferentially encode these events. Moreover, being right in this
experimental task implies knowledge of group norms, which may confer
social benefits. Thus, our results suggest that being right is rewarding, especially when being right is consistent with being a good group member.

B41
THE NEURAL MECHANISM FOR EMBODIED SELF-REFLECTION
Zhenhao Shi1, Shihui Han1; 1Peking University — Recent research has shown
that self-reflection on visual and auditory stimuli recruited distinct neural
activities (Ma & Han, 2011), and making gestures modulated hormone level
and altered one’s self-evaluation (Carney et al., 2010; Schubert & Koole,
2009). These findings imply the embodied nature of self-reflection. The present study investigated the neural mechanism for embodied self-reflection
by examining the effect of sensorimotor experience on the neurocognitive
processing of self-reflection. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), we scanned adults while they made judgments on whether trait
words described either self or a celebrity (SELF/OTHER). Trait judgments
were performed while participants either held tight or relaxed the left hand
(FIST/REST). We found that SELF relative to OTHER activated the medial
prefrontal cortex (MPFC) in both FIST and REST conditions. However, the
supplemental motor area (SMA) and the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(lDLPFC) were activated only in the FIST condition. Moreover, SMA and
lDLPFC activities were associated with subjective feelings of embodiment.
Granger-causal connectivity analysis showed that the MPFC received influence from both SMA and lDLPFC, and these influences were correlated
with participants’ dispositional bodily consciousness. Our findings suggest that the embodiment of self-reflection engages the SMA and lDLPFC,
which may modulate self-reflection processes in the MPFC. Reference: [1]

70

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
Carney DR, Cuddy AJC, Yap AJ. 2010. Psychol Sci 21:1363–8 [2] Ma Y, Han
S. 2011. Brain 134:235–46 [3] Schubert TW, Koole SL. 2009. J Exp Soc Psychol
45:828–34

B42
KEEPING MINE CLOSE: THE EFFECTS OF SPACE ON THE
SELF-OWNERSHIP ADVANTAGE Grace Truong1, Craig S. Chapman2,
James T. Enns1, Todd C. Handy1; 1University of British Columbia, 2University of
Alberta — Objects that are arbitrarily identified as belonging to you (selfowned) are preferentially attended and remembered better (Cunningham
et al., 2008; Turk et al., 2011). We questioned whether this ownership effect
would interact with the spatial position and the movement required to classify an object as “Mine” or “Other”, as has been shown for motor responses
to other affective stimuli (Eder & Rothermund, 2008). On each trial, participants (n=24) acted directly with pictures of objects on a touch interactive table. The border color cued them whether the object was “Mine” or
“Other” and participants had to drag the object either towards themselves
(close) or away from themselves (far) into specified areas on the tabletop.
We predicted the self-ownership advantage would be largest for objects
identified as “Mine” and moved close to the participant. Confirming this
prediction, in a subsequent surprise recognition memory task we show a
significant space-by-ownership interaction (Cohen’s d = .397). Objects in
the Mine-close group were recalled with greater accuracy than those in the
Mine-far group as well as all objects in the Other category, regardless of
space. Importantly, this reveals that this is neither specifically an ownership
advantage, nor specifically a space advantage, but rather an advantage for
objects that participants identified as theirs and moved close to them. Our
novel use of motion-tracked reaching during the ownership sorting and
recognition memory tasks also allows us to show kinematic evidence (i.e.
reach trajectories and timing) consistent with the critical memory advantage for self-owned objects moved towards participants.

B43
HIGH QUALITY SLEEP IS ASSOCIATED WITH PREPARATION AND
TASK-SET ADOPTION IN YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS Kristine Wilckens1, Kirk I. Erickson1, Mark E. Wheeler1; 1University of Pittsburgh — Sleep
affects cognitive function, but whether it does so by influencing preparatory functions remains unknown. Objective sleep efficiency was measured
through accelerometery for one week in young and older adults. Using a
task-switching paradigm, which manipulated preparation time, we found
that, independent of age, higher sleep efficiency was associated with
faster response times during a switching block compared to a single task
block, suggesting specificity of sleep efficiency to executive control. Also
independent of age, higher sleep efficiency was associated with a robust
preparation effect on task accuracy such that individuals with higher sleep
efficiency were more likely to take advantage of the preparatory interval
when switching task sets than their less efficient counterparts. This effect
remained significant after controlling for inhibition and working memory
abilities. These results suggest that switching and preparation abilities are
enhanced in individuals with high sleep quality and that this relationship
is independent of age.

B44
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF BRAIN PLASTICITY WITH COMPLEX
COGNITIVE TRAINING IN HEALTHY SENIORS Sandra Chapman1, Sina
Aslan2, Jeffery Spence3, John Hart1, Nyaz Didehbani1, Molly Keebler1, Hanzhang
Lu3; 1Center for BrainHealth®, The University of Texas at Dallas, Dallas, TX
75235, United States, 2Advance MRI, LLC, Frisco, TX 75034, United States,
3
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, United
States — Evidence suggests that complex mental activity induces cognitive
improvements as well as changes in brain function and structure in animals
and young healthy adults. It is not clear to what extent the aging brain
is able to exhibit such plasticity. This study builds on previous evidence
of generalized cognitive gains after short-term complex mental training
in healthy seniors. Using three MRI-based measurements, i.e. arterial spin
labeling (ASL) MRI, functional connectivity (fcMRI), and diffusion tensor
imaging (DTI), we examined training-induced brain changes at three time
points pre-training (T1), mid-training (T2, 6 weeks), and end of training
(T3, 12 weeks) in a randomized sample (n=37) who received strategy-based
cognitive training versus a control group. We found significant training-re-

2013 Annual Meeting
lated brain state changes at rest specifically, (1) increases in global CBF
with specific group differences in the Default Mode Network (DMN) and
the Central Executive Network (CEN), (2) greater connectivity in the these
same networks: DMN and CEN, and (3) increased white matter integrity
in the left uncinate fasciculus demonstrated by linear increase in fractional
anisotropy. We also found improvements in cognition on trained and
untrained measures as well as significant neural correlates of the cognitive gains. These convergent results across brain networks provide clear
evidence that mechanisms of neural plasticity (i.e., resting blood flow,
network connectivity at rest and structural connectivity) can be harnessed
with strategy-based cognitive training in cognitively healthy seniors.

B45
INFORMATION PROVIDED BY FOREGONE REWARDS HINDERS
DECISION-MAKING ABILITY IN OLDER ADULTS Jessica Cooper1,
Darrell Worthy2, W. Todd Maddox1; 1The University of Texas at Austin, 2Texas
A&M University — Despite neural declines associated with aging, our lab
(Worthy et al., 2011) found an age-related advantage in a decision-making task for which the optimal strategy involves forgoing larger immediate
rewards to maximize delayed reward. This advantage was attributed to
compensatory scaffolding whereby older adults recruit additional frontal
regions to compensate for age-related neural decline (Park & Reuter-Lorentz, 2009). We hypothesized that knowledge of foregone rewards (i.e.
information about the non-chosen reward on each trial) would increase
attention to immediate outcomes over long-term gains, causing older
adults to reach their “crunch” point which will attenuate performance
(Reuter-Lorenz & Cappell, 2008). To test this hypothesis older and younger
adults performed the Worthy et al. (control) task where only the reward
from the chosen option was shown or where rewards were given from the
chosen and unchosen (foregone) option on each trial. Supporting our predictions, we replicated the age-related advantage in the control task and
found that foregone rewards led to an age-related performance decline.
We applied a Softmax reinforcement-learning model, a heuristic-based
win-stay lose-shift (WSLS) model that assesses participants’ propensity to
“stay” or “shift” after experiencing a “win” or “loss” on the current reward
relative to the previous trial, and a similar WSLS model that compares the
current reward to the foregone reward. Model-based analyses indicate that
older and younger adults were less likely to use heuristic-based strategies
when foregone rewards were present and that the deficit for OA was due to
greater attention to the foregone reward than younger adults.

B46
ERPS REVEAL LIFE-SPAN DIFFERENCES IN REACTIVE COGNITIVE CONTROL AND CONFLICT DETECTION Daniela Czernochowski1,
Julia Saße1, André Haese1, Steffen Herff1; 1Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf
— Current theories propose that detecting response conflict triggers the
up-regulation of cognitive control. Previous research (Czernochowski et
al., 2010) has demonstrated that older adults experience increased response
conflict, in particular as task difficulty increases, but are able to maintain
high accuracy by relying on reactive control. By contrast, children are typically error-prone despite long reaction times, which could be due to a deficit in conflict detection or up-regulation of control or both. Here, children
in grade two (7-8 years) and grade five (10-11) as well as young (20-25) and
older (65-74) adults were instructed to emphasize either accuracy or speed
in separate blocks during a cued task-switch paradigm. Event-related
potentials (ERPs) were recorded to determine potential age differences in
the neural correlate for reactive control (pre-response negativity, PRN) and
post-response conflict detection (medio-frontal negativity, MFN). Behavioral data indicate adjustments in response criteria in terms of speed and
accuracy in young adults, and small response speed adjustments for children and older adults. Starting 200 ms pre-response, ERPs revealed a (left-)
frontal PRN for adult participants only. In young adults, it was observed
selectively under accuracy instructions, but across task-conditions for older
adults. While both groups of children appeared unable to up-regulate cognitive control, post-response MFN amplitudes revealed a deficit in detecting conflict for young children only, suggesting that older children are able
to detect response conflict, but not to efficiently counteract it by recruiting
additional control processes. By contrast, both conflict and reactive control
were elevated for older adults

Poster Session B

B47
BILINGUALISM EFFECTS ON LEXICAL AMBIGUITY RESOLUTION:
BEHAVIOURAL AND N400 RESPONSES IN HEALTHY OLDER
ADULTS. Will Deller1,2, Shanna Kousaie2, Vanessa Taler1,2; 1University of
Ottawa, 2Bruyère Research Institute — It has been found that inhibitory
control declines with age, resulting in language comprehension changes.
However, bilingualism has been associated with spared cognitive function, including inhibition, which is important for language comprehension,
particularly for lexical ambiguity processing (e.g., homonyms, words with
more than one meaning, e.g., pen, meaning “writing implement” or “enclosure”). The present study examines the effects of bilingualism on lexical
ambiguity processing in a sample of healthy older monolingual (n=13) and
bilingual (n=14) adults. Participants were presented with sentences biasing
the meaning of a sentence terminal homonym towards one of its meanings
(e.g., She signed the letter in pen.) and were required to judge whether a
target word was related to the homonym. Target words could be related
to the contextually appropriate (e.g., pencil) or inappropriate (e.g., cage)
meaning, or unrelated to either meaning. Both behavioural and electrophysiological (N400) data were collected. It was expected that language
group differences in inhibitory control would result in different patterns
of meaning activation as measured by reaction times and N400 amplitude
in a semantic priming paradigm. Preliminary analysis of the electrophysiological data revealed an Appropriateness x Language Group interaction
(F(2,50)=4.9, p=.01), showing that bilinguals demonstrated selective activation of the appropriate meaning of the homonym, whereas monolinguals
did not. These findings suggest language group differences in lexical ambiguity processing in older adults. Future research will examine this question
in patients with cognitive impairment.

B48
URIC ACID AND NEUROCOGNITIVE FUNCTION IN SURVIVORS OF
CHILDHOOD ACUTE LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA Michelle N. Edelmann1, Tara M. Brinkman1, Daniel A. Mulrooney1, Cara I. Kimberg1, Melissa M.
Hudson1, Kevin R. Krull1; 1St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital — Long-term
survivors of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) are at risk for
numerous late effects, including cardiac, renal, and neurocognitive morbidity, yet the interaction between these is unclear. The aim of this study was
to examine associations between biomarkers of renal and cardiovascular
function with neurocognitive performance. Neurocognitive function was
evaluated in 84 adolescent survivors of ALL (mean age of diagnosis=6.5
years, age at evaluation=14.3 years) treated with chemotherapy only. Fasting serum measurements of uric acid, creatinine, and glucose, as well as
resting blood pressure, and body mass index (BMI) were assessed within 48
hours of neurocognitive testing. For each biomarker, survivors with values
within the highest quartile were designated as “at risk” and were compared
to survivors in the lower quartiles. Neurocognitive function was examined
between groups for each biomarker. Compared to national norms, survivors demonstrated lower performance on measures of visuospatial skills,
processing speed, attention, and executive function. Survivors in the highest uric acid quartile performed lower on measures of executive function
(Complex Figure, p=0.03; Letter Fluency, p=0.03) and focused attention
(Trail Making, p=0.05) compared to those in the lower quartiles. Gender
and age did not impact associations between biomarkers and neurocognitive measures. There were no significant associations between neurocognitive performance and creatinine, blood pressure, BMI, or glucose. Uric acid
may be useful in identifying survivors of childhood ALL at higher risk for
neurocognitive problems. Further examination of interactions between this
marker of vascular and renal health and adverse late neurocognitive effects
is warranted.

B49
NEURAL CORRELATES OF RESPONSE CONFLICT AND EMOTIONAL REGULATION IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD Sarah Elke1, Diya Shi1,
Mahsa Khoei1, Aamena Kapasi1, Sandra Wiebe1; 1University of Alberta — Past
research suggests emotion regulation and executive function are mediated
by overlapping brain networks including prefrontal and anterior cingulate
cortices. Childhood is marked by rapid development of emotional, attentional, and behavioural control, but the precise relationship between these
distinct, interacting systems remains unclear. The current study investi-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

71

Poster Session B
gated the relationship between emotion regulation and executive function
in middle childhood using event related potentials (ERPs). The frontocentral N2, a stimulus-locked negative deflection reflecting response conflict,
was examined in a modified Flanker task. Seven- and 8-year-olds were
asked to “follow the middle fish” by pressing the left or right button. The
target fish was flanked by fish swimming in the opposite direction (conflict),
the same direction (congruent) or by starfish (neutral). Emotional regulation was manipulated across three blocks: a Baseline block where the task
was presented normally; a Frustration block where some trials included
a temporal lag; and a Recovery block where the task returned to normal.
There was a significant flanker effect on response times (RTs): conflicting
stimuli were associated with longer RTs than congruent or neutral trials.
ERP effects varied by block: in the Baseline block, N2 amplitude was larger
to conflict trials than neutral trials consistent with the N2’s suggested role
in conflict detection, whereas in the Frustration block, N2 amplitude was
larger to congruent trials than neutral trials while the conflict N2 did not
differ from either of the other two conditions. These results suggest frustration alters children’s ability to process stimulus conflict and this effect
persists after induction.

B50
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN MONITORING AND CONTROL IN
DISSOCIABLE LEARNING SYSTEMS Marissa Gorlick1, David Schnyer1,
W. Todd Maddox1; 1University of Texas at Austin — Cognitive psychology
emphasizes two learning systems; a reflective system that is under conscious control and a reflexive system that functions implicitly. Research
from our lab (Glass et al., 2011) found an age-related deficit in reflective
learning but an age-related advantage in reflexive learning. During reflective learning, conscious knowledge about the current state of learning is
updated (monitoring) and used to guide strategy selection (control). However, reflexive learning is an implicit process and does not rely on these
mechanisms. Age-related declines in monitoring and control likely influence differences in reflective learning. Older adults both (a) struggle to
monitor their learning and (b) have difficulty applying that knowledge to
select the appropriate strategy. The present study provides evidence for
an age-based deficit in monitoring reflective learning leading to poor control. Participants learned to classify exemplars modified from one prototype (AN; reflexive learning) or two prototypes (AB; reflective learning)
and were then tested on both categories. During test, participants provided
a confidence rating as a measure of online monitoring. Replicating Glass
et al, older adults were less accurate than younger adults in the reflective
task indicating poor control, but older adults outperformed younger adults
in the reflexive task. Older adults revealed poorly calibrated monitoring
relative to younger adults in the reflective task. Also as predicted, there
were no age-related monitoring differences in the reflexive task. Overall,
our results suggest that older adults are less successful than younger adults
at monitoring reflective learning, potentially contributing to deficits in control that are critical for learning.

B51
GIVING YOUR BRAIN A BOOST: ENGAGING ACTIVITIES ENHANCE
NEURAL RECRUITMENT Sara Haber1, Ian McDonough1, Denise Park1; 1Uni-

versity of Texas, Dallas — The Scaffolding Theory of Aging and Cognition
(STAC) postulates that with advancing age, people use and develop alternative neural circuits (neural scaffolding) to maintain cognitive functioning
in response to brain changes (i.e., cortical thinning, dopamine depletion).
Neural scaffolds may develop as a result of differing lifestyle activities and
potentially explain individual variations in cognitive function in old age.
To evaluate this hypothesis, a lifestyle intervention was implemented in
older adults (aged 60-90) using a sub-sample of the Synapse Project (n=39).
Participants in the experimental groups engaged in cognitively demanding
tasks for 15 hours a week over 14 weeks such as quilting and digital photography (Productive Engagement). Control groups had an equivalent weekly
commitment, but did not participate in new learning and involved low-demand cognitive or social stimulation (Receptive Engagement). All participants underwent a battery of cognitive tests and fMRI scanning before
and after the intervention. While in the scanner, older adults completed
a semantic classification task in which they made living/non-living judgments to easy (cat) or hard (virus) words. Univariate analyses were used
to evaluate the extent that the lifestyle intervention altered neural modulation in response to increased task demands. Productive Engagement (when

72

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
compared to Receptive Engagement) increased neural modulation at posttest in regions not previously recruited at pre-test including occipital,
parahippocampal, and fusiform regions. Thus, as predicted by the STAC
model, making a lifestyle change that requires learning new, cognitively
demanding sets of skills can result in neural scaffolding by the recruitment
of alternate brain regions.

B52
PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL CONCOMITANTS OF CRAVING: THE
ROLE OF SMOKING CUES IN INFORMATION PROCESSING IN
ACTIVE SMOKERS AND NON-SMOKERS Justinn Cochran1, Ewald
Naumann2, Rob Kydd1, John Sollers1; 1University of Auckland, 2Universität
Trier — Substance abuse is prevalent worldwide and represents one of the
largest preventable health problems in developed countries. Craving has
been identified as an undeniable symptom of substance abuse withdrawal
and is also one of the most commonly reported reasons for relapse in those
attempting to quit. However, little is actually known about the complex
nature of the many components driving the phenomenon. In the present
study, the contingent negative variation (CNV) and baseline heart rate
variability (HRV) will be assessed in smokers and non-smokers while they
viewed smoking, appetitive and neutral images. Participants (Total N= 50,
24 smokers) took part in a standard S1-S2 CNV paradigm which consisted
of three blocks (40 trials each) of visual stimuli separated by six seconds.
Baseline HRV (5 minutes) was assessed prior to any image presentations.
Event-related potential (ERP) data were collected from frontal, central, and
parietal sites along the vertex (Fz, Cz, Pz). Results indicate there were differences in the early CNV at more frontal sites by group, such that smokers
showed increased negativity to the smoking images while the non-smokers
did not. This relationship was only observed at Fz and Cz and disappeared
at Pz. Individuals with high baseline HRV appeared to process all images
in a situationally appropriate manner, regardless of group. It appear both
HRV and CNV provide important data that will elucidate how information
processing may be different in substance dependent persons, and lead to
better understanding of craving.

B53
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN ORIENTING SENSITIVITY MODULATE EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS AND REACTION TIMES IN
A MODIFIED ATTENTION NETWORK TASK Russell Costa1, Emilee
Naylor1,2, Jaiya Choles1, Nicholas Halper1, Stephen Rutishauser1, Lesa Ellis1;
1
Westminster College, 2University of Oregon — Orienting Sensitivity (OS),
considered a broad attentional construct in models of adult temperament,
reflects individual differences in the propensity to notice and react to low
intensity stimuli. We investigated relationships between self-reported
levels of orienting sensitivity and behavioral and electrophysiological measures in 54 individuals completing a modified Attentional Network Task.
The task included trials with either congruent or incongruent flankers that
were either not cued or preceded by a double asterisk cue, allowing for
examination of interference effects (congruent/incongruent trials) and
alerting effects (cued/non-cued trials). Individuals also completed a self-report measure of temperament (Adult Temperament Questionnaire) and
median scores on the Orienting Sensitivity factor were used to divide participants into low and high OS groups. Response time (RT) data revealed no
main effect between OS groups; however, a significant interaction between
Cueing, Interference, and OS Group revealed that individuals with low
Orienting Sensitivity demonstrated greater RT differences between cued
and non-cued congruent trials than did individuals high in Orienting Sensitivity. Moreover, event-related potential (ERP) data showed a significant
Cueing by OS Group interaction in centro-parietal and frontal electrode
sites for target-locked N1 and P3 components, such that participants low
in orienting sensitivity displayed greater amplitude differences for cued
versus non-cued trials than did those high in orienting sensitivity, regardless of Congruency condition. These findings suggest that individuals low
in Orienting Sensitivity are more likely to show decreased attention specifically in non-cued conditions, and that performance differences may be
attributable to attentional mechanisms of orienting during early stages of
visual processing.

2013 Annual Meeting

B54
TO IMITATE OR NOT: PREPARATORY SUPPRESSION AND
MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM MODULATION Katy Cross1, Rob Eriksen1,
Marco Iacoboni1; 1University of California, Los Angeles — Humans have an
automatic tendency to imitate observed actions. This is thought to result
from motor activation during action observation, mediated by the human
mirror neuron system. To avoid perpetual imitation, an active control
mechanism is thought to inhibit this automatic tendency. Recent work has
focused on reactive imitation control mechanisms in situations where the
need for control is unpredictable. Here, we used fMRI to examine preparatory control mechanisms that can be employed when advance information is available. Participants performed a cued compatibility task requiring either imitation (compatible trials) or counter-imitation (incompatible
trials) of finger movements. A parallel spatial compatibility task replacing
the fingers with moving dots was included to determine whether control of
imitation relies on different mechanisms from non-social stimuli. According to dual route models, the automatic response proceeds on compatible
trials but is suppressed (1) during preparation for incompatible trials (automatic response is incorrect) and (2) when the compatibility is not known in
advance (automatic response is incorrect on half of trials). A Cue (Fingers/
Dots) x Preparation (Compatible/Incompatible/No Information) interaction demonstrated that preparatory suppression involves bilateral middle
frontal gyrus, primary motor and inferior parietal cortices during imitative
control, but only early visual cortex during spatial control. Preparation for
compatible trials also demonstrated striking differences: Faster responses
were associated with increased inferior frontal gyrus, pars opercularis
activity for imitation trials, compared to superior parietal and dorsal premotor cortex for spatial trials. These results suggest a specialized preparatory imitation control mechanism that involves modulation of the mirror
neuron system.

B55
SOCIAL SIMON EFFECT: CO-REPRESENTATION OR SOCIAL
FACILITATION? Karen Davranche1, Laurence Carbonnell1, Clément Belletier1,
Thierry Hasbroucq1, Pascal Huguet1; 1Aix-Marseille Université et CNRS — This
study aimed to elucidate the mechanisms underlying the social Simon effect
(SSE). Electromyographic (EMG) recordings and distributional analyses
have been used to assess whether coaction alters information processing,
cognitive control, and the susceptibility of making fast impulsive errors.
Additionally, each participant’s social comparison orientation (SCO) was
measured to address whether the effects of co-action varies according to
their inclination to compare with others. In a randomized protocol, forty
participants performed a Simon task, an individual Go/Nogo task, and a
joint Go/Nogo task (social Simon task). Results showed that coaction shortened reaction time (RT). As predicted from social facilitation theory, the
benefit was larger for compatible (CO) than for incompatible (IN) trials.
This social facilitation effect explains the larger SSE observed in the joint
Go/Nogo task (10ms), compared to that observed in the individual Go/
Nogo task (4ms). The propensity of making fast impulsive errors also
increased when working co-actively, especially for the high SCO participants. The correction rate and the delta curves yet did not highlight any
cognitive control impairment. Based on the occurrence of the EMG activity
of the agonist muscle involved in the task, fractionated-RT showed that
coaction actually shortened both pre-motor time (14ms) and motor time
(4ms). Interestingly, for high SCO participants, the coaction affected each
RT-component (pre-motor/motor time) differently as function of the nature
of the trials (CO vs. IN). The fact that coaction predominantly affected CO
trials suggests that SSE has more to do with a social facilitation effect than
with a co-representation phenomenon.

B56
REGULATION OF CRAVING IN COCAINE-DEPENDENCE: AN FMRI
STUDY Cameron M. DeLeone1, Dan Marino1, Kathleen M. Carroll1, Hedy
Kober1; 1Yale University School of Medicine — Can cocaine addicts regulate
their craving? Craving is a central feature of addiction, which repeatedly
predicts drug use and treatment outcomes. Consistently, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), the ‘gold standard’ therapy for addiction, includes
key training on regulation of craving, and decreases drug use. In contrast,
it is a commonly held view that substance-dependent individuals have
a brain-based deficit in inhibitory control and regulation. Furthermore,

Poster Session B
cocaine use has been related to structural decrements in prefrontal cortex
(PFC) control systems. Here, we investigated whether cocaine-dependent
individuals (CDs) can recruit PFC and regulate their craving for cocaine
using a cognitive strategy. A treatment-seeking sample of CDs completed
the Regulation of Craving task during fMRI. Participants viewed pictures
of food and cocaine, and were instructed to think about either (a) the immediate experience of consuming the item (“NOW”) or (b) the negative consequences of consuming the item (“LATER”) – the strategy taught in CBT.
Self-reported cravings for cocaine were lower during the LATER condition
than the NOW condition, suggesting that CDs can regulate craving. Furthermore, the LATER strategy resulted in relative deactivation of subcortical regions associated with craving (e.g., ventral striatum and amygdala)
and increased prefrontal activity in regions associated with cognitive control and emotion regulation (e.g., dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC)).
However, dlPFC activity was variable and related to individual differences
in regulation success. Results further related to clinical variables associated
with cocaine use.

B57
PUTTING RANDOMNESS UNDER CONTROL: HOW PERSPECTIVE
TAKING AND AGENCY INFLUENCE RANDOM DIGIT GENERATION
Sebastian Dieguez1, Lucas Spierer1, Peter Brugger2, Jean-Marie Annoni1; 1University of Fribourg, 2University Hospital Zurich — The perception of patterns in
random events is increased by (real or illusory) control over the generation
of those events. Here we investigated whether subjective control would
also affect the voluntary production of random events. We tested participants with the Mental Dice Task (MDT), which requires generating digits
1–6 as randomly as possible at a paced timing. In separate experiments, we
manipulated motor agency, perspective taking and felt control. Throwing a
blank die while generating random digits significantly reduced stereotyped
responses (counting in +1), compared to watching someone else throw the
blank die. This effect persisted even after the blank die was no longer rolled
(Study 1). The same effect was found when instructions were given in a
first-person perspective (compared to a third-person perspective) format
(i.e. “imagine [You are vs I am] rolling a die”) (Study 2). Additionally,
when throwing a blank die with the left hand we found that right-handers
also reduced backward counts (counting in -1), suggesting a motor-spatial
component (Study 3). Finally, we investigated whether generally lacking
control influenced MDT performance. After performing a frustrating task,
participants produced less stereotypical responses than after a neutral task
(Study 4). Collectively, our findings show that modulating the sense of control alters random digit generation: motor involvement and motor priming
of the self, first-person perspective-taking, and the need to restore personal
control all improve the production of randomness by suppressing a prepotent counting bias. Somewhat paradoxically, staying in control can thus be
said to facilitate random behavior.

B58
GO /NOGO PERFORMANCE UNDER SOCIALLY EVALUATED
PHYSIOLOGICAL STRESS: INFLUENCES ON INHIBITORY CONTROL - AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Angelika Dierolf1, Julia
Fechtner1, Ewald Naumann1; 1Department of Psychology, University of Trier,
Germany — There is increasing evidence for impairing effects of stress on
cognitive performance, especially memory. However, other cognitive functions, such as flexibility or inhibitory control have been hardly examined,
even though there is some evidence that stress increases impulsive and
aggressive behavior. The aim of the present study was to investigate the
effect of acute stress and the thereby caused cortisol increase on executive
function, specifically inhibitory control. 39 healthy male participants were
randomly assigned to the socially evaluated cold pressor test or warm pressor test (control condition). Beforehand and afterwards, participants performed a Go/Nogo task with visual letters. Event-related potentials (ERPs),
reaction times, and error rates were measured. Additionally, acute levels of
salivary cortisol were collected on the basis of which stressed participants
were divided into cortisol-responder and –nonresponder. Established Go/
Nogo effects within the ERPs could be replicated: the N2 and P3 components were augmented for Nogo relative to Go stimuli at frontal and fronto-central sides. Additionally, Go trials showed a more positive P2 compared to Nogo trials. Acute stress or cortisol increase did not affect error
rates and reaction times, but influenced event-related earlier components.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

73

Poster Session B
While cortisol-responder showed an enlarged frontal P2 Go>Nogo effect
after the stressor, it was diminished in cortisol-nonresponder. Moreover,
cortisol-nonresponder and –responder showed a more negative N2 after
the stressor. These results indicate that stress affects the underlying neuronal processes of behavioral inhibition as a function of cortisol increase. This
study provides further evidence that acute stress changes brain processes
during executive functions.

B59
UNCONSCIOUS WORKING MEMORY ENGAGES THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX Johan Eriksson1, Fredrik Bergström1; 1Umeå University —
Representational durability is commonly considered to differ depending
on whether the initial presentation was consciously or unconsciously
perceived. Consciously perceived material can be retained for a lifetime,
whereas the effects of unconscious perception is believed to last for less
than a second. Here we use the attentional blink paradigm to present single
letters either consciously or unconsciously. By introducing a delay of 5-15
seconds between letter presentation and a forced-choice task, we demonstrate that task performance was above chance level for unseen letters even
for delays of up to 15 s, implying a long representational durability. We
then used functional magnetic resonance imaging and multiple regression to separate brain activity related to the different processing stages of
perception (encoding), information maintenance, and response (retrieval),
similar to a common approach for studying neural correlates of working
memory. We demonstrate that the maintenance phase, which for unseen
T2:s can be conceptualized as unconscious working memory, engages the
prefrontal cortex. Thus, memory for unconscious events can have a duration of several seconds, and prefrontal cortex is involved in maintaining
unconscious representations over longer periods.

B60
NEUROIMAGING DURING A WORKING MEMORY TASK IN
REMOTE TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY: EVIDENCE FROM NHL
ALUMNI Carrie Esopenko1, Priya Kumar1, Claude Alain1,2, Tiffany Chow1,2,
Randy McIntosh1,2, Stephen Strother1,2, Brian Levine1,2; 1Rotman Research
Institute, 2University of Toronto — Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is associated
with neurocognitive changes that can result in cognitive impairment, and
can elevate the risk of developing dementia, including Alzheimer’s disease
(AD) and chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE). Repetitive mild TBIs
in sport have been linked to cognitive impairments in aging (such as AD
and memory impairments) and to an earlier onset of cognitive impairments
compared to individuals who have not experienced a concussion. Given
that the National Hockey League alumni (NHLa) comprise a large sample
of individuals across a wide age range who were subjected to high speed
collisions with concussion during their careers, these athletes provide an
excellent model for research examining the interaction between TBI and
aging. NHLa and control participants’ working memory (WM) and attention abilities were assessed during simultaneous functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electroencephalography using a series of n-back
tasks. Behaviorally, NHLa showed decreasing accuracy with increasing
WM load relative to controls. FMRI data showed greater activation in the
middle prefrontal cortex and posterior parietal regions with increasing WM
load for NHLa compared to controls. This was accompanied by a greater
P300 for the target relative to the standard for NHLa compared to controls, also modulated by differences in WM load. Our results suggest that
sports-related TBIs may have long-term implications on neurocognitive
functioning.

B61
ENHANCING VERBAL AND SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY WITH
NON-INVASIVE, DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION OF LEFT DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX Brian Falcone1, Ryan McKendrick1,
Raja Parasuraman1; 1George Mason University — Previous research points
to a possible dissociation between left and right dorsal lateral prefrontal
cortex (DLPFC) in the control of working memory, with left DLPFC associated with verbal working memory and right DLPFC with spatial working memory, although the latter results are less clear than the former. This
study further examined the issue of lateralized DLPFC control of verbal
and spatial working memory through the application of a non-invasive
brain stimulation technique, transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS).

74

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
Anodal (2mA) or sham (0.1mA) stimulation was applied to the left or right
DLPFC while participants performed spatial and verbal working memory
tasks. The results of stimulation were compared to pre-stimulation baseline
performance to determine performance gain scores for each group. Anodal
stimulation of DLPFC enhanced performance in both working memory
tasks. However, no evidence was found for a dissociation between left and
right DLPFC stimulation. Participants who received right DLPFC stimulation did not display improved spatial working memory as predicted; however stimulation of the left DLPFC improved performance on both verbal
and spatial working memory. The results show that the left DLPFC plays a
major role in the control of both verbal and spatial working memory.

B62
TIMING AND FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF CORTICAL
REGIONS SUBSERVING VERBAL ENCODING AND REHEARSAL
David Fegen1, Bradley Buchsbaum2, Mark D’Esposito1; 1University of California, Berkeley, 2Rotman Research Institute, Toronto — Working memory (WM)
refers to the limited-capacity store responsible for maintaining and manipulating task-relevant information over short time-periods. WM tasks generally involve multiple stages: an encoding period during which the incoming task-relevant information is perceived and converted into a construct
that can be remembered, and a delay period during which the task-relevant
information is maintained by rehearsal processes. For verbal WM many
areas are known to be active during encoding including primary auditory
cortex in superior temporal gyrus (STG) as well as Sylvian-parietal-temporal junction (area Spt), while during the delay period rehearsal regions are
known to be active: inferior frontal gyrus (IFG, BA 44), premotor (PM, BA
6) and area Spt. However, while many studies have consistently identified
these cortical areas as being active, there is little evidence directly using the
fMRI BOLD signal demonstrating how the different areas relate to each
other in a network. Therefore, we examined both the timing and functional
connectivity during two important phases of verbal WM: encoding (with
a listen word task), and the delay period (with a subvocal rehearsal task)
in an fMRI study with 31 subjects. Preliminary results show that during
the listen word task STG activates before area Spt and that the two regions
are functionally connected. We also demonstrate that during the subvocal
rehearsal task activity occurs first in PM, then area Spt, followed by IFG
and that these regions form a functional network. These results provide
evidence that functional networks among different cortical areas subserve
different stages of WM.

B63
CAUSAL EVIDENCE FOR MECHANISMS UNDERLYING MAINTENANCE IN VISUAL WORKING MEMORY: A BEHAVIOURAL TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION STUDY. Eva Feredoes1,2, Nahid
Zokaei2,3, Masud Husain2,3; 1University of Reading, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, 3Institute of Neurology, University College
London — The number of visual items that can be maintained in working
memory is limited, although the underlying mechanisms of maintenance
that leads to such capacity limits are unclear. One hypothesis is that, in
sensory cortex, only a one item (or a subset) can be represented in a focus
of attention (FOA). To test this, we applied the causal brain stimulation
approach of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to motion sensitive
MT+, with the aim of disrupting maintenance of motion information in
FOA. In Experiment 1, TMS was applied after a cue indicating which of two
previously presented motion directions was to be recalled. This manipulation would presumably bring the cued item only into FOA. TMS decreased
recall precision of the cued item; recall of the uncued item was unaffected.
In Experiment 2, by presenting motion memory targets sequentially, the
item in FOA was manipulated intrinsically. This manipulation relied on
previous observations in which the last item in a sequence is maintained
with higher precision, suggesting it enters FOA in an obligatory fashion.
Seemingly paradoxically, TMS improved precision for the first item in the
sequence (and marginally disrupted the second item). We suggest that TMS
again disrupted the item in FOA (i.e., the second item), resulting in it producing less interference on maintenance of the first item, hence improving
its recall precision. Together, these results show that items are maintained
in sensory cortex with varying precision, which could, in turn, be explained
by some items being represented in a limited capacity FOA.

2013 Annual Meeting

B64
NEURAL SYSTEMS UNDERLYING DISTRACTOR INHIBITION IN
VERBAL WORKING MEMORY AND THEIR CONTRIBUTION TO
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY
Christian Fiebach1,2,3, Basten Ulrike1; 1Department of Psychology, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 2IDeA Center for Individual Development
and Adaptive Education, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 3Donders Institute for
Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands
— Recent work has shown that ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) is
involved in shielding the contents of working memory (WM) against distraction. While it has been suggested that the individual ability to inhibit
distractors critically contributes to individual differences in WM capacity,
an association between inhibition-related brain activity and WM capacity
was observed in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) but not in VLPFC.
These insights rely primarily on studies of visual and visuo-spatial WM.
We used functional magnetic resonance imaging to investigate the neural
bases underlying distractor inhibition in verbal WM and their contribution
to individual differences in WM capacity. In a sample of 52 participants, we
observed robust activity in VLPFC and DLPFC, elicited by distractor letters during the delay period of a letter WM task, but suppressed activation
in occipital cortex. Functional coupling of VLPFC and DLPFC with visual
regions was increased during distractor inhibition, and multiple prefrontal seed regions showed convergent functional coupling with the occipital
areas that exhibit distractor-related suppression of BOLD signals. Individual WM capacity was negatively correlated with the strength of functional
coupling between right VLPFC and higher visual areas. These results provide evidence for fronto-posterior top-down guided suppression of perceptual processing as a mechanism underlying the shielding of working
memory against distraction. Importantly, our data lend strong support to
the hypothesis that the capacity of WM is determined – at least partly – by
the degree to which VLPFC can implement top-down control over visual
areas when task-irrelevant information must be ignored.

B65
BLOBOLOGY : USING MECHANISTIC COMPUTER MODEL OF
HUMAN BRAIN CIRCUITS TO UNDERSTAND THE NEUROBIOLOGY
OF BOLDFMRI Hugo Geerts1, Athan Spiros1, Patrick Roberts1; 1In Silico Biosciences — Many BOLD-fMRI imaging studies report on changes in neuronal activation during specific tasks, but the real payoff is to understand
the neurobiological basis of these changes that might ultimately lead to new
drug targets for cognitive enhancement. Quantitative Systems Pharmacology, e.g. computer-based mechanistic simulation of biophysically realistic
neuronal circuits, especially when combined with human pathology or
genotype imaging, is a new approach to understand the neurobiological
basis of BOLD-fMRI changes. We have developed a computer model of a
cortical network, containing 18 different neuromodulatory receptors that is
calibrated using human clinical data on the N-Back working memory test in
various populations. We calculate a measure for a single-voxel BOLD-fMRI
signal based upon the implementation of the biophysical processes from
neuronal synaptic activity and coupled with energy and glucose metabolism and changes in vascular flow and blood level oxygen. The COMT Val158Met genotype is implemented using the results of clinical PET imaging
radiotracer displacement in healthy volunteers. We illustrate the power of
this approach by reproducing the observed effects of the COMT genotype
in schizophrenia patients on cognitive performance and on cortical activation. While the COMT Met/Met subjects as a group are better on working memory performance, a subgroup of COMT Val/Val achieve the same
performance level, but always at the expense of higher BOLD-fMRI by
recruiting additional GABA or D1 mediated processes. With the limitation
of studying single-voxel readouts, this approach is a powerful technique
for starting to better understand the neurobiology of BOLD-fMRI changes.

B66
THE ROLE OF AGE OF ACQUISITION AND PROFICIENCY ON NONWORD RHYMING IN 6- TO 8-YEAR-OLD BILINGUAL CHILDREN
Annika Andersson1, Jessica L Fanning2, Lisa D Sanders3; 1Lund University,
2
University of Oregon, 3University of Massachusetts — Speech signals change
rapidly and timing differences as small as 50 ms can be critical for distinguishing between minimal pairs (e.g., bat-pat). Thus, fast phonological

Poster Session B
processing is important for understanding speech. Strong and positive
relationships between phonological awareness (PA, e.g., the ability to recognize rhymes) and vocabulary size have been widely reported in both
monolingual and bilingual children. Though PA has been explored with
behavioral studies in bilingual children, online processing of phonology
has not. ERPs were measured in 6- to 8-year-old native Spanish speaking
children with English as their second language listening to rhyming and
nonrhyming pairs of nonsense words with English phonology. Nonwords
were used to help children focus on phonological rather than semantic
processing. Though bilingual 6- to 8-year olds were expected to recognize
rhymes, neurocognitive measures of rhyme processing failed to establish
the anterior effect (an increased negativity for rhyming targets) previously
reported in monolingual children. Further, the posterior rhyming effect (a
decreased negativity for rhyming targets) was evident only in the group
with higher English proficiency, within the normal range for monolingual
children. In this group the posterior rhyming effect had a longer latency
than what was observed in younger monolingual children. The results suggest that even though bilingual children do well on behavioral tests of PA,
processing of sub-syllabic phonology is slowed and more variable in their
second language. Proficiency and age of acquisition are more important
for mature phonological processing than previous behavioral studies have
suggested.

B67
ADULTS WITH DYSLEXIA SHOW INTACT BUT LESS ACCESSIBLE
NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF SPEECH SOUNDS Bart Boets1,
Hans Op de Beeck1, Maaike Vandermosten1, Sophie Scott2, Céline Gillebert3,
Dante Mantini4, Stefan Sunaert1, Jan Wouters1, Pol Ghesquière1; 1KU Leuven,
Belgium, 2University College London, UK, 3University of Oxford, UK, 4ETH
Zurich, Swizerland — It is well-established that individuals with dyslexia
perform poorly on various phonological tasks. Currently, there is an ongoing debate whether this phonological deficit should be attributed to less
well specified phonetic representations per se or rather to an impaired
access to these speech sound representations. Here we combine functional
magnetic resonance imaging with multi-voxel pattern analysis to quantify
the neural quality of these representations in adult dyslexic and typical
readers. Results reveal that the activity profiles elicited by different sublexical speech sounds can be differentiated along various brain areas involved
in auditory, speech and phonological processing, with left-hemisphere
regions outperforming right-hemisphere regions in classifying stop-consonants. Yet, in spite of their obvious reading and phonological problems,
the neural fingerprint of these speech sounds was as robust and distinct in
adults with dyslexia as in typically reading controls. However, by assessing intrinsic functional connectivity we revealed that the communication
between left inferior frontal areas and left superior temporal areas was significantly hampered in dyslexics. These findings, along with the evidence
for a structural impairment in the left superior longitudinal fasciculus white
matter tract, suggest that the left inferior frontal areas (which are involved
in effortful phonological processing) have less efficient access to the phonetic representations which are mainly hosted in left superior temporal
areas. Therefore, these data provide the first neural evidence that individuals with dyslexia show intact but less accessible phonetic representations.

B68
AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY OF BILINGUALS’ READING STRATEGY TRANSFER: THE CONTRIBUTION OF SPELLING-SOUND CONSISTENCY AND ORTHOGRAPHIC SIMILARITY
TO THE ACTIVATION OF PHONOLOGY Mona Roxana Botezatu1, Maya
Misra1; 1The Pennsylvania State University — We examined whether bilinguals with a logographic first language (L1–Chinese) transferred reading
strategies to their orthographically deep second language (L2–English).
Highly proficient Chinese-English bilinguals made rhyme judgments of
visually presented English words while behavioral and EEG measures
were recorded. Results were compared to those from a group of English
monolingual controls. The spelling-sound consistency and orthographic
similarity of semantically unrelated rhyming and non-rhyming prime-target pairs were varied systematically. To manipulate consistency, graphemically dissimilar primes and targets that either matched or did not match
in consistency were compared in both rhyming (consistent/consistent:
WHITE-FIGHT; inconsistent/consistent: HEIGHT-FIGHT) and non-rhymCognitive Neuroscience Society

75

Poster Session B
ing conditions (consistent/inconsistent: SCALE-LEAK; inconsistent/
inconsistent: WORK-LEAK). Orthographic similarity was manipulated by
comparing pairs that matched in consistency but were either graphemically dissimilar (WHITE-FIGHT; WORK-LEAK) or similar (RIGHT-FIGHT;
STEAK-LEAK). Bilinguals were more sensitive than monolinguals to the
consistency manipulation for rhyming words, with increased N400 amplitudes to targets following inconsistent versus consistent words. Bilinguals
also showed increased latencies and N400 amplitudes to targets primed
by consistent non-rhyming words, whereas monolinguals were more sensitive to targets primed by inconsistent non-rhyming words. However, both
groups showed equally accurate responses to the consistency manipulation. The effect of orthographic similarity was comparable for the bilingual
and monolingual participants, with behavioral and ERP measures from
both groups showing facilitation for converging cues from orthography
and phonology and inhibition for diverging cues. Results suggest that bilinguals with an L1 logographic writing system may have a bias to consider
words in an L2 alphabetic orthography as more consistent than they are.

B69
PREDICTING TONE LANGUAGE APTITUDE WITH THE MISMATCH
NEGATIVITY Anita R. Bowles1, Valerie Karuzis1, Valerie Shafer2, Joseph
Dien1; 1University of Maryland, 2City University of New York — The MMN
is an event-related potential (ERP) component that provides an index of
early auditory sensory memory (Näätänen, 2001). It is sensitive to native
and foreign language (FL) phonological categories (e.g., Chandrasekaran,
Krishnan & Gandour, 2007; Kaan et al, 2008; Näätänen et al., 1997) and may
differ for successful and unsuccessful FL learners (Diaz et al., 2008; Jakoby,
Goldstein, & Faust, 2011). In a study of tone language FL vocabulary learning, English native speakers were passively exposed to two auditory nonce
syllables during EEG recording. These syllables carried different pitch contours (rising, falling, or flat) and began at three different frequencies (low,
middle, or high). MMN responses were recorded for segmental and tonal
contrasts. Following this EEG session and a set of behavioral pre-tests of
intelligence, memory, pitch processing ability, and other cognitive abilities,
individuals learned to associate Mandarin-like monosyllables and disyllables with a set of 24 pictures, over 6 training sessions, and were tested on
their learning accuracy. MMN responses to specific contrasts differed for
successful and unsuccessful learners of the new words and correlated with
pre-training tests of cognitive and perceptual ability. In addition, previous
musical experience, self-rated musical ability, and performance on musical aptitude tests correlated with MMN responses. This study supports the
MMN as one measure of an underlying ability that supports FL vocabulary
learning in a tone language.

B70
AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY OF THE TIME COURSE OF
BILINGUAL WORD RECOGNITION Loretta Yiu1, Kriya Krisnabai-Gitanjali1,
Michael Pitts1, Enriqueta Canseco-Gonzalez1; 1Reed College — Current theories of language comprehension in monolinguals suggest that phonological
processing occurs before activation of semantic and syntactic information.
Bilingual language comprehension likely requires an additional level:
knowledge of which language a specific utterance belongs to. The Revised
Bilingual Interactive Activation (BIA+) model of word recognition proposes
that bilinguals use language ‘tags,’ that is, information identifying the specific language of a word, to help them monitor the appropriate language
at any given time (Dijkstra & van Heuven, 2002). A central question then
is when exactly this language ‘tag’ information becomes available during
language comprehension. Using the recording of event-related potentials,
we investigated the time course of semantic and language ‘tag’ encoding during visual word recognition. Spanish-English bilinguals viewed a
series of printed words while making dual-choice go/nogo and left/right
hand decisions based on semantic (whether the word was an object or an
animal) and language ‘tag’ information (whether the word was in English
or Spanish). The onset latency of the N200 (related to response inhibition)
indicated that semantic information was available approximately 50 ms
before language ‘tag’ information. This finding is compatible with the BIA+
model and supports the claim that language ‘tag’ information is accessed
relatively late during bilingual word recognition.

76

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

B71
HIGH PROFICIENCY IN A SECOND LANGUAGE IS CHARACTERIZED BY GREATER INVOLVEMENT OF THE FIRST LANGUAGE NETWORK: EVIDENCE FROM CHINESE LEARNERS OF ENGLISH Fan
Cao1, Ran Tao2, Li Liu2, Charles Perfetti3, James Booth4; 1Division of Psychology, School of Humanities and Social Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 2State Key Lab of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing
Normal University, Beijing, China, 3Learning Research and Development Center,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 44Department of Communication
Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University, Evanston, Il., USA — The
assimilation hypothesis argues that second language learning recruits the
brain network for processing the native language, whereas the accommodation hypothesis argues that learning a second language recruits brain
structures not involved in native language processing. This study tested
these hypotheses by examining brain activation of a group of native Chinese speakers, who were late bilinguals with varying levels of proficiency
in English, when they performed a rhyming judgment to visually presented
English word pairs (CE group) during fMRI. Assimilation was examined by
comparing the CE group to native Chinese speakers performing the rhyming task in Chinese (CC group), and accommodation was examined by comparing the CE group to native English speakers performing the rhyming
task in English (EE group). The CE group was very similar in activation to
the CC group, supporting the assimilation hypothesis. Additional support
for the assimilation hypothesis was the finding that higher proficiency in
the CE group was related to increased activation in the Chinese network (as
defined by the CC > EE) including the left middle frontal gyrus, the right
inferior parietal lobule and right precuneus and decreased activation in the
English network (as defined by the EE > CC) including the left inferior frontal gyrus and the left inferior temporal gyrus. Although most of the results
support assimilation, there was some evidence for accommodation as the
CE group showed less activation in the Chinese network including the right
middle occipital gyrus, which has been involved in holistic visuo-spatial
processing of Chinese characters.

B72
MATURATION OF NEURAL CORRELATES OF DISCRIMINATION
OF SPEECH SYLLABLE SEQUENCES IN PRESCHOOL CHILDREN
AND ADULTS Margaret Kamowski-Shakibai1,2, Valerie L. Shafer2, Yan H. Yu2,3,
Katherine Hawkland2; 1Marymount Manhattan College, 2City University of New
York, Graduate Center, 3William Paterson University — Previous studies have
shown both positive and negative mismatch responses (MMRs) under the
age of five years to segmental changes (Shafer, Yu, Datta, 2010). The goal of
the current study is to examine MMRs to syllable sequence changes in preschool children and adults. Three naturally-produced 150-ms syllables [ko],
[gu] and [ka] were presented as a standard sequence /koguka/ or deviant
sequence /kokagu/ to preschoolers and adults. Preliminary analyses show
a variation of responses across age groups. Mature adults showed a mismatch negativity (MMN) at all frontal-central sites to the syllable sequence
change. In preschoolers, the MMR appears initially as a positivity at frontal
midline and right sites; the negativity first appears at left sites around 20
months of age. Four-year-olds generally showed a negative MMR/MMN
over left sites and a positive MMR over right sites. The topography of these
MMRs differs from that found to changes in vowel spectral information;
the negative MMR/MMN first emerged over right rather than left sites to
these spectral changes (Shafer, et al., 2011). These preliminary findings suggest differences in involvement of the hemispheres in spectral versus temporal changes that are highly apparent in cortical maturation.

B73
THE ORTHOGRAPHIC CONSISTENCY EFFECTS IN CHINESE
SPOKEN WORD RECOGNITION Wei-Fan Chen1, En-Ju Lin1, Yu-Lin Tzeng2,
Jie-Li Tsai3, Chia-Ying Lee1,2,3; 1Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, Taiwan,
2
Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, 3Department
of Psychology, National Chengchi University,Taiwan — In alphabetic languages, orthographic consistency or feedback consistency is defined as the
degree of mapping consistency from phonology to orthography (whether
words had rimes that can be spelled in multiple ways, e.g., /ip/ in heap
and deep). Studies have demonstrated the orthographic consistency effect,

2013 Annual Meeting
in which the feedback inconsistent words took longer and yielded more
errors than the consistent words in the auditory lexical decisions task. It
suggests that the orthographic knowledge influences the spoken word recognition. In Chinese, the pervasive homophony implies the orthographic
form is particularly important for selecting meaning and escaping homophony. A greater impact from orthography during spoken word recognition in Chinese than in other alphabetic writing system is expected. This
study examined two types of orthographic consistency effects, namely
homophone density and feedback consistency, in the semantic categorical
task with event-related potentials (ERPs) measurement. The homophone
density is defined as the number of characters sharing exactly the same
pronunciation (including tonal variation) and the feedback consistency is
defined as whether a set of homophones can be subdivided into several
orthographic subgroups based on their phonetic radical. Two types of
orthographic consistency effects were found in different ERP components.
One is the feedback consistency effect in the N400 time window with frontal central distribution and the other is the homophone density effect in
the late positivity component with central parietal distribution. Congruent
with the orthographic consistency effect found in English, our data supports the bi-directional interaction between phonology and orthography
for Chinese spoken word recognition.

B74
THE NEURAL LOCUS OF THE BILINGUAL ADVANTAGE

Emily
Coderre1,2, Jason Smith2, Walter van Heuven1, Barry Horwitz2; 1University of
Nottingham, 2NIDCD, National Institutes of Health — In bilingualism, the daily
need to control multiple languages is thought to enhance cognitive control
abilities, conferring a ‘bilingual advantage’ such that bilinguals outperform their monolingual counterparts on both linguistic and non-linguistic
tasks of executive control. However, despite the well-documented behavioral evidence for a bilingual advantage, there has been no methodological investigation into the neural origin of this advantage. If the bilingual
advantage stems from the experience of bilingual language processing,
and if the advantage extends to non-linguistic executive function, then a
brain area or network that is commonly activated for language processing,
linguistic cognitive control, and non-linguistic control should be enhanced
in bilinguals compared to monolinguals. The current study investigated
this possibility by testing monolinguals and bilinguals on separable conditions of linguistic and non-linguistic cognitive control (via an adapted
flanker task) and language processing (via a semantic categorization task).
A conjunction analysis in each group identified brain regions that were
similarly activated by all three functions. In monolinguals, the conjunction
showed no significant areas of overlap between these functions, indicating
that monolinguals used largely disparate areas for each function. However,
the bilingual conjunction showed a significant area of overlap in the left
inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG), indicating that the broad involvement of the
LIFG in cognitive control and language processing selectively enhances this
structure in bilinguals, reciprocally enhancing domain-general executive
processing. This research therefore identified, for the first time, a neural
locus of the bilingual advantage, providing valuable insight into the nature
of the enhanced cognitive abilities in bilinguals.

B75
CLIMAXING UNEXPECTEDLY: EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS TO
STRUCTURAL AND SEMANTIC VIOLATIONS IN SEQUENTIAL
IMAGE PROCESSING Neil Cohn1, Phillip Holcomb2, Ray Jackendoff2, Gina
Kuperberg2; 1University of California, San Diego, 2Tufts University — Recent
evidence suggests that sequential image comprehension relies on an interaction between narrative structure and semantic content, analogous to the
interaction between syntactic structure and semantics in the comprehension of sentences (1). In this study, we used event-related potentials (ERPs)
to determine whether the brain responds differently to violations of narrative structure and violations of general semantic theme as participants
viewed 6-panel comic sequences. In Normal sequences, the critical panel
was semantically related to its context and depicted the expected narrative
climax, as defined by Cohn’s theory of visual narrative (2). In Semantic Violation sequences, the critical panel was semantically unexpected (its content
was unrelated to its context), but structurally expected (still depicted a narrative climax). In Structural Violation sequences, the critical panel violated
structural expectations by introducing a narrative initiation rather than a
climax; its content, nonetheless, was semantically related to the context.

Poster Session B
In Dual Violation sequences, the critical panel was both structurally and
semantically unexpected (a narrative initiation that was semantically unrelated to its context). The N400 evoked by critical panels was smaller when
the content was semantically expected (Normal, Structural Violations) than
unexpected (Semantic and Dual). At the subsequent panel, the P600 was
larger following structural violations (Structural and Dual) than following
a coherent structure (Normal, Semantic Violations). These findings provide
further evidence that sequential image comprehension is guided by an
interaction between narrative structure and semantic content. 1. N. Cohn,
et al, Cognitive Psychology 65,1 (2012). 2. N. Cohn, Cognitive Science, (In
Press).

B76
FACING EMOTIONAL LANGUAGE: IMPAIRED FACIAL FEEDBACK
AFFECTS EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS TO EMOTIONAL LANGUAGE Joshua Davis1, Piotr Winkielman1, Seana Coulson1; 1UCSD — This
research examined the role of motor processes in understanding emotional
language. Specifically, we tested how inhibiting spontaneous smiling influences comprehension of emotional sentences, as measured by the N400
Event-Related Potential (ERP). Ability to smile was inhibited by having
participants hold chopsticks between their teeth and closed lips. In the
motor control condition, participants held chopsticks lightly using their lips
alone. As a manipulation check, we recorded facial muscle activity from
the zygomaticus “smiling” muscle using electromyography (EMG). During
the experiment, participants read sentences and judged their valence. Each
sentence’s overall valence was contingent upon its last three words: “After
climbing into bed, she heard her new KITTEN (PURRING/CHOKING)
close BY.” ERPs were time-locked to the control word (kitten), the valence
word (purring), and the sentence final word (by). The results showed a
significantly larger N400 to the final word of the pleasant sentences in the
motor inhibition condition relative to the motor control condition. This was
also where the greatest difference in smiling EMG occurred. The obtained
results suggest that the semantic integration of motor and language information occurs during sentence wrap up. It is also possible that a threshold
of differential motor activity must be overcome to generate an N400 effect.
Overall, these data suggest naturally produced facial expressions serve
as implicit cues for the comprehension of emotional texts, and that in the
absence of these cues, additional cognitive resources are recruited.

B77
ANIMACY, THEMATIC REVERSALS, AND PSYCHOLOGICAL VERBS
REVISITED John Drury1, Nicolas Bourguignon2,3, Karsten Steinhauer3; 1Stony
Brook University, 2University of Montreal, 3McGill University — Thematic reversals (TR) have been shown to be highly relevant for understanding the factors responsible for eliciting N400 or P600 effects (or both) in connection
with violations turning on animacy (e.g., …the eggs would *eat…). Bourguignon et al. (2012) found that Agent-Subject verbs (e.g., The eggs have
*eaten…) elicit only a monophasic late positivity whereas Experiencer-Subject verbs (e.g., The storm has *feared…) elicit a biphasic N400/P600 pattern. They claim that the N400 for the latter case is tied to additional lexical
processing since Experiencer is a role that can also be assigned to objects
(given the existence of Experiencer-Object verbs like “frighten”; in contrast,
note there are no Agent-Object verbs). However, the details of their account
suggest that this N400 effect may not be expected if both arguments of
Experiencer-verbs are encountered before the verb is. We tested this in an
English ERP reading study (N=19) involving psychological-verbs (both
subject- and object-experiencers) in object relative clauses (e.g., The storm/
girl [that the girl/storm had feared/frightened __ ] was…). Results showed
that TR-violations yielded positive-going deflections (“semantic P600s”)
for both verb types, with no N400 effects for either (consistent with the idea
that an increase in lexical processing for these verbs does not occur when
both arguments have been encountered before the verb). Also, an early posterior positivity for object-experiencers only was observed which strongly
resembles an effect reported for contrasts involving the same verb-type in
German (Bornkessel et al. 2003), which has been interpreted as reflecting
early thematic reanalysis.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

77

Poster Session B

B78
THE COMPUTATION OF MEANING VIA EVENT KNOWLEDGE AND
NUMBER Veena Dwivedi1, Kaitlin Curtiss1; 1Brock University — In order
to investigate the role that heuristic vs. algorithmic mechanisms play in
language comprehension, we conducted a picture verification study with
word triplets that described a conceptual script, such as KID CLIMB TREE
(cf., Chwilla & Kolk, 2005). These words formed the lexical skeleton from
quantifier scope ambiguous sentences such as Every kid climbed a tree.
Such sentences are semantically ambiguous; either one or several trees
were climbed. This ambiguity is attributed to the algorithmic computation
of quantifier scope, where it has been shown that participants prefer the
plural interpretation. However, perhaps the interpretation is not derived
via computation but instead from heuristic knowledge regarding events
and the likely number of participants in events. In the current word triplet
study, 45 subjects were instructed to interpret such word chunks as telegrams, and select a picture via button press regarding the number associated with TREE. The hypothesis was that responses to word triplets could
serve as a predictor for judgments of full sentences. In a previous norming study, 32 participants judged tree in Every kid climbed a tree as plural
100% of the time but diamond in Every jeweler appraised a diamond was
judged as plural at 60%. In the present work, a logistic regression analysis
was conducted to test the likelihood of a plural judgment in the norming
study using the word triplet responses as a predictor. Results confirmed
that the triplet judgments were reliable predictors of the sentence judgments. Implications for the on-line computation of meaning are discussed.

B79
ARE RELIGIOUS IDEAS SPECIAL BECAUSE THEY ARE SEEN AS
METAPHORS? : AN EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIAL STUDY
Sabela Fondevila1, Sabrina Aristei3, Werner Sommer3, Laura Jiménez-Ortega1,2,
Pilar Casado1,2, Manuel Martín-Loeches1,2; 1Center for Human Evolution and
Behaviour, UCM-ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 2Complutense University of Madrid,
Spain., 3Humboldt-University at Berlin, Germany. — In this study we aimed
at exploring to what extent the figurativeness of religious ideas might be
an important factor in explaining the human natural tendency for religious thought. Using the N400 component of the ERPs (Event-related brain
potentials) we looked at the semantic processing of two types of counterintuitive ideas, i.e., religious and non-religious, when they are either literally
or metaphorically interpreted. Reading mode (literal and metaphorical)
was induced by asking questions about the semantic content of the sentences in a block-wise design. Performance results showed longer reaction
times (RTs) for the metaphorical relative to the literal mode. Furthermore,
whereas both counterintuitive ideas displayed similar RTs when literally
interpreted, religious ideas were more quickly interpreted when comprehension was biased to metaphorical interpretation. ERPs revealed no
differences in the early N400 (300-380ms) between both counterintuitive
sentences. However, the late N400 (380-500ms) was modulated as a function of reading mode and type of counterintuitive material. Namely, the
amplitude for the non-religious ideas was larger than to religious ones only
when a metaphorical mode of processing was induced. Our results suggest
that the semantic integration of counterintuitive religious ideas is favoured
by the metaphorical induction while the integration of counterintuitive
non-religious ideas exhibit semantic processing difficulties during both the
literal and the metaphorical modes. Some religious ideas could, therefore,
behave as metaphors for the human cognitive system unlike other types of
counterintuitions, and this could arguably be a reason for their evolutionary success and spreading.

B80
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN LEXICAL AND SYNTACTIC KNOWLEDGE DURING INCREMENTAL PROCESSING OF THE CAUSATIVE
CONSTRUCTION IN ENGLISH Gwen Frishkoff1, Gregory Taylor Brooks1,
Jessica Wise1; 1Georgia State University — We examine event-related potential (ERP) responses during comprehension of the Causative construction.
A construction is a mapping between sentential form (syntax) and meaning. The English Causative is syntactically specified as ‘NP-V-NP-PP’, and
means ‘Someone-CAUSED-Something-toChangeLocation’. Importantly,
only certain verbs are permitted within this construction: e.g., “walk” is
allowed (“Jack walked his sister to the party”), but “arrive” is not (*”Jack

78

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
arrived his sister to the party”). Our goal was to test whether word-to-construction mismatches would elicit semantic or syntactic ERP effects, or
both. 17 native English-speaking adult participants viewed sentences, presented one phrase at a time, while we recorded their EEG. The task was
to say whether each sentence was acceptable (speeded task). The response
probe could come after the verb (intransitive construction), after the object
NP (transitive construction), or after the PP (Causative/to-Dative construction). According to syntax-first theories, “arrive” should elicit a P600
syntactic response to the object NP (*“Jack arrives HIS SISTER ...”), but no
N400 semantic response. Results supported this prediction. Interestingly,
however, the final PP (*“Jack arrives his sister TO THE PARTY”), elicted
a pronouned N400 effect. This suggests that subjects continued to process
the sentence meaning, even after they recognized the syntactic error earlier
in the sentence. These results are inconsistent with syntax-first theories, but
are compatible with theories like Construction Grammar, which emphasize
ongoing meaning integration at the level of words and higher-level structures, i.e., clause-level meaning.

B81
A HOMOLOGY BETWEEN HUMAN AND MONKEY BRAIN SYSTEMS
THAT CONSTRUCT MEANING FROM VOCAL COMMUNICATION
Ricardo Gil-da-Costa1, Steven Hillyard2, Marta Kutas2, Raynard Fung1, Thomas
Albright1; 1Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 2University of California San Diego
— Previous research suggests homologies between the neural networks
for conceptual representation and vocal communication in human and
non-human primates. We investigated the temporal dynamics of the activation and integration of information from the rhesus macaque vocal repertoire, as compared to human speech. In humans, the “N400” event-related
brain potential (ERP) is associated with the processing of meaning across a
sequence of items, and characterized by a negative-going voltage deflection
between 250-550ms, with a parietal maximal scalp topography. Building
from knowledge pertaining to the semantic content of rhesus vocalizations,
we investigated electrical brain responses to contextually congruent versus
incongruent strings of three vocalizations (words or rhesus calls) across
species (humans and rhesus). As expected, humans elicited an increased
N400 to the third word when it violated the semantic context of the previous words, and a decrease when it was contextually congruent. Humans
showed no congruency modulation for rhesus calls. Remarkably, rhesus
macaques showed a homologous pattern: a negative-going ERP with the
same functional sensitivity and topography for their own vocalizations,
but occurring 400ms later. We label this congruence-related ERP, occurring between 700-900ms, “mN800” (macaque N800). The first evidence of
an ERP functionally homologous to the N400 in any other species, it implies
that rhesus monkeys not only appreciate the meaning associated with each
call, but also the meaningful (or not) relationship between the various calls
in a sequence. This finding offers novel insights into the cognitive and
neural mechanisms associated with vocal communication, shedding new
light onto the evolution of language.

B82
SPEECH ACT COMPREHENSION IN SPOKEN DIALOGUE: AN ERP
STUDY Rosa Gisladottir1,2, Dorothee Chwilla3, Stephen Levinson1; 1Max Planck
Institute for Psycholinguistics, 2International Max Planck Research School for
Language Sciences, 3Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Radboud University — Speech acts such as asking people out, teasing, and
complimenting are the building blocks of conversation. Successful communication requires recognizing these speech acts for planning an appropriate response. However, little is known about how listeners bridge the gap
between the literal meaning of utterances and the relevant action content.
In an EEG study, we aimed to find the ERP correlates of speech act comprehension. Participants listened to spoken dialogues, without semantic or
pragmatic violations, in which target sentences (e.g., “I have a credit card”)
delivered three speech acts (Answers, Declinations, Pre-offers) depending
on the prior turn. The ERP results reveal an early influence of the prior
turn on speech act processing, reflected by a right fronto-temporal slowwave in Declinations and Pre-offers, relative to Answers, starting 100 ms
(in Declinations) and 200 ms (in Pre-offers) after first word onset. In Pre-offers a late posterior negativity occurred at the final word. In Declinations
a midline and left frontal positivity emerged 400 ms after first word onset.
The Empathy Quotient (Baron-Cohen and Wheelwright, 2004) was used to

2013 Annual Meeting
assess participants’ cognitive (theory of mind) and affective empathy. The
positivity in Declinations was found to be positively correlated with empathy in an early time window, suggesting that the positivity starts earlier in
people with high empathizing skills. The results demonstrate that speech
act comprehension in natural dialogue starts immediately, already at the
first word, and that the ability to empathize can impact the online processing of speech acts.

B83
GESTURE COMPENSATES FOR IMPAIRED LEXICAL ACCESS FOR
SPATIAL LANGUAGE Tilbe Goksun1, Matthew Lehet2, Katsiaryna Malykhina1,
Anjan Chatterjee1; 1The University of Pennsylvania, 2Carnegie Mellon University
— People gesture when they talk about spatial information. Little is known
about the neural correlates of spatial language and their accompanying
spontaneous gestures. We ask how focal brain-injured individuals describe
spatial motion events, involving dynamic components of manner and path.
In a sentence “the boy jumps over a fence,” jumping describes the manner
and over describes the path of the motion. We tested whether motion
event components are independently impaired, and if gestures compensate for impaired verbalization. Patients with left (LHD, n=16) or right
hemisphere damage (RHD, n=16), elderly controls (n=14) were asked to
describe motion events (e.g., the woman runs across the street), depicted in
brief video clips (22 trials). The correct use of manners and paths of motion
and spontaneous gestures representing these components (e.g., wiggling
the middle and index fingers for running) were coded. Patients with LHD
made more errors in producing both manners and paths compared to RHD
and controls, p<.01. Yet, they were worse in producing paths of motions
than manners (Mmanner=76%, Mpath=52%). Using voxel-lesion symptom
mapping we found that damage to the left posterior middle frontal gyrus,
left inferior frontal gyrus, left superior temporal gyrus (STG) were related
specifically to impairments in producing paths of actions. While describing
motion events, LHD patients produced more spatial gestures than other
participants. Lesions to the left STG were significantly correlated higher
use of path gestures. We suggest that manners and paths of actions can be
separately impaired and gestures compensate for lexical access produced
by STG lesions.

B84
THE EFFECTS OF NEGATIVE EMOTION ON ENCODING-RELATED
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL ACTIVITY PREDICTING SUBSEQUENT
RECOLLECTION Luciano G. Buratto1, Yee Y. Yick1, Alexandre Schaefer1;
1
University of Durham — The goal of this study was to investigate the emotional modulation of an electrophysiological index of memory encoding
(the “Dm” effect) using two retrieval tasks previously linked to recollection
processes: source memory and confidence judgment tasks. Event-related
potentials (ERPs) were recorded while participants studied two blocks of
randomly intermixed negative and neutral images. On the next day, participants performed an Old-New recognition test. In addition, they were
also asked (a) to judge the confidence of their recognition responses and,
for images judged “old”, (b) to decide whether the image was originally
presented in the first or in the second study block (source memory task).
The Dm effect was obtained by separating ERPs elicited to images at encoding according to whether these images were later accurately recognized or
forgotten. ERPs were also separated according to source memory accuracy,
confidence levels, valence (negative vs. neutral) and arousal levels (high vs.
low). Behavioural results revealed better source memory to negative compared to neutral images. A Dm effect starting at 400 ms with fronto-central
maxima was enhanced for negative compared to neutral images, regardless of source accuracy and negative images’ arousal levels. By contrast,
the enhancement of the Dm effect by emotion was only found for high- but
not for low-confidence judgments. These results are consistent with models
suggesting that the emotional enhancement of recognition is influenced by
effects of emotion at encoding. The results also suggest that the modulation
of source memory and memory confidence by emotion might rely on different encoding processes.

Poster Session B

B85
RECALL ORDER IS PREDICTED BY CATEGORY-SPECIFIC NEURAL
ACTIVITY OF PRECEDING ITEMS AT STUDY Stephanie C.Y. Chan1,
Marissa C. Applegate1, Neal W. Morton2, Sean M. Polyn2, Kenneth A. Norman1;
1
Princeton University, 2Vanderbilt University — Context-based models of episodic memory posit that memories of items are linked to a “mental context”
representation that drifts over time; at test, we can retrieve recently-studied items by cuing with the current state of mental context. These models
have successfully explained a wide range of memory effects (e.g., temporal clustering in free recall), but there is still considerable debate over the
factors that shape mental context. Early context models (e.g., Estes, 1955)
posited that mental context drifted randomly over time, whereas modern
implementations (e.g., Howard & Kahana, 2002) posit that mental context
reflects a running average of recently-experienced thoughts. A key prediction arising from the latter set of models is that, if two items are preceded
by similar thoughts, they will be linked to similar mental contexts, which
(in turn) will bias participants to recall the items sequentially at test. To test
this prediction, we scanned participants using fMRI while they studied,
one item at a time, lists of the form AACBBCAACBBCAACBBC; A, B, and
C denote different categories. For each list, participants were asked to recall
as many C-items as possible, in any order. We used an fMRI pattern classifier to track category-specific neural activity, and examined pairs of C-items
that were preceded by the same category during study (e.g. A). For a given
pair, if the classifier showed an elevated level of the preceding category
when the two C-items were studied, then participants showed an elevated
probability of recalling the two items sequentially, as predicted.

B86
MEMORY ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL OSCILLATIONS ARE
RELATED Yvonne Y Chen1, Jeremy B Caplan1; 1University of Alberta — Memory-related EEG oscillations at study show analogous effects on memory.
At study, the subsequent memory effect (SME; activity during hits minus
activity during misses), points to alpha (8-12 Hz) desynchronization and
concurrent theta (4-8 Hz) synchronization associated with better subsequent memory (Klimesch, 1997, 1999). At test, the retrieval success effect
(RSE) also reveals reduced alpha and increased theta power associated with
better memory (Burgess and Gruzelier 1997, Düzel et al, 2003, 2005; Klimesch, 1997). We hypothesized that this reflects visual attention (reduced
alpha) combined with activation of item-context representations at both
study and test. We tested the prediction that memory-related oscillations
at study would correlate with the same memory-related oscillations at test,
across participants. Participants were given 9 25-word lists for study, each
followed by old/new recognition. After replicating the alpha/theta pattern
for both the SME and RSE using a duration-of-oscillation measure that has
high sensitivity to rhythmic activity relative to non-repeating signal that
has energy at a particular frequency (Caplan et al., 2001), we found support
for our prediction: the SME and RSE correlated positively in the alpha band
at Oz (r(29)=0.94, p<0.01) and the theta band at Fpz (r(29)=0.66, p<0.01);
thus, the study and test oscillatory pattern explained common subject variability, and suggest that alpha and theta oscillations have a similar influence on recognition memory at study and test.

B87
MOVE FASTER TO LEARN BETTER: EXPLORATION SPEED
IMPACTS LEARNING ABOUT OBJECTS AND THEIR LOCATIONS
Nathan Clement1, R. Alison Adcock1; 1Duke University — The identification
and induction of neural and behavioral states that are conducive to learning
would benefit education, psychotherapy, and workplace training, as well
as numerous other potential applications. Previous work in humans has
shown that activation of midbrain regions containing dopamine neurons
and implicated in motivated behavior prior to learning predict enhanced
memory (Adcock et al., 2006). Because dopamine also regulates goal-directed movement, including exploration (e.g., Fink and Smith, 1980), there
is reason to predict a relationship between exploration and learning. To
date, however, the relationship between exploratory movement and learning has received little focus. In the present studies, we manipulated the
speed with which participants could explore a spatial array of objects. We
made the counterintuitive prediction that increased speed of exploration
during learning would positively correlate with subsequent memory for
objects as well as for their locations. Participants used keypresses to explore
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

79

Poster Session B
spatial arrays under variable speed conditions: Slow or Fast. Total viewing time for each stimulus was capped to control for maximum duration
of stimulus exposure. Participants showed considerable variability in both
their exploratory behavior and their subsequent memory. Across individuals, greater exploration in the Fast vs. Slow condition predicted a selective
enhancement of memory for objects encountered during the Fast condition
as well as for their spatial locations. We posit that increasing exploratory
activity may enhance the relationship between midbrain neuromodulatory
systems and the hippocampus to induce a state conducive to new learning.

B88
MEMORY SELECTIVITY IS ASSOCIATED WITH GREATER ENGAGEMENT OF AREAS INVOLVED IN DEEP SEMANTIC ENCODING FOR
HIGH-VALUE ITEMS Michael S. Cohen1, Jesse Rissman1, Alan D. Castel1,
Barbara J. Knowlton1; 1University of California, Los Angeles — Previous work
examining the neural basis of how value affects memory (e.g., Adcock et al.,
2006) has focused on the role of the midbrain dopaminergic reward system
in potentiating memory for valuable items via functional connections with
the hippocampus. However, people may also strategically control encoding strategies to enhance memory selectivity for more valuable items. We
used fMRI to examine how differences in neural activity at encoding as
a function of value relate to subsequent free recall for words. Each word
was preceded by an arbitrarily assigned point value, and participants went
through multiple study-test cycles with feedback on their point total at the
end of each list, allowing for further sculpting of strategy use. We examined the correlation between value-related modulation of neural activity
and participants’ selectivity index, a measure of how close a participant
was to their optimal point total given the number of items recalled. Greater
selectivity scores were associated with greater enhancement of neural activity in semantic processing regions, including left anterior ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, during encoding of high-value words relative to low-value
words. This suggests that strategic engagement of deep semantic processing may be critical for enhancing memory for valuable items. While the
present study tested only young adults, it is notable that older adults are
particularly proficient at utilizing value in this type of paradigm (Castel et
al., 2002). Thus, engagement of this semantic processing network may be a
means whereby older adults can efficiently mobilize limited resources to
prioritize encoding of important information.

B89
IDENTIFYING ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY DEFICITS AND NEUROBIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF ENCODING AND PERFORMANCE IN
A NATIONAL SAMPLE OF VETERANS WITH GULF WAR ILLNESS
USING FMRI Crystal Cooper1, Timothy Odegard2, Richard Briggs1, James
Bartlett2, Farris Emily3, Haley Robert1; 1University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center at Dallas, 2University of Texas Dallas, 3University of California
San Francisco — Roughly 26-32% of U.S. veterans who served in the 1991
Persian Gulf War report suffering from chronic health problems (Golomb,
2008). Memory complaints are regularly reported by ill Gulf War veterans (GWV), but there is scarce data to verify their complaints. Using an
associative memory paradigm of faces and names, the present study was
conducted to 1) investigate the memory deficits reported by ill-GWV in
a nationally representative sample comprised of both ill- and well-GWV
and 2) investigate whether or not there are functional brain differences
between the groups when encoding face-name pairs. During administration of the memory task, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
was used to acquire the Blood Oxygenation Level Dependent (BOLD) contrast to serve as a proxy of brain activation evoked by the memory task.
It was hypothesized that ill-GWV would demonstrate decreased memory
performance relative to well-GWV on the associative memory test, providing evidence of memory deficits using an objective measure of memory.
This was confirmed. Additionally, it was hypothesized that these memory
differences would be related to differences in brain function during the
encoding of novel associative memories. We predicted that differences
would be observed between ill- and well-GWV in the amount of brain activation measured during associative memory encoding using BOLD fMRI.
Such differences were observed in several brain regions, which included
the frontal and temporal lobes, parahippocampus, and posterior cingu-

80

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
late. However, hippocampal differences did not follow predictions. Of the
regions found to differ between the groups, several may be implicated in
compensatory processing.

B90
SYSTEMATIC ERROR IN THE DUAL PROCESS SIGNAL DETECTION
MODEL OF RECOGNITION MEMORY Adam Dede1,6, John Wixted1,
Ramona Hopkins4,5, Larry Squire6,1,2,3; 1University of California San Diego
department of psychology, 2University of California San Diego department of
psychiatry, 3University of California San Diego department of neurosciences,
4
Bringham Young University department of psychology, 5Intermountain Medical
Center department of medicine, 6Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System
— In recent years, neuroscientists have used the Dual Process Signal Detection (DPSD) model to measure two processes thought to subserve declarative memory (familiarity and recollection), and to relate these processes
to neuroanatomy. Familiarity refers to a simple feeling that an item has
been encountered before, and recollection refers in addition to memory for
the context in which learning occurred. The DPSD model relies on strong
assumptions about the nature of familiarity and recollection. An alternative
model, the Unequal Variance Signal Detection (UVSD) model, makes no
assumptions about familiarity and recollection, and does not measure these
two processes directly. We compared these models using a novel technique.
The two models can be represented by memory strength distributions associated with studied and unstudied items. The differences in these distributions are such that if the UVSD model is correct, then the DPSD model
should consistently underestimate low-confidence responses to targets. If
the DPSD model is correct, then the UVSD model should consistently overestimate low-confidence responses to targets. Recognition memory was
tested in patients with circumscribed hippocampal lesions and in healthy
controls. The UVSD model did not yield systematic errors (and also fit the
data better overall). By contrast, the DPSD model systematically underestimated low-confidence responses to targets in both the patients and controls
(as it should if the UVSD model is correct). These findings raise questions
about the legitimacy of using the DPSD model to investigate which brain
structures support familiarity and recollection. Other methods for measuring these constructs will be discussed.

B91
THE IMPACT OF PARTIAL AND FULL DETAIL RECOMBINATION ON
THE ACCEPTANCE OF AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY CONJUNCTION ERRORS Aleea Devitt1, Edwin Monk-Fromont1, Daniel L. Schacter2,
Donna Rose Addis1,3; 1The University of Auckland, 2Harvard University, 3ARC
Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders — Memory conjunction
errors may be the most common type of false autobiographical memory,
yet current theories provide conflicting views on whether partial or full
recombinations of details are more likely to result in false memories. Combining memory conjunction error and autobiographical recombination
paradigms, the current study examines the relative contribution of partial
versus full recombination to the acceptance of autobiographical memory
conjunction errors. In session one, participants retrieved 150 autobiographical memories, specifying a person, place and object for each. These details
were randomly recombined to form 108 fictitious sets, each containing a
person, place and object, where either one detail was substituted or all three
details came from separate memories. Using these sets, participants imagined novel past events in session two, rating each for plausibility and vividness. In session three, source judgements were made for 216 sets from real
and imagined events, and previously unseen recombinations. False memories occurred when imagined and unseen sets were incorrectly judged as
depicting real memories. Partially recombined sets were accepted twice as
often as full recombinations, regardless of whether the set had been previously seen. Imagined events with higher plausibility ratings had subsequently greater false acceptance rates, and partial recombinations were
more likely to result in plausible imagined events. These results suggest
that plausibility may be utilised more as a cue for veridicality than recollection rejection, familiarity, or vividness when making rapid source judgements about autobiographical memory conjunctions, resulting in greater
acceptance of partial recombinations.

2013 Annual Meeting

B92
TIME-DEPENDENT CHANGES IN CONTEXTUAL FACILITATION OF
MEMORY RETRIEVAL Manoj K. Doss1, Maureen Ritchey1, Charan Ranganath1; 1University of California, Davis — Several studies have demonstrated
that immediate recall of a studied item can be facilitated if the study context is reinstated, but it is not clear whether context-dependence of episodic
retrieval changes over time. One possibility is that, through systems consolidation processes, memories might become less tied to their specific context.
We ran a series of experiments that tested the context-dependency of memories over time. On two consecutive days, participants encoded separate
sets of objects overlaid onto scenes that served as contexts. Immediately
after the second encoding session, memory was tested for these objects in
two possible conditions: the same condition in which objects were overlaid
onto their respective scenes from encoding and the different condition in
which objects were overlaid onto different scenes. We found that for items
studied on the same day (i.e. short retention interval), context reinstatement affected recollection-based recognition such that recollection was
worst in the different condition. Furthermore, under some circumstances,
this effect tends to diminish for items studied on the previous day. Future
variants will incorporate a cued recall test, which may be more sensitive
to recollection-based memory effects. This study provides evidence that
with increasing retention intervals, memories may be less dependent on
reinstatement of the exact encoding context, possibly due to the effects of
memory consolidation.

B93
FMRI ENCODING PATTERNS PREDICT TEMPORAL ORDER
MEMORY ACROSS BOUNDARIES Sarah DuBrow1, Lila Davachi1; 1New

York University — One theory of episodic memory organization proposes
that changes in context create representational distance between events
(Howard & Kahana, 2002; Polyn, Norman & Kahana, 2009). This model
of temporal context has been largely supported by patterns of free recall,
but has rarely tested with explicit temporal order memory. In rodents, it
has been shown that a gradual change in hippocampal activity is related
to successful order memory (Manns, Howard & Eichenbaum, 2007). Thus,
we predicted that externally driven changes in context might also enhance
relative order memory. In the present fMRI experiment (N=18), we introduced shifts in context across sequences of images that would be tested
in recency discrimination and serial recall. We hypothesized that contextual boundaries would enhance relative order memory by increasing the
representational distance between across-context items in accord with temporal context models. Surprisingly, we found that recency discrimination
for across-context items was significantly worse than within-context items
matched for temporal lag. To investigate whether the neural representation of items was modulated by context shifts, we performed RSA analyses on BOLD activity. In the hippocampus, we found no main effect of
context switch on similarity scores of the to-be-discriminated items. However, increased similarity predicted subsequent temporal order memory for
across but not within-context items. This result suggests that the maintenance of the hippocampal representation may be important for encoding
temporal order across boundaries, perhaps acting to bridge across events.
Further analyses will investigate the role of MTL and prefrontal cortex in
subsequent order and serial recall memory.

B94
HIPPOCAMPAL AMNESIA DISRUPTS EPISODIC MEMORY AND
NARRATIVE CONSTRUCTION Melissa Duff1,2,3, Jake Kurczek3; 1Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of Iowa, 2Department of Neurology, Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Science, University of
Iowa, 3Neuroscience Training Program, University of Iowa — The critical role
of the hippocampus and related medial temporal lobe structures in the formation and subsequent retrieval of new enduring memories (i.e. long-term
memory) is well established. The hippocampus has also been linked to episodic future thinking. Much of the work investigating episodic memory
and future thinking has relied heavily on the analysis of the verbal productions of patients with amnesia. Given that there is also growing evidence of
disruptions in language use and processing in patients with hippocampal
damage, it has been challenging to disentangle the impairments in memory
from those in language. We have argued that the hallmark processing features afforded by the hippocampus (e.g., relational binding, representa-

Poster Session B
tional flexibility) are critical for both memory and language performance.
To test this proposal, we collected narrative samples using gold standard
procedures in the memory (e.g. Autobiographical Memory Interview) and
language (e.g., picture description) literatures from six participants with
bilateral hippocampal damage and severe declarative memory impairment and 6 healthy comparison participants. We analyzed all samples on
memory (e.g., episodic detail) and language (e.g. cohesive adequacy, local
coherence, reported speech) measures. Across all narrative types and all
memory and language measures, amnesic patients were impaired relative
to the healthy comparison participants. These findings suggest that the hippocampus contributes to the use of both episodic memory and language.
In patients with amnesia, when the demands on hippocampal processing
are sufficiently high, both memory and language performance is affected.

B95
ABNORMAL SEMANTIC MEMORY STRUCTURE IN A CASE OF
DEVELOPMENTAL AMNESIA Devin Duke1,2, Ben Bowles3, Asaf Gilboa4,
Shayna R. Rosenbaum5, Ken McRae1,2, Stefan Köhler1,2,4; 1Department of
Psychology, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, 2The Brain and
Mind Institute, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, 3Department of
Psychology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California, 4Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, Toronto, Canada, 5Department of Psychology, York University,
Toronto, Canada — Developmental Amnesia (DA) is considered one of the
strongest sources of evidence for the notion that episodic and semantic
memory are dissociable systems that develop independently, with hippocampal integrity necessary for episodic memories only (Vargha-Khadem
et al., 1997). While it has been demonstrated that core semantics can be
learned even without an intact hippocampus, there is no research directly
addressing the structural relationships among semantic representations
acquired in DA. Inasmuch as there are suggestions that re-organization
processes known to support episodic memory may also play a role in general knowledge integration, it seems likely that semantic representations
differ in their structure when acquired against the background of episodic
memory impairment. To examine this possibility, we tested a well-characterized developmental amnesic (HC) using semantic memory tasks based
on an established normative database of concrete concepts. Importantly,
unlike typical neuropsychological tests that primarily tap into discrete
aspects of semantic memory, our tasks required comparisons among similar concepts in terms of their typicality for semantic categories, and also
their familiarity. Furthermore, we probed relationships between concepts
and their features, and between related concepts, in two generation tasks.
Preliminary analyses suggest that HC’s category structure (typicality
rating) differs from that of age- and education-matched controls. In DA,
abnormalities in these structural relationships may be present even when
concepts have apparently been acquired successfully. These findings suggest that the hippocampus, a brain structure thought to be dedicated to
episodic memory, may also play a pivotal role in the development of finegrained structural semantic relationships.

B96
VALUE-BASED DECISIONS ARE MODULATED BY EXPOSURE
TO FAMILIAR VS. NOVEL CUES Katherine Duncan1, Daphna Shohamy1;
1
Columbia University — There is growing behavioral and neural evidence
that mnemonic processes unfold over a broad period of time, and that this
ongoing processing has consequences for memory performance. Of note,
a new series of behavioral studies demonstrated that recent exposure to
novel images benefitted processes that support episodic encoding compared to recent exposure to familiar images which benefitted processes
that support retrieval (Duncan, et al., 2012). The breadth of situations that
mnemonic biases may influence, however, has yet to be investigated. Here,
we developed a novel decision-making task that relies on memories for
single experiences. Participants were asked to decide between an option of
unknown value and one that has been associated with a monetary value on
a previous trial. Critically, each of these decisions was made following the
presentation of an unrelated scene, which was either familiar or novel. We
found that participants’ value-based choices were influenced by of the prior
scene: Stronger value-associations were formed after viewing unrelated
novel images, but value information was more readily recalled after unrelated familiar images. Together, this research provides a novel approach to

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

81

Poster Session B
systematically assessing the influence of single trial experiences on monetary decisions and demonstrates that manipulations that elicit biases within
the episodic memory system influence these decisions.

B97
MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHIC EVIDENCE THAT FAMILIARITY
IS GRADED AND INDEPENDENT OF RECOLLECTION Lisa Evans1,
Edward Wilding1; 1Cardiff University Brain Imaging Centre, School of Psychology, Cardiff University, UK — Event-related fields (ERFs) were employed
to test a neural prediction that will hold if recollection and familiarity
are independent memory processes. Evans and Wilding (2012) observed
that an ERF index of familiarity was larger when accompanying a ‘Know’
rather than a ‘Remember’ response during a memory retrieval task. This
outcome is predicted if the two processes are independent because the level
of familiarity associated with all Know responses will be above a criterion,
whereas there is no lower bound for the level of familiarity associated with
Remember responses – as long as it is assumed that familiarity supports
Know responses and recollection supports Remember responses. In this
study a further prediction was tested: if the familiarity strength of items
increases then the neural index of familiarity will converge for Remember
and Know responses. To test this, a modified Remember/Know task was
used in which 20 participants endorsed items as remembered if any details
from the study episode could be retrieved and, if not, old/new status was
judged on a 4-point confidence scale, assumed to index familiarity strength.
Familiarity estimates were higher in this experiment than in our previous
one, and the ERF index of familiarity was equivalent when accompanying
Remember and Know responses. Importantly, these results are not due to a
lack of sensitivity to familiarity, because the effect varied with confidence,
which is assumed to index familiarity strength. These findings provide further support for the view that recollection and familiarity are independent
processes.

B98
INVOLVEMENT AND INTERACTION OF MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBEAND PREFRONTAL STRUCTURES DURING CONTEXTUAL FEAR
CONDITIONING IN A NOVEL CUE-ARRAY PARADIGM Christian
Bäuchl1,2, Patric Meyer1,2, Michael Hoppstädter1,2, Carsten Diener1,2, Herta
Flor1,2; 1Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Germany, 2Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience
Heidelberg/Mannheim, Germany — Contextual fear conditioning is hypothesized to be dependent on the hippocampus. Nevertheless, studies using
rodents with hippocampal lesions have shown that contextual fear can still
be acquired if damage occurs prior to conditioning. In case of hippocampal impairment neo-cortical areas are believed to facilitate the association
of contextual cues with an aversive event. However, theoretical considerations suggest that this ‘elemental strategy’ fails if there is overlap between
the context stimuli, in which case the hippocampus is needed to form hierarchical context representations. To elucidate the neural correlates of this
pure hierarchical account we created a cue-array context paradigm that
comprises two contexts with identical component features, only differing
in their relational arrangement. This new paradigm was tested in humans
during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). T-contrasts revealed
sustained activity for the electrical-shock-associated context (CS+), relative
to the non-shocked context (CS-), in right rostrolateral prefrontal cortex
and bilateral insula. Transient activity for the same contrast was found in
right hippocampus and parahippocampal cortex. An analysis of functional
connectivity showed that the posterior hippocampus was significantly
stronger connected to the right superior orbital gyrus during unpaired CS+
contexts relative to CS- contexts. An additional analysis of effective connectivity revealed that activity of the right anterior hippocampus influences
activity in the amygdala and the primary somatosensory cortex. These
results depict the activation and interaction of brain regions that are crucial
for the acquisition of a differential fear response as a function of learning
the distinction between similar contexts.

B99
DELAYED ALTERNATION IN WILD CALIFORNIA SEA LIONS WITH
NATURALLY OCCURRING HIPPOCAMPAL DAMAGE Peter Cook1,
Colleen Reichmuth1, Sophie Dennison2, Frances Gulland3; 1University of California Santa Cruz, 2Animal Scan, 3The Marine Mammal Center — Each year,

82

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
many hundreds of sea lions are exposed in the wild to domoic acid, an algal
neurotoxin with high affinity for AMPA and kainate receptors. Exposure
can lead to mossy fiber sprouting in the dentate gyrus, medial temporal
lobe epilepsy, and serious hippocampal damage. Because many of these
animals come to shore in distress and are sourced to rehabilitation facilities
for treatment, they are available short-term for study, thus representing a
unique natural model for low-impact behavioral neuroscience. Between
2009 and 2011, 30 wild sea lions were brought from The Marine Mammal
Center in Sausalito to University of California’s Long Marine Lab, where
they completed training and testing in a delayed alternation task. After
completion of behavioral testing, each animal’s brain was imaged in vivo
via MRI. All animals were then returned to The Marine Mammal Center for
further treatment or release, as warranted. Brain images were acquired in
an oblique plain perpendicular to the long axis of the hippocampus. Hippocampal volumes were calculated by manual tracing, and normalized
against total brain volume to provide a measure of possible atrophy for
each animal. Some subjects showed bilateral atrophy, but unilateral atrophy, divided across subjects between the right and left hippocampal formations, was more common. Relative hippocampal volume was correlated
with a performance deficit in the delayed alternation task, and this effect
was driven predominately by damage to the right hippocampus.

B100
TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION FACILITATES
EPISODIC MEMORY ENCODING. Kevin Jones1, Filiz Gözenman2, Marian
Berryhill3; 1University of Nevada, Reno, 2University of Nevada, Reno, 3University of Nevada, Reno — Posterior parietal cortex (PPC) involvement in episodic memory remains poorly understood. Parietal activations during episodic memory performance may reflect attention to the task or functional
involvement in mnemonic function. Here, we used the neurostimulation
technique of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) to investigate
parietal involvement in episodic memory. TDCS is a safe and noninvasive
neurostimulation technique that permits the study of structure-function
relationships by subtly altering the resting potential of underlying neural
populations. We investigated the role of the left PPC in episodic memory by
applying anodal (+, depolarizing) or sham tDCS during encoding (Experiment 1) or maintenance (Experiment 2) periods. Participants performed
two versions of the California Verbal Learning Task (CVLT) in which a
16-item word list is repeated and immediately recalled five times with further retrieval testing after short and long delay periods. We hypothesized
that tDCS to the left PPC would facilitate encoding because P3 has been
shown to be important in both working memory and in long-term memory
formation/retrieval (reviewed in: Berryhill 2012). In Experiment 1, the data
confirmed that participants learned the word list more quickly after anodal
tDCS than after sham. Experiment 2 showed that left PPC stimulation
during the delay period did not improve episodic memory. Thus, tDCS to
the left PPC selectively improved episodic encoding but not maintenance.
These data confirm that there is PPC involvement in episodic memory and
that tDCS is an emerging technique that may be used to elucidate PPC function in memory.

B101
RETRIEVAL PRACTICE IS CHARACTERIZED BY REDUCED FRONTO-STRIATAL ACTIVITY Linnea Karlsson1, Carola Wiklund-Hörnqvist1,
Johan Eriksson1, Bert Jonsson1, Lars Nyberg1; 1Umeå University, Sweden —
Retrieval practice is known to have stronger effects on long-term retention
of material than mere re-reading of the same material, an effect known as
the “testing effect”. The neurocognitive mechanisms behind such retrieval-enhanced learning are not well understood. The current study examined
changes in functional brain networks as a function of retrieval practice. Participants (n=20) first studied 60 Swahili-Swedish word-pairs. Subsequently,
they underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging while being tested
on each item three times. A factorial design compared activity changes of
items successfully repeatedly retrieved with items that were not successfully repeatedly retrieved, a design capturing variance unique to retrieval
practice. Successful repeated retrieval was characterized by decreased
activity in prefrontal and premotor regions and in the right caudate, compared to items not successfully retrieved at consecutive tests. Successful
repeated retrieval was also characterized by increased activity in right
middle temporal cortex. The results imply that the benefits of retrieval-enhanced learning might be due to reduced retrieval and executive demands

2013 Annual Meeting
in frontal cortex and striatum along with strengthening of memory representations in temporal cortex. The current results not only point at possible neurocognitive mechanisms governing the effectiveness of testing as
a learning method but also demonstrate how cognitive neuroscience and
educational research might learn from each other.

B102
HIPPOCAMPAL DAMAGE DISRUPTS REFERENTIAL PROCESSING
Jake Kurczek1, Sarah Brown-Schmidt2, Melissa Duff1,3; 1Neuroscience Training
Program, University of Iowa, 2Department of Psychology & Beckman Institute,
University of Illinois, 3Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders,
University of Iowa — A growing body of work suggests the hippocampus
contributes to a variety of cognitive domains beyond its traditional role in
declarative memory. We propose that the hippocampus, in its capacity for
relational binding, representational flexibility, on-line maintenance and
integration of rich, multimodal relational representations, is a key contributor to language processing and use. Here we test the hypothesis that
referential processing, which requires both maintaining and integrating
representations of potential referents with the unfolding discourse, is hippocampus-dependent. We combined eye-tracking with neuropsychological
methods, where participants (patients with bilateral hippocampal damage
and severe declarative memory impairment and healthy comparison participants) viewed a scene while listening to short dialogs introducing two
characters (manipulating gender– same/different) and then referred to one
using a pronoun (manipulating order of mention– first/second in preceding sentence); e.g., Minnie is playing violin for Daisy/Donald as the sun
is shining overhead. She is wearing a blue/purple dress). Consistent with
previous work, healthy comparison participants show preferential viewing
of the first-mentioned character particularly when there is ambiguity (same
gender). In contrast, this effect was attenuated, and in some cases reversed
in hippocampal patients (preferentially viewing the most recently mentioned character). This finding suggests that hippocampus plays a role in
maintaining and integrating information even over a very short discourse
history and when all the key information is immediately available in the
scene. These observed disruptions in referential processing demonstrate
how promiscuously the hallmark processing features of the hippocampus
are used in service of a variety of cognitive domains including language.

B103
SEX AND SEX HORMONE INFLUENCES ON RETENTION OF EMOTIONAL GIST AND DETAIL Shawn Nielsen1, Larry Cahill1; 1Department of
Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, Irvine — Sex influences on
emotional memory have received increasing interest over the past decade.
However, only a subset of studies explored the influence of sex on emotional memory for central information (gist) and peripheral detail. Here
we examined the influence of sex and sex hormones on memory for either
an emotional or neutral story, specifically with respect to the retention of
gist and detail. Naturally cycling women and men viewed a brief, narrated,
three-phase story containing neutral or emotionally arousing elements.
One week later, participants received a surprise free recall test for story
elements. The results indicate that naturally cycling women in the luteal
(high hormone) phase of the menstrual cycle show enhanced memory for
peripheral details, but not gist, when in the emotional compared with neutral stories (p<.05). In contrast, naturally cycling women in the follicular
(low hormone) phase show enhanced memory for gist, but not peripheral
details, in the emotional compared with neutral stories (p<.05). Men also
show enhanced memory for gist, but not peripheral details, in the emotional versus neutral stories (p<.05). In addition, these sex influences on
memory cannot be attributed to differences in attention or arousal; luteal
women, follicular women, and men performed similarly on measures of
attention (fixation time percentage) and arousal (pupil diameter changes).
These findings suggest that sex and sex hormones influence memory for
different types of emotional information. We relate these findings to an
established sex difference in the relationship between amygdala activity
during emotional events and subsequent memory for those events.

Poster Session B

B104
VOLUMETRIC ANALYSIS OF MTL SUBREGIONS IN DEVELOPMENTAL AMNESIA USING HIGH-RESOLUTION MRI Rosanna Olsen1, Daniela Palombo1,2, Brian Levine1,2,3, Jennifer Ryan1,2,4, R. Shayna Rosenbaum1,5;
1
Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest, 2Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, 3Department of Medicine (Neurology), University of Toronto,
4
Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, 5Department of Psychology,
York University — There is great interest in the cognitive consequences of
early hippocampal volume loss in developmental amnesia (DA). However,
surprisingly little is known about the locus, extent, and distribution of hippocampal damage in individuals with DA, in which neural insult occurs
well before development is complete. Here we used high-resolution MRI
(T2-weighted, voxel size = 0.4x0.4x3.0mm) to manually segment the medial
temporal lobe (MTL) subregions in patient H.C., a young adult with DA,
and a group of sex- and age-matched control participants (n=10). First, the
hippocampus as a whole was defined and divided into anterior and poster
segments. Next, the subfields of the hippocampus (CA1, dentate gyrus/
CA2/3, and subiculum) were defined within the body of the hippocampus. Finally, the entorhinal (ERC), perirhinal (PRC), and parahippocampal
(PHC) cortices were defined. Volumetric estimates were corrected for head
size (Arndt et al., 1991) and statistical significance was set to p<0.05 (Crawford et. al., 2010). In the right hippocampus, both anterior and posterior
segments were significantly smaller in patient H.C.; in the left hemisphere,
only anterior hippocampus was significantly reduced. In the body of the
hippocampus, all three subfields were significantly reduced in the left
hemisphere; CA1 and subiculum were reduced in the right hemisphere. In
the MTL cortex, no differences were observed between groups in the PRC
and ERC, while bilateral PHC volume was significantly increased in patient
H.C. compared to controls. These results can be used to inform patterns
of spared and impaired cognitive abilities in DA and perhaps in amnesia
more generally.

B105
LONG-TERM MEMORY EFFECTS IN THE N400 DURING SENTENCE PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FROM A NOVEL RECOGNITION
MEMORY - SENTENCE COMPREHENSION PARADIGM Maria Lago1,
Chow Wing yee1, Barrios Shannon1, Parker Dan1, Morini Giovanna1, Lau Ellen1;
1
University of Maryland — Does memory of individual words interact with
the expectations built during sentence comprehension? The amplitude of
the N400 component is known to be modulated by item repetition in word
lists (Rugg, 1985) and by the predictability of a word in sentences (Kutas,
1993). Previous work has examined the relationship between repetition and
congruity using whole-sentence repetition (Besson et al. 1992). This work
has found an effect of repetition, but only when the target word is incongruous given the context, which suggests that having studied a word might
only play a role when something has gone awry in the computation of the
meaning of the sentence. Here we asked: (1) whether memory of words
affects their processing during sentence comprehension and (2) whether
the effect of repetition interacts with the effect of predictability in the sentence. We embedded a sentence comprehension task within a recognition
memory task. Participants (n=24) were asked to study a list of words and
perform a recognition task after reading sentences. We manipulated the
cloze probability of a semantically congruous target word (expected vs.
unexpected) and whether the target word was studied earlier (old vs. new).
We found a significant main effect of both factors in the N400 amplitude
and no interaction between them. That is, repetition of a word leads to a
smaller N400 effect during sentence comprehension regardless of its predictability in the sentence. These results suggest that memory of individual
words facilitates access to expected and unexpected words equally during
sentence comprehension.

B106
REWARD BINDS STIMULUS-ACTION TO STIMULUS-CLASSIFICATION ASSOCIATIONS Karolina Moutsopoulou1,2, Qing Yang1,2, Yi-Fang
Hsu1,2, Anne-Marike Schiffer3, Nick Yeung3, Florian Waszak1,2; 1Université Paris
Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 2CNRS (Laboratoire Psychologie
de la Perception, UMR 8158), Paris, France, 3Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3UD, UK — Many
studies have shown that in associative learning, a stimulus is associated
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

83

Poster Session B
with the particular action used to respond to it (S-A), as well as to the specific classification task that is performed on it (S-C). Recently, studies using
various methodologies have shown that S-C and S-A associations are independently processed. Here, using an item-specific across-task priming paradigm and measuring reaction times we investigated whether the processing of these associations is influenced by monetary reward which is known
to increase dopamine. Reward was investigated using a dynamic model of
expected value estimation where participants’ expectation of the reward
value was defined by whether an upcoming reward was higher, approximately equal, or lower than what they expected (based on the rewards they
already had in the previous trials). The results show that giving rewards
during the initial learning phase (priming phase) which are higher than
the expected, creates an interaction between S-C and S-A while when the
reward is lower than expected S-C and S-A associations are processed independently. The type of interaction observed indicates that under conditions
of increased dopamine, S-A processing pathways interact with S-C processing, an association not previously observed in the literature. These findings
suggest that dopamine-dependent reward learning can strengthen connections between S-C and S-A processing.

B107
NEURAL BASIS OF SUBLIMINAL INHIBITORY PRIMING IN VISUAL
WORD RECOGNITION Maciej Pas1, Kimihiro Nakamura1, Nobukatsu Sawamoto1, Hidenao Fukuyama1; 1Kyoto University — Some recent behavioral
studies of masked priming report that the subjects’ reaction time (RT)
for word recognition is increased, as opposed to the typical RT reduction
in most priming experiments. This inhibitory priming is observed when
prime and target words share a syllable at their initial segment (e.g. ‘koin’
- ‘koruku’). In this study we employed functional magnetic resonance
imaging to explore the brain regions linked to inhibitory priming. The
behavioral paradigm had a 2x2 factorial design, with prime-target syllabic
overlap (shared or different), and prime presentation field (left or right
hemifield) as within-subject factors, thereby allowing us to measure the
neural priming of each hemisphere separately. Twelve right-handed volunteers judged whether target words represented natural or artificial objects.
Consistent with previous behavioral studies, our results showed significant
delay in RT in shared syllable trials relative to different syllable trials. At
the neural level, imaging results revealed increased activation of the left
prefrontal cortex in shared syllable trials, relative to different syllable trials,
suggesting that behavioral inhibitory priming is mediated through repetition enhancement rather than repetition suppression previously known
for facilitatory behavioral priming. This neural priming was produced by
masked primes flashed to the left hemisphere but not by those presented
to the right hemisphere. These results provide novel imaging data for the
fast word processing mechanism mediated by the left inferior prefrontal
cortex, which is distinct from the classical visual word form system in the
left occipitotemporal cortex.

B108
LEFT PARIETAL TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION DISTURBS PRIMING BETWEEN SYMBOLIC AND NON-SYMBOLIC
NUMBER REPRESENTATIONS Delphine Sasanguie1, Silke M. Göbel2,
Bert Reynvoet1; 1KU Leuven, Belgium, 2University of York, UK — An amodal
number representation activated by all types of numerical input, irrespective of the input notation, has often been proposed to be located in the left
or right IntraParietal Sulcus (IPS). Two cross-notational priming experiments were carried out to test the existence of a notation-independent
magnitude representation in the left or right parietal lobes. In Experiment
1, stimuli were Arabic digits and number words. Results revealed no significant effect of stimulation with Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS)
over left or right IPS during prime presentation. In contrast, in Experiment
2, digits and dot patterns were intermixed and here the priming distance
effect (PDE) was reduced in the right TMS condition and absent for stimulation over left IPS. These findings suggest: 1) that TMS over left but not
right IPS disrupt processes that are crucial for priming when symbolic and
non-symbolic stimuli are intermixed, and 2) that disruption of the left IPS
on its own is not sufficient to disrupt cross-notational priming when purely
symbolic number notations are used. Our results point towards a crucial
role of the left hemisphere for the mapping between small symbolic and
non-symbolic numerosities.

84

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

B109
TRACKING SOURCES OF IMPLICIT RECOGNITION IN VISUAL
CORTEX USING PARAFOVEAL KALEIDOSCOPE IMAGES Iliana
M. Vargas1, Joel L. Voss1, Alejandra N. Garcia2, Jonathan H. Hofman3, Ken
A. Paller1; 1Northwestern University, 2California State University San Marcos,
3
Columbia University — Stimulus repetition can facilitate perceptual processing and behavioral responses in implicit memory tests. In some circumstances, repetition-induced facilitation of perceptual processing can also
support highly accurate recognition responses in the absence of awareness
of memory retrieval. Our previous studies examined this phenomenon
of “implicit recognition” using two-alternative forced-choice recognition
testing with kaleidoscope images and perceptually similar foils. Recently
we found that implicit recognition was dependent on stimulus location,
in that guesses were 71% accurate for stimuli presented on the same side
of fixation and in the same location during study and test, but only 50%
accurate (chance) for stimuli presented on different sides. We thus hypothesized that implicit recognition arises from memory storage in retinotopic
visual cortex. In order to further test this hypothesis, we adapted recognition testing procedures for recording event-related brain potentials. At
encoding, stimuli appeared briefly either left or right of fixation. At test,
stimuli appeared on both sides simultaneously (either the same repeat
kaleidoscope on both sides or the same highly similar foil on both sides).
Guess responses were more prevalent than remember and know responses,
and guessing accuracy was greater than chance, as in our previous studies. Analyses of corresponding lateralization of implicit recognition brain
potentials was motivated by our previous findings regarding neural correlates of implicit recognition. Overall, results confirmed that remarkably
accurate guessing can arise during recognition testing when behavioral
responses are influenced by a repetition-induced facilitation of perceptual
processing.

B110
DISTINCT NEURAL SYSTEMS FOR THE PRODUCTION OF SPEECH
AND EMOTIONAL VOCALIZATIONS Zarinah Agnew1, Lilya Ward1, Carolyn
McGettigan1,2, Oliver Josephs1, Sophie Scott1; 1UCL ICN, Alexandra House, 17
Queen Square, London, WC1N 3AR, UK, 2Royal Holloway, University of London,
UK — The neural control of production of emotional vocalizations may be
fundamentally different to that of speech sounds. Emotional vocalizations
may be more akin to vocalizations made by non-human primates in that
many are universal, i.e. recognizable across distinct cultures. Conversely,
speech sounds are highly over-learnt articulations that are not consistent
across cultures. Given these differences, it has been suggested that emotional vocalisations may rely on evolutionarily older, or different neural
systems. This is the first time functional neuroimaging has been used to
investigate two evolutionarily distinct subsystems for articulation by comparing the production of speech sounds and emotional vocalizations. Subjects were cued to either produce an emotional vocalization or a speech
sound related to a written cue. The emotional conditions were disgust,
sadness, amusement and relief. Functional data were acquired using a
clustered sparse acquisition to deal with head motion. Breathing was monitored throughout in order to investigate neural activity associated with
changes in breathing across conditions. Finally a motor localizer was performed in order to identify cortical maps for movement of different aspects
of the articulators. Early analyses indicate that production of emotional
vocalizations compared to speech was associated with activity in right
putamen, right anterior inferior frontal gyrus/insula, anterior cingulate
and bilateral inferior parietal cortex. These data suggest that there may be
different neural pathways for the control of these two types of movement,
lending support to the suggestion that speech and emotional vocalizations
rely on different neural pathways.

B111
LATERALIZED READINESS POTENTIAL AMPLITUDE IS ASSOCIATED WITH RELATIVE MOVEMENT EFFICIENCY AND CHOICE:
SIMULTANEOUS PREPARATION OF LEFT AND RIGHT HAND
ACTIONS DURING A POINTING TASK. Donald Atkin1, Peter Dixon1,
Anthony Singhal1; 1University of Alberta — Evidence from human and non-human primates indicates that two or more potential actions can be represented simultaneously. In humans, conflict between prepared actions can

2013 Annual Meeting
be detected using electroencephalography (EEG) via the lateralized readiness potential (LRP), which appears smaller in amplitude as the number
and distance between potential targets is increased. However, this line of
research has thus far only investigated conflicts between potential actions
involving a single effector, such as a hand, rather than conflicts between
effectors. In two experiments, we sought to extend the investigation of
action competition by offering participants a choice of effector when performing pointing towards a left- or right-lateralized, circular target. While
Experiment 1 was free-viewing in design, Experiment 2 introduced a fixation cross as a control for target visual field. EEG was recorded during
each experiment, which permitted detection and analysis of the LRP.
Experiment 1 demonstrated a reduction in LRP amplitude when participants performed contralateral movements as well as when they performed
movements to centrally-located targets regardless of effector, while Experiment 2 replicated the reduction in LRP amplitude during contralateral
movements. Together, these findings constitute the first evidence of competition between effectors in humans. Competition appears to occur when no
effector possesses an efficiency advantage in terms of the physical distance
it must transverse to the target, or when people choose to perform movements which are inefficient. As relative movement efficiency is likely established through movement simulation and prediction, this finding suggests
that the LRP could be used to measure imagined movements.

B112
USING EEG AND MACHINE LEARNING TO PREDICT ACTION
GOALS FROM DATA IN THE HUMAN MIRROR SYSTEM Lawrence P
Behmer Jr.1, Jason Fairey1, Lawrence B Holder1, Lisa R Fournier1; 1Washington State Univeristy — The frontal-parietal mirror circuit (FPMC) is active
when individuals observe or perform a goal-directed behavior. Evidence
in macaques and humans suggest that the FPMC is extremely robust at
the point when individuals code the goal of the motor act, enabling an
observer to understand an agent’s intentions. Recent theoretical hypotheses in the fields of computer science and machine learning suggest that
data from the FPMC may have applications in robotics and artificial intelligence. Recently, EEG data has been used to control brain-machine interfaces, move a cursor on a computer screen, access a smart phone app, and
to predict whether an individual won or lost in a blackjack game. Here, we
used human FPMC data from the EEG (electroencephalography) to design
a machine learning algorithm to predict the action outcome of an event
that a participant was observing. Adapting a paradigm used by Iacoboni
and colleagues, we measured mu-ERD (event-related desynchronization)
while individuals observed videos of an actor engaging in goal-directed
actions where the outcomes were either ambiguous or unambiguous. We
observed that mu-ERD was significantly strongest during the action and
goal conditions compared to the non-movement setting conditions. Additionally, mu-ERD was strongest when the action outcome was ambiguous.
Mu-ERD data was used to evaluate machine learning algorithms that can
predict an individual’s intention. We discuss the use of this data towards
the development of hands-free, non-invasive neural devices that can assist
senior citizens with mobility impairments in a Smart Home environment.

B113
PLASTICITY IN ADULT SOMATOSENSORY CORTEX: COMPARISON BEFORE AND AFTER BRAIN SURGERY Hana Burianova1, Anina
Rich1, Mark Williams1, Lars Marstaller1, Michael Morgan2, Greg Savage3;
Centre in Cognition and its Disorders, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia,
2
Australian School of Advanced Medicine, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia, 3Department of Psychology, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia — We
investigated brain reorganization in a patient who underwent a surgery to
remove a brain arteriovenous malformation located in left somatosensory
cortex and who, consequently, lost proprioception in the fingers of her right
hand. The objectives of our study were to investigate long-term changes
in neural activation and functional connectivity associated with the loss of
finger proprioception and its gradual recovery. The patient participated in
a longitudinal functional magnetic resonance imaging study in which she
was required to engage in a simple motoric (finger tapping) task several
times in the span of fourteen months. The results show that after surgery
the patient’s right finger tapping was significantly slower than left finger
tapping. These behavioural changes were associated with pronounced
decreases in left-hemispheric somatosensory activity and increases in
1

Poster Session B
right-hemispheric motor activity. Additionally, we observed significant
changes in functional connectivity of the somatosensory network over time.
The results of this study provide further support for neural plasticity in
adulthood, evidenced not only by changes in regional activations but also
by changes in functional connectivity.

B114
LOOKING AT UNDERSTANDING THE INFLUENCE OF PERSPECTIVE ON HANDEDNESS IN ACTION RECOGNITION IN RIGHT
HANDED SUBJECTS Rachel Kelly1, Chris Mizelle1,2, Lewis Wheaton1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2Atlanta VA Medical Center — Comprehension of
skilled action is a typical aspect of daily behavior. The ability to understand
action may require us to simulate that action in ourselves. The purpose
of this neurobehavioral study is to evaluate the interaction of handedness
and perspective plays in our ability to recognize the goals of motor acts. In
a two- part study, right- handed subjects were first trained directly with
different tools. Then they were presented with randomly organized static
visual images of novel and familiar tools from egocentric or allocentric perspectives performed by either a left or right hand. For the first part, behavioral results showed there was a significant effect of accuracy with respect
to perspective, with highest accuracy in the egocentric perspective. As this
may relate to encoding of action from an internal perspective as opposed
to a social perspective, the second neural study was performed. The neural
study showed parietal and occipital activation for the allocentric perspective when compared to egocentric perspectives. Egocentric perspective
showed a greater activation in the premotor regions that which is involved
in motor planning. Further analysis revealed an effect of handedness of the
actor, which showed activations consistent with limb-specific motor simulation. This suggests activation of motor representations of the observer’s
left hand when watching a left-handed person for comprehending actions,
regardless of the perspective of the action seen. Consequently, the current
research will help us better understand how we encode action and recall
motor simulations and may ultimately contribute to understanding of
some tool-use related deficits.

B115
TIME-FREQUENCY ANALYSIS OF CORTICAL RESPONSES TO
VOICE PITCH FEEDBACK PERTURBATION REVEALS BILATERAL
NETWORK OF DETECTION AND COMPENSATION. Naomi S Kort1,
John F Houde1, Srikantan S Nagarajan; 1University of California, San Francisco — Speech requires the coordination of motor commands to produce
sounds that convey an intended message. While auditory feedback, when
available, is used to monitor speech and correct errors, the role of feedback in speech remains poorly understood. Thus, experimental manipulation of auditory feedback during speaking offers a unique window to
understand the neural substrates of speech motor control. This study used
real-time pitch-altered auditory feedback with magnetoencephalography
to explore the neural correlates of feedback processing. In the Speaking
Condition, subjects produced a sustained utterance of the vowel /a/.
During the phonation the subjects heard one 100-cent pitch perturbation
lasting 400ms. Equal numbers of trials raising and lowering the perceived
pitch were pseudorandomly distributed. In the Listening Condition, subjects passively listened to the recording of their perturbed voice feedback.
The neural analysis consisted of time-frequency beamforming using the
NUTMEG software package. Only subjects who systematically changed
their pitch to oppose the direction of the applied perturbation were used in
this analysis. The compensation began on average 206ms after the perturbation onset with an average compensation of 19% and the range from 9%
to 41%. The cortical response to the applied pitch perturbation revealed a
distinct bilateral pattern of enhanced activity in the speaking condition as
compared to the listening condition. Furthermore, a temporally dynamic
network including temporal and motor areas shows significant regression
with individual subjects’ compensation. With this time-frequency analysis
we observe the bilateral network involved in recognizing and responding
to the pitch perturbation.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

85

Poster Session B

B116
ERROR ARGUMENTATION ENHANCE ADAPTABILITY IN ADULTS
WITH LOW MOTOR ABILITY Chi-Mei Lee1, Jin Bo1; 1Eastern Michigan
University, Michigan, USA — Developmental Coordination Disorder (DCD)
is characterized as having motor deficits that interfere with individuals’
daily activities. It is a pervasive and enduring disorder, which persists into
adulthood. Children with DCD have shown learning deficits in visuomotor adaptation tasks, and failure to detect the errors seem to be the key
that impede their motor learning (e.g., Kagerer et al., 2006). Studies showed
that larger feedback could improve the rate and extent of motor learning in
young adults (e.g., Patton et al., 2006). The current study recruited adults,
who self-reported as having motor coordination problems and as healthy
controls (aged from 18 to 34), to examine their adaptability in a center-out
adaptation task when error feedbacks were either regular (30° rotation) or
enlarged (30° + double error). We predicted that adults with low motor
ability would show less difficulty in the enlarged feedback condition compared to the regular feedback condition. Results revealed that participants
with lower motor ability (assessed by the Adult DCD/Dyspraxia Checklist,
Kirby et al., 2010) showed less adaptability (i.e. significant group x block
interaction on spatial variability and no aftereffects on motor planning
measures) than those with higher motor ability in the regular feedback
condition. However, they were able to reach a similar level of adaptability
compared to the controls in the enlarged feedback condition (i.e. no group
differences on aftereffects for all the measures). We argue that adults with
motor difficulties can compensate their “noisy” internal visuomotor mapping by relying more on their feedback processes.

B117
EXPERIENCE AND EXPERTISE MODULATE REWARD PROCESSING WITHIN MEDIAL-FRONTAL CORTEX Stephane MacLean1, Cameron
D. Hassall1, Olav E. Krigolson1; 1Dalhousie University — A series of recent
studies (Krigolson & Holroyd, 2006, 2007a, 2007; Krigolson et al., 2008) suggest that a reinforcement learning system within medial-frontal cortex may
underlie motor learning. Here, we sought to further that work by examining how expertise modulated reward evaluation by the medial-frontal
system. In the present study we had participants do a postural control task
while electroencephalographic (EEG) data was recorded. Specifically, we
had participants complete a task that required them to learn to improve
their control of their center of balance. An analysis of our behavioral data
revealed that participants did improve their postural control over the
course of the experiment. An analysis of the EEG data revealed that a feedback error-related negativity (fERN) was elicited by movement errors, a
finding in line with previous work (i.e., Krigolson et al., 2008). Further, we
found that the amplitude of the fERN could be used to distinguish between
differing levels of behavioral performance – people who exhibited better
behavioral performance had larger fERN amplitudes overall. Finally, participants who demonstrated better behavioral performance at the postural
control task also self-reported histories of greater athletic experience. Interestingly, these results suggest a relationship between reward processing by
the medial-frontal system, behavioral performance, and expertise. In sum,
these findings are in line with the aforementioned research (i.e., Krigolson
& Holroyd) and further extend it to provide an insight into the mechanisms
that potentially underlie the development of expertise.

B118
AGING, AEROBIC ACTIVITY AND INTERHEMISPHERIC COMMUNICATION Keith McGregor1,2, Kenneth Heilman3,4, Joe Nocera1,2, Carolynn
Patten3,4, Todd Manini5, Bruce Crosson1,2, Andrew Butler1,6; 1Atlanta VA RR&D
Center for Neurocognitive and Visual Research, 2Emory University, Department of Neurology, 3Malcom Randall VA Medical Center, 4University of Florida, Department of Physical Therapy, 5University of Florida, Institute on Aging,
6
Georgia State University, Department of Physical Therapy — Recent studies
have shown that during unimanual motor tasks older adults show bilateral
recruitment of primary motor cortex (M1), while younger adults show a
suppression of the ipsilateral motor cortex. Additional work has indicated
that increased bilateral M1 recruitment in older adults may be deleterious
when performing some motor tasks. However, higher levels of physical
fitness are associated with improved dexterity and fitness may mitigate the
loss of both inhibitory and excitatory communication in aging adults. The

86

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
goal of this study was to assess dexterity and interhemispheric motor communication in physically fit and sedentary middle-age (40-60 years) right
handed participants using tests of hand deftness and transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS). To behaviorally assess the influence of interhemispheric
communication on motor performance, participants also perform the coin
rotation deftness task while maintaining pinch force with the opposite hand
(bimanual condition). We correlated these behavioral measures with the
ipsilateral silent period using TMS to assess interhemispheric inhibition.
Our results show that the middle-aged adults who were physically fit had
better dexterity of their right hand (finger tapping and peg-board). When
performing the coin rotation task the fit group had no between hand differences, but the sedentary group’s left hand performance was inferior to the
their right hand. Whereas we found that better dexterity correlated with
ipsilateral silent period duration (greater inhibition) thereby supporting the
postulate that fitness improves interhemispheric motor communication, for
unknown reasons the two groups’ performance during the bimanual task
condition was similar.

B119
INTERACTION OF THE TWO VISUAL SYSTEMS IN A GRASPING
TASK Kelly Mills1, Claudia Gonzalez1; 1University of Lethbridge — The dualstream theory of visual processing posits that visual information is processed by two functionally distinct neural pathways. The ventral stream
mediates the conscious perception of visual features that remain relatively
stable over time, while the dorsal stream mediates visually-guided actions
and updates spatial information on a moment to moment basis. For example, the location of your coffee cup earlier this morning is irrelevant to dorsal
stream processing; only the information of where the cup is as you reach
to pick it up is of importance. Here, we demonstrate that stable information stored in the ventral stream can in fact influence online actions under
the control of the dorsal stream. Two groups of participants constructed
replicas of a presented Lego model, from an array of Lego pieces, over 11
trials. Participants first used memorized visual information to search and
build (Ventral trials), and in later trials they used online visual feedback to
complete the models (Dorsal trials). In the Ventral trials, participants that
were presented with Lego pieces in consistent locations on the table top
(Experimental group) showed a decrease in search time over trials; participants that were presented with identical pieces but in randomized locations
(Control group) did not show any savings. In the Dorsal trials, when both
groups completed the task using online information, the results showed
that the dorsal visual stream can capitalize on information acquired and
stored by the ventral visual stream. This finding highlights the interaction
between the two visual streams in a behavioural task.

B120
SEEING WHAT YOU WANT TO SEE: A BAYESIAN ACCOUNT Noham
Wolpe1,2, Daniel M Wolpert1, James B Rowe1,2; 1University of Cambridge, 2Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit — People tend to perceive their own abilities as superior to others. These illusions of superiority
are not common in many aspects of life, but are also linked to good mental
health. Misperceptions that arise in visual illusions have been successfully
explained by Bayesian models. According to these models, the brain generates a percept by combining imperfect sensory information about the
external world with expectations of possible sensory events, called priors.
Here we ask whether self performing a task affects the priors people use
when perceiving the outcome, and thus whether overestimation of performance might have a Bayesian account. We developed a visuomotor task
to examine how participants integrate priors with sensory information,
either when performing goal-directed actions themselves or when observing these actions. By fitting Bayesian models, we inferred the distribution
of these priors, and compared them to the actual performance distribution.
We found that priors for self-generated actions were consistently narrower
(smaller standard deviations) relative to both the actual performance distribution and the priors for observed actions. In contrast, priors for observed
actions were similar to performance distribution. This indicates that when
performing goal-directed actions, the brain uses priors that represent exaggerated expectations of goal success, compared to when simply observing
these actions. Consequently, people underestimate their own errors while
more accurately perceiving the errors of observed actions. Such a Bayesian

2013 Annual Meeting
account suggests that goal priors for our own actions underlie the common
illusions of superiority, so that when acting we tend to see what we want
to see.

B121
N170 VISUAL WORD SPECIALIZATION ON IMPLICIT AND
EXPLICIT READING TASKS IN SPANISH-SPEAKING ADULT NEOLITERATES Trey Avery1, Laura Sanchez1, Karen Froud1; 1Teachers College,

Columbia University — Adult literacy training is known to be difficult in
terms of teaching and maintenance (Abadzi, 2003), perhaps because neoliterate adults have not acquired reading automaticity. This study examines
fast word recognition processes in neoliterate adults, to evaluate whether
they show evidence of perceptual (automatic) distinctions between linguistic and visual (symbolic) stimuli. Such a mechanism is thought to be
the basis for effortless reading, associated with Visual Word Form Area
activation that becomes “tuned” to script as literacy skills are acquired
(McCandliss, Cohen, & Dehaene, 2003). High density EEG was recorded
from a group of neoliterate adults who participated in two reading tasks:
(1) a one-back task requiring implicit reading (available only to those who
have attained automaticity), and (2) an explicit reading task, in which participants detected mismatches between pairs of visual and auditory words.
Results were compared to recordings from a comparison group of adults
who learned to read in childhood. The left-lateralized N170 ERP was targeted as an index of automaticity in reading. Participants from the comparison group showed left-lateralized N170 to word stimuli in both the implicit
and reading tasks. Conversely, the N170 elicited from the experimental
group showed a left-lateralized topography only in the explicit reading
task, and a right lateralization in the one-back task. This suggests that automaticity in reading can be indexed in neoliterate adults using the N170,
and that automaticity had not been acquired by the experimental group
investigated here. Study implications with respect to literacy education and
attainment are discussed.

B122
INTEGRATING REAL AND IMAGINED STIMULI ACROSS SENSORY
MODALITIES Christopher C. Berger1, H. Henrik Ehrsson1; 1Karolinska Institutet — Research on imagery has found a great deal of behavioral and neuroanatomical overlap between the things we conjure up in our minds, and
the things we perceive as coming from the external world (c.f., Kosslyn,
Ganis, & Thompson, 2001). Independently, an abundance of research on the
interaction and integration of the senses has demonstrated the importance
of combining stimuli from different sensory modalities on our perception
of the external world (cf., Stein & Stanford, 2008). Historically, however,
research on imagery has focused on similarities between imagery and
perception within a single modality (Kosslyn et al., 2001). Here, in a novel
approach to investigating the nature of imagery, we utilized classic multisensory illusions and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), to
systematically examine whether imagery can interact with veridical stimuli of a differing sensory modality in the same way veridical stimuli from
different sensory modalities interact with one another. We found that supplanting a veridical stimulus with an imagined stimulus in the presence
of a simultaneously presented veridical stimulus from a different sensory
modality lead to the same multisensory effects found for veridical versions
of the cross-bounce illusion (Sekuler, Sekuler, & Lau, 1997), ventriloquist
illusion (Howard & Templeton, 1966), and McGurk illusion (McGurk &
MacDonald, 1976). Together, these findings demonstrate for the first time
that imagery is capable of leading to multisensory integration, and are consistent with previous findings of overlapping representations of imagery
and perception.

B123
NEURAL MECHANISMS MEDIATING TOLERANCE FOR AUDIOVISUAL STIMULUS ONSET ASYNCHRONY Jyoti Bhat1, Lee M. Miller2,
Antoine J. Shahin1; 1The Ohio State University,Columbus, OH, 2University of
California, Davis, CA — Audiovisual (AV) integration is integral to maintaining speech intelligibility in adverse acoustical environments. However, AV integration can be compromised by auditory and visual stimulus
onset asynchrony (SOA) e.g. long AV delays often experienced while using
electronic media communications, such as video conferencing. However,
the brain is able to tolerate long SOA durations up to a point, termed the

Poster Session B
point of perceptual fusion (PPF). Here, PPF indicates the time point that
lies between the first instance in which the forward-shifted acoustic signal
is perceived out of sync and the last instance in which it was perceived in
sync with respect to mouth movements. We investigated the neural mechanisms that facilitate the tolerance of long duration SOA for monosyllabic
spoken words, in which SOA duration was adaptively roved around the
PPF for each subject. The subjects judged each AV pair as either synchronous or asynchronous. The comparison of the underlying EEG activity for
these conditions, revealed a significant difference in right lateralized centro-parietal beta band (14-30 Hz) activity following the PPF (0 – 500 ms) that
was greater for the synchronous percept. Beta activity has been implicated
in cortical-to-cortical long distance communication associated with perceptual object binding in the visual and auditory domains. Also, it has been
implicated in AV integration mediating the McGurk effect, via the superior
temporal gyrus (STG). Our findings suggest that the brain creates a temporal window of tolerance for SOA by coupling neural activity of auditory
and visual centers via a central integrator, i.e., STG.

B124
ANATOMICAL AND FUNCTIONAL NETWORKS UNDERLYING
AUDIO-VISUAL INTEGRATION David Brang1, Jacob Zweig1, Jyoti Mishra2,
Satoru Suzuki1, Steven A Hillyard3, Vilayanur S Ramachandran3, Marcia
Grabowecky1; 1Northwestern University, 2UCSF, 3UCSD — Our senses interact
in daily life through multisensory integration, facilitating perceptual processes and behavioral responses. Anatomical and functional connectivity
have been suggested as mechanisms underlying the ability to integrate
information across the senses. Here we examined the role of both forms
of connectivity in the modulation of visual processes by auditory cues.
Multisensory interaction was quantified using the “sound-induced illusory
flash” paradigm, in which a single visual flash paired with two auditory
beeps frequently generates the novel percept of an illusory second flash.
The role of anatomical connectivity was assessed by examining the relationship between the perception of an illusory second flash and individual
differences in white matter connectivity (as assessed by diffusion tensor
imaging) on 22 participants. Results revealed a significant positive correlation between the experience of an illusory second flash and enhanced anatomical connectivity (fractional anisotropy) between auditory and visual
cortices, suggesting that increased connectivity increases auditory-visual
interactions. Functional connectivity was assessed from EEG coherence
data on a separate group of 40 subjects. Physically identical trials were
divided for each participant according to whether or not an illusory second
flash was reported. Interestingly, the experience of an illusory second flash
was significantly associated with decreased phase coherence between
auditory and visual cortices, suggesting increased functional connectivity
reduces auditory-visual interactions. Thus, stronger anatomical connectivity increased but stronger functional connectivity decreased auditory-visual interactions. This dissociation suggests a complex and novel interaction between anatomical and functional connectivity in multisensory
processes, suggesting both facilitatory and inhibitory processes between
vision and audition.

B125
HEIGHTENED MOTOR REFERRAL AND SENSORY REFERRAL
INDUCED BY NERVE BLOCK OR TOPICAL ANESTHETIC Laura Case1,
Radhika Gosavi1, Vilayanur Ramachandran1; 1Center for Brain and Cognition,
University of California, San Diego — Mirror neurons allow us to covertly
simulate the sensation and movement of others. Yet if motor and sensory
neurons fire during observation of movement or touch, why don’t we actually feel that movement or touch? Might synesthetes lack inhibitory mechanisms that normally inhibit mirror representations from reaching conscious
experience? Indeed, we have previously reported heightened sensory referral in amputees with phantom limbs and in patients with temporarily anesthetized arms. These observations suggest that sensory referral is heightened when sensory feedback is reduced or eliminated. In the current study
we replicate the enhancement of sensory referral under nerve block, and
also extend it to motor referral, in dental clinic patients undergoing minor
procedures on one side of the mouth. In addition, we obtain causal, quantitative evidence of heightened sensory referral under temporary deafferentation in healthy participants who had anesthetic cream (versus control
creams; double-blind) applied using a mirror-touch confusion task that
elicits “false alarms” when the apparent visual feedback of touch leads the
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

87

Poster Session B
participant to feel touch. We suggest that sensory and motor feedback participate in dynamic equilibrium with mirror representations of observed
sensation and motor activity; when sensory or motor feedback is reduced,
the brain relies more on visual information. The fact that participants actually feel touch in these cases, as opposed to merely guessing it occurred,
suggests that this integration occurs in the mirror system. The sensory and
mirror systems may implement Bayesian processes through mutual inhibition and disinhibition, relying more on visual feedback when sensorimotor
feedback becomes noisy.

B126
THETA MODULATION IN THE FRONTAL CORTEX: A NEURAL CORRELATE OF CYBERSICKNESS EunHee Chang1, InJae Hwang1, Hyeonjin
Jeon1, YeSeul Chun1, Changhoon Park2, Hyun Taek Kim1; 1Korea University,
2
Hoseo University — Cybersickness occurs when participant experience
virtual environments. Most studies of cybersickness have focused on subjective indices using questionnaires. However, physiological measures
can provide more objective indices of cybersickness, and these measures
can characterize depending on the levels of cybersickness. To determine
whether the level of cybersickness affects brain activity, participants (n=4)
passively navigated a 3D virtual environment for 10 min while undergoing
EEG recording. They were instructed to report cybersickness by pressing
a button whenever they felt symptoms of cybersickness while navigating
the environment. Low-level cybersickness refers to the 60 s duration for
which cybersickness was least reported among participants, and high-level
cybersickness refers to the duration for which cybersickness was most often
reported. Spectrograms were used to identify different brain activity patterns between low-level and high-level cybersickness. A repeated measures
ANOVA was conducted on each frequency band (delta: 0.1–4 Hz, theta:
4–8 Hz, alpha: 8–13 Hz), with the level of cybersickness and periods of each
level (the first 30 s and the last 30 s) as within-subject factors. We found that
the power of the theta band was higher for the high-level cybersickness
than for the low-level cybersickness at the F4 site (F(1,3)=11.795, p<.05).
This result indicates that higher levels of cybersickness can be associated
with increased brain activity related to spatial encoding, which is known
to be a correlate of theta oscillations. This may reflect compensatory brain
processing to reduce spatial disorientation caused by cybersickness.

B127
PERCEPTUAL CONFLICT OVER TIME AND BETWEEN MODALITIES: COMPARING BISTABLE PERCEPTS AND INTERSENSORY
ILLUSIONS. Pin-wei Chen1, Allison K. Allen1, Carlos Montemayor1, Ezequiel
Morsella1,2; 1San Francisco State University, 2University of California, San
Francisco — Although neuroimaging research has illuminated the neural
correlates of intersensory processing (e.g., ventriloquism) and of bistable
percepts (e.g., Necker cube), little research has revealed how these conflicts influence action and the experience of the ‘psychological self’ (i.e.,
the sense of an observing self). Hence, building on previous research, we
investigated these under-explored phenomena using two novel behavioral
paradigms amenable to neuroimaging technologies. To assess the effects
of intersensory conflict on action, in Study 1 (n = 16) we employed the
McGurk illusion, where observers are unaware of intersensory interactions
involving discrepant visual and auditory speech cues (McGurk & MacDonald, 1976). We observed that, under some circumstances, responses to the
consciously-experienced illusion were influenced by the nature of trained
responses to the unconscious speech-related cues underlying the illusion,
F(1,15) = 13.34, p = 0.002. We discuss the inherent confounds of this paradigm. To investigate the effects of bistable stimuli on the stable, psychological self, in Study 2 (n = 26) participants observed bistable and unambiguous
objects (e.g., 12 dots) while introspecting about the stability of the self. As
predicted, participants reported that the self was more unchanging than the
experience of either bistable or, interestingly, even unambiguous objects,
F(16) = 17.92, p = .0006. Together, these projects introduce paradigms that
are amenable to neuroimaging technologies and can reveal much about the
neural bases of perception, unconscious conflicts, and the sense of self.

88

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

B128
AN EMPIRICAL EXAMINATION OF CREATIVE THINKING IN SYNESTHETES Charlotte Chun1,2, Jean-Michel Hupe2; 1University of North Carolina
at Greensboro, 2Centre de Recherche Cerveau et Cognition, Université de Toulouse & Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque — Synesthesia is a subjective phenomenon in which individuals experience an automatic connection
between two or more senses; for example, grapheme-color synesthesia, in
which letters or numbers evoke a color association. Synesthesia is purportedly associated with enhanced creativity, though this claim lacks empirical support. The goal of this study was to examine creativity in groups
of synesthetes and non-synesthetes, along with cognitive and personality
factors. Participants were recruited from universities and public museums (n=3743) to complete an online screening survey, thus avoiding the
usual requirement bias of synesthetes who spontaneously contact researchers. From the initial pool of respondents (n=1092), we selected a group of
verified synesthetes (n=29) and non-synesthetes (n=36) to complete tests
of creativity (verbal, visual, convergent, and divergent) and global cognition, as well as questionnaires of personality and mental imagery. The two
groups did not differ on overall cognitive ability. However, synesthetes
showed enhanced visual convergent and verbal divergent thinking relative
to non-synesthetes. They also exhibited elevated self-reports of openness
to experience and absorption in imaginative activities on personality questionnaires, as well as higher usage (but not vividness) of mental imagery.
These differences were, however, rather weak (effect sizes between 0.1 and
0.2, as measured by partial Eta squared), meaning that, on the individual
level, synesthetes might not be necessarily different from non-synesthetes.
But on the group level, synesthesia is associated with some enhanced creative thinking skills and specific personality traits. This work is supported
by Agence Nationale de Recherche ANR-11-BSH2-010

B129
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING AND COGNITIVE MAPS: THE ROLE
OF MEDIAL-FRONTAL CORTEX Shannon Doherty1, Laura Bow2, Cameron
Hassall1, Olave Krigolson1; 1Dalhousie University, 2University of British Columbia
— A series of recent studies has demonstrated that a reinforcement learning
system within medial-frontal cortex plays a role in the acquisition of perceptual expertise (Krigolson et al., 2009), motor skill acquisition (Krigolson
& Holroyd, 2007), language development (Gossett et al., 2010) and other
types of cognitive learning. In addition to the aforementioned research, a
recent study demonstrated that the medial-frontal reinforcement learning
system seemed to play a role in a navigational maze-learning task (Baker
& Holroyd, 2009). Here, we used event-related brain potentials (ERPs) to
extend Baker and Holroyd’s work and demonstrate that the medial-frontal
reinforcement learning system plays a role in the development of spatially
based cognitive maps (i.e., Tolman, 1948). Participants completed a spatial
navigation task where they sought to find rewards and avoid punishments
while navigating a virtual room. Interestingly, reward feedback elicited the
feedback error-related negativity (fERN: Miltner et al., 1997). However, the
ERP waveform was not as clear as in previous work – our data demonstrated
that the spatial context evoked an electroencephalographic response in the
same time range as the fERN in addition to the reward related activity. To
confirm our findings, we ran two control experiments which: 1) highlighted
the influence of spatial context on the ERP waveforms, and 2) affirmed that
a fERN was indeed elicited by reward feedback within the context of our
task. In sum, our results indicate that the medial-frontal reinforcement
learning system does play a role in the development of the cognitive maps
that underlie spatial navigation.

B130
DIFFERENCES IN LEARNING FROM ‘YUMMY’ AND ‘YUCKY’ FEEDBACK: EVIDENCE FOR MULTIPLE SIGNALS GUIDING FOOD-RELATED LEARNING IN HUMANS Matthias Doucerain1,2, Lesley K. Fellows2;
1
Harvard University, 2McGill University — Food is a primary reinforcer, and
learning from feedback is likely to play a key role in human eating behavior. It has been proposed that dopamine provides a general reward signal
underlying such learning. However, food does not only vary between so-so
and delicious: it can also be disgusting. There is debate about whether
dopamine alone is sufficient to signal negative outcomes, with other brain
systems, such as amygdala and insula, implicated in aversive learning. The

2013 Annual Meeting
present study explored choice behavior of healthy human participants in
a variant of a probabilistic selection task (Frank, 2004). In this task, participants learned through trial and error that abstract representations of
novel food packages predicted visual feedback in the form of a humanoid exclaiming either ‘yummy’, ‘okay’, or ‘yucky’, with varying probabilities. As expected, the probability of correct choices increased across trials
(p<0.0001) and did so more quickly for easy than for difficult stimulus pairs
(p<0.001). Interestingly, the probability of correct choices given ‘yummy/
okay’ feedback was significantly larger (p<0.05) than that for ‘okay/yucky’
feedback, even after controlling for the other influences. This effect was
also evident in the test phase (which examines how learning generalizes
across novel combinations of stimuli in the absence of feedback). This result
suggests distinct disgust-driven and reward-driven learning mechanisms,
engaged here by entirely abstract feedback in a hypothetical ‘food choice’
learning task. A fuller understanding of the neural basis of these mechanisms will be important if feedback-learning models are to be applied to
food choice in humans.

B131
DISSOCIATING THE NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF RISK CONSTRUCTS IN A NOVEL GAMBLING TASK Rena Fukunaga1, Joshua W.
Brown; 1Indiana University — Risk is a concept with multiple meanings that
are often disputed when used to inform cognitive neuroscience studies of
decision making. This study was designed to test competing hypotheses
of how risk is represented in the brain based on different measures of risk.
We aimed to dissociate between three types of risk constructs, specifically
variance (Preuschoff et al., 2008), loss probability (Brown & Braver, 2005),
and the magnitude of a loss (Brown & Braver, 2007). Participants chose
between a series of hypothetical gambles that measured their preferences
regarding decisions about money. For each given trial, a sure payoff option
was presented against a gamble option. Five gamble options were created
in order to independently manipulate the risk constructs while keeping
the expected value constant across the conditions. Gambles were created
to consist of three pairwise comparisons that partially controlled for each
of the three risk constructs thus ensuring that any effects from a given pairwise comparison was not due to the controlled factor. Preliminary findings
showed a greater bilateral anterior cingulate, right inferior frontal gyrus,
and left insula activity at the time of decision with increasing variance of
the chosen gamble. In contrast, we found no significant activation for either
the loss probability or the magnitude of loss in brain regions known to be
involved in representing risk. Our results suggest that the neural representation of risk reflects the variance of the possible outcomes, thus highlighting the importance of distinguishing between the different measures of risk
in decision-making paradigms.

B132
FRAMING EFFECTS IN DECISION-MAKING: ORBITOFRONTAL
DAMAGE DISRUPTS THE DECISION, BUT NOT THE FRAMING
EFFECT Anna Garr1, Lesley Fellows1; 1Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill

University — People often make markedly different choices depending on
the context in which options are presented, even when the objective values
of the options are identical, an irrational choice phenomenon termed the
framing effect. For example, people tend to take more risks when the potential for a loss is emphasized, but choose the certain outcome more often
when the same decision is framed in terms of potential gains. A recent
fMRI study proposed that the framing effect is mediated by the amygdala,
with the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) playing a regulatory role and so promoting more rational choice. Here we asked whether OFC damage alters
the framing effect, measured using several widely used tasks including
the classic “Asian-Disease Problem”, a multi-trial risky decision paradigm
with monetary losses and gains, and scenarios where attributes of decision
options were framed in positive or negative terms. Thirteen patients with
chronic focal damage affecting OFC were compared to 13 patients with
frontal damage sparing OFC and 28 demographically-matched healthy
participants. OFC damage did not systematically alter the magnitude of
the framing effect in any of these tasks although patients with OFC damage
were somewhat more likely to make aberrant choices in trials that required
right and wrong answers. This argues that the framing effect is the result of
simplifying heuristics--decision ‘short cuts’--that do not require OFC and
highlights the likely existence of multiple decision mechanisms within the
human brain.

Poster Session B

B133
NEUROFUNCTIONAL DIFFERENCES RELATED TO THE IOWA
GAMBLING TASK IN HEALTHY OLDER ADULTS Kameko Halfmann1,
Julie Gudenkauf1, William Hedgcock1, Antoine Bechara2, Natalie L. Denburg1;
1
University of Iowa, 2University of Southern California — The Iowa Gambling
Task (IGT) is thought to model real-life decisions by factoring in reward,
punishment, and uncertainty. Impairment on this task has been associated
with circumscribed damage to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPC).
Further, we have demonstrated that two groups of functionally and cognitively intact older adults show divergent behavioral performance (impaired
versus unimpaired) on this task – a difference we hypothesize is attributable
to disproportionate decline in the prefrontal cortex. To specifically test this
hypothesis, sixteen IGT-impaired and sixteen IGT-unimpaired older adults
performed an alternate version (K’) of the IGT while in a functional magnetic resonance imaging scanner. We predicted that IGT-impaired older
adults would have neurofunctional deficits in the prefrontal cortex relative
to IGT-unimpaired older adults. In early blocks of the IGT, we observed
greater activation among IGT-impaired older adults relative to IGT-unimpaired older adults in ventromedial prefrontal regions. In later blocks of the
IGT, we observed greater activation among IGT-unimpaired older adults
relative to IGT-impaired older adults in ventral prefrontal regions. These
results are consistent with our original hypothesis that there may be disproportionate decline in the IGT-impaired older adults. On a broader scale,
these results are consistent with the interpretation of a neural dissociation
between decision-making under ambiguity (in the earlier blocks) and decision-making under risk (in the later blocks).

B134
TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF NEURAL COMPUTATIONS FOR STIMULUS VALUE AND EFFORT COST Alison Harris1, Seung-Lark Lim2, Antonio Rangel3; 1Claremont McKenna College, 2University of Missouri-Kansas City,
California Institute of Technology — We often make decisions not only based
on an item’s value, but also the effort required to obtain it: e.g., using a
vending machine versus walking to a café. Whereas good-based value is
represented in ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), recent data has
implicated dorsomedial frontal cortex (dmFC) in integrating stimulus
value with effort cost to derive net (combined) value. However, the temporal dynamics of net value computation remain unclear. Here we examined
this question using event-related potentials (ERP) while hungry subjects
decided whether to work at different levels of physical effort cost (low,
medium, or high grip strength) for the opportunity to obtain food. Subjects’ decisions generally incorporated both stimulus value and effort cost,
as indicated by significant logistic fits to their choice curves. Parametric
ERP responses associated with net value were visible from 100-300 ms after
stimulus onset, negatively correlated with effort cost, and from ~450-650
ms, positively correlated with stimulus value. Distributed reconstruction
of stimulus-locked responses revealed significant sources in the vmPFC,
but not dmFC. In contrast, response-locked signals were chiefly localized
to dmFC and superior parietal sources rather than vmPFC, and largely
reflected effort cost computations preceding response. Together, these
data suggest that localization of net value integration to vmPFC and dmFC
sources depends on whether the data is time-locked to the onset of stimulus or response. In line with a transition from good-based to action-based
valuation, computations of effort cost may play an increasing role in dmFC
activity in the time directly leading up to choice.
3

B135
SEROTONIN TRANSPORTER GENOTYPE MODULATES IMPULSIVE
CHOICE IN HUMANS Catherine Hartley1, Jonathan Kanen2, Morgan McKenna1, B.J. Casey1, Joseph Kable3, Elizabeth Phelps2, Charles Glatt1; 1Weill
Cornell Medical College, 2New York University, 3University of Pennsylvania —
Many important real-world decisions involve weighing actions that yield
immediate gratification against those that only pay off over time. The influence of time on the subjective value of a reward varies widely between
individuals, yet the origins of such differences are not well understood. A
recent theory that serotonin fosters patience during intertemporal choice
suggests that genetically mediated differences in serotonergic function
may modulate temporal discounting. Here, we test whether a functional
serotonin transporter polyadenylation polymorphism (STPP/rs3813034)

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

89

Poster Session B
is associated with temporal discounting of monetary rewards. Participants
provided saliva samples for genotyping and completed a decision-making
task consisting of a series of choices between smaller immediate or larger
delayed rewards, from which we estimated each individual’s discount
parameter. Based on existing theoretical models and experimental data,
we hypothesized that a genetic propensity toward lower serotonin transporter expression (and thus, higher extracellular serotonin) would foster
patience, increasing preference for larger delayed rewards. Consistent with
this hypothesis, we found that individuals carrying a greater number of
the lower serotonin-transporter-expressing STPP G allele exhibited lower
discount rates. These results suggest that variation in serotonergic function due to STPP genotype modulates preferences for immediate versus
delayed rewards, highlighting a genetic contribution to individual differences in impulsive decision-making in humans.

B136
CONNECT FIVE: CORPUS CALLOSUM CONTRIBUTIONS TO CREATIVITY Jessica Carrasco1, Eileen Luders2, Joseph Frantz1, Sephira Ryman1,
Rex Jung1; 1University of New Mexico, 2UCLA — The Corpus Callosum (CC)
is the primary fiber bundle connecting the two cerebral hemispheres, integrating motor, sensory, and cognitive functioning. Creativity—the ability
to generate novel and useful ideas—appears to be influenced by cognitive
domains spanning multiple brain networks. We hypothesized that callosal thickness would predict creative cognition measured by the Composite Creativity Index – a composite of several measures of both verbal and
non-verbal aspects of divergent thinking (Jung et al., 2010). 120 neurologically and psychiatrically healthy subjects (55 females) between the ages of
18-29 (mean age=22 ± 3) were scanned in a 3 Tesla Siemens MRI. To obtain
callosal thickness measures, we traced the CC using MultiTracer and surface-based mesh modeling methods. Correlations between creativity and
CC thickness were then computed. We found negative correlations between
the Genu and Anterior Midbody thickness and CCI, and positive correlations in the Posterior Midbody and Isthmus. Both negative and positive
correlations between CC thickness and CCI were found in the Splenium.
Significant results (p< 0.05, uncorrected for multiple comparisons) were
obtained between the transition of positive and negative correlations, on
the border of the Anterior and Posterior Midbody of the CC. These results
support the transient hypofrontality hypothesis wherein lower frontal connectivity is seen to facilitate higher idea generation, indicated by negative
correlations within the Genu and Anterior Midbody of the CC. In contrast,
posterior aspects of the CC demonstrated positive correlations, suggesting
that better access to knowledge stores within temporal, occipital, and parietal (TOP) lobes facilitate such ideational generativity.

B137
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN APPROXIMATE NUMBER ACUITY
CORRELATE WITH CALCULATION AND MATHEMATICAL REASONING ABILITIES Selim Chang1, Soohyun Cho1; 1Chung Ang University
— Approximate number acuity (or number sense) refers to the intuitive
ability to perceive and recognize numerosity. It has been hypothesized
that number sense is a basic intuition which provides a basis for not only
approximate, nonverbal numerical processing but also for formal mathematical education. Recently, several studies reported evidence that individual differences in number acuity are correlated with mathematical achievement measured longitudinally from kindergarten to 5th grade. However,
in these studies, mathematical achievement has been taken from tests of
numerical concept and basic calculation, without including higher level
mathematical problem solving skills. For a thorough test of the hypothesis that number acuity correlates with mathematical achievement, we
considered both arithmetic and mathematical reasoning components of
mathematical achievement and examined their correlations with number
sense. Participants were 29 adults who were assessed on their number
acuity, mathematical reasoning, calculation abilities and fluid intelligence.
The results demonstrated that individuals who had better number acuity
scored higher on both the mathematical reasoning and calculation tests.
When the individual’s major was taken into consideration in addition to
number sense in a stepwise regression analysis predicting mathematical
achievement, both major and number sense were good predictors of mathematical reasoning, while number sense was the only significant predictor
for calculation ability. Our results not only provide support for the hypothesis that number sense contributes to the acquisition of arithmetic skills but

90

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
also demonstrates the possibility that number sense may serve as a foundation for higher achievement in mathematical reasoning and problem solving that goes beyond calculation.

B138
STIMULATING GAME AND STIMULATING BRAIN: IMPROVING
BRAIN FUNCTIONS USING BRAIN STIMULATION WHILE PLAYING A COMPUTER-BASED MATH GAME Chung Yen Looi1, Mihaela
Duta1, Stefan Huber2, Hans-Christoph Nuerk2, Roi Cohen Kadosh1; 1University
of Oxford, 2Eberhard Karls University — Effective processing of spatial representation of number magnitude is crucial for the development of mathematical skills. Recent research has shown that: 1) bodily spatial experiences
of number magnitude resulted in pronounced improvement in numerical
development (Moeller et al, 2012), and 2) competence with fractions predicts gains in mathematical achievement (Bailey et al, 2012). We combined
an adaptive computer-based mathematical game using a motion-sensing
input device (KINECT™) with wireless transcranial direct current stimulation (TDCS, NeuroElectrics), and delivered anodal-TDCS to the right
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex to modulate neuronal excitability and neuroplasticity during the game. Participants completed two 20-minute training
sessions on two separate days. They indicated the location of fractions on
a visually presented number line by physically moving side-to-side. Trial
difficulty increased as a function of performance. Compared to sham stimulation, TDCS led to more accurate performance and faster reaction times
at higher levels of difficulty on the second day of training. At the end of the
training, TDCS led to a transfer effect in which participants who received
TDCS showed a significant increase in verbal digit-span working memory
performance alongside a decrease in visuospatial working memory performance compared to the sham group. These results suggest that the combination of TDCS with computer-based training can lead to an enhancement
effect, including positive and negative effects to non-trained mental faculties. Future studies should aim to optimize stimulation parameters to avoid
cognitive side effects, in order to facilitate gains in mathematical achievement and provide a potential intervention for those with mathematical
learning difficulties.

B139
ACUITY FOR CONTINUOUS MAGNITUDE IS ASSOCIATED WITH
MATHEMATICAL ACHIEVEMENT IN EARLY ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
CHILDREN Yunji Park1, Selim Chang1, Soohyun Cho1; 1ChungAng University
— Approximate number acuity (also known as number sense) refers to
the intuitive ability to determine numerosity (the number of elements of
a set) in an instant. According to previous research, individuals who have
accurate number sense have higher mathematical achievement. In addition,
children with dyscalculia tend to have lower number acuity compared to
typically developing children of the same age. In the present study, we
investigated the correlation between the sensitivity for continuous magnitude and numerosity and whether these measures are correlated with
mathematical achievement in children vs. adults. We examined the weber
fraction for length and numerosity discrimination as measures of the acuity
for continuous magnitude and numerosity, respectively. In addition, each
subject was assessed on his or her intelligence quotient and mathematical achievement. The mean weber fraction for length discrimination was
.09 in adults and .22 in children. The mean weber fraction for numerosity
discrimination was .30 in adults and .48 in children. The weber fraction
for numerosity, but not length discrimination, was significantly smaller
in adults compared to children. The acuity for continuous magnitude (but
not numerosity) was correlated with both intelligence and mathematical
achievement in children. On the other hand, the acuity for numerosity
(but not continuous magnitude) was correlated with both intelligence and
mathematical achievement in adults. Our results indicate that the development of acuity for continuous magnitude precedes that of the acuity for
numerosity and children’s mathematical achievement is better predicted by
the acuity for continuous magnitude rather than for numerosity.

B140
NEUROIMAGING PREDICTORS OF COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE
ACROSS A STANDARDIZED NEUROCOGNITIVE BATTERY David
Roalf1, Kosha Ruparel1, Raquel Gur1, Warren Bilker1, R. Sean Gallagher1, Mark
Elliott1, Laura Almasy2, Michael Pogue-Geile3, Konasale Prasad3, Joel Wood3,

2013 Annual Meeting

Vishwajit Nimgaonkar3, Ruben Gur1; 1University of Pennsylvania Perelman
School of Medicine, 2Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, TX,
3
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA — The advent of fMRI enables the
identification of brain regions recruited for specific behavioral tasks. Most
fMRI studies focus on single tasks, which limit applicability where assessment of multiple brain systems is needed. We demonstrate the feasibility
of using an fMRI activation patterns during a computerized neurocognitive
battery (CNB) at two sites to predict performance in 212 healthy individuals. Brain activation reflected task-responsive and domain-specific regions
reported in previous single-task studies. Using a cross-validation LASSO
approach, brain activation and extent of activation was used to determine
the brain regions that best predicted neurocognitive performance on each
of six neurocognitive tasks. Prediction of performance was reasonable for
abstraction/mental flexibility, visuo-spatial memory and attention. Prediction was less accurate for verbal memory, face memory and emotion
processing. In addition, association models within our sample using the
cross-validated regions-of-interest indicated improved performance prediction, as expected. Here, we establish a benchmark index of performance
associated brain activation that can be applied across an entire CNB. These
data may facilitate identification of neural dysfunction associated with
poor neuropsychological performance, allow for identification of individuals at-risk for brain disorders, and may ve helpful for early intervention and
rehabilitation of neurocognitive deficits.

Poster Session B
dence in goal accomplishment, were used as covariates in six hierarchical
linear regression models. This modeling procedure removed shared variance among the ratings, allowing us to determine the independent relationship between ratings of interest and BOLD signal during autobiographical
planning. Differential activity in hippocampus, retrosplenial cortex, and
medial prefrontal cortex was modulated by plan detail, novelty, temporal
distance, and confidence. More detailed and higher novelty plans were also
associated with increasing caudate, lateral prefrontal and lateral parietal
activity. Foreseeable difficulty in goal completion increased with amygdala
and orbitofrontal cortex activity. Results suggest that specific qualities of
autobiographical plans are important predictors of default network and
executive control engagement during plan formation and reflect the multifaceted process of autobiographical planning.

B141
CREATIVE ACHIEVEMENT AND RESTING STATE NETWORKS
Sephira Ryman1, Andrei Vakhtin1, Joseph Frantz2, Jessica Carrasco1, Ranee
Flores2, Rex Jung2; 1University of New Mexico, 2University of New Mexico
Health Sciences Center, Department of Neurosurgery — Creativity has historically been a difficult construct to map on the brain using neuroimaging
techniques, likely due to the diverse interaction of multiple brain regions
involved. The effect of creativity on resting brain function was investigated
using independent component analysis (ICA) of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), which has been shown to be more sensitive than
conventional analysis techniques. 131 participants were given the creative
achievement questionnaire (CAQ) and had resting state fMRI scans collected over a period of 10 minutes. Group ICA of FMRI Toolbox (GIFT)
was used to split the intensity normalized z-scaled data into 100 independent components (ICs). Twenty-eight resting state networks (RSNs) were
selected from the GIFT output according to previous publications: 6 visual,
6 sensorimotor, 6 attentional, 4 frontal, 4 default-mode (DMN), auditory,
and basal ganglia. Effect of CAQ on the RSNs was examined in three fMRI
domains: spatial maps, time course spectra, and functional network connectivity (FNC). Results of the spatial map analysis revealed a positive effect of
CAQ on the right superior frontal gyrus. Time course spectra results indicated positive effects of CAQ scores on ~ 0.15 Hz power in 3 RSNs: 2 visual
and a DMN. No effects of CAQ on FNC were detected. The increased right
frontal superior gyrus activity is consistent with the problem solving and
creativity literature. While the lack of effects on FNC was surprising, it may
be that increases on FNC would only be apparent while performing a creative task rather than at rest.

B142
DEFAULT NETWORK AND EXECUTIVE CONTROL CORRELATES
OF AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL PLANS AND THEIR QUALITATIVE FEATURES REVEALED BY PARAMETRIC MODULATION ANALYSES R.
Nathan Spreng1, Kathy Gerlach2, Daniel Schacter2; 1Cornell University, 2Harvard University — In order to engage in purposeful behavior, it is important
to make plans, which then organize subsequent actions. Most studies of
planning involve “look-ahead” puzzle tasks that are unrelated to personal
or autobiographical plans. We recently developed a novel task to assess
autobiographical planning involving the formulation of personal plans
in response to real-world goals. Autobiographical planning was found to
engage the default network, including medial temporal lobe and midline
structures, as well as executive control regions in lateral prefrontal and
parietal cortex (Spreng et al., 2010). To examine how specific qualitative
features of autobiographical plans modulate neural activity, we collapsed
across three fMRI studies of 63 healthy young adults and performed parametric modulation analyses. Ratings of plan detail, novelty, temporal distance, ease of plan formulation, difficulty in goal completion, and confi-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

91

Poster Session C
C1
GRAPH PROPERTIES OF LARGE-SCALE FUNCTIONAL BRAIN
NETWORKS DURING SENSORY MAINTENANCE IN TOP-DOWN
SELECTIVE ATTENTION TO AUDIOVISUAL INPUTS Xiangfei Hong1,2,
Junfeng Sun1, Shanbao Tong1; 1Med-X Research Institute and School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, 2Center for
Mind and Brain, University of California, Davis — Previous studies reported
that sensory maintenance in top-down selective attention to audiovisual
inputs involved distributed cortical activations, while the connectivity
between these large-scale cortical regions has been poorly understood.
Graph theory has demonstrated to be a useful tool in the analysis of brain
networks. In this study, we investigated graph properties of the large-scale
functional brain networks during sensory maintenance in top-down selective attention to audiovisual inputs. EEGs were recorded from 30 channels
in 13 young healthy subjects (age: 21:2±2:3 yrs; male/female=9/4) during
a passive viewing task, and a top-down intersensory selective attention
task in the auditory and visual modalities. Phase synchronization indices
between EEG channel pairs were estimated to create an association matrix,
which were further converted into weighted graphs with different edge
numbers. We found invariant small-world properties of the brain networks
during both the passive viewing state and the top-down intersensory selective attentional state in alpha (8~13 Hz), beta (13~30 Hz) and gamma (30~50
Hz) EEG bands. The significantly increased clustering coefficient (C) and
decreased characteristic path length (L) of the functional brain networks
during the attentional state compared with the passive viewing state were
observed in beta band and gamma band, but not in alpha band. Our results
provided direct evidence for the important role of large-scale brain networks within higher frequency bands (beta band and gamma band) during
sensory maintenance in top-down selective attention to audiovisual inputs.

C2
MULTIMODAL MULTITASKING MEASUREMENT AND EYE-MOVEMENTS Li Hsieh1, Sean Seaman1, Richard Young2; 1Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Wayne State University, 2Department of
Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurosciences, School of Medicine, Wayne State University — We investigated the role of task modality and demands on multitasking using a series of event detection tasks designed to assess levels
of distraction and cognitive workload during multitasking scenarios. By
measuring event detection to fixed-location visual events (remote detection), head-locked visual events (head-mounted detection) and vibratory
stimuli (tactile detection), levels of distraction incurred by different cognitive tests were determined. These tests included the Surrogate Reference
Task (SuRT), a motor-visual visual search task, and the N-Back task, and
auditory-memory-vocal task, and a driving-related lane-tracking task. In
triple task conditions, participants completed a detection response task
(remote, head-mounted, or tactile detection), lane-tracking and either an
easy or difficult SuRT or N-Back task. Eye glance patterns, reaction times at
detecting events and accuracy were used as principle measures of distraction. Our results showed that both N-Back and SuRT tasks increased reaction times and miss rates to all the event detection tasks. However, while
increasing difficulty in the N-Back task caused longer RT and more misses
for most tasks; increasing difficulty in the SuRT task did not increase RT
for all tasks. These findings indicate that increased visual demand did not
necessarily cause more distraction during event-detection. Results of eye
glance analyses also showed that increased visual task load in the SuRT
condition did not result in task “shedding,” or a loss of attention to the task.
This study suggests that subjects were able to engage with a more difficult
visual motor task while multitasking without increasingly distracted by it.

C3
ATTENTION’S GRASP: EARLY AND LATE HAND PROXIMITY
EFFECTS ON VISUAL EVOKED POTENTIALS David Leland1, Benjamin
Brekke2, Alan Hartley3, Catherine Reed4; 1University of Wisconsin - Eau Claire,
Pitzer College, 3Scripps College, 4Claremont McKenna College — Behavioral

2

92

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

studies suggest that the region of space near the hand (“graspable space”)
commands a disproportionate share of attentional resources, but it is
unclear at what stage of processing this hand-related bias arises. Also, prior
work has focused on overtly visuo-tactile integration (involving physical
touch) and visual stimuli on the hands themselves, rather than visuo-proprioceptive integration, where the role of the hand is more implied. To
address these questions, we examined event-related potentials (ERPs) using
a visual detection task in which the palm of the hand was placed near or
kept away from target and non-target stimuli, which were matched/counterbalanced for frequency and visual features. Focusing on attention-sensitive ERP components, we found first that P1 (100-140 ms) amplitude was
increased for both targets and non-targets in grasping space, suggesting an
early, precategorical increase in sensory gain. P3 (350-450 ms) amplitude
was increased in grasping space for targets only, demonstrating a late postcategorical effect consistent with the P3’s cross-modal and task-relevance
influences. In between these components, an N1 variant (central Nd1, 120190 ms) also showed a target-specific effect of grasping space, which agrees
with the N1’s association with stimulus discrimination and cross-modal
influence. Collectively, these findings provide insight into the time-course
of visuo-proprioceptive interaction. Grasping space appears to bias attention early and over a long period, starting with a facilitation of processing
for perhaps any visual stimuli near the hand, and continuing with enhancements that are selective to those stimuli categorized as task-relevant.

C4
BORED OR DISTRACTED? FACTORS INFLUENCING ATTENTION
ACROSS MODALITY AND AGE Xu Li1, Ziyong Lin1, Anne S. Berry1, Cindy
Lustig1; 1University of Michigan — Attentional performance can be affected
both by ability and by motivation. To test the contributions of these factors, we used visual and auditory versions of the Continuous Temporal
Expectancy Task (CTET; O’Connell et al., 2009), with and without distraction implemented by an adjacent computer playing video clips. The CTET
requires participants to monitor the duration of briefly-presented stimuli
to detect targets (1070 ms) of longer duration than the standard (800 ms).
The visual version has been linked to behavioral and electrophysiological
measures of attention lapses. The timing literature suggests that compared
to visual stimuli, auditory stimuli capture and hold attention more automatically (Block &Zakay, 1997; Meck, 1991; Penney, 2003), leading to the
prediction that performance in an auditory version of the CTET should be
better and less influenced by attention lapses. Consistent with this prediction, young adults tested in the auditory condition detected more targets,
although both visual and auditory conditions showed declines related to
time-on-task and the video distractor. Individual differences in performance differed between the two modalities, with poor performance in the
auditory condition primarily related to boredom and poor performance in
visual condition primarily related to distractibility. Additional data from
older adults suggest that they outperform young adults, and this age difference was mediated by boredom scores. These results support the idea
that auditory stimuli capture but do not necessarily hold attention more
automatically than visual stimuli. The contributions of ability versus motivation also differ across modalities and influence individual and group differences in attentional performance.

C5
THE COST OF LIMITING POTENTIAL DISTRACTION

Francesco
Marini1,2, Leonardo Chelazzi3,4, Angelo Maravita1; 1University of Milan-Bicocca,
Milan, Italy, 2Duke University, Durham, US, 3University of Verona, Verona, Italy,
4
Italian Institute of Neuroscience, Verona, Italy — The role of attention in the
selection of relevant stimuli is particularly critical when distracting events
are likely to occur. In these situations, the exclusion of potential distracters
is an essential process for guiding behavior towards the achievement of
current goals. Recent work shows that the brain can anticipate the presence
of a distracting event and prepare to deal with it. Although beneficial for
limiting potential distraction, engagement of this mechanism can be costly
for the individual, as it might drag away some cognitive resources that
are needed to perform a given task. So far, however, this prediction has

2013 Annual Meeting
never been tested. In a series of experiments, we aim to investigate whether
foreseeing potential distraction produces a cost in performance even when
distraction is only expected, yet absent. We clearly show that, in potentially distracting contexts, the engagement of a mechanism for dealing
with potential distraction causes a dramatic behavioral cost in no-distracter
trials. Crucially, across participants, the observed strategic cost is inversely
related to the interference exerted by a distracter on distracter-present
trials. We replicated this pattern of results with different combinations of
target and distracter sensory modalities, such as vision, audition and touch.
Although the activation of the mechanism for dealing with distracters is
modulated by probabilistic and cross-trial contingencies, its engagement is
consistent across different manipulations of task and context, being likely a
general feature of attentional control. Our data thus attest to a supramodal
mechanism for monitoring and limiting potential distraction in the human
brain.

C6
AUDITORY INDUCED MODULATION OF VISUAL OSCILLATORY
ACTIVITY DEPENDS ON THE SOUND SOURCE POSITION Wiktor Mlynarski1, Claudia Freigang2, Marc Stöhr2, Jan Bennemann2, Rudolf Rübsamen2;
1
Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, 2University of Leipzig —
According to the existing evidence, most of the neocortex is multisensory. A
unimodal stimulus can modulate activity of multiple cortical areas already
on the early stage of sensory processing. It is still unclear, which stimulus
features exhibit crossmodal influence of this sort. Here, we investigated the
dependence of crossmodal auditory-visual interactions on a spatial location of a sound source. We performed an experiment to verify, whether
oscillatory activity of the visual cortex depends on a position of an auditory object. In an acoustic free-field setup, we presented white noise bursts
either at the center of the visual focus or at lateral positions on the edge of
the binocular visual field (-/+ 64 deg) and recorded high-density electroencephalogram (EEG). Using Independent Component Analysis, clustering
algorithms and single trial population analysis, we identified three cortical
sources in the visual areas showing systematic, stimulus-specific oscillatory
responses. During lateral stimulation, amplitude of alpha (8-12 Hz) and
beta (13-20 Hz) band activity slightly decreased over contralateral visual
area, which was preceded by pronounced phase resetting of theta (4-7
Hz) oscillations. Those effects were inverse in the ipsilateral visual area:
alpha/beta amplitude was strongly increased, while theta phase resetting
was weaker. When the stimulus originated at the center of the gaze, alpha/
beta power was highly reduced in all three visual sources. In summary, we
show, that visual cortex is early modulated by auditory stimulus alone and
it is informed about the sound source position, which may result in shifting
visuospatial attention towards unattended locations.

C7
WHERE WOMEN SEE CONTRAST, MEN SEE LUMINANCE

Julia
Mossbridge1, Marcia Grabowecky1, Satoru Suzuki1; 1Northwestern University
— The ability to ignore visual context in order to perform an unrelated task,
sometimes called “field independence,” is generally more common among
men than women. A large literature has shown that reduced prioritization
of context is related to adaptive traits, such as better performance on working memory tasks, as well as maladaptive conditions, such as autism spectrum disorders. However, the source of the gender difference in context
prioritization has not been clear. Here we test the hypothesis that women
prioritize context even at the most fundamental level of visual processing,
center-surround contrast (e.g., a center dot is darker relative to a lighter surround). We used an implicit behavioral task that exploited the well-known
auditory-visual association based on intensity (sounds that are louder and
higher-pitched are associated with higher visual intensity). The task was
visual flicker detection of a centrally presented gray dot on a white background, and either the high-luminance or high-contrast phase of the flicker
was synchronized with the high-intensity/high-pitch phase of the accompanying sound. Women’s (N=16) flicker-detection performance improved
when the high-CONTRAST phase of the flicker was synchronized with
the high-intensity/pitch phase of the sound; men’s (N=16) flicker-detection performance improved when the high-LUMINANCE phase of the
flicker was synchronized with the high-intensity/pitch phase of the sound
(F[2,60]=12.581, p<0.00003 for the gender by crossmodal-phase interaction).
It appears that women prioritize center-surround contrast whereas men

Poster Session C
prioritize center luminance. Thus, gender differences in context prioritization in perception and cognition may arise from fundamental differences in
the processing of basic visual features.

C8
BOTH PERCEPTUAL AND CENTRAL INTERFERENCE CONTRIBUTE
TO DUAL-TASK COSTS Omar AlHashimi1, Joaquin Anguera2, Adam Gazzaley2; 1UCSF/UCB, 2UCSF — Performance deficits characterized by response
delays and errors often arise when dual-tasking. Psychological refractory
period (PRP) experiments have largely pointed to central processes as the
serial bottleneck responsible for these costs. Based on accumulating neural
evidence, we hypothesized that dual-tasking costs involve a limitation of
attention resources during perceptual processing. To investigate, we combined a continuous visuomotor tracking task (task 1;T1) that included jittered events (tracking changes) with a perceptual discrimination task (task
2;T2) while recording electroencephalography to resolve processing limitations with high temporal resolution. Decreasing time between events of the
two tasks (stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA)) led to increased RT in T2, as
well as reduced amplitude of an early measure of visual processing of T2
(P100). Importantly the degree of modulation of the P100 correlated with
the RT effect. To further understand what aspect of T1 is causing T2 perceptual interference effects, we used another condition where the tracking
task was entirely passive. Interestingly, a similar P100 and RT effect was
observed revealing T1’s influence on T2 was not due to central or motoric
effects but rather perceptual processing of T1. We also found discrimination errors in T2 increased during dual-tasking, but this was unrelated to
SOA and correlated with the timing of a midline frontal theta power drop
when dual-tasking. These findings demonstrate neural evidence that two
events interact in a phasic manner to impact early visuocortical processing
that result in performance delays, while frontal resources are depleted in a
tonic fashion and result in performance errors.

C9
SELECTIVE VULNERABILITY TO DISTRACTION ASSOCIATED WITH
CHOLINE TRANSPORTER GENE Anne Berry1, Yona Isaacs1, Elise Demeter1, Randy D Blakely2, Martin Sarter1, Cindy Lustig1; 1University of Michigan,
2
Vanderbilt University — The neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh) plays a
critical role in the top-down control of attention. Its availability is mediated
by the choline high-affinity transporter gene (CHT1), which regulates the
uptake of choline into neurons that produce ACh. Approximately 8% of the
population carries a polymorphism (coding variant Ile89Val of SLC5A7)
that reduces transporter capacity and thus ACh availability. The Ile89Val
polymorphism has been associated with attention deficit disorder and
increased severity of depression (English et al., 2009; Hahn et al., 2007).
The present study examines its effects on attention function in a community sample. Across our entire sample (n = 617), Ile89Val carriers self-reported greater distractibility on the Short Imaginal Processing Inventory
(SIPI; Huba et al., 1982), and most strongly endorsed items such as “I find it
difficult to concentrate when the TV or radio is on.” We next tested groups
matched for age, gender, and depression scores on a sustained attention
task linked to behavioral and electrophysiological measures of mind-wandering and attention lapses, the Continuous Temporal Expectancy Task
(CTET; O’Connell et al., 2009), with and without distraction implemented
by an adjacent computer playing video clips. Carriers of the Ile89Val variant were significantly more impaired by the distracting videos than controls, but did not show sustained attention differences without distraction.
In a post-test questionnaire, carriers also had higher subjective scores for
distraction but not boredom or mind-wandering. These results suggest
low-capacity cholinergic transport is selectively associated with reduced
top-down control of attention during distraction.

C10
AUTOMATIC FORMATION OF TEMPORAL EXPECTATIONS BY TEMPORALLY REGULAR INPUT INDEPENDENTLY OF HIGH-LEVEL
TEMPORAL EXPECTATION Assaf Breska1, Leon Y. Deouell1,2,3; 1Psychology
Department, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, 2Edmond and Lily Safra Center
for Brain Sciences, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, 3Interdisciplinary Center
for Neural Computation, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem — The processing
of an event is facilitated if it appears in-phase with a preceding isochronous input, putatively reflecting entrainment of internal oscillators to the
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

93

Poster Session C
input frequency and phase. However, whether these behavioral and neuronal effects are based on controlled or automatic processes is unknown.
We isolated the automatic component of this effect from controlled components, in two experiments with a total of 31 participants. Visual targets
were presented either in-phase or out-of-phase with regularly flickering colored stimuli. The facilitative effect of the rhythm on responses to
in-phase targets was measured in three conditions differing in the source
of expectation: 1. Non-predictive, task-unrelated rhythm; 2. Non-predictive
task-unrelated rhythm, concurrently with predictive, task-related color
cues 3. Predictive, task-related rhythm. While the rhythm affected performance most strongly when it was predictive (and task-related), significant
facilitation was seen even when it was not predictive, independent of the
information provided by the color. Congruently, regardless of whether
the rhythm was predictive, a) the contingent negative variation (CNV), an
EEG component related to temporal expectations, reflected the interval of
the rhythm, and b) EEG alpha desynchronization was enhanced around
the timing that was in-phase with the rhythm. The facilitating effect of the
non-predictive rhythm as well as the EEG results were replicated in a control experiment in which there was no predictive rhythm condition, thus
eliminating the possibility that the effect of task-irrelevant non-predictive
rhythm resulted from task confusion. In conclusion, regular rhythms bias
temporal expectations automatically even in the presence of different highlevel expectations.

C11
REPRESENTING THE STATISTICAL RELATIONSHIPS OF CONTINUOUS VISUAL INPUTS USING OSCILLATORY NEURAL ACTIVITY
Nathan Cashdollar1, Uri Hasson1; 1University of Trento — The human brain
is particularly sensitive to the ongoing complexity of sensory information
from the external environment and the ability to represent the statistical
relationships of this information can help facilitate behavior. One method
that the complexity of continuous information has been mathematically
conceptualized is by measures of Markov entropy that characterize the
mean level of transition constraints within a sequential input. By using
this approach, we manipulated the level of Markov entropy of continuous
sequences consisting of visual stimuli from four distinct categories (Animals, Houses, Faces, Tools). In a behavioral version of this study, we presented high and low entropy sequences and asked participants to indicate
if each picture was a ‘Living’ (Animals, Faces) or ‘Non-living’ (Houses,
Tools) item. For low entropy picture sequences (increased statistical regularity) participants demonstrated a beneficial increase in response times,
while participants had slower reaction times in the high entropy sequences
(increased randomness). Using magnetoencephalography we demonstrate
that in a similar paradigm, high frequency bursts of gamma-band (30+ Hz)
activity, thought to reflect the neural coding of individual ‘bits’ of visual
information, are present in both high and low entropy sequences. However in the low entropy sequences, these gamma bursts were functionally
embedded or ‘nested’ on slower wave oscillations within the alpha and
theta-band frequency (4-12 Hz). Together these results suggest that this
high/low frequency nesting temporally binds incoming sensory information allowing for the maintenance of ongoing statistical relationships from
continuous visual inputs and thereby allowing the ability to behaviorally
anticipate future sensory inputs.

C12
FUNCTIONAL FRACTIONATION OF THE STIMULUS-DRIVEN
ATTENTION NETWORK Suk Won Han1,2,3, René Marois1,2,3; 1Department of
Psychology, Vanderbilt University, 2Vanderbilt Vision Research Center, Vanderbilt University, 3Center for Integrative and Cognitive Neurosciences, Vanderbilt
University — The presentation of a salient, novel (oddball) event recruits a
network of brain areas comprised of anterior insula (AI), inferior frontal
junction (IFJ), and temporo-parietal junction (TPJ) (Corbetta et al., 2008).
However, it remains unknown how each nodes of this stimulus-driven
attention network contribute to the processes evoked by oddballs; namely
detection of and switching attention to the oddball event (attentional orienting), followed by evaluation and identification of the event (Kahneman,
1973), and finally by re-orienting of attention towards the goal-oriented
task. Because previous studies used brief oddball presentations, they
did not have the temporal resolution to dissociate these processes. To
address this issue, the first fMRI experiment (N = 14) presented temporally
extended oddballs (10-sec long movies) while participants were engaged

94

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
in a goal-directed attention task. The results showed that the AI was transiently activated by the onset and offset of the oddballs, thereby implicating
this region in attentional orienting/reorienting. In stark contrast, a neural
signature of stimulus evaluation – sustained monophasic activation during
the oddball presentation – was found in the IFJ and TPJ. In a follow-up
experiment (N =6) in which the same oddball was repeatedly presented to
alleviate the need for its continuous evaluation, the IFJ now showed transient, biphasic activity at oddball onsets/offsets while the TPJ still showed a
(weak) monophasic response. These results show a functional dissociation
within the stimulus-driven attention network; the AI and TPJ are involved
in orienting to and evaluating novel events, respectively, while the IFJ is
implicated in both processes.

C13
THE NEURAL GENERATORS OF VISUAL MISMATCH: A SHARED
FRONTAL GENERATOR ACROSS MODALITIES Craig Hedge1, George
Stothart1, Jenna E. E. Todd Jones1, Priscila Rojas Frias1, Kristopher Magee1,
Ute Leonards1, Elanor C. Hinton1,2, Jamila Andoh1,2, Jonathan Brooks1,2; 1University of Bristol, 2Bristol Clinical Research and Imaging Centre — The automatic detection of change in low-level stimulus characteristics is a core
component of our attentional mechanisms. An electrophysiological marker
of this mechanism, the mismatch negativity (MMN; Näätänen, Gaillard &
Mäntysalo, 1978), has been studied prominently in the auditory domain,
with cortical generators identified in temporal and frontal regions (Deouell,
2007; Garrido, Kilner, Stephan & Friston, 2009). In contrast, the cortical
generators of its counterpart in the visual modality, the visual mismatch
negativity (vMMN), have yet to be established. Here, we use functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to assess whether the frontal regions
associated with MMN in the auditory domain also play a role in the
vMMN. Twenty healthy young adults completed a vMMN task in separate EEG and block-design fMRI sessions. The task consisted of a centrally
presented target, flanked vertically by rapidly presented single or double
white bars, with stimulus type counter-balanced within participants. Participants were instructed to attend to the central target and respond if it
changed colour. In ‘standard’ blocks, the flankers did not change, whereas
‘deviant’ blocks contained 6.25% of the alternate stimulus type. Separate
region of interest analyses were conducted on left and right middle frontal
(MFG) and inferior frontal (IFG) gyri (the frontal areas identified as potential auditory MMN generators) using a non-parametric cluster based permutation test technique. Significant increases in activation were observed
in the left MFG and IFG in response to blocks containing deviant stimuli.
These findings provide support for a common frontal generator for MMN
across modalities.

C14
MINDFULNESS DISPOSITION AND RESTING-STATE AMYGDALA
CONNECTIVITY IN OLDER ADULTS Angeline De Leon1, Lana Wiens1,
Maryanna Klatt1, William Malarkey1, Ruchika Prakash1; 1The Ohio State University — An ancient, Eastern-based practice involving interoceptive awareness and emotion regulation, mindfulness has been associated with lower
stress, increased positive affect, and enhanced emotional well-being.
Research suggests that mindfulness disposition is associated with increased
recruitment of frontal top-down control regions and reduced activation of
subcortical structures involved in emotional processing. Given the age-related differences in emotion regulation, the current study chose to investigate this top-down modulatory emotion regulation process associated with
mindfulness in a developmental context. We examined the resting-state
functional connectivity of the amygdala as a function of trait mindfulness
in 25 older and 19 young adults. Participants performed a resting-state
scan and filled out a measure of mindfulness disposition. A mixed-effects
regression revealed that young adults exhibited greater amygdala connectivity to frontal cognitive-control-related regions, such as the orbital frontal
cortex (OFC), anterior cingulate cortex, and temporal pole, whereas older
adults showed greater amygdala connectivity with posterior brain regions,
such as the posterior cingulate gyrus, and precuneus. Across both cohorts,
mindfulness was associated with increased amygdala connectivity to similar frontotemporal regions, including the OFC, inferior frontal gyrus, and
superior temporal gyrus. Findings imply an age-related reduction in the
amygdala’s functional coupling with cognitive control regions in older
adults at rest. Evidence also indicates the prophylactic potential of mind-

2013 Annual Meeting
fulness to functionally strengthen the emotion regulation system across
both older and young adults. Our findings contribute to an understanding
of the relationship between mindfulness, neurocognitive functioning, and
emotional processing, especially in respect to the aging emotional brain.

C15
WHAT’S SO IMPORTANT ABOUT PEOPLE, ANYWAY? AN ERP
STUDY OF SOCIAL INFORMATION PROCESSING IN ADOLESCENTS. Danielle diFilipo1,2, Alison Higgins2, Renee Migliaccio2, Jill GroseFifer1,2; 1The Graduate Center - CUNY, 2John Jay College of Criminal Justice
- CUNY — Increasing social awareness is a hallmark of adolescence. In this
study, we used ERP recording to determine whether there are differences
in the ways adolescents and adults process pictures containing social information. We recorded the EEG using 64 scalp electrodes from 12-17 yearolds and 25-35 year-olds while they viewed pleasant pictures from the
International Affective Picture Series. Half of the pictures featured people
(social stimuli), while the other half did not (non-social stimuli). For adolescents, we found stimulus-related amplitude differences in the early posterior negativity (EPN), which suggested that adolescents showed greater
early attention to the non-social stimuli. In contrast, adults had comparable
EPN amplitudes for both social and non-social stimuli. Additionally, the
late positive complex (LPC) was more positive-going for adolescents for
non-social versus social stimuli, but in adults, LPC amplitudes were greater
for social than for non-social images. Interestingly, in a later memory test,
both adults and adolescents recalled social pictures more reliably than
non-social pictures. These data suggest that although the ERP data implies
that adolescents found the non-social stimuli more motivationally salient
than adults, this did not result in better encoding of the non-social material.
Our data infer that there may be age-related differences in social stimulus
processing, and supports the idea that social information processing is still
developing during adolescence.

C16
DEVELOPMENT OF HUMAN AMYGDALA-CORTICAL FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY AT REST Laurel Gabard-Durnam1, Jessica Flannery1, Bonnie
Goff1, Dylan Gee1, Kate Humphreys1, Eva Telzer2, Nim Tottenham1; 1University
of California, Los Angeles, 2University of Illinois — Connectivity between the
amygdala and the pre-frontal cortex (PFC) comprises the neural substrates
moderating emotional regulation processes (e.g. Banks et al., 2007; Phelps,
2006). Despite its central role in emotion regulation behavior in both typical individuals as well as in mental illness, the normative developmental
progression of neuronal functional connectivity between these two regions
is still undefined (Tottenham et al., 2010). Resting-state functional magnetic
resonance imaging (rsfMRI) methodology provides a robust approach for
characterizing such network organization during development as it has
been shown to index the functional integrity of network connections (Pizoli
et al., 2011). This study employed MRI-compatible amygdala nuclei maps
and rsfMRI methodology to characterize the typical development of the
functional connections between amygdala nuclei and the PFC in participants from age four to 23. Positive resting-state functional connectivity
between the amygdala and medial PFC and between the amygdala and the
anterior cingulate cortex emerged across development (p < 0.01). Specifically, children below the age of 12.5 showed no connectivity between the
amygdala and the PFC regions, while participants older than 12.5 possessed
positive connectivity between these regions that became increasingly positive with age. Therefore, the resting-state functional network between the
amygdala and PFC first appears in late childhood but continues to develop
over an extensive period through adulthood. These results inform our
understanding of the typical development of emotion regulation neural
substrates and may have important implications for clinical interventions
targeting emotion dysregulation throughout development.

C17
SUSTAINED EFFECTS OF COGNITIVE LOAD ON AMYGDALA REACTIVITY AMONG CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS Dylan Gee1, Bonnie
Goff1, Laurel Gabard-Durnam1, Jessica Flannery1, Nim Tottenham1; 1University
of California, Los Angeles — Experimental enhancement of prefrontal cortex
(PFC) function has been shown to dampen amygdala reactivity during
adulthood (e.g., Pessoa et al., 2005; Blair et al., 2007). More recently, it has
been shown that these effects of cognitive load can have sustained and

Poster Session C
lasting effects on amygdala reactivity (Wagner & Heatherton, 2012). The
current study aimed to examine the sustained effects of cognitive load on
amygdala reactivity during development. Given changes in this circuitry
with development, it remains unclear how manipulations of cognitive load
might affect emotional reactivity in childhood and adolescence. Using a
novel functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) task that manipulates cognitive load on subsequent brain activation to emotional stimuli,
we examined how increased recruitment of PFC may affect amygdala reactivity during development. Typically developing children and adolescents
exhibited reduced amygdala reactivity to fearful faces following a period
of high cognitive load, relative to low cognitive load (p<.05). This finding suggests that PFC regulation over the amygdala is functional during
childhood and adolescence. Moreover, results showed sustained effects of
cognitive load on reducing amygdala reactivity even after the period of
increased cognitive demand. In a second group of children with a history
of early life stress, amygdala hyperactivity was unaffected by the cognitive load manipulation, suggesting differential effects of cognitive load on
amygdala reactivity following early life stress. Taken together, the present
study characterizes the effects of cognitive load on amygdala reactivity in
children and adolescents and may have important implications for clinical
populations and interventions targeting emotion dysregulation.

C18
REDUCED NUCLEUS ACCUMBENS REACTIVITY AND ADOLESCENT DEPRESSION FOLLOWING EARLY-LIFE STRESS Bonnie Goff1,
Dylan G. Gee2, Eva H. Telzer3, Kathryn L. Humphreys4, Laurel Gabard-Durnam5,
Jessica Flannery6, Nim Tottenham7; 1University of California, Los Angeles —
Depression is a common outcome following early life stress (ELS). Depressive symptoms typically increase during adolescence and appear to endure
into adulthood, suggesting alterations in the development of brain systems
involved in depression. Developmentally, the nucleus accumbens (NAcc),
a limbic structure associated with reward learning and motivation, typically undergoes dramatic functional change during adolescence. Therefore, age-related changes in NAcc function may underlie the emergence of
depression observed in adolescents following ELS. The current functional
magnetic resonance (fMRI) study examined the effects of ELS in 38 children
and adolescents in comparison to a group of 31 youth without a history
of ELS. Consistent with previous research, depression was higher in adolescents with a history of ELS than in children. Additionally, fMRI results
showed atypical NAcc development, where the ELS group did not show a
typical age-related increase in NAcc reactivity during adolescence. Consequently, the ELS group showed NAcc hypoactivation during adolescence,
and lower NAcc reactivity was correlated with higher depression scores.
The results have important implications for understanding how ELS may
influence increases in depression via neural development during adolescence and highlight the importance of identifying at-risk individuals in
childhood, a potential critical period for depression-targeted intervention.

C19
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN LATE POSITIVE POTENTIAL DURING
EMOTIONAL PICTURE PROCESSING AND EMOTION REGULATION COMPETENCE IN PRESCHOOLERS Mizhi Hua1, Siyi Chen1, Meng
Yang1, Renlai Zhou1; 1Beijing Normal University — Late positive potential
(LPP) is increased for emotional compared to neutral pictures, and is sensitive to emotion regulation strategies in adults. This study examined the
LPP elicited by passively viewing IAPS pictures in 20 preschoolers aged
from 4- to 5-year-old, and explored its association with emotion regulation
competence. Results suggested that in the posterior region, significant main
effects were found for picture type (F (2,38) = 22.76, p < .01, ηp2 = .55), LPP
amplitudes elicited by unpleasant and pleasant pictures were both larger
compared to neutral pictures during the early (300–700 ms), middle (700–
1500 ms), and late (1500–3000 ms) time windows. In the central region, a
significant interaction was found between time window and picture type
(F (4,76) = 53.39, p = .01, ηp2 = .20), besides the similar emotional effects in
the late window, LPP amplitudes elicited by pleasant pictures were larger
compared to neutral pictures in the middle window. In the anterior regions,
a significant interaction was found between time window and picture type
(F (4,76) = 6.51, p < .01, ηp2 = .26), LPP amplitudes elicited by unpleasant
and pleasant pictures were larger compared to neutral pictures only in the
late window. Additionally, the LPP amplitudes elicited by unpleasant pic-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

95

Poster Session C
tures in the posterior region in the early and middle windows were negatively correlated with preschoolers’ emotion regulation competence rated
by their teachers (all ps < .05). The potential of identifying LPP as a neurophysiological marker for emotion regulation competence in preschoolers
is discussed.

C20
MULTI-VOXEL PATTERN ANALYSES REVEAL AGE-DIFFERENCES
IN SPECIFICITY OF EMOTION REGULATION STRATEGIES Bruna Martins1, Ricardo Velasco1, Allison Ponzio1, Jonas Kaplan1, Mara Mather1; 1University of Southern California — Recent research reveals neural dedifferentiation
in older adults in basic perceptual processes (Park & Reuter-Lorenz, 2009).
In the current study, we examine whether older adults also show fewer differences in brain activity when engaging distinct emotion regulation strategies. Cognitive reappraisal and distraction are two of the most commonly
used and effective emotion regulation strategies (Augustine & Hemenover,
2009). Traditional fMRI analyses reveal that reappraisal and distraction
activate a shared set of frontal and parietal brain regions involved in cognitive control processing (McRae et al., 2010). In this study, younger (18-30
yrs) and older adults (60+ yrs) subjects viewed a slideshow of negative
scenes, and were cued to either “distract” or “reappraise” during each
trial in an fMRI scan. Consistent with previous findings, participants later
were better able to recall pictures from reappraisal trials than from distraction trials. This memorial difference was as large for older adults than for
younger adults. However, multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) searchlight
methods showed greater discrimination between strategies in areas of the
prefrontal and parietal cortex for younger than for older adults (p < 0.01). In
contrast with the fMRI results, gaze location alone did not significantly predict emotion regulation strategy use. These findings support an age-consistent network of regions involved in emotional regulation processes, but
a more diffuse neural representation of specific strategies in older adults.

C21
HOW REAL-LIFE PRIOR EXPERIENCE INFLUENCES TRUST DECISIONS AND REWARD LEARNING MECHANISMS Dominic S. Fareri1,
Luke J. Chang2,3, Mauricio R. Delgado1; 1Rutgers University-Newark, 2University
of Colorado-Boulder, 3University of Arizona — Social relationships are predicated on trust– the notion that generosity will be reciprocated. Learning
whether someone is trustworthy often occurs through repeated interactions, relying on neural circuitry typically implicated in reward learning such as the striatum (e.g., King-Casas et al., 2005). Importantly, prior
descriptive knowledge (Delgado et al., 2005) or social experience (Fareri et
al., 2012a) can form impressions of others that bias decisions to trust and the
ability to learn in subsequent social interactions. As many daily interactions
occur with members of our social networks already deemed as trustworthy,
however, it remains unclear how prior real-life experience with members
of one’s own social network may influence subsequent trust decisions and
social learning mechanisms. We investigated whether participants would
differentially trust three different partners in a repeated trust game––a
close friend (in-network), a confederate (out-of-network), and a computer.
Participants played as investors and believed interactions would occur
in real-time; however, all partners reciprocated participants’ investments
50% of the time. We expected highest rates of investment and enhanced
reward-related neural responses when interacting with in-network partners. Accordingly, participants (n=18) rated in-network partners as most
trustworthy and invested most often with them. This network effect was
observed in a ventral striatum ROI when processing trust game outcomes.
Further, medial prefrontal cortex demonstrated enhanced neural responses
when processing outcomes of trials with social compared to non-social
partners. These results suggest that real-life prior experience can bias not
only behavior but also value related neural signals during social interactions.

C22
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN EUTHYMIC BIPOLAR PATIENTS.
AN FMRI RESTING STATE STUDY. Pauline Favre1,2, Mircea Polosan1,3,4,5,
Cédric Pichat2, Thierry Bougerol1,3,4,5, Monica Baciu1,2; 1Structure Fédérative de
Recherche Santé et Société, Université Pierre Mendès France, 2Laboratoire de
Psychologie et de NeuroCognition, UMR CNRS 5105, Université Pierre Mendès
France, 3Pôle Psychiatrie et Neurologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de

96

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

Grenoble, 4Centre expert en troubles bipolaires, Fondation FondaMental, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Grenoble, 5Institut des Neurosciences de Grenoble,
Université Joseph Fourier, INSERM — Objectives: The current study aims to
assess default mode network (DMN) functional connectivity in euthymic
bipolar patients (EBP) in order to identify potential trait abnormalities
(not dependent of the mood state) responsible for cognitive and affective
processing disturbances in these patients. Methods: Twenty EBP and 24
matched healthy controls (HC) underwent fMRI examination during 6 min
resting state condition. Seed-analysis has been used to process data. Posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) was used as a seed region. Functional connectivity maps from PCC were computed for each participant and were compared
statistically across groups (EBP, HC). Moreover, we investigated the relationship between patients’ clinical variables and functional connectivity in
regions showing significant group differences. Results: Different patterns
of functional connectivity in EBP and HC were observed between PCC and
right amygdala, right putamen, right orbito-frontal cortex (OFC), gyrus
rectus (GR) and bilateral angular gyri (AG). Specifically, EBP exhibited significant positive correlation between PCC and right amygdala, medial OFC
and bilateral AG, whereas HC exhibited anticorrelation between PCC, right
amygdala, OFC and putamen. Significant negative correlation was found
between functional connectivity of right AG and scores of social functioning; positive correlation was found between functional connectivity of
right OFC and anxiety and mania scores. Conclusions: Our results revealed
abnormal increased functional connectivity of DMN within frontal and
parietal regions in EBP suggesting abnormal internally-focused activity in
these patients. Furthermore, the abnormal recruitment of right amygdala
may reflect emotional instability and hyperreactivity of EBP and may constitute a potential trait abnormality of BD.

C23
EMOTIONAL INTERFERENCE IN A WORKING MEMORY TASK IS
INFLUENCED BY INDIVIDUAL AUTONOMIC REACTIVITY Alessandra Galli1, Jan Derrfuss1, Christian J. Fiebach1,2,3; 1Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, The Netherlands,
2
Department of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, Germany,
3
IDeA Center for Individual Development and Adaptive Education, Frankfurt am
Main, Germany — Studies investigating the effects of emotional distraction
on working memory performance have been inconclusive. While some
studies found impairments after emotional distraction, others reported
improvements. We suggest that in order to explain these inconsistencies,
it is critical to understand how individual psychological and psychophysiological differences modulate emotion-cognition interactions. Here we
used a delayed-match-to-sample task where the participants (n = 45) had
to encode into working memory an abstract shape, followed during the
maintenance period by a distracting positive, negative, or neutral vocalization. Prior to the task, participants were asked to fill in psychological
scales followed by a baseline Galvanic skin conductance response recording. The effects of emotional distraction on performance were analyzed in
terms of diffusion model parameters. The results showed that overall skin
conductance level (SCL) and the reward responsiveness of the BIS/BAS
scales were the best predictors of general performance. When SCL was considered as a covariate, emotional distractors (in particular positive vocalizations) lead to a decrement in drift rate and boundary separation. This indicates that the speed of evidence accumulation and the response caution are
reduced after emotional distraction. Importantly, the underlying processing changes were only uncovered by the diffusion model analysis while no
significant effects on reaction times or error rate were found. In summary,
these results highlight the influence of psychological and psychophysiological variables on emotion-cognition interactions and the importance of
employing models that decompose reaction times into separate processing
components.

C24
MINDFULNESS DISPOSITION AS A MODERATOR IN THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DISEASE SEVERITY AND DEPRESSION IN
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS Brittney Gidwitz1, Alisha Janssen1, Beth Patterson1,
Aaron Boster1, Ruchika S Prakash1; 1The Ohio State University — Multiple
Sclerosis is an autoimmune disease that affects the central nervous system,
resulting in physical, affective, and cognitive deficits. This population
shows a high prevalence of depression, with research evincing support

2013 Annual Meeting
for a positive association between disease severity and depression. Mindfulness disposition has been found to support better psychological and
physical functioning in individuals with a wide range of disorders. In this
study, we examined dispositional mindfulness as a moderator in the relationship between disease severity and depression in MS. Forty-four individuals with a clinical diagnosis of relapsing-remitting MS were recruited
for this study. All participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory,
Expanded Disability Status Scale, and the Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire. All participants underwent an MRI to collect T2-weighted,
FLAIR, and MPRAGE structural scans that were used to assess lesion load
volume. Disease severity was measured as a composite score of lesion load
volume, disease duration, and self-reported EDSS scores. Consistent with
the literature, we found disease severity to be positively associated with
depression, such that individuals experiencing greater MS burden also
experienced higher levels of depression. We found trait levels of mindfulness, however, to moderate this association. Specifically, in individuals low
in dispositional mindfulness, there was a significant positive relationship
between disease severity and depression. However, there was no relationship found between disease severity and depression in those high in trait
mindfulness. These results show that dispositional mindfulness may play a
protective role in patients with MS by guarding against depression as their
disease progresses.

C25
PIECE OF CAKE: AFFECTIVE REACTIVITY TO AND COGNITIVE
REGULATION OF FOOD CUES Nicole Giuliani1, Rebecca Calcott1, Elliot
Berkman1; 1University of Oregon — Recent research on neural processes
underlying eating behavior has focused on reward-related reactivity. However, a recent “seesaw” model of self-regulation proposed that failures
result from increases in reactivity, decreases in regulation, or both. In the
current study, we apply this model to the consumption of energy-dense
foods. In the task, subjects were instructed to passively view healthy or
energy-dense foods or engage a process called reappraisal, where they cognitively altered the meaning of the food stimuli by, for example, focusing
on the negative consequences of consumption. Behaviorally, energy-dense
foods induced greater self-reported desire to eat healthy foods, and reappraisal reduced that desire to a level not significantly different from viewing healthy foods. There was no relationship between self-report and ad
hoc consumption of energy-dense foods two weeks later. Neurally, reactivity (look energy-dense > look healthy) induced activation in the occipital
lobe (e.g., precuneus, angular gyrus). Reappraisal (regulate energy-dense
> look energy-dense) induced activation in the left inferior frontal gyrus
(IFG), dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and a cluster encompassing bilateral
dorsal anterior cingulate and the pre-supplementary motor area (SMA).
Only reappraisal-related activation of the left IFG and pre-SMA predicted
eating behavior, such that those individuals who ate a lot activated these
regulatory regions to a greater degree than those who did not eat or ate
very little. These findings support the regulation seesaw model, and suggest that, while individuals who consume large quantities of energy-dense
foods can self-regulate, they must try harder, thus engaging regulatory
brain regions to a greater degree.

C26
DYNAMIC LARGE-SCALE BRAIN NETWORKS FOR EMOTIONAL
PROCESSING Enrico Glerean1, Raj Kumar Pan1, Mikko Sams1, Lauri Nummenmaa1,2; 1Aalto University School of Science, 2Turku PET Center — Emotions coordinate activity of cognitive and physiological systems in survival-salient situations, but how is this coordination undertaken from
the perspective of dynamic brain networks? Here we reveal for the first
time the functional large-scale networks encoding emotional qualities of
highly naturalistic sensory input. Participants’ brain activity was measured
with fMRI while they watched movies triggering unpleasant, neutral,
and pleasant emotions. After scanning, participants watched the movies
again and rated continuously their experience of pleasantness-unpleasantness (valence) and of arousal–calmness. We modelled the fMRI data as a
dynamic whole-brain network using instantaneous pairwise synchronization between each possible pair of gray matter voxels. The se pairwise
connectivity time series were then modelled using subject-wise valence
and arousal time series. This resulted in a multilayer complex network with
separate network layers being modulated by valence and arousal. Central
nodes in these layers were subsequently identified with graph-theoretical

Poster Session C
tools. Main hubs of the valence layer were located in the right amygdala,
left thalamus, anterior cingulate and medial prefrontal cortex as well as
right middle and polar temporal areas and cerebellum. The arousal layer
had hubs in the middle cingulate, precentral and orbitofrontal cortex,
visual cortex, and right cuneus. The right putamen was a significant hub
in both valence and arousal networks. Our findings delineate the dynamic
networks encoding appetitive and aversive value (valence) vs. intensity
(arousal) of sensory events. They further highlight that valence and arousal
are represented as two parallel dynamic neural systems distributed across
partially overlapping fu nctional networks.

C27
TRUST ALL, LOVE A FEW: NEURAL CORRELATES OF SOCIAL
INTERACTIONS WITH PEERS Berna Guroglu1,2, Eduard Klapwijk2,3, GeertJan Will1,2; 1Institute of Psychology, Leiden University, the Netherlands, 2Leiden
Institute for Brain and Cognition (LIBC), the Netherlands, 3Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, Curium - Leiden University Medical Center, the Netherlands —
When people interact with other people they have all sorts of expectations
about others’ intentions, which guides social decisions in interactions. In
this fMRI study we investigated the neural correlates of trust related social
decision-making in which participants interacted with personally familiar
peers from their classroom. Before the scanning session where the participants (N=16, Mage = 20.6 years) played a repetitive Trust Game as the first
player, they briefly met the three players: a friend (i.e., a liked peer), an
antagonist (i.e., a disliked peer), and an unfamiliar peer they had not met
before (a confederate). Although amounts of trust displayed by the participants towards the three different interaction partners were similar on average, there were differences in activation in brain regions related to mentalizing and reward during the interactions. Preliminary findings showed
higher insula activation during no-trust choices and higher anterior medial
prefrontal cortex activation during trust choices. Two brain regions important for mentalizing, the temporoparietal junction (TPJ) and the dorsal
medial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC), were more active during interactions
with friends than during interactions with antagonists. Furthermore, brain
regions involved in mentalizing (e.g., TPJ) and reward related learning (e.g.
lateral orbitofrontal cortex and caudate) were differentially involved in
received feedback, showing highest activation during defect feedback following no-trust choices. Taken together, the findings provide insight into
the neural basis of feedback processing in social interactions and highlight
the moderating role of real-life relationships with interaction partners in
social cognition.

C28
CORTICAL NETWORK FLEXIBILITY DURING ADMINISTRATION
OF BETA-ADRENERGIC ANTAGONISTS: AN AUTISM SPECTRUM
DISORDER STUDY John P. Hegarty II1, Brad J. Ferguson1, Rachel M.
Zamzow1, Shawn E. Christ1, Micah O. Mazurek1, David Q Beversdorf1; 1University of Missouri — Behavioral interventions for autism focus on increasing quality of life whereas pharmacological interventions are directed at
managing the secondary manifestations such as anxiety. Pharmacological
research directed at the core features of autism is limited. Propranolol, a
beta-adrenergic antagonist, improves verbal problem solving in controls
as well as people with autism. Current theories suggest that autism may
be due to altered network flexibility within cortical regions important for
information processing. fMRI allows for the measurement of a correlate of
flexibility, functional connectivity. We have previously shown the beneficial effects of propranolol during verbal problem solving may be due to
increased functional connectivity, and wish extend this line of research to
facial and emotional processing. We hypothesize that during propranolol
administration subjects will show increased connectivity. We examined a
pilot sample of individuals with autism during administration of propranolol, nadolol, and placebo. Nadolol provides a control for general vascular effects on fMRI. Stimuli consisted of faces either exhibiting an angry,
fearful, or neutral expression. The facial matching task activated our main
regions of interest, fusiform and amygdala, allowing for the use of these
regions as seeds for functional connectivity analyses. We found a significant
effect for drug such that functional connectivity was significantly altered
during propranolol trials compared to placebo. Better understanding of the
effects of the beta-adrenergic system on neuronal processing, especially in

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

97

Poster Session C
the autism population, and modulation of the beta-adrenergic system pharamacologically could lead to development of additional treatments for the
core features of autism.

C29
CUE-REACTIVITY PREDICTS CHANGES IN SMOKERS’ DESIRE TO
QUIT Sarah Henderson1, Catherine Norris1; 1Dartmouth College — Although

past research has identified a network of brain regions that are reliably activated when smokers view cigarettes, little research has investigated if activity in these regions predicts behavioral outcomes related to quitting. Even
less research has investigated how the emotional content of smoking cues
might further impact patterns of neural activity. The current study sought
to understand the relationship between neural activity to positive, negative, or ambivalent smoking stimuli and changes in self-reported desire to
quit smoking. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), thirty
cigarette smokers viewed pleasant or unpleasant smoking images paired
with positive or negative smoking-related text, rated how they felt about
each stimulus pairing, and answered questions about their smoking attitudes. Changes in desire to quit were assessed by comparing self-reports
several weeks prior to the neuroimaging session with self-reports immediately following scanning. We then conducted four whole-brain regressions,
one for each stimulus pairing, to examine relationships between changes in
desire to quit smoking and patterns of neural activity. Regardless of stimulus pairing, we found that less activity to smoking cues in typical cue-reactivity regions, including the left ventral striatum, right anterior insula, and
the left frontal pole (BA 10), was associated with increased desire to quit.
Conversely, we found that greater activity to smoking cues in left dorsolateral PFC (BA 9), an area implicated in self-regulation, was associated with
increased desire to quit. Taken together these findings suggest that reduced
cue-reactivity and greater self-regulatory activity to cigarette cues predict
increased desire to quit smoking.

C30
PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF THETABURST STIMULATION ON
INSTRUCTED AND SPONTANEOUS EMOTION REGULATION. Birthe
Henne1, Ignazio Puzzo1, Yanbo Hu1, Tom Johnstone1; 1University of Reading —
This study was conducted to determine the effect of thetaburst stimulation
(TBS) to the lateral prefrontal cortex on physiological arousal during spontaneous and intentional emotion regulation. 16 participants completed an
instructed reappraisal task as well as an n-back working memory task with
threat of shock in 50% of blocks. TBS stimulation targets were chosen on the
basis of individual’s fMRI data collected previously. Effects of stimulation
to the left and right hemisphere were compared, with sham stimulations
performed as a baseline. Skin conductance responses (SCR), heart rate and
corrugator EMG were recorded. For the instructed reappraisal task, analyses compared negative/decrease to negative/attend conditions with left
vs. right target hemisphere and sham vs. TBS as factors. Compared to sham,
TBS to the right but not the left hemisphere significantly reduced heart rate
during the negative/decrease relative to the negative/attend condition.
Analysis of the working memory task compared threat vs. safe conditions
with difficult vs. easy, left vs. right target hemisphere and TBS vs. sham
as factors. Level of difficulty had no effect on SCR number or amplitude
of responses. The number of SCRs was significantly greater under threat
than during safe blocks. Furthermore, a significant target hemisphere by
threat interaction revealed that TBS to the right but not the left PFC reduced
the difference in SCR amplitude between safe and threat trials. From these
results it can be concluded that TBS to the lateral prefrontal cortex has differential effects on measures of arousal during instructed and spontaneous
emotion regulation.

C31
STRESS, AROUSAL AND MISINFORMATION: STRESS STATE
AND HIGH SUBJECTIVE AROUSAL INTERACT TO DECREASE
ENDORSEMENT OF MISINFORMATION FOR EMOTIONAL STIMULI Siobhan Hoscheidt1, Kevin LaBar1, Lee Ryan2, Jake Jacobs2, Lynn Nadel2;
Duke University, 2University of Arizona — People exposed to misleading
questions tend to remember false details as true components of a past
experienced event (i.e. the misinformation effect). This phenomenon is of
particular interest in the legal domain, as witnesses may be exposed to misleading details that can influence subsequent memory accuracy. Eyewit-

1

98

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
ness events, however, are likely to be stressful and involve arousing and
non-arousing information. Currently it is not well understood if stress and/
or arousal moderate misinformation effects. The present study investigated
the effects of misinformation on memory for negatively arousing and
non-arousing stories encoded under stress. One hundred and three young
adults participated in a between-groups design with three experimental
sessions conducted 48 hours apart. Session one consisted of a psychosocial
stress induction (or control task) followed by incidental encoding of a negatively arousing or non-arousing slideshow. On session two participants
were asked questions about the slideshow and a random subgroup was
exposed to misinformation. Memory was tested on the final session. Stress
groups had enhanced memory for the arousing slideshow and impaired
memory for the non-arousing slideshow compared to no-stress groups.
Misinformed groups showed the misinformation effect, however these
effects were moderated by subjective arousal during slideshow encoding
within the arousing story condition. Misinformed-stress group participants
with higher, relative to lower, subjective arousal ratings during encoding
were less likely to endorse misinformation for the emotional phase of the
story. Furthermore these participants showed better memory for emotional
items that had been directly misinformed. These findings have important
implications for eyewitness testimony.

C32
VOCALIZATION-SELECTIVE SUPERIOR TEMPORAL REGIONS ARE
NOT CONSPECIFIC-SPECIFIC IN HUMANS Attila Andics1,2, Márta
Gácsi1, Tamás Faragó1, Anna Kis1,3, Ádám Miklósi1; 1Comparative Ethology
Research Group, Hungarian Academy of Sciences - Eötvös Loránd University,
Budapest, 2MR Research Center, Semmelweis University, Budapest, 3Comparative Behavioural Research Group, Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience and
Psychology, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest — Regions along
the bilateral superior temporal sulcus (STS) and in the bilateral temporal
pole (TP) have been shown to be more sensitive to human vocalizations
than to nonvocal sounds. Here we investigated the human-specificity of
these ‘temporal voice areas’ in an fMRI experiment, that is, whether these
regions are selective for human voices or they are also differentially active
for nonhuman vocalizations, compared to nonvocal sounds. We presented
human listeners with blocks of nonlinguistic human and dog vocalizations
that were previously rated for perceived emotional valence and intensity,
and with nonvocal stimuli. We found that both human and dog vocalizations elicited increased neural activity in the bilateral STS, compared to
nonvocal sounds. In contrast, neural activity in the bilateral TP increased
for human but not for dog vocalizations, compared to nonvocal sounds.
Finally, reduced neural activity in the bilateral medial fusiform gyrus (FG)
was found for human but not for dog vocalizations, compared to nonvocal
sounds. These distinct activity patterns for STS, TP and FG persisted after
factoring out emotional valence and intensity. Our findings suggest that TP
regions are specialized for human voices, but that the vocalization-selective
STS regions are also involved in processing non-conspecific vocalizations.
The experiment also demonstrates that this species-aspecific selectivity to
biological sounds in STS cannot be accounted for by the perceived emotionality in the stimuli. The FG deactivation to human but not to animal
voices supports an account of topographical tuning for human voices over
an account of selectivity for non-biological objects.

C33
TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF FACIAL IDENTITY AND EXPRESSION
RECOGNITION IN A DEVELOPMENTAL PROSOPAGNOSIC Stephanie Bastidas1, Ann M Hu2, Lauren Hill1, Jason S Nomi1, Lucy J Troup1; 1Colorado
State University, 2Grinnell College — Facial recognition and expression recognition are encoded by distinct pathways (Haxby, Hoffman, & Gobbini,
2000). Individuals with prosopagnosia present impaired identity recognition with preserved expression recognition, supporting this view. EEG
studies have found diminished amplitude of the N170 component for faces
in individuals with prosopagnosia. The effect of facial expression on the
face-specific N170 is still unclear, but the late positive potential (LPP) at
300ms after stimulus onset is likely to be modulated by type of emotion
and emotion processing. This study aimed to confirm that participant TM
– a female with developmental prosopagnosia – demonstrated a marked
decrease in the N170 and to acquire the first ERPs related to emotional
expression processing in an individual with prosopagnosia. Compared to

2013 Annual Meeting
11 control participants (4 age-matched), TM presented impaired identity
recognition (scores 2 standard deviations (SD) below age-matched controls)
and gender discrimination (scores 4 SDs below age-matched controls).
TM showed intact emotion and object recognition and emotional expression discrimination (scores <1 SD above controls). On a faces vs. houses
comparison of ERPs, TM showed a smaller N170 at temporal and occipital electrodes to faces than controls, and a smaller difference between the
two conditions. On a comparison of implicit (gender discrimination) vs.
explicit (emotion discrimination) emotional processing task, TM’s late positive potential was not modulated by emotion or condition, an effect that
controls did show. These results further support the dissociation not only
between identity and emotion recognition but also gender discrimination,
reflected both in behavioral measures and in ERP components.

C34
EXPLAINING BEHAVIOR: PERSON PERCEPTION AND BIOLOGICAL MOTION BRAIN NETWORK DIFFERENCES DURING HELPFUL AND HARMFUL ACTIONS FROM HUMAN AND NON-HUMAN
AGENTS Beatrice H. Capestany1, Lasana T. Harris1; 1Duke University —
People can quickly extract intentional and causal attributions for actions
and behaviors originating from human (Fiske & Taylor, 1991, 2007) and
non-human agents (Heider & Simmel, 1944) using mental state inference
processes. The brain has adapted systems to support these inference processes, recognizing whether agents are animate (Blake & Shiffrar, 2007)
so that we can determine the originator of action. This allows people to
explain and predict the behaviors of an agent. Here, we assess the extent
to which people use the same language to explain the behavior of human
and non-human agents, and the extent to which person perception and
biological motion brain networks respond to animate action from a variety of human and non-human agents. While in the fMRI scanner, participants explained non-random, “meaningful” motion in a series of animated
video clips showing three different human and non-human agents (greebles, shapes, human faces) engaging in matched helpful or harmful actions
(Heider & Simmel, 1944). Results demonstrate remarkable similarities in
the use of mental state inferences across the three different agents. Moreover, brain systems implicated in biological-motion detection and person
perception were differentially engaged depending on the type of agent
(human, non-human) and valence of behavior (helpful, harmful). Specifically, mental state inferences during harmful behavior drive activations
in both systems, particularly when involving human agents. This dissociates the influence of brain networks engaged in social cognition beyond
self-report behavior, hinting at categories of stimuli and behaviors that
maximally drive these brain systems consistent with evolutionary theories
about human behavior.

C35
SELF- AND OTHER-REFERENT TRAIT INFERENCE DURING
FACE PROCESSING. IMPLICATIONS FOR SOCIAL ANXIETY AND
SOCIAL COGNITION Ana Draghici1,2, Kateri McRae2, Jay Hull1; 1Dartmouth
College, 2University of Denver — The study explored the hypothesis that the
biased responding to facial expressions associated with trait social anxiety
emerges from engaging a different set of mental operations while processing these stimuli. fMRI was used to compare brain responses to facial stimuli during blocks of instructed self-referent trait inference and other-referent trait inference in 9 right handed, neurologically healthy participants.
Pictures of angry, happy, and neutral facial expressions were presented in
an event-related manner. During each block, participants were asked to
either consider what the next set of expressions communicate about them
(self-referent trait inference), what they communicate about the people in
the pictures (other-referent trait inference), or just imagine the people in
the pictures are standing in front of them (spontaneous appraisal). Compared to self-referent trait-inference, other-referent trait inference was associated with increased BOLD response in a widespread set of brain regions,
including left dmPFC, right vlPFC, right SPL, and insula bilaterally. In turn,
self-referent as compared to other-referent trait inference was associated
with increased activity in a more constrained set of regions: the right temporal pole, left cerebellum, and right dlPFC. Individual differences in trait
social anxiety were negatively associated with the percentage of self-reported other-referent trait inference during the spontaneous appraisal condition (r= - .831, p < .007). This relationship was mediated by the spread

Poster Session C
of dmPFC activation during spontaneous appraisal. Results are discussed
in terms of implications for social anxiety, and the function of mPFC in
self-referent and other-referent cognition.

C36
A FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING STUDY DISENTANGLING
NEURAL PROCESSES OF EGOCENTRIC AND ALLOCENTRIC
MENTAL SPATIAL TRANSFORMATIONS USING WHOLE-BODY
PHOTOS OF SELF AND OTHER Shanti Ganesh1,2,3, Hein Van Schie1,2,
Floris de Lange2, Emily Cross1,2, Daniel Wigboldus1; 1Radboud University
Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3University of California, Berkeley, USA —
Mental imagery of our own body moving through space is important for
imagining changing visuospatial perspectives and for determining how we
might appear to other people. Previous neuroimaging research on mental
imagery of one’s own body rotating through space has implicated the temporoparietal junction (TPJ) in this process. It is unclear, however, how this
TPJ activity is related to the rotation perspectives from which mental spatial
transformation (MST) of one’s own body can take place, i.e. from an egocentric or an allocentric perspective. It is also unclear whether TPJ involvement
is specific to MST of one’s own body only. The current study aims to disentangle neural processes involved in egocentric versus allocentric MSTs
of photographed human bodies representing self and other. We measured
functional brain activity of 23 healthy participants while they performed
egocentric and allocentric MST in relation to whole-body photographs of
themselves and a same-sex stranger. Findings confirmed that egocentric
versus allocentric MST recruits greater bilateral TPJ activity. Moreover,
TPJ activity during egocentric MST correlated positively with the extent to
which participants indicated feeling awkward while viewing whole-body
photos of themselves. Described from the perspective of high awkwardness individuals (for viewing self-photos), results indicate that bilateral TPJ
activity during egocentric versus allocentric MST was higher for self than
for other. By disentangling neural processes of egocentric versus allocentric
mental spatial transformations involving whole-body photos of self and
other, the current study considerably advances our understanding of the
role of the TPJ in egocentric bodily transformations and self-awareness.

C37
DOES EMPATHY EXPLAIN INTER-INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
IN THE PROCESSING OF FACIAL EXPRESSIONS? Jessika Golle1,
Norman Rose2, Fred Mast1, Janek Lobmaier1; 1University of Bern, 2University
of Tübingen — Visual adaptation paradigms are often used to investigate
the processing of facial attributes such as identity, sex, attractiveness, and
emotional expression. In this study, we investigated the facial expression
after-effect (FEAE). Unlike previous studies on after-effects, we were interested in inter-individual differences and whether such differences can be
explained by empathy. After-effects represent the perceptual manifestation of fast neural plasticity (Kanai & Verstraten, 2005). Thus, inter-individual differences in FEAE may reflect variable neural plasticity across the
subjects for the processing of facial expressions. We tested the hypothesis
whether people scoring high in empathy are more adaptable and therefore more flexible in their neural plasticity as measured by the FEAE.
Thirty female participants underwent two pre-adaptation, adaptation and
post-adaptation phases. They adapted to happy and sad faces and the task
was to categorize the emotional expression of presented test faces. We collected an empathy questionnaire (SPF) measuring emotional and cognitive
components of empathy. Using multilevel logistic regressions for repeated
measurement, we found inter-individual differences in the magnitude of
the after-effects. The emotional component of empathy (empathy concern)
explained a significant proportion of the between-subject variance. The
higher the ability to sympathize the larger the FEAE. These results suggest
that people scoring high on emotional empathy show larger plasticity in
neurons that process emotional expressions. Their visual system seems to
recalibrate faster and as a consequence is more sensitive towards changes
in emotional expressions of other people. This may explain why high
empathic people are better in sympathizing than low empathic people.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

99

Poster Session C

C38
CROSS-SEX VS. OWN-SEX FACE PERCEPTION MODULATES
EARLY ATTENTIONAL ERPS Robin I. Goodrich1,2, Sierra P. Niblett2, William Krenzer2, Avi Ben-Zeev2, Mark W. Geisler2; 1University of California, Davis,
2
San Francisco State University — There is strong evidence that group membership and in-group biases influence perception across multiple social
domains. Previous research on cross-race effects has shown that P2 amplitude is larger for cross-race than for own-race faces. Although other studies
have found that sensitivity to gender information also emerges in the P2,
differences in cross- vs. own-sex face perception on the P2 are unclear. The
current study attempts to extend and elucidate the pattern of event-related
potentials (ERPs) underlying the cross-sex effect. Participants completed a
recognition task with either all-male faces (n = 19; seven male participants)
or all-female faces (n = 21; seven male participants); stimuli were computer-generated in order to ensure perceptual homogeneity across stimulus
sets. Preliminary analyses revealed significantly larger P2 amplitudes (μV)
for cross-sex (M = 6.41, SE =.81) than for own-sex faces (M = 4.45, SE = .50),
t(38) = 2.107, p = .042, consistent with previous research. Planned contrasts
indicated that female participants in the cross-sex condition showed significantly larger P2 amplitudes, t(36) = 3.119, p = .004, than all other conditions, which did not differ from one another. These results suggest that
female participants may be driving the cross-sex effect, which could reflect
a stronger automatic in-group sex bias for females than for males (Rudman
& Goodwin, 2004). The heightened cross-sex attentional effect seen for
female, but not for male, participants might help to explain some of the
previously inconsistent cross-sex ERP results.

C39
DIFFERENTIAL VMPFC RESPONSE TO THE PERCEPTION OF TARGETS VARYING ON FINANCIAL AND MORAL SOCIAL STATUS
Ivo Gyurovski1, Jasmin Cloutier1; 1University of Chicago — Social status is
believed to play a central role in guiding social interactions. Surprisingly,
relatively little is know about the impact of social status information on
person perception and its neural substrates. Previous research suggests that
increases in ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) activity may reflect
positive evaluation of social targets paired with person-knowledge indicative of higher moral status (Cloutier et al., 2012). The current study was
designed to examine the effects of social status on the neural substrates
of person perception when social status is assigned to faces without the
use of person-knowledge. Following a training procedure, participants
took part in a block-design fMRI experiment, during which they passively
viewed photographs of the targets varying on social status type (Financial
vs. Moral) and level (Low, Medium, High). A region of interest analysis
revealed a significant status type by level interaction, such that significantly
less VMPFC activation was observed during the viewing of high relative to
low financial status targets, and significantly more activation was observed
in response to high relative to low moral status targets. These results, corroborated by explicit behavioral responses, confirm the involvement of
VMPFC in the evaluation of targets varying in social status and provide
novel evidence for the spontaneous use of social status information during
person perception.

C40
DYNAMIC CAUSAL MODELLING OF EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY
DURING MENTAL STATE ATTRIBUTION Hauke Hillebrandt1; 1University
College London — Biological agents are among the most complex systems
humans encounter in their natural environment. This complexity renders
modelling and predicting others’ mental states computationally difficult.
To achieve this humans generate a mental representation of other agents
based on an internal neural model. In hierarchical predictive coding frameworks, high level cortical areas inform lower level sensory cortex about
incoming sensory signals and unpredicted sensory information is passed
forward to higher level areas. Given the complexity of predicting mental
states, there should thus be greater connectivity between higher and lower
level brain areas when making social predictions versus more simple predictions. We test this hypothesis by investigating effective connectivity of
fMRI data from the Human Connectome project (WU-Minn Consortium).
During the task, participants either viewed Heider-Simmel like animations
of triangles that move purposefully and intentionally to evoke mental
state attributions, or participants viewed triangles that move in random

100

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
directions. We use a novel exhaustive model-selection approach to test all
possible Dynamic Causal models and use diffusion-tensor derived tractography priors to enhance region selection. We find differential effective
connectivity networks between higher level areas and lower level sensory
areas when participants make inferences about mental states of the agentlike triangles to predict their behaviour as opposed to looking at randomly
moving inanimate triangles.

C41
EXPERIENCE REMODELS AXONAL BOUTONS THAT CONNECT
THE ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX AND DORSOMEDIAL FRONTAL
CORTEX. Carolyn Johnson1, Hannah Peckler1, Francisco Javier Munoz-Cuevas1, Linda Wilbrecht1; 1University of California, San Francisco — Adaptive goal directed behavior depends on the ability to update behavior in
response to new information. The dorsomedial frontal cortex (dmPFC)
and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) likely work together to update associations
and action plans, though the nature of the connection between these areas
is poorly understood. Here, we investigated the anatomical connection
between OFC and dmPFC and tested how experience in a decision-making task impacted this connection in mice. Using viral tracing methods, we
found a direct bilateral connection from the OFC to dmPFC. Using channelrhodopsin, we confirmed that OFC axons make functional synapses onto
dmPFC neurons. Using longitudinal 2-photon in vivo imaging through
a cranial window, we followed individual axonal boutons across days in
control mice and mice undergoing training. Experimental groups were
trained on a foraging based reversal learning task previously shown to
involve the dmPFC (Johnson and Wilbrecht, 2011) and imaged before and
after training. In standard housed control mice, we found that OFC axons
in the dmPFC showed higher levels of bouton turnover than in neighboring
motor cortex. Training further elevated the turnover of boutons on OFC
axons in dmPFC. Our data suggest that OFC connectivity with dmPFC is
highly dynamic under baseline conditions and that this circuit is actively
remodeled by experience.

C42
CORTICOSTRIATAL CONNECTIVITY, DOPAMINE, AND INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION Andrew
Kayser1, Jennifer Mitchell1, David Badre2, Michael Frank2; 1Ernest Gallo Clinic &
Research Center, UCSF, 2Brown University — Whether to continue to exploit a
source of reward, or to search for a new one of potentially greater value, is
a fundamental and underconstrained decision that humans face. A recent
computational model of this exploration-exploitation tradeoff posits that
variability in such decisions across individuals is influenced by differences
in baseline dopaminergic tone within corticostriatal circuits. In behavioral
and neurophysiological tests of this model, Frank and colleagues demonstrated that human subjects with less active genetic variants of the catechol-O-methyltransferase gene (COMT), whose protein product degrades
synaptically-released dopamine, show greater exploratory behavior; and
the degree of exploratory behavior correlates with activity within the right
rostrolateral prefrontal cortex. Here we sought to address additional implications of these findings by assessing two further predictions of this model:
(1) If COMT genotype and corticostriatal function underlie this behavior,
then the strength of corticostriatal connectivity at rest should correlate
with the degree of exploratory behavior; and (2) pharmacological inhibition of COMT should increase exploration. In this study, subjects received
either placebo or the centrally-acting COMT inhibitor tolcapone in double-blind, randomized, counterbalanced fashion prior to performing an
exploration-exploitation task. As predicted, greater resting state connectivity between the right rostrolateral prefrontal cortex and the right striatum
correlated with greater exploration in the placebo condition. Moreover,
subjects showed a trend toward greater exploration on tolcapone than placebo. These results support the idea that corticostriatal function is linked
to exploratory behaviors, and that these influences may be impacted by
changes in putatively cortical dopamine tone.

C43
STATE TRANSITION ASSOCIATED WITH INTRINSIC CONNECTIVITY
NETWORKS: IMPLICATIONS FOR SEXUAL COMPULSIVITY. Edward
Patzelt1, Krista Wisner1, Zeb Kurth-Nelson1,2, Kelvin Lim1, Michael Miner1, Angus
MacDonald1; 1University of Minnesota, 2University College London, UK — Sexual

2013 Annual Meeting
compulsivity (SC) refers to a drive for sexual encounters that results in feeling distressed or addicted, and has been shown to facilitate the contraction
of HIV. To understand how feedback integration and state transitions may
be related to SC, we examined perseverations and excessive switching on
a reversal learning paradigm in two studies. In study 1, a Bayesian Hidden
Markov Model was applied to reversal learning task data from a sample
of healthy controls (N= 27) who had been scanned using resting-state
fMRI. The emotion-interoception intrinsic connectivity network consisting
of insula, temporal pole, hippocampus, and anterior cingulate cortex was
extracted using group ICA. The state transition parameter from the reversal
learning model showed a significant relationship with this emotion-interoception network such that higher connectivity was associated with a lower
state transition (rs = -.39, p = 0.043). In study 2, a second sample of subjects (n=58) were measured on sexual compulsivity, completed the reversal
learning task. This group showed a trending relationship between number
of sexual partners and transition (rs = -.23, p = 0.077), such that lower state
transition was associated with increased numbers of sexual partners. Thus
adherence to a particular state parallels sexual compulsivity in that the
sexual behavior is pervasive despite increasing numbers of partners. These
findings are consistent with the hypothesis that sexual compulsivity results
from anxiety rather than under-controlled impulses and, by extension, that
reduced connectivity within the emotion-interoception intrinsic connectivity network may be related to this behavior.

C44
DOES PERFORMANCE IN A NONVERBAL COGNITIVE CONTROL
TASK PREDICT FMRI BRAIN ACTIVITY IN A VERBAL TASK IN
BILINGUALS? Aurora I. Ramos Nunez1, Maya Ravid1, Arturo E. Hernandez1;
1
University of Houston — Previous studies have found neural similarities
between verbal and nonverbal processes. Given these findings, performance in one task may predict neural mechanisms in the other task. The
current study investigated how performance in a nonverbal executive control task predicts brain activity in a verbal task using a regression analysis
method. Spanish-English adult bilinguals (n=46) performed verbal language switching and nonverbal rule-changing tasks while inside the fMRI
scanner. Participants overtly named objects in three conditions: Spanish
only, English only and mixed (alternating between Spanish and English) in
a picture-naming task. The nonverbal task was a rule-switching paradigm
in which participants responded using a button box to color or shape, with
the dimension of interest changing after a small number of trials, as indicated by a cue. We performed a regression analysis using the behavioral
error rates from the nonverbal task as regressors to predict neural activity
in the single language and mixed conditions of the verbal task. Our results
show that participants with higher error rates in the nonverbal task showed
increased activity in frontoparietal, cingulate, and caudate regions associated with cognitive control processes. Participants with lower error rates
presented with increased activity in sensorimotor areas such as precentral and postcentral cortices, rolandic operculum, and occipital cortex in
the verbal task. Our results suggest a direct connection between nonverbal
control and verbal task performance. These findings are consistent with
models suggesting a link between cognitive control and language processing in bilinguals.

C45
THE EFFECTS OF BILINGUALS’ PROFICIENCY ON NONVERBAL
COGNITIVE CONTROL PERFORMANCE—AN FMRI EXAMINATION
Maya Ravid1, Aurora I. Ramos-Nunez1, Arturo E. Hernandez1; 1University of
Houston — Previous research found that bilinguals outperform monolinguals on cognitive control tasks, but few studies have examined differences
within the bilingual population. This study aims at comparing cognitive
control performance in groups of bilinguals divided along their proficiencies in two languages. Spanish-English adult bilinguals (n=47) performed a
nonverbal rule-switching task while inside the fMRI scanner. Participants
were required to respond as quickly as they could using a button box to
either the color or shape of stimuli, with the dimension of interest changing
(switch trials) or staying the same (non-switch trials), indicated by a cue.
Proficiency was measured using the vocabulary and sentence comprehension portions of the Woodcock Language Proficiency Battery-Revised in
English and Spanish. Balanced bilinguals were defined as those individuals who have similar scores on both the English and Spanish tests. Unbal-

Poster Session C
anced bilinguals are those with large differences between their English
and Spanish proficiencies. Our results indicate that proficiency balance has
significant effects on neural activation while bilinguals engage in a nonverbal rule-switching task. Specifically, unbalanced bilinguals present with
large activation patterns in brain areas related to executive function in the
rule-switch condition. In contrast, there are little to no activations in the
unbalanced group in the non-switch condition, and under both conditions
in the balanced group. From these results we can conclude that nonverbal
task-switching is more effortful for the unbalanced group than the balanced
group. These results are consistent with the view that the bilingual advantage most likely emerges from the consistent use of two languages.

C46
LEARNING THE VALUE OF OPTIONS: THE ROLE OF ANTERIOR
CINGULATE CORTEX IN HIERARCHICAL REINFORCEMENT
LEARNING Akina Umemoto1, Michael E. Yates1, Clay B. Holroyd1; 1University
of Victoria — Much of human behaviour is complex and involves hierarchical structure. One influential approach for understanding action hierarchies is called hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL). Whereas standard reinforcement learning algorithms are suited for dealing with simple
decision problems, HRL solves more complex problems by organizing
temporally extended sequences of primitive actions (e.g., cutting tomatoes)
into “options” that are directed toward particular goals (e.g., making a
sandwich) (Botvinick et al., 2009). By learning the values of options at this
higher level of abstract representations, HRL reduces the number of decisions necessary to carry out extended sequences of behavior, hence making
problem-solving computationally more efficient. A recent theory holds that
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) plays a key role in selecting and maintaining high-level options based on their learned values (Holroyd & Yeung,
2012). To test this theory, we employed a novel gambling task where participants played multiple gambling games in two different casinos and
learned over time that one casino provided a better payoff than the other
(cf. Diuk et al., 2012). By measuring the reward positivity, an event-related
potential component believed to reflect reward-related signals carried to
the ACC by the midbrain dopamine system, we show that the ACC is sensitive not only to reward feedback as is commonly observed but also to the
value of high-level options such that more value is attributed to the good
casino than the bad casino. Our results indicate the importance of ACC
in guiding high-level action selection based on learned option values in a
hierarchical context.

C47
OH THE PLACES YOU’LL GO: AN ADAPTIVE GAIN ACCOUNT OF
MIND WANDERING BEHAVIOUR Melaina T Vinski1, Alex Gough2, Kaian
Unwalla3, Kyle Fitzgibbon4, Scott Watter5; 1McMaster University — Incorporating the Adaptive Gain Theory of attentional allocation within the mind
wandering paradigm, the current work investigates the role of norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine (DA) on decoupled states of attention. Online
measures of NE and DA were collected during task performance to observe
natural shifts in attentional allocation (Experiment 1) and following activation of the Hypothalamtic-Pituitary-Adrenal (HPA) Axis stress response
(Experiment 2). The ebb and flow of catecholamine release was measured
using an eye-tracker, with pupil dilation used as an indicator of current
NE levels and blink rate as an indicator of DA levels. Mind wandering
frequency, or the shift toward a task-irrelevant orientation, was measured
using the Sustained Attention to Response Task (SART) and the HPA-Axis
was activated using the Trier Social Stress Test (TSST). In Experiment 1,
findings suggest that elevations in NE and DA precede early inattention to
task features and predict attention-related performance errors on the SART.
Findings from Experiment 2 reveal that acute stress induces atypical deficits in task performance by facilitating a TSST-oriented attentional focus.
Pupillary evidence supports the behavioural account, with variation in NE
release upon HPA-Axis activation contributing to the cognitive shifts. In
both experiments, variation in catecholamine release was dependent on
individual differences in negative mood and absent mindedness in daily
life. The current work provides behavioural and psychobiological evidence
for NE and DA as neuromodulators of attentional allocation in the preservation of task-oriented focus, supporting an Adaptive Gain account of
attentional allocation within the mind wandering paradigm.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

101

Poster Session C

C48
WITHIN-SESSION TIME COURSE OF STRATEGIC ADAPTATIONS
IN COGNITIVE CONTROL. Christopher Walker1,2, Laetitia Ngamassi1,
Thomas Wozny1, Nicola Polizzotto1, Raymond Cho1,2; 1University of Pittsburgh,
2
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition — Cognitive control requires integrating multiple cognitive capacities, including the ability to maintain
task-relevant information and goal representations. While temporally
local behaviors (e.g. trial-to-trial behavioral adjustments) are well-investigated, the longer term control modulations remain relatively unexplored.
Our recent findings suggest that typical practice and fatigue explanations
may not fully explain the behavioral shifts that occur over the experimental session. We collected behavioral and electroencephalographic (EEG)
data from a sample of 28 healthy controls performing a prepotent response
inhibition task (i.e. the Preparing to Overcome Prepotency (POP) task).
Condition averages were calculated across the task by grouping trials into
four quartiles from beginning to the end of the task. Analyses of error rates
revealed a condition by time-on-task interaction. As expected, participants
gradually improved in the high-control condition; however, this was paralleled by worsening performance in the low-control condition. Reaction
times showed main effects for condition (high > low) and time (decreasing).
Preliminary EEG findings suggest an upward trend in gamma-band (i.e.
30-80 Hz) synchrony in the pre-trial baseline period with relatively stable
between condition differences during a preparatory delay phase. This pattern of findings suggests strategic adjustments of a control state that optimizes performance as a function of trial-type statistics—with a high proportion of cognitively demanding trials, there may be shifts in the baseline
control state to meet these demands, perhaps even incurring some expense
during low control trial performance. Together, our findings indicate cognitive control modulations may be sensitive to more global as well as local
task demands.

C49
SHARED AND DISTINCT CONTRIBUTIONS OF ROSTRAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX TO ANALOGICAL REASONING AND EPISODIC
MEMORY RETRIEVAL: INSIGHTS FROM FMRI FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY AND MULTIVARIATE PATTERN ANALYSES Andrew J.
Westphal1, Nicco Reggente1, Yama Nawabi1, Jesse Rissman1; 1UCLA — The
rostral prefrontal cortex (RPFC), positioned at the apex of the prefrontal
processing hierarchy, has been implicated in a diverse array of high-level
cognitive processes. These include abstract analogical reasoning and episodic memory retrieval, which may be linked by their common demands
for relational integration. However, because reasoning and memory tasks
have not been compared in the same studies, the degree of neuroanatomical overlap in RPFC is unclear. To address this gap, we developed a mixed
block/event-related fMRI paradigm that required subjects to periodically
shift between Reasoning, Memory, and Perception tasks. While these three
task sets entailed dramatically different cognitive goals, all involved the
presentation of 4-word stimulus arrays, with the tasks closely matched for
response demands and reaction times. FMRI results from 20 participants
revealed highly overlapping recruitment of RPFC during successfully
solved analogy and source memory retrieval trials, without significant univariate activity differences. However, searchlight-based multi-voxel pattern analysis identified areas of RPFC wherein local activity patterns could
facilitate robust decoding of these trial types. One such prominent cluster
in left lateral RPFC was then seeded in a psychophysiological interaction
analysis. Strikingly, this region showed divergent profiles of functional
connectivity across task blocks, coupling more strongly with frontoparietal control network structures during Reasoning and with default mode
network structures during Memory. These findings suggest that common
areas of RPFC may differentially contribute to analogical reasoning and
episodic retrieval via their coordinated interactions with distinct brain networks that respectively facilitate the integration of complex semantic or
episodic relationships.

C50
THE EFFECTS OF RESPONSE NUMBER AND TASK ON THE ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF CONFLICT PROCESSING
Sarah E. Donohue1, Lawrence G. Appelbaum1, Marty G. Woldorff1; 1Duke University — Incompatible environmental stimuli that lead to differing behav-

102

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
ioral responses have the capability to compete for attention, yielding slower
response times and increased errors. The degree to which such behavioral
costs are driven by the composition of specific types of competing stimuli
versus the number of possible stimulus-response associations is not clear.
To investigate how these two factors contribute to behavioral and neural
conflict effects, we conducted an event-related potential (ERP) experiment
in which participants performed versions of the Stroop and Flanker tasks
where stimulus-response sets consisted of either 2 or 4 response options
in different blocks. In this manner, we were able to experimentally cross
the influence of stimulus conflict type (color-word conflict in the Stroop
and spatial conflict in the Flanker) with response-set-size to determine
how these factors induce differing levels of behavioral costs, as well as
how these manifest in the early frontocentral negativity (N450/Ninc) that
is a hallmark neural signature of conflict processing. Behaviorally, participants were slower to respond to incongruent trials in all the tasks, as
well as slower on the four-response conditions than in the corresponding
two-response conditions. The ERP data revealed an early conflict-related
negativity (Ninc) for all four tasks. While the Ninc was similar in onset for
all conditions, it appeared to last longer in duration for the four-response
compared to the corresponding two-response conditions. These data suggest that response-set size, assessed across two different stimulus-conflict
tasks, can induce a distinctive temporal modulation of the underlying conflict-related neural processing.

C51
THE HOT HAND FALLACY AND COGNITIVE CONTROL: AN EE…E
STUDY Wout Duthoo1, Elger Abrahamse1, Maarten De Schuymer1, Wim Notebaert; 1Ghent University — In this study, we aimed to elucidate the neural
correlates underlying prediction-driven adjustments in cognitive control.
We recorded the EEG while participants were engaged in a Stroop task in
which they also had to predict the (in)congruency of the upcoming trial,
and measured how these predictions influenced conflict resolution. When
taking into account the congruency level of the previous trial, analyses
revealed that participants displayed a clear congruency level repetition bias
(or so-called hot hand fallacy), even though congruency level repetition
probability was set at 50%. Moreover, behavioural adjustments (e.g., congruency-based sequential effects) were only present following these repetition predictions, and not following alternation predictions. At the neural
level, we found that these sequential effects were reflected in both the early,
fronto-medial negativity (N450) and the late, parietal conflict slow potential, which contrasts previous studies (e.g., Larson, Kaufman, & Perlstein,
2009). Again, this pattern was only found following repetition predictions.
Moreover, in the interval between prediction and stimulus presentation,
we found fronto-central and centro-parietal preparatory activity that differentiated alternation and repetition predictions, with stronger activity for
the latter. These results indicate that predictions can steer attentional control and suggest a role for repetition expectancies in bringing about sequential congruency effects.

C52
RESPONSE INHIBITION DURING A WALKING TASK COMPARED
TO UPPER LIMB COMPUTER INHIBITION TESTS. Jacques Duysens1,2,
Zrinka Potocanac1, Inge Leunissen1, James Coxon1, Bart Nienhuis2, Stephan
Swinnen1; 1KU-Leuven, Belgium, 2Sint Maartenskliniek, Nijmegen,The Netherlands — A number of studies stressed inhibitory deficits as possible causes
of falls. Our aim was to assess response inhibition during a novel walking
task, namely a form of obstacle avoidance (OA) based on the STOP&GO
paradigm and compare this lower limb performance to two upper limb
standardized computer motor inhibition tasks (Coxon et al., 2012). The
walking task consisted of walking by stepping onto stepping stones projected onto the treadmill. Some stones suddenly changed color, indicating
that they became obstacles to avoid (hence the need to suppress ongoing
movement). The walking task was completed with and without an auditory
Stroop dual task to evaluate possible interference of inhibitory processes
(OA and Stroop). The Stroop task required suppression of responses to
incongruent stimuli. Nine young, healthy adults participated in the experiment. OA failure rates on the walking task increased significantly with
increasing difficulty (p < 0.01). The addition of the secondary task (dual
tasking) further increased failure rates (p < 0.01). Increased walking task
difficulty (less time to suppress responses) diminished Stroop task performance, reflected by increasing incorrect response rates (p < 0.01) and laten-

2013 Annual Meeting
cies of correct responses (p < 0.05). Although inhibition is clearly needed
for successful execution of the OA task, performance on the walking task
was not correlated to stop signal reaction time as measured by 2 upper limb
computer tests (Coxon et al., 2012). Interference between OA and Stroop
supports the notion of a “global” mechanism of response inhibition when
speed is essential.

C53
DO ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF A NEW STRATEGY REQUIRE
CONSCIOUS PERCEPTION? Imen El Karoui1,2, Kalliopi Christoforidis1,
Lionel Naccache1,3,4; 1ICM Research Center, INSERM/CNRS/UPMC UMRS 975,
Paris, France, 2Ecole Doctorale Cerveau Cognition Comportement, UPMC,
Paris, France, 3Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Groupe Hospitalier
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 4Faculté de Médecine Pitié-Salpêtrière, UPMC,
Paris, France — This study investigates whether a strategy established on
conscious stimuli can be applied to non-conscious stimuli. We derived our
experimental paradigm from the task used by Merikle et al (1995). Subjects
were asked to respond to the color of a green or blue string of ampersands.
Preceding this target, the word “GREEN” or “BLUE” was presented consciously or masked. In experimental blocks, 80 % of the trials were incongruent. Then the optimal strategy consists in preparing the response opposite to the one associated with the word (e.g.: prepare “green” response after
the word “BLUE”). In each block, trials were either conscious or non-conscious. Crucially, we added rare non-conscious trials in conscious blocks to
test if, once acquired, this strategy could be applied to non-conscious trials.
Our paradigm also included a conscious and a masked baseline blocks,
with 50% incongruent trials. We analyzed behavioral and electroencephalographic (EEG) data on 21 subjects. Behaviorally, subjects were able to
use the optimal strategy in experimental blocks only when the cue was presented consciously. Neither the acquisition nor the transfer of this strategy
could be observed when the cue was masked. Nevertheless, we found a
N2 component modulated by trial difficulty in conscious and unconscious
blocks, suggesting the detection of the conflict induced by the proportion
of incongruent trials, even in non-conscious conditions. Current analyses of
lateralized readiness potential (LRP) and P3b will precise the other specific
stages of processing (response preparation; updating of working memory)
affected by the absence of conscious perception.

C54
BILINGUAL INHIBITORY CONTROL: EVIDENCE FROM SCHOOL
BILINGUALS Ingrid Finger1, Luciana Brentano1, Ana Beatriz Fontes2; 1Federal
University of Rio Grande do Sul - Brazil, 2Penn State Beaver — Recent research
on childhood bilingualism has indicated that the daily use of two or more
languages sharpens the development of certain cognitive processes, such
as selective attention and inhibitory control, as well as linguistic and metalinguistic processes, in bilingual children when compared to monolingual
children of the same age (BIALYSTOK, 2001, 2005, 2006, amongst others).
However, this advantage has only been observed with native bilingual
children, i.e., children who are exposed to both languages at a very young
age. To fill this gap, the present study aimed to investigate the effect of
bilingualism on inhibitory control in bilingual children who experience
bilingualism (or second language learning) exclusively in a school context,
compared to the usual sample of bilingual children who experience bilingualism at home or in the community. Thus, 174 children of ages 9 to 12
from three different linguistic groups (75 school bilinguals; 57 home bilinguals and 42 monolinguals) participated in the study. Children completed
both the Simon Arrows and the Stroop Tasks to assess their inhibitory control with both non-linguistic and linguistic stimuli. The analysis showed
the smallest reaction times for the bilingual children from a school context,
in comparison to the other two groups of participants, in both tasks. These
findings suggest that children who deal with both languages on a daily
basis, although only at a school context, also show cognitive advantages
probably due to a bilingual experience.

C55
THE CONTEMPLATIVE BRAIN: A META-ANALYSIS OF MORPHOMETRIC NEUROIMAGING OF MEDITATION PRACTITIONERS Kieran
C.R. Fox1, Savannah Nijeboer1, Matthew L. Dixon1, Jelena Markovic2, Kalina
Christoff1; 1University of British Columbia, 2University of Toronto — While the
investigation of the neural basis of contemplative practices remains in its

Poster Session C
infancy, numerous studies have now addressed how the brain engages in,
and is shaped by, meditation. In nearly twenty studies examining morphometric measures of brain structure and their relationship to meditation, a
panoply of differences have been found between meditators and controls
(or in the same subjects after meditation training) in both gray and white
matter throughout cortical and subcortical regions. We conduct a review
and meta-analysis of over 100 morphometric group differences (meditators
vs. controls) reported in 18 papers over the last decade. We also review
the results of correlations between meditation experience level and brain
structure. We summarize convergent results across meditation techniques
and neuroimaging methodologies, and also compare findings from shortterm training vs. long-term practitioners. A meta-analysis of all results to
date found reliable, well-replicated structural differences in regions key
to introspection (BA 10), exteroceptive and interoceptive body awareness
(sensory cortices and insular cortex, respectively), memory (hippocampus),
self-regulation (anterior cingulate), and interhemispheric communication
(corpus callosum). Many of these regions have previously been implicated
in functional neuroimaging studies of meditation, suggesting a strong
overlap between functional and structural differences related to contemplative practice. Moreover, there is nearly total overlap between differences
found in novices after short-term training, vs. those observed when comparing long-term practitioners to meditation-naïve controls, offering strong
evidence that meditation is causally implicated in the observed changes.

C56
NEURAL RESPONSE TO HIGH-CALORIE FOOD WORDS IN OBESITY AND SUCCESSFUL WEIGHT LOSS MAINTENANCE. Jason Hassenstab1, Elizabeth Kathleen Vernon1, Lawrence Sweet3, Jeanne McCaffery2,
Suzanne Phelan4, Kathryn Demos2, Ronald Cohen5, Rena Wing2; 1Washington
University in St. Louis, 2Brown University, 3University of Georgia, 4California
Polytechnic State University, 5University of Florida — Successful weight loss
maintenance in obesogenic environments requires ongoing behavioral vigilance. Weight loss maintainers (WLMs) must actively inhibit responses
to tempting food cues in order to maintain control over food intake. We
used block-design versions of the traditional Stroop task and a Food Stroop
task to evaluate inhibitory control and neural response to food words
(high-calorie vs. low-calorie vs. neutral words) in 14 WLM’s, 13 currently
obese (OB), and 17 never-obese lean (NOL) adults (ages 27-65 years, 91 %
female). WLMs were significantly slower to name the ink color of high calorie food words than OB or NOL (p = .03; Phelan et al., 2011). Contrasting
the high-calorie condition against the control conditions (low-calorie, neutral), significant BOLD responses (all FDR q’s <.05) were observed across
all participants in 9 regions, including the precuneus, anterior cingulate,
medial and lateral prefrontal cortices, and striatum. A significant group by
condition interaction revealed that WLMs had altered patterns of activation relative to OB and NOL in regions associated with response inhibition,
reward sensitivity, and sensory processing. WLMs exhibited greater activity in the left inferior frontal gyrus, right middle frontal gyrus, and the right
caudate/putamen (all p’s <.05). Interestingly, WLMs showed decreased
activity in the right insula (p<.01). There were no behavioral or BOLD
response differences between groups on the traditional Stroop task. Overall, these results suggest that WLMs show altered responses to high-calorie food stimuli, perhaps reflecting differences in cognitive processing that
regulates food intake.

C57
THE INTERACTION OF PROBABILITY LEARNING AND WORKING
MEMORY Filiz Gözenman1,2, Didem Gökçay2, Murat Perit Çakır2; 1University
of Nevada Reno, 2Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey — Probability learning is the ability to establish a relationship between stimulus
and outcomes based on occurrence probabilities. Participants learn the task
according to the cue-outcome relationship, and try to gain in depth understanding of this relationship throughout the experiment. While learning is
at the highest level, people rely on their working memory. In this study 20
participants were presented a probability learning task, and their prefrontal
cortex activity was measured with fNIRS. It was hypothesized that as participants gain more knowledge of the probabilities they will learn cue-outcome relationships and therefore rely less on their working memory.
Therefore as learning precedes a drop in the fNIRS signal is expected. Significant negative correlation between dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activity

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

103

Poster Session C
and learning was found. Similarly, response time also decreased through
the task, indicating that as learning precedes participants made decisions
faster. Participants used either the frequency matching or the maximization
strategy in order to solve the task in which they had to decide whether the
blue or the red color was winning. We had hypothesized that the people
in frequency matching and maximization groups would show working
memory differences which could be observed from the fNIRS signal. However, we were unable to detect this type of behavioral difference in the
fNIRS signal. Overall, our study showed the relationship between probability learning and working memory as depicted by brain activity in the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex which widely known as the central executive
component of working memory.

C58
PASSING THE GATE: DISRUPTING FEATURE BINDING IN VISUAL
WORKING MEMORY Jonathan Hakun1, Susan Ravizza1; 1Michigan State Uni-

versity — Areas of the inferior and medial temporal lobe (ITL/MTL) take
part in the maintenance and rapid binding of multi-feature objects in visual
working memory (VWM; Ranganath, 2006; Parra, et al 2009). Selection of
relevant information for storage is, at least in part, reliant on a putative
gating network that includes the basal-ganglia and prefrontal cortex (BGPFC; McNab & Klingberg, 2008; Hazy, Frank, & O’Reilly, 2007). In the
current study, we investigated the effect of visual information presented
during VWM maintenance in view of revealing whether such a selection
mechanism could be breached through distraction. Recent behavioral work
suggests that behaviorally relevant information presented during maintenance is specifically disruptive of bound features in VWM (e.g. plausible
study objects; Ueno, et al 2012). We extended this work by including not
only unrelated (empty boxes) and related objects (colored-shapes that share
no features with the study objects), but also new colored-shape objects that
match the study sets’ colors (matched condition). We found a significant
cost related to all three distraction conditions; however, the greatest cost
was associated with matched condition, while no difference was observed
between the unrelated and related conditions. These results suggest that
related information may induce contingent capture of attention but is no
more consequential to maintenance than unrelated information. However,
information that matches the contents of VWM may pass the putative
BG-PFC selection gate and cause a rebinding of features in memory.

C59
MENTAL LOAD IN THE COMPLEX MENTAL MULTIPLICATION
Cheng-Ching Han1,2, Chia-Yuan Lin1,3, Nai Shing Yen1,2,3; 1Taiwan Mind & Brain
Imaging Center, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Research Center for Mind, Brain, and Learning, National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Department of Psychology,
National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan — Several studies in math cognition have identified areas of the brain that are involved in number processing (Dehaene, Piazza, Pinel, & Cohen, 2003) and complex problem solving
(Anderson, 2007), and also found the arithmetic performance is highly correlated with working memory capacities (Iuculano, Moro, & Butterworth,
2011). Only a few research studied the relationship of the more complex
arithmetic problem and brain activities. In the present study, we examined
cortical activation as a function of different mental loads for mentally solving multi-digit multiplication problems. There are two types of problems in
the experiment: 2-digit multiplied by 1-digit (2x1) and 4-digit multiplied by
1-digit (4x1); and two degree of mental digit loading: easy one and difficult
one. It is 2 (types) x2 (degree of mental loading) within-subject design. The
degree of mental loading is calculated from the highest digit loading of the
school strategy (Rosenberg-Lee, Lovett, & Anderson, 2009). There are 100
trials in total. The participants took a rest after every 25 trials. The result
showed that when the participants solved the problems had higher digit
working memory demands in the mental multiplication, they produced
greater activity in right frontal areas.

C60
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN COGNITIVE AND MOTOR FUNCTIONS
IN OLDER ADULTS Toshikazu Kawagoe1, Kaoru Sekiyama1; 1Kumamoto Uni-

versity — Previous research suggests that older adults’ working memory
(WM) has a possibility to have relation to motor function. We focused on
the relationship between motor functions, divided into mobility and dexterity, and cognitive functions, especially WM and general cognitive decline.

104

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
For measuring diverse WM, we adopted N-back (1-back and 2-back) tasks
using three distinct types of stimuli (numbers, locations and faces). Participants were older adults (age: 78.6 yrs, SD: 5.2 yrs; education: 11.9 yrs,
SD: 2.69 yrs; no one had diagnosed as any dementia). Simple correlation
analysis indicated that WM tasks correlated to motor functions to some
extent and that the degree of cognitive decline is related to motor function
as well as WM capacities. Partial correlation analysis revealed that older
adults with higher mobility functions marked good performances of the
location 1-back task, and that the participants who had little decline in general cognitive functions scored better performances of the face 1-back task
and of dexterity. From these results, Older adults’ WM capacities has the
potentials to be the indices of their cognitive or motor functions by distinguishing different types of WM (for example, spatial WM for motor function and face WM for cognitive function). We conclude that the spatial WM
is specifically related to motor function or mobility.

C61
THE P300 SUBSEQUENT MEMORY EFFECT ELICITED BY THE
FIRST WORD IN THE LIST DEPENDS ON ITS OUTPUT POSITION
DURING RECALL Chris Kiley1, Siri-Maria Kamp1, Emanuel Donchin1; 1University of South Florida — Several studies (e.g., Karis et al., 1984) have shown
that when participants use simple study strategies, the amplitude of the
P300 elicited by stimuli that “stand out” is correlated with the probability of later recalling these stimuli (“P300 subsequent memory effect”); furthermore, items that “stand out” are frequently the last item to be recalled
during test (Fabiani and Donchin, 1995). In a recent study, Kamp et al.
(2012) reported a P300 subsequent memory effect for the first word in a
study list as well. In the present study we investigated whether the magnitude of the P300 subsequent memory effect elicited by the first word
varies with this word’s output position during subsequent recall. Thirteen
participants studied and immediately recalled 40 lists of 15 words while
their ERPs were recorded. The recall rates showed a strong primacy- and
a recency effect. Compared to study items from the middle of the list, the
first study word was more likely to be recalled first, however, this word
was about equally likely to be recalled first or last. In agreement with prior
findings, the first study word elicited a P300 subsequent memory effect.
Words that were recalled last during test elicited the largest P300 at study,
while words that were recalled first elicited the smallest P300. These results
suggest that P300 amplitude elicited by the first study word does not only
correlate with whether or not this word is subsequently recalled, but also
with its precise output position during recall.

C62
DO ADULTS WITH ATTENTION DEFICIT/ HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER HAVE PROBLEMS IN WORKING MEMORY? Soyeon Kim1,2,
Zhongxu Liu1, Daniel Glizer1, Rosemary Tannock1,2, Steven Woltering1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Hospital for Sick Children — Objectives: The aim of this study
is to determine how underlying, covert factors such as attention resource
allocation or arousal level contribute to working memory (WM) performance in adults with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
and a healthy comparison group. Methods: Dense-array (128-channel)
electroencephalography will be used to capture a specific event related
potential (ERP) -the P3, known to be associated with WM - during performance of a delayed match-to-sample task with low and high memory
load conditions. Standardized neuropsychological tests, such as digit span
and subtests of the Cambridge Neuropsychological Testing Automated
Battery (CANTAB) will be used to provide behavioral measures of WM
performance. Neural analyses will focus on the early encoding stage of WM
in the delayed-match-to-sample task – an early stage of WM known to be
influenced by attention and arousal. Results: The ADHD group had similar
accuracy scores and reaction time compared to the comparison group on
the delayed-match-to-sample task, and in performance on the neuropsychological WM tasks. However, the P3 amplitude was smaller in ADHD
group than the comparison group on first stimuli and last stimuli. This
main effect of group was also present on low and high load conditions collapsed across stimuli. Conclusions: This study provides the first evidence
of neural impairments in the encoding stage of WM in adults with ADHD.
Findings suggest that low arousal level as well as failure to allocate sufficient attentional resources, rather than poor WM per se, may accounts for
the lower P3 amplitudes in the ADHD group.

2013 Annual Meeting

Poster Session C

C63
MORPHOLOGICAL PROCESSING IN A MINIMALLY INFLECTED
LANGUAGE: EVIDENCE FROM MANDARIN CHINESE Yun-Hsuan

C65
PROCESSING CONSONANT LENGTH: ERP AND BEHAVIOURAL
EVIDENCE FROM BENGALI Sandra Kotzor1, Allison Wetterlin1, Adam

Huang1,2, Elisabeth Fonteneau1,2, Caroline M. Whiting1,2, Qing Cai3,4, William
Marslen-Wilson1,2; 1Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, 2MRC
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, U.K., 3East China Normal University, China, 4INSERM U992, Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, France — Previous
research in English and Polish provides evidence that two distinct but partially overlapping networks underlie spoken word processing. Morphological inflections, an assumed hallmark of human language, mainly engage a
left-lateralized frontal-temporal network linking inferior frontal and posterior temporal regions; non-inflected simple words and derived words are
supported by a more widely distributed bilateral fronto-temporal network
(Bozic et al. 2010; Szlachta et al, 2012). The aim of this study is to examine
the possible role of these two networks in a minimally inflected language,
Mandarin Chinese. Native speakers of Mandarin passively listened to three
types of disyllabic Mandarin words, where the second syllable contrasted
different types of morphological complexity (simple compound words
(hu shi ‘to breath’), derived words (jing hua ‘purify’) , and inflected words
(chang zhe ‘singing’), while combined electro- and magneto-encephalography (EMEG) data were recorded. This allows us to track the transient
real-time morphological computations underlying the three types of complexity. The alignment point was set to the onset of the second syllable,
where information about word type and complexity becomes available.
Minimum Norm Estimate (MNE) techniques were used to compute wholebrain source estimates. Early results suggest that derived words elicit more
activation than inflected words in the bilateral fronto-temporal network
at early time-windows, while inflected words preferentially activate left
hemisphere frontal and temporal ROIs at a later time-window. This is preliminary evidence that, despite the reduced role of grammatical morphological combination in Mandarin, a similar functional differentiation can be
observed in the underlying neurobiological systems.

Roberts1, Aditi Lahiri1; 1University of Oxford — About half of the world’s
languages use consonantal length to contrast words; e.g. in Bengali: singleton [pata] ‘leaf’ vs. geminate [pat:a] ‘whereabouts, location’. The main
acoustic cue for differentiating length of consonants is closure duration,
geminates being almost twice as long as single consonants (e.g., average
singleton 80ms, geminate 180ms). Since duration contrasts are invariably
relative, how would listeners process consonantal length if there were no
other cues to differentiate them? To investigate this question we used both
behavioural and evoked potential recordings in a crossmodal semantic
priming paradigm. Two sets of Bengali disyllabic words were chosen as
auditory primes; lexical singletons with no geminate counterparts, and
underlying geminates with no corresponding singleton word. Nonword
mispronounced primes were created by shortening or lengthening the
medial consonant to create the corresponding (fake) geminate or singleton.
Significant semantic priming confirming lexical activation was observed,
reflected by lower mean N400 amplitudes and faster reaction times with
nonword mispronunciations, but only when the real word was a singleton.
This asymmetry shows that although the brain is very sensitive to durational differences, a perfect match of consonantal length is not required for
lexical activation. Nevertheless, while increasing the length of the consonant appears to facilitate the recognition of the the real word, reducing its
length does not result in facilitation.

C64
BEHAVIORAL AND MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHIC EVIDENCE
FOR THE CONTRIBUTION OF PHONETIC AND SEMANTIC RADICALS TO CHINESE CHARACTER RECOGNITION Yi-hui Hung1,2, Daisy
L. Hung1,2,3, Ovid J.-L. Tzeng1,2,4, Denise H. Wu2,3; 1Institute of Neuroscience,
National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, R.O.C., 2Laboratories for Cognitive Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, .R.O.C, 3Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, National Central University, Taiwan, R.O.C, 4The Institute of Linguistics, Academia Taiwan, R.O.C. — Most Chinese characters have a horizontal structure with a semantic and a phonetic radical on the left and right
side, respectively. Although pre-lexical involvement of the phonetic radical
in Chinese character recognition has been established, there is little agreement on the contribution of the semantic radical. We used magnetoencephalography (MEG) to investigate the temporal dynamics of the processes
elicited by semantic and phonetic radicals. When participants performed
homophone judgment on a pair of Chinese characters with or without the
same phonetic radical, sharing a phonetic radical facilitated the decision
on two homophonic characters but interfered with the decision on two
non-homophonic characters. The repetition of the phonetic radial resulted
in a smaller M170 component, and further interacted with homophony of
the stimulus pair in M250 and M350 components, indicating early involvement of the phonetic radical in orthographic/phonological computation
of Chinese character recognition. When participants performed synonym
judgment on a pair of Chinese characters with or without the same semantic radical, sharing a semantic radical facilitated the decision on two synonymic characters but interfered with the decision on two non-synonymic
characters. The repetition of the semantic radial might be a post-lexical
effect, however, as it did not modulate MEG components nor did it interact
with synonymy of the stimulus pair. Although both the semantic and phonetic radicals affected response latencies of character recognition, the MEG
results suggest that only the phonetic but not the semantic radial plays an
early/dominant role in accessing the sound and the meaning of a Chinese
character.

C66
NEURAL PROCESSING OF WRITTEN LANGUAGE IN DEAF READERS: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL ANALYSIS Alison S Mehravari1,
Lee Osterhout1; 1University of Washington — A majority of deaf students
leave high school reading at or below a fourth grade level, but some deaf
individuals do become highly proficient readers. There is disagreement
about the causes of this reading difficulty, and by association, disagreement about the effectiveness of different strategies for teaching reading
to deaf children. The goal of this project was to use real-time measures of
neural language processing to better assess what leads to successful reading in deaf adults. Two groups of participants took part in this study: 1)
adults who became severely or profoundly deaf before two years of age,
and 2) age-matched normal hearing adults. Event-related potentials (ERPs)
were recorded while participants read: a) sentences that were either wellformed or contained a subject-verb agreement, meaning, or combined
agreement-meaning error, and b) pairs of words that were either unrelated
or related in meaning, phonology, orthography, or both phonology and
orthography. Standardized reading comprehension skill was measured in
all participants. Deaf participants displayed both quantitatively and qualitatively different ERP responses to sentence violations and related words
than did normal hearing participants. Additionally, greater variation was
seen in ERP responses within the group of deaf participants. These data
begin to suggest what patterns of neural language processing may be associated with better reading proficiency in deaf individuals.

C67
EFFECTS OF EXPERIMENTAL CONTEXT ON WORD FREQUENCY
EFFECTS IN AN ERP MASKED PRIMING PARADIGM Priya Mitra1,
Marianna Eddy1,2, Jonathan Grainger3, Phillip Holcomb1; 1Tufts University, 2US
Army NSRDEC, 3CNRS and Aix-Marseille University — Event-related potential
(ERP) masked priming paradigms have demonstrated that automatic word
processing is sensitive to word frequency at sublexical and lexico-semantic
stages of word recognition. Previous ERP research has shown that low-frequency word pairs consistently elicit sublexical (N250) masked priming
effects. Intermixed high-frequency word pairs did not elicit this effect
when presented with a long stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA), perhaps
because the prime stimuli are processed so efficiently as to not overlap with
target stimuli processing. However, in a subsequent experiment using only
high-frequency pairs and a long SOA, our results did show N250 masked
priming effects. The present study examines this discrepancy by comparing high- and low-frequency word pairs in separate experimental blocks,
using the same presentation durations (53ms primes, 120ms SOA) previously shown to elicit an N250 priming effect for high-frequency words. We

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

105

Poster Session C
replicate the finding that high-frequency words can elicit an N250 priming
effect using this paradigm, and further show that the presence and size
of this effect is dependent upon the order of stimulus presentation. Both
high-frequency and low-frequency N250 priming effects were larger when
the words were presented in the first block. High-frequency words only
elicited a significant priming effect from 200-300ms when they preceded
the low-frequency block. These findings suggest that the effects of word
frequency on N250 masked priming effects are highly sensitive to experimental context. Both high- and low-frequency words are influenced by
presentation order and N250 priming effects may be especially sensitive to
presentation parameters when participants read extremely high-frequency
words.

C68
HEMISPHERIC ASYMMETRY IN IMAGERY PROCESSING THAT
LINKS TO LANGUAGE: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY
Li-Hsin Ning1, Hsu-Wen Huang2, Kara D. Federmeier1; 1University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, 2National Taiwan Normal University — This study used
visual half-field (VF) presentation and event-related potential (ERP) measures to examine how the left (LH) and right (RH) hemispheres process
concrete and abstract senses of polysemous nouns (e.g., “green book,”
referring to the concrete, physical object that is a book, versus “interesting book,” referring to the abstract information that a book conveys) and,
in particular, in their ability to switch between these senses. Participants
read adjective-noun-adjective triplets, in which the first adjective and the
noun were presented centrally and the second adjective was presented laterally, and were asked to judge which adjective was more appropriate as
a description of the noun. Responses on the first adjective replicated standard ERP concreteness effects, with concrete adjectives eliciting a sustained
frontal negativity (500–900 ms) that has been linked to imagery. With initial
presentation to the LH, this concreteness effect was also seen on the second
adjective, irrespective of the concreteness of the prior adjective. However,
with presentation to the RH, sustained frontal negativity was seen only for
concrete adjectives not preceded by a prior concrete adjective. That is, prior
imagery eased additional imagery selectively for the RH. These results
provide additional evidence for a critical role of the RH in creating, maintaining, and augmenting mental imagery during normal language comprehension.

C69
EARLY ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL COMPONENTS ARE ALTERED
IN ADULTS WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA DURING A LEXICAL DECISION TASK. Darlene Oliveira1, Patrícia Silva1, Karen Ueki1, Paulo
Boggio1, Elizeu Macedo1; 1Social and Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory Mackenzie Presbyterian University — Developmental Dyslexia is a specific
learning disorder characterized by difficulties in reading accuracy and
fluency. Previous findings have been shown alterations on event related
potential (ERP) latency and amplitude concerning different stages of word
recognition on participants with dyslexia indicating core deficits and the
use of compensatory mechanisms and/or inefficient reading. However,
these are most described in children. Limited information is provided
with respect to adults with this reading disability. c Therefore, we aimed
to investigate the pattern of ERPs in adults with Dyslexia in a lexical decision task. 13 undergraduate dyslexics and 13 controls (mean age 23,5)
matched by age, gender and educational level were enrolled in this experiment. The lexical decision task was composed by regular high frequency
words (Brazilian Portuguese), quasi-words derived from real words and
pseudowords not derived from real words. EEG were collected with the
128 electrodes Geodesic EEG System. Repeated measures ANOVAs were
used to analyze behavioral and eletrophysiological data. Dyslexic subjects
showed less accuracy and higher reaction times as compared to controls
in all lexical categories. Occipital and occipito-temporal P1 and N1 amplitudes were lower in dyslexic group, reflecting an early-altered processing
of the holistic characteristics of the stimuli. Moreover, parietal P600 amplitude was lower in dyslexics indicating deficits in reprocessing of linguistic
items. Additionally, we find a significant effect of hemisphere for the control group that was not observed in the dyslexic group. Our data corroborate previous findings and introduce new data about the abnormal ERP
pattern in dyslexic adults.

106

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

C70
DISTINCT PATTERNS OF BRAIN ACTIVITY CHARACTERIZE LEXICAL ACTIVATION AND COMPETITION IN SPEECH PRODUCTION
Vitoria Piai1,2, Ardi Roelofs1, Ole Jensen1, Jan-Mathijs Schoffelen1,3, Mathilde
Bonnefond1; 1Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, 2International Max Planck Research School for Language
Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands — A fundamental ability of speakers is to
quickly retrieve words from long-term memory. According to a prominent
theory, concepts activate multiple associated words, which enter into competition for selection. Previous electrophysiological studies have provided
evidence for the activation of multiple alternative words, but did not identify brain responses reflecting competition. We report a magnetoencephalography study examining the timing and neural substrates of lexical activation and competition. The degree of activation of competing words was
manipulated by presenting pictures (e.g., dog) simultaneously with distractor words. The distractors were semantically related to the picture name
(cat), unrelated (pin), or identical (dog). Semantic distractors are stronger
competitors to the picture name, because they receive additional activation from the picture, whereas unrelated distractors do not. Picture naming
times were longer with semantic than with unrelated and identical distractors. The patterns of phase-locked and non-phase-locked activity were distinct but temporally overlapping. Phase-locked activity in left middle temporal gyrus, peaking at 400 ms, was larger on unrelated than semantic and
identical trials, suggesting differential effort in processing the alternative
words activated by the picture-word stimuli. Non-phase-locked activity in
the 4-10 Hz range between 400-650 ms in left superior frontal gyrus was
larger on semantic than unrelated and identical trials, suggesting different degrees of effort in resolving the competition among the alternatives
words, as reflected in the naming times. These findings characterize distinct
patterns of brain activity associated with lexical activation and competition
respectively, and their temporal relation, supporting the theory that words
are selected by competition.

C71
THE NEUROANATOMY OF SENSORY-MOTOR INTEGRATION: A
LESION STUDY Tasha Poppa1, Corianne Rogalsky1, Kristin Raphel2, Steve
Anderson3, Hanna Damasio2, Tracy Love4, Gregory Hickok1; 1University of California, Irvine, 2University of Southern California, 3University of Iowa, 4San Diego
State University & University of California, San Diego — Numerous studies
have demonstrated a tight link between sensory and motor speech processes. While many recent imaging and transcranial stimulation studies
have focused on sensorimotor functions of frontal regions during speech
perception, research on speech production has identified a region in the let
temporal-parietal junction (area Spt) that serves as a sensorimotor interface
for vocal tract effectors. The present lesion study investigates the neuroanatomy of sensorimotor integration by measuring speech repetition and
perception abilities in 55 patients with left-hemisphere lesions. Subjects
completed a psycholinguistic battery to assess their phonological, lexical, and sentence-level speech comprehension and production abilities.
This battery included word and non-word repetition tasks. The non-word
repetition task should particularly tax sensorimotor integration processes
because these novel speech stimuli do not have lexical-semantic representations to assist in their production. Voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping
identified a large voxel cluster spanning gray and white matter in the left
temporal-parietal junction, including area Spt, where damage was significantly related to poor non-word repetition. The real-word repetition task
analysis identified a very similar dorsal network including area Spt, as
well as a small adjacent middle temporal gyrus region. Removing variance
associated with speech perception abilities (as measured by d-prime scores
on a syllable discrimination task) did not alter the overall lesion pattern
for either task. These preliminary results suggest that area Spt is critically
involved in both word and non-word repetition, and that its contribution
is not driven by perceptual processes alone. Supported by NIH-DC03681.

2013 Annual Meeting

C72
PREDICTIONS IN SPEECH COMPREHENSION: FMRI EVIDENCE
ON THE METER-SEMANTIC INTERFACE Kathrin Rothermich1, Sonja A.
Kotz2; 1McGill University, School of Communication Sciences and Disorders,
Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Research Group — When listening to speech we not
only form predictions about what is coming next, but also when something
is coming. For example, metric stress may be utilized to predict the next
salient speech event (i.e. the next stressed syllable) and in turn facilitate
speech comprehension. However, speech comprehension can also be facilitated by semantic context, that is, which content word is likely to appear
next. In the current fMRI experiment we investigated (1) the brain networks
that underlie metric and semantic predictions by means of prediction errors
(2) how semantic processing is influenced by a metrically regular or irregular sentence context and (3) if task demands influence both processes. The
results are three-fold: First, while metrically incongruent sentences errors
activated a bilateral fronto-striatal network semantically incongruent trials
led to activation of fronto-temporal areas. Second, metrically regular context facilitated speech comprehension in the left-fronto-temporal language
network. Third, attention directed to metric or semantic aspects in speech
activate engaged different subcomponents of the left inferior frontal gyrus
(IFG). The current results suggest that speech comprehension relies on different forms of prediction, and extends known speech comprehension networks to subcortical sensorimotor areas.

C73
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS ELICITED BY SINE-WAVE SPEECH
STIMULI BEFORE AND AFTER SPEECH RECOGNITION TRAINING
Kathryn Schelonka1, Chris Graulty1, Enriqueta Canseco-Gonzalez1, Michael
Pitts1; 1Reed College, Portland, OR — Previous studies have suggested that
linguistic information is processed differently from non-linguistic sounds
at early and late stages of auditory perception; however, the neural mechanisms responsible for discrimination between speech and non-speech
sounds have been notoriously difficult to identify due to the physical
acoustic differences between speech and non-speech stimuli. Sine-wave
speech (SWS) is a unique auditory phenomenon in which the same physical
stimulus can be perceived as noise or as speech depending on perceptual
expectations. In this study we compared event-related potentials (ERPs)
elicited by SWS stimuli in both non-speech and speech conditions. Participants completed a discrimination task between four SWS sounds before
and after they had been trained to hear the sounds as speech. We found
that the N1 auditory component was larger in the non-speech condition,
likely reflecting increased attentional demands for the more difficult task
of sound discrimination compared to speech discrimination. The speech
and non-speech elicited ERPs also diverged around 300 ms over the frontal
scalp, resulting in a lasting positive shift in the speech condition compared
to the non-speech condition. This latter difference may reflect upper-level
speech processes. Follow-up studies controlling for task difficulty and
word repetition will also be discussed.

C74
TOO WEIRD TO CATEGORIZE? ARE INFERENCES SUPPORTED
BY CATEGORY-RESISTANT VALENCES? Connie Shears1, Shaun Flax1,
Christine Brown1, Adriana Ariza1, Francesco Onorati1; 1Chapman University —
Consideration of the influence emotions have on many cognitive processes
has recently flooded studies of language comprehension (Gygax et al.,
2007). Language that conveys or connotes an emotional state of a fictional
character (emotional language) has been arbitrarily dichotomized as ‘positive’ or ‘negative’, which avoids the rich variance between pleasure, relief,
triumph or sadness, anger, fear (Sauter, 2010). Utilizing two methods of
measuring the formation of causal inferences (yes/no key press responses
to comprehension questions or target word recognitions), we examined
readers’ response times and accuracy to two-sentence stimulus pairs conveying emotions that resist positive or negative categorization. Pride, awkward, boredom, resentment, regret, and sympathy all significantly affected
readers’ formation of inferences. When readers’ answered comprehension
questions, they were faster and more accurate following pride sentences.
When readers’ responded to target words, they were slowest following
resentment sentences and least accurate following pride sentences. Both
methods of measuring inference processes suggest these valences support

Poster Session C
inferences. However, the data indicate that questions, rather than targets,
are a stronger measure of these category resistant or “weird” valences. A
post-test survey of reader’s ratings of these valences as positive or negative
indicated that readers who think pride is a positive emotion, made more
causal inferences than readers who think pride is negative.

C75
A SITUATION AT HAND: SIGN LANGUAGE LEARNING DYNAMICALLY RE-ORGANIZES SPOKEN LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION
AND THE BRAIN Emily Gaudet1, Bonnie Buis1, Jeremy Skipper1; 1Hamilton

College — We have proposed that the organization of language and the brain
is supported by multiple dynamically organizing networks. The weighting of these networks varies as a function of the “contextual” information
available to listeners and their prior experience with that information. By
this model, experience with a manual language will weight networks that
extract information from co-speech gestures more strongly. We tested this
hypothesis with students enrolled in an introductory American Sign Language (ASL) class who watched an actress telling a spoken English story
while undergoing 4-dimensional electroencephalography neuroimaging.
We predicted that ASL students would show greater sensorimotor network
activity when viewing gestures compared to spoken language-learning
matched controls. As predicted, ASL learners showed significantly greater
activity in parietal cortex during imagistic and less-imagistic gestures and
frontal “motor” and anterior temporal “language” regions during imagistic gestures. A direct contrast confirmed that the ASL group had increased
activity in these regions for imagistic gestures. Furthermore, parietal,
motor, and language regions formed a network for the ASL group with
motor preceding language region activity, followed by a reduction of activity in early auditory areas. In conclusion, results suggest that learning ASL
weights “co-speech gesture networks” more strongly and does so because
the information in more informative (imagistic) gestures can more readily
be used in a predictive manner to reduce auditory processing demands.
More generally, results are consistent with the hypothesis that the networks
underlying the organization of language and the brain are dynamically
organized, in part, as a function of prior experience.

C76
THE INFLUENCE OF LANGUAGE ON EXACT ADDITIONS IN BILINGUAL ADULTS Amandine Van Rinsveld1, Martin Brunner2, Karin Landerl3,
Christine Schiltz1, Sonja Ugen1; 1University of Luxembourg, 2Free University of
Berlin, 3University of Graz, Austria — To which degree is language involved
in arithmetic? We investigated this question in a German-French bilingual
setting. In Luxembourg, bilingualism is acquired through education: mathematics are taught in German in primary and in French in secondary school.
Interestingly, the decades and units within two-digit number names follow
the unit-decade order in German but the decade-unit order in French. Forty-eight bilingual adults performed simple and complex additions. Participants had to orally respond either in German or in French. Additions were
presented in different conditions: (1) visual Arabic presentation, (2) auditory presentation (in German or in French), and (3) as a dual task in which
visually presented additions were preceded by visually presented semantic judgments to indirectly activate a German or French language context.
The results showed that participants performed complex calculations better
in the dominant language (German), while there were no differences for
simple calculations. Thus, language proficiency seems to be crucial for the
computation of more complex calculations, whereas arithmetic facts can be
retrieved equally well in both languages. Further, adding language at the
input level (auditory presentation) enhanced performances for simple calculations, especially in the non-dominant language (French), while it was
exactly the opposite effect for complex calculations. Additionally, visual
additions were better performed within a surrounding linguistic context (3)
than alone (1) in their non-dominant language, suggesting the crucial role
of the linguistic context of an addition task in bilinguals. Taken together,
these results support the view of a strong language impact on calculations.

C77
THE INTERPLAY BETWEEN EMOTION AND ATTENTION ON THE
PROCESSING OF SYNTACTIC ANOMALIES: EVIDENCE FROM
P600 Constance Vissers1,2, Martine Verhees2, Dorothee Chwilla2; 1Centre
of Excellence for Neuropsychiatry, Vincent van Gogh Institute for Psychiatry,
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

107

Poster Session C

Venray, The Netherlands, 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Centre for Cognition, Radboud Univeristy Nijmegen, The Netherlands — Little
is known about the relationship between language and emotion. In an earlier event-related potential (ERP) experiment, an interaction was observed
between mood and the processing of syntactic anomalies for which three
explanations were offered: one in terms of syntactic processing, one in
terms of heuristic processing, and one in terms of more general factors
like attention. The present aim was to determine the locus of the effects of
mood on language by investigating whether attention contributes to the
mood-related modulation in P600 effect to syntactic anomalies. We compared the P600 effect to subject-verb agreement errors relative to correct
sentences while ERPs were recorded and mood was manipulated by presenting happy or sad film clips. Attention was directed using a task manipulation: participants either had to focus attention on syntactic features or on
physical features. The main findings were as follows. The mood induction
procedure was effective: participants were happier after watching happy
film clips and sadder after watching sad film clips compared to baseline
(ps<.01). For the P600 time window, interactions with mood, task and correctness were obtained, reflecting that mood and attention both modulated
P600. The mood manipulation led to a reduction in P600 for sad mood as
compared to happy mood, in the syntactic task (ps<.05). The task manipulation led to a reduction in P600 in the physical task as compared to the syntactic task, in happy mood (ps<.04). These data show that attention contributes to the mood-related modulation in P600 effect to syntactic anomalies.

C78
IDIOM COMPREHENSION DURING SENTENCE PROCESSING IN
CHILDREN WITH AUTISM Matthew Walenski1,2, Ashlee Heldreth1, Stephanie Hubbell1, Connor McCabe2, Tracy Love1,2; 1San Diego State University,
University of California San Diego — The language of children with autism
is characterized by, among other things, the excessively literal interpretation of idioms (e.g., responding “No, it’s raining water” to “It’s raining
cats and dogs”).Such abnormal usage is generally ascribed to deficits of
pragmatic language and inference making, though other accounts instead
posit that poor idiom comprehension reflects structural language deficits.
In the current study, we used cross-modal lexical priming to investigate
the real time auditory comprehension of idioms in sentences by children
with autism, as compared against two control groups: typically-developing
(TD) children and children with specific language impairment (SLI). Children listened to sentences containing idioms like “hit the sack” (e.g., “The
toddler in a dinosaur shirt hit the sack * at eight o’clock after a long day
of playing outside with his best friend.”), and responded to visual targets
presented immediately at the offset of the idiom (*). We tested for priming
of the literal and the figurative meanings of the idiom. Results indicate that
the TD and SLI groups primed the figurative but not literal meaning, consistent with prior findings from typical adults. The children with autism
showed a different pattern, instead priming only for the literal meaning.
The results are consistent with prior findings of abnormal idiom comprehension in autism, and suggest that the difficulty with idioms in autism is
rooted in early automatic language processes, and moreover that it reflects
a different dysfunction than found in SLI (which does not appear to affect
idiom comprehension at this stage of processing).
2

C79
THE EFFECTS OF SCHEMATIC SUPPORT AND UNITIZATION ON
THE ASSOCIATIVE DEFICIT IN OLDER ADULTS Fahad Ahmad1, Myra
Fernandes2, William Hockley3; 1Wilfrid Laurier University, 2University of Waterloo, 3Wilfrid Laurier University — Cognitive aging is associated with a decline
in episodic memory, but stability in semantic memory. According to the
Associative Deficit hypothesis proposed by Naveh-Benjamin(2000), there
is an age-related decline in episodic memory because older adults cannot
bind together unrelated information at encoding into a coherent whole
needed for recognition of item pairs. Here we examined the effect of schematic support on reducing the associative deficit in older adults. During
encoding younger and older adults studied compound (e.g., store keeper)
and non-compound word pairs (e.g., needle birth), the former of which
provided greater schematic support. Participants were instructed to combine items in the word pair into a sentence for better performance on subsequent recognition of word pairs (associative test). We found older adults’
memory accuracy, and discrimination, for intact compound word pairs was

108

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
higher than for non-compound word pairs. Schematic support provided by
the compound nature of words can ease unitization of word pairs, and contribute to a significant reduction in the associative deficit in older adults.
Our results are in line with Craik’s (1986) environmental support theory:
schematic support provided at encoding is beneficial in reducing the associative deficit in older adults, likely making the task less resource-demanding.

C80
SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES IN ADULT AND CHILD
RESPONSES TO IRRADIATION AND IMPLICATIONS FOR NEURAL
RECOVERY Carol Armstrong1,2, Robert Lustig1,2, Jane Minturn1,2, Michael
Fisher1,2, Zelig Tochner2, Christine Hill-Kayser1,2, Peter Phillips1,2; 1Children’s
Hospital of Philadelphia, 2University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine — Introduction and Purpose: There are phasic effects on brain function
following therapeutic irradiation (XRT) that demonstrate cognitive injury,
but also recovery of function. Selective long-term memory processes are
cognitive biomarkers for delayed effects of irradiation on cognition. After
a period of decline after XRT, there is a temporal period of recovery of
long-term memory processes. Comparison of this technique for measuring irradiation effects on cognition, and the nonlinear change over time in
adults versus children, will probe neural plasticity. Methods: Results from
41 irradiated and 29 nonirradiated adults with primary brain tumors were
submitted to a mixed effects model (time, group, age, surgical status, medications, practice). Results were compared to the model for 35 children with
primary brain tumors and XRT. Data from both groups were collected preXRT and three times post-XRT to two years. Six tests of associative and
configural memory and other cognitive tests were investigated in adults to
identify cognitive processes specific to XRT (independent of tumor locus).
The XRT-specific tests were then examined in children. Results: Findings
were decline 2m after full dose, and recovery by one year of memory
dependent on semantic cortex and hippocampal memory system only in
XRT-treated adults; there was double dissociation from visual memory.
Children demonstrated the same patterns in memory, except decline continued for one year, and recovered by two years. Conclusions: The delay
in recovery of long-term memory processes in children implies attenuated
neural recovery; potential clinical causes such as ablation of neurogenesis
and other pathophysiological mechanisms are discussed.

C81
SLEEP-DEPENDENT MEMORY CONSOLIDATION IN OLDER
ADULTS – PRELIMINARY RESULTS Kathryn Atherton1, Christopher
Butler1, Anna C Nobre1; 1University of Oxford — There is now a large body
of evidence demonstrating that sleep plays a role in memory consolidation. The overwhelming majority of these studies have used young adults
as participants and there is comparatively little research on sleep-dependent memory consolidation in older adults. Here we present a new dataset showing that sleep is beneficial for memories of arbitrary associations
between pairs of word stimuli even in older adults (mean age 62±1.51).
Memory was tested twelve hours after the training session, following a
night of sleep or a day of wake. Interfering pairs of words were learnt ten
minutes before the memory test. This interference learning has been shown
in previous studies with young adults to ‘unmask’ the benefit of sleep for
memory. Each participant took part in both conditions and the order was
counterbalanced. Retention was significantly better in the sleep condition
than the wake condition. Learning was not significantly different in the two
conditions, arguing against a circadian interpretation of the data. Once analysed, polysomnographic features recorded during the sleep condition will
be correlated with overnight memory retention. However, while the same
participants demonstrated complex motor sequence learning on a serial
reaction time task, there was no evidence that this skill was preferentially
consolidated during sleep.

C82
FUNCTIONAL COMPENSATION IN RESPONSE TO INCREASING TASK DIFFICULTY: COMPARING SEMANTIC AND EPISODIC
MEMORY TASKS IN YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS. Elsa Baena1,
Lee Ryan1; 1University of Arizona — Neuroimaging studies have shown
that older adults who perform similarly to young adults on memory tests
activate bilateral frontal regions, compared to younger adults who show

2013 Annual Meeting
unilateral activations. This increase has been described as functional compensation. Whether or not functional compensation is specific to older
adults is unknown. The present fMRI study compared patterns of brain
activation of 24 young (18-24) and 24 older (62-83) healthy adults while
performing two memory tasks –episodic and semantic–as task difficulty
increased. Difficulty was manipulated with word frequency. In the semantic task, participants judged whether pairs of words were either synonyms
or antonyms. In the episodic task that followed, participants made yes/
no recognition judgments for the word pairs previously presented. Behavioral results showed a double dissociation -older adults were adversely
affected in the episodic but not the semantic task, while young adults were
affected adversely only in the semantic task. fMRI activations showed
linear increases in bilateral frontal and parietal regions as a function of task
difficulty in the older adults, for both tasks, regardless of their behavioral
performance. Young adults showed bilateral increases only as difficulty
increased in the semantic task. ROI analyses on left middle frontal gyrus,
bilateral medial and inferior frontal gyrus, yielded significant activations
between groups. The results suggest that both younger and older adults
may demonstrate functional compensatory processes when faced with
increasing task difficulty. This suggests that younger adults show a compensation response that is task-network related, while older adults show a
fronto-parietal compensation that is task-independent

C83
APOE Ε4 GENOTYPE PREDICTS MEMORY FOR EVERYDAY ACTIVITIES Heather Bailey1, Jesse Sargent2, Shaney Flores1, Petra Nowotny1, Alison
Goate1, Jeffrey Zacks1; 1Washington University St. Louis, 2Francis Marion University — The apolipoprotein E (ApoE) ε4 allele is associated with neuropathological buildup of amyloid in the brain, and with lower performance
on some laboratory measures of memory in some populations. In two studies, we tested whether ApoE genotype affects memory for everyday events.
In Study 1, participants aged 20-79 years old (n = 188) watched movies of
actors completing daily activities and completed memory tests related to
the activity in the movies. In Study 2, cognitively healthy and demented
older adults (n = 97) watched and remembered similar movies, and also
underwent structural MRI scanning. All participants provided saliva samples for genetic analysis. In both samples we found that ApoE ε4 carriers
demonstrated worse everyday memory performance than did ε4 non-carriers; however, this effect only held in older adults (ages 50-79 in Study 1 and
the entire sample for Study 2). ApoE ε4 carriers had smaller MTL volumes,
and MTL volume mediated the relationship between ApoE genotype and
everyday memory performance. Thus, these easily administered everyday
memory measures may be a useful clinical tool in identifying ε4 carriers
who may be at risk for MTL atrophy and further memory decline that is a
common characteristic of the earliest stages of Alzheimer’s disease.

C84
AGE-RELATED LATERALITY AND SUB-SYSTEM DIFFERENCES IN
THE INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF THE DEFAULT
MODE NETWORK Amy Belﬁ1,3,4, Michelle Voss2,4, Merry Mani2, Chelsea
Wong5,6, Gillian Cooke5, Matthew Sutterer1,3,4, Rachel Clark4, Daniel Tranel1,4,
Edward McAuley7, Arthur Kramer5; 1University of Iowa, Department of Neurology, 2University of Iowa, Department of Psychology, 3University of Iowa,
Department of Neurosurgery, 4University of Iowa, Department of Neuroscience,
5
University of Illinois, Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, 6University of Illinois, Department of Neuroscience, 7University of Illinois,
Department of Kinesiology — Functional integration of the default mode
degrades with aging. However, whether and how such changes relate to
cognitive and behavioral functioning in older adults is not well understood.
Recent evidence suggests that the DMN is comprised of two functionally
distinct subsystems: a dorsal-medial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC) subsystem involved in self-oriented cognition and a medial temporal lobe (MTL)
subsystem involved in memory and scene construction. Both subsystems
interact with the posterior cingulate and the medial prefrontal regions that
form the DMN core. The present study investigated age-related differences
in intrinsic functional connectivity of these two subsystems. Participants
(n = 60) were between the ages of 19-83 (mean = 46.3). Following previous
work (Andrews-Hanna et al., 2010), a seed-based functional connectivity
approached was used that corrected for small-scale motion. Functional connectivity within the right, but not left, core DMN regions negatively cor-

Poster Session C
related with age (r = -.26, p = .05). Additionally, there was an effect of aging
on within, but not between, subsystem connectivity, suggesting no loss of
specialization of the two DMN subsystems. Further, functional correlations
between regions in the right MTL subsystem negatively correlated with age
(r = -.29, p = .02), but this was not seen in the left MTL or either left or right
DMPFC subsystem. Previous research has suggested that age-related cognitive decline might preferentially affect the right hemisphere (e.g., Dolcos
et al., 2002). Our results are consistent with this within the DMN and further demonstrate MTL specificity for age-related DMN changes.

C85
DIFFERENCES IN FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY PATTERNS IN
THE LATERAL PARIETAL CORTEX DURING A RESTING-STATE
SCAN Amy Frithsen1, Michael Miller1, Nicole Marinsek1; 1University of Califor-

nia Santa Barbara — There has been much debate in the field as to what
functional role the left lateral parietal cortex may have during successful
memory retrieval. Recent research has suggested that within this area,
different sub-regions may be responsible for different functions. In addition to the dorsal/ventral dissociation, an anterior/posterior distinction
within the ventral regions has recently been proposed. This heterogeneity
of the lateral parietal cortex may explain why some researchers have found
ostensibly conflicting results when discussing possible functional roles of
the region. In this study, we used a resting state functional connectivity
analysis to investigate whether different sub-regions within the lateral parietal cortex displayed different connectivity patterns. Specifically, we were
interested in comparing anterior and posterior regions of the left inferior
parietal lobule. Using an anterior seed located in the angular gyrus and
a posterior seed located within the supramarginal gyrus we computed
ROI and seed-to-voxel functional connectivity maps throughout the entire
brain. Results revealed a strong positive correlation between the posterior
seed region and regions commonly described as part of the default mode
network (most notably the posterior cingulate cortex). Interestingly, the
anterior seed region showed a slightly negative correlation with these same
default regions. Although some caution must be taken when inferring functionality from resting state analyses, our results seem to suggest that different sub-regions within the lateral parietal cortex may be playing different
roles during memory retrieval. This project was supported by the Institute
for Collaborative Biotechnologies through grant W911NF-09-0001 from the
U.S. Army Research Office.

C86
CROSS-FREQUENCY DYNAMICS IN HUMAN PARIETAL CORTEX
DURING RECOGNITION MEMORY DECISIONS Alexander Gonzalez1,
J. Benjamin Hutchinson2, Melina R. Uncapher1, Brett L. Foster1, Vinitha Rangarajan1, Josef Parvizi1, Anthony D. Wagner1; 1Stanford University, 2Princeton University — Posterior parietal cortical (PPC) correlates of recognition memory
have been reported in numerous scalp-EEG and fMRI studies. ERPs have
revealed a parietal ‘old/new effect’, wherein greater positivity is observed
at left parietal electrodes 500-800ms after stimulus onset when subjects
correctly recognize old items (Hits) vs. correctly reject new items (CRs).
In fMRI studies, multiple memory-related functional patterns are observed
across lateral PPC, including greater BOLD activity in (a) the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) during Hits vs. CRs, and (b) angular gyrus (AG) during
Hits associated with recollection of event features. In the present experiment, we characterized memory-related electrophysiological responses
in human PPC by directly recording electrocorticography (ECoG) while
four patients (with left coverage), undergoing pre-surgical mapping for
epilepsy, performed a recognition memory task with words. Theta and
high gamma amplitude and phase were derived from electrodes on IPS,
AG and the superior parietal lobule (SPL). Electrodes from which we could
classify Hits vs CRs using high gamma and theta power were selected for
cross-frequency coupling analyses. Event-locked theta phase–high gamma
amplitude coupling differed between Hits and CRs as early as 375 ms, with
greater phase-locking values (within electrode) for Hits in SPL electrodes.
Notably PLV in IPS and SPL electrodes peaked around 550ms (Hits > CRs),
while in AG the peak was later in the trial at 700ms. These findings shed
new light on the temporal dynamics of PPC subregion activity during
memory-guided decisions.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

109

Poster Session C

C87
STAGING THE FUTURE: CONTRIBUTIONS OF EXECUTIVE DYSFUNCTION TO LOW SPECIFICITY OF FUTURE THINKING IN
DEPRESSION Sylvia Hach1, Lynette J Tippett1, Joseph Smith1, Tessa BirdRitchie1, Donna Rose Addis1; 1The University of Auckland, New Zealand — A
range of psychiatric conditions including depression are associated with
a decrease in specificity of autobiographical memory (i.e., overgeneral
memory). That is, when relating events from their past, patients with a
history of depression more frequently recall generic events compared to
people without a history of depression. Moreover, decreases in specificity of autobiographical memory correlate with similar changes in autobiographical future thinking. The CaRFAX model proposes that reduced
specificity of memory results from a combination of mnemonic interlock,
rumination, functional avoidance and executive dysfunction. We tested the
contributions of the CaRFAX model components, and subcomponents of
executive function (working memory, inhibition, set-shifting and strategy
use), to decreased specificity of future events in participants with a history of dysphoria or depression. Three main findings emerged. First, event
descriptions generated by dysphoric/depressed participants were less specific than those of matched controls. Second, while measures of avoidance
and rumination as well as neuropsychological indices of working memory,
inhibition and set-shifting failed to show a relationship with event specificity, an index of strategic retrieval strongly correlated with specificity. Preliminary regression analyses show that the measure of strategic retrieval
but not the severity of depressive symptoms predicts the proportion of specific events in dysphoric/depressed participants. These results confirm the
reduction of specificity in autobiographical future thinking in participants
with a history of depression, and provide a first indication that the ability to
effectively employ retrieval strategies plays a special role in combining the
mnemonic elements necessary for high specificity in imagining or “staging” one’s future.

C88
AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF THE NEURAL BASIS OF INVOLUNTARY MEMORY: HOW DO THEY DIFFER FROM ESTABLISHED
VOLUNTARY MEMORY NETWORKS? Shana Hall1, Amanda Miles2, Simon
Davis3, Dorthe Berntsen2, Roberto Cabeza1, David Rubin1; 1Duke University,
2
Aarhus University, 3University of Cambridge — Involuntary memories are
memories that come to mind spontaneously. They often arise faster after a
cue than voluntary memories. The neural basis for involuntary memories,
and how they differ from their voluntary counterparts, is poorly understood. One view of the difference between voluntary and involuntary
memories is that involuntary memories can be attributed to a lack of effort
during retrieval. Therefore, we predict that voluntary retrieval will evoke
activity in frontoparietal regions associated with retrieval effort and involuntary memories will not. Participants heard sounds, some of which were
paired with pictures during encoding. We had two groups: one in which
participants were told to try to remember the pictures had been paired with
the sounds, and the other group was not. They reported their incidence of
involuntary memories in a post-scan session. Consistent with our hypothesis, a group of ventral occipitotemporal regions, including ventral parietal
cortex and parahippocampal gyrus, were more active for retrieved pictures
than unpaired sounds in both groups. Furthermore, time-course analysis
revealed a distinct temporal dissociation between early differences between
paired and unpaired stimuli in medial temporal regions (across both voluntary and involuntary conditions), and later differences between voluntary and involuntary conditions in frontoparietal regions (across paired
and unpaired conditions). These results clarify the distinct role of dorsal
frontoparietal and ventral occipitotemporal regions in predicting retrieval
effort and retrieval information, respectively, and suggest that while there
are neural differences in retrieval effort, involuntary memories share neural
components with established voluntary memory systems.

C89
EYE-MOVEMENT-BASED RELATIONAL MEMORY EFFECTS PRECEDE EXPLICIT DEADLINE-BASED RECOGNITION RESPONSES.
Deborah Hannula1, Jeremy LeVeque1; 1University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee —
Past work has shown that eye movement behavior is sensitive to memory
for learned item-context relationships (e.g., scene-face pairings). These eye-

110

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
movement-based memory effects are evident soon after display onset, precede explicit recognition responses, have been documented across a variety
of instructional manipulations, and depend critically on the integrity of the
hippocampus. However, previous work has not addressed questions about
whether the time-course of these effects persists even when a response deadline is imposed, or whether these effects differ as a function of memory confidence. To address these questions, we conducted an experiment in which
participants were asked to commit several scene-face pairs to memory.
During a corresponding recognition test, participants were presented with
a scene cue, followed by three studied faces, one of which was the studied associate of that scene. Eye movements were recorded and participants
were instructed to make deadline-based recognition responses, indicating
thereafter how confident they were in the accuracy of their choice. As in
past work, disproportionate viewing of correctly identified associates was
evident within 500-750ms of 3-face display onset. This effect was evident
irrespective of confidence, though the difference was most robust for associates endorsed with high confidence. Furthermore, eye-movement-based
memory effects preceded explicit responses, even when the response deadline was met, and when estimates of time required to make button press
responses were taken into account. Results suggest that these effects precede and may contribute to explicit identification of studied relationships
and will be discussed in the context of current models of memory.

C90
SUCCESS AND PRECISION: AN IMPORTANT DISTINCTION IN
RECOLLECTION. Iain M. Harlow1, Andrew P. Yonelinas1; 1University of Cal-

ifornia, Davis — Episodic recollection is a crucial component of cognition,
linking the present self with past experience. Recollection is a thresholded
process, supporting conscious retrieval of detailed memories when successfully engaged, but it is not an infallible window into the past. Impairments
in recollection, such as those associated with aging, might result from either
less frequent or less precise recollection. We build on previous work, using
response errors on a cued recall task to separately measure the successful
engagement and precision of recollection. Participants studied word-location pairs, and at test were required to recall the location for a given word
as accurately as possible. Additionally, participants made two concurrent
but distinct confidence ratings on each trial, judging 1) the probability that
they recollected the correct location, and 2) the precision of the location
information recalled. A distinct pattern emerges: On any given trial, participants either recollected the target location with considerable (but variable)
precision, or they retrieved no location information at all. Importantly,
participants could dissociate recollection engagement from the quality of
recollected information: Probability confidence reliably predicted whether
locations were recollected, while precision confidence instead reflected the
precision of the locations retrieved. The results demonstrate both that the
precision of a retrieved memory is separable from the probability that it is
successfully recollected, and furthermore that participants can judge the
precision of their memory on a trial-by-trial basis. Future work should distinguish between the engagement and quality of recollection, and carefully
designed confidence ratings can provide useful insights into both properties.

C91
CONTRIBUTIONS OF SLEEP-DEPENDENT MEMORY CONSOLIDATION TO REALITY MONITORING Chris A. Hawkins1, Lauren C. Rendon1,
Carmen E. Westerberg1; 1Texas State University — Reality-monitoring errors
occur when imagined events are mistakenly remembered as perceptually
experienced events, and likely arise when rich perceptual details accompany memories of imagined events. Memory consolidation processes active
during sleep are hypothesized to strengthen connections between various
aspects of a memory, serving to stabilize memories for long-term storage.
Thus, sleep may reduce reality-monitoring errors, as connections between
a memory and its source (perceived or imagined) become more thoroughly
bound together. We tested this possibility by asking participants to generate mental images of words viewed one at a time. For half of the words, a
photographic depiction of the word was also shown immediately after the
word. Next, one group of participants took a nap monitored with polysomnography, whereas another group remained awake. After 90 min, all
participants took a reality-monitoring test. For each auditorily-presented
test word, they indicated whether a picture of the word was previously
perceived. Participants who napped made fewer reality-monitoring errors

2013 Annual Meeting
than those who did not. Furthermore, for participants who napped, time
spent in stage-2 sleep positively correlated with reality-monitoring success,
whereas as slow-wave power at frontal sites (.5-4.5 Hz) negatively correlated with reality-monitoring success. Collectively, these results indicate
that sleep reduces reality-monitoring errors, and that different aspects of
sleep may contribute to memory consolidation in different yet complementary ways. Stage-2 sleep may facilitate the binding of source information
to a memory, whereas slow-wave activity may strengthen other aspects of
memory representations that in typical circumstances are advantageous for
long-term retention.

C92
HOW CONSISTENT ARE HIPPOCAMPAL ACTIVATIONS FOR SCENE
AND OBJECT STIMULI ACROSS INDIVIDUALS? Carl Hodgetts1, Jonathan Shine2, Mark Postans2, Andrew Lawrence1, Hilary Watson3, Paul Downing4,
Kim Graham1; 1Wales Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, School of Psychology,
Cardiff University, 2Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre, School
of Psychology, Cardiff University, 3Department of Psychology (Scarborough),
University of Toronto, 4Wales Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, School of Psychology, Bangor University — Recent studies suggest that regions within the
medial temporal lobe (MTL) are involved in representing specific visual
categories, with the hippocampus (HC) containing scene representations
necessary for perception and memory (Graham et al., 2010). Unlike the
case of category-specific regions in extrastriate cortex (Peelen & Downing,
2005), no study has yet looked at the consistency of category-specific activations in the hippocampus across individuals. To address this, we analysed
fMRI data obtained at 3T from 53 participants who had performed a oneback matching task while viewing blocks of objects, scenes and scrambled
objects. To extract individual-level activations, and to ensure consistency
across MTL and extrastriate analyses, separate probabilistic masks of the
HC and parahippocampal gyrus (PHG) were transformed into subjects’
native space. We found that 79% of subjects had significant (P < 0.05) clusters within HC for the contrast scenes versus scrambled objects. The contrast objects versus scrambled objects revealed HC clusters in only 11% of
individuals. As expected, 92% of participants had clusters in PHG for the
scene versus scrambled objects contrast, and only 8% for the objects versus
scrambled objects contrast. Probabilistic overlap techniques indicated that
the location of individuals’ scene clusters were not limited to a particular
area of the HC. These results imply a relatively high degree of consistency
in eliciting HC activations for scenes at the individual level, and add to the
existing literature on the role of the HC in scene memory by demonstrating
this using a working memory task.

C93
EMOTIONAL MODULATION OF VISUAL CORTEX DURING
MEMORY MISATTRIBUTIONS Christoph Hofstetter1,2, Aline Pichon1,2,
Patrik Vuilleumier1,2; 1University Medical Center, University of Geneva, Switzerland, 2Swiss Center for Affective Sciences, University of Geneva, Switzerland
— Previous studies revealed that sensory cortices show memory reactivation reflecting the content of the memory. Further, such reactivation was
found to be stronger when memory retrieval was cued with an emotional
stimulus compared to a neutral one. However, these studies focused on
correct recall and hence it remains unknown whether sensory cortices may
also reactivate during memory errors. Here we compared brain activations
during different memory responses in 17 healthy participants who encoded
faces paired with either negative or neutral scenes. Participants were tested
the next day with a scene-cued recall test while undergoing function magnetic resonance imaging. Preliminary results from a face-responsive region
of interest in left fusiform cortex show stronger activation for Hit compared
to Miss responses. Activation for Misattribution (MA) errors (recall of an
incorrect face) was intermediate between Hit and Miss. In addition, emotional cues modulated these activation patterns. For MA cued by a negative
scene the activation in left fusiform cortex was comparable to Hits, while
MA in neutral context was similar to Miss responses. No modulation by
emotion was found for Hit or Miss responses. The results suggest that emotion can enhance activation for memory recall in sensory cortices only when
the cue is recognized but source memory is absent.

Poster Session C

C94
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN YOUNG
ADULTS AND SENIORS REVEAL THAT SUCCESSFUL SOURCE
MEMORY ENCODING REQUIRES ACTIVITY FROM FRONTAL
REGIONS AND INCREASED THETA POWER Michael Hoppstädter1,2,
Christian Bäuchl1,2, Carsten Diener1,2, Herta Flor1,2, Patric Meyer1,2; 1Central
Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University,
2
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Heidelberg/Mannheim —
Item memory tasks are generally solvable by relying on familiarity based
processes, whereas subjects usually have to engage in recollective processing to perform accurately in associative or source memory tasks. Successful recollection has been linked to a hippocampal-prefrontal network
and communication within this network was shown to occur at theta frequency. Already during encoding of associations, processing differences
between subsequently recognized and forgotten contextual information
emerge. These subsequent memory effects and corresponding changes in
theta power occur on a fast timescale and can be investigated using electroencephalography (EEG). To examine encoding processes of subsequent
successful versus failed recollection, we tested young controls and seniors
in a spatial four-choice source memory paradigm. During retrieval, older
people performed significantly worse than younger adults in associating an
object with its correct source whereas item memory performance was comparable. Electrophysiologically, younger adults exhibited a pronounced
positive component predicting later recollection at frontal electrodes at
encoding. Preceding this subsequent memory effect, higher theta power
across frontal and posterior sites differentiated between later correct and
incorrect source judgments. Contrary to this, seniors showed a prominent
posterior subsequent memory effect. Whereas the prefrontal positivity in
younger adults might reflect efficient item-context binding, the posterior
effect in older subjects possibly reflects their reliance on item memory while
item-context binding failed. At least in the young subjects, this successful
associative encoding might be subserved by foregoing large-scale synchrony in the theta band.

C95
AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF UNITIZATION OF ABSTRACT VISUAL
STIMULI: THE ROLE OF CONCEPTUAL INFORMATION Ryan Hubbard1,2, Brian Gonsalves1,2; 1University of Illinois, 2Beckman Institute — According to dual-process theories of memory, recognition memory is dependent
upon two distinct processes: familiarity (a sense of oldness for a particular
item) and recollection (retrieval of contextual information). Generally, performance on associative memory tasks, in which participants must remember pairs of items, is thought to be dependent on recollection; however, it
has been proposed that items that are encoded as a single representation,
or “unitized”, can be supported by familiarity without recollection. Yet it is
unclear whether these unitization effects reflect the perceptual binding of
items into a single unit, or a more conceptual / semantic process, as even
studies with visual stimuli use clearly nameable objects. The current study
attempts to address this question by using pairs of novel, abstract visual
stimuli. Participants were told to either mentally combine the pairs into
a single unit, or to declare which item of the pair they prefer (resulting in
separate encoding). They were then given a memory test containing intact,
rearranged, and new pairs. ERPs were recorded during test to assess any
electrophysiological differences between conditions. Preliminary evidence
shows canonical old/new effects in the brain; namely, greater amplitudes
for correctly identified old items than correctly identified new items in frontal, central, and parietal electrodes. Further analyses will explore the necessity of conceptual information for the process of unitization.

C96
DYNAMIC NEURAL CONNECTIVITY OF AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL
MEMORY RETRIEVAL PROCESSES Cory Inman1, G. Andrew James2,
Carolina Campanella1, Thanujeni Pathman3, Robyn Fivush1, Patricia Bauer1,
Stephan Hamann1; 1Emory University, 2University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, 3University of California, Davis — Recollection of autobiographical
memories (AM) is a complex process that recruits multiple cognitive operations, including access and elaboration. Previous studies have focused on
differences in connectivity between memory access and elaboration within
coordinated multi-region networks and on changes in regional brain actiCognitive Neuroscience Society

111

Poster Session C
vation, rather than interregional interactions involving specific regions
such as the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. Determining the functional
role of changes in interregional connectivity across AM retrieval is critical for understanding mechanisms of AM retrieval and testing theoretical
accounts of dynamic AM retrieval processes. Healthy adults (n=16) generated AMs from neutral cue words in a pre-scan session and were later cued
to retrieve the AMs for 16 seconds while being scanned with fMRI. We used
a moving window connectivity analysis to examine dynamic changes in
connectivity within and across regions involved in AM retrieval processes.
Connectivity between neighboring regions dynamically varied as a function of the hypothesized process (early-access or late-elaboration). Bilateral
connectivity between the amygdala and hippocampus increased and sustained its strength from the onset through the end of memory retrieval,
likely reflecting construction and mnemonic binding processes throughout
memory retrieval. Connectivity between the retrosplenial cortex, precuneus, and inferior parietal lobule increased later in retrieval, potentially
related to elaboration processes. As predicted, connectivity between the
hippocampus and prefrontal cortex increased during early access processes
whereas fronto-parietal connectivity increased during later elaboration
processes. These changes in interregional connectivity are consistent with
models of AM retrieval that predict dynamic coordination of brain regions
supporting retrieval, self-reference, episodic construction, and elaboration.

C97
REMEMBER-KNOW PROCEDURE AND EPISODIC FEELING
OF-KNOWING: ROLE OF RECOLLECTION AND FAMILIARITY IN
YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS Michel Isingrini1, Helene Stoehr1, Mathilde
Sacher1, Laurence Taconnat1, Badiaa Bouazzaoui1; 1University François Rabelais of Tours, CeRCA CNRS 7295, France — The present study examined
the hypothesis that feeling of knowing (FOK) in episodic memory may
be influenced by the quality of the learning experience related to the cue
and the unrecalled target pair. To this end, a first experiment, conducted
on younger adults, was designed to test for the first time the contribution
of that quality, as indexed by recollection and familiarity. The remember-know procedure (RK) was combined with the episodic FOK procedure.
This new procedure enabled to distinguish two type of FOK predictions,
associated to the recollection of the context information (R-FOK) or associated to a feeling of familiarity (K-FOK). Results indicate that the capacity
to relate the cue item, presented at study with the unrecalled target item,
to the learning episode, on the basis of either a recollection process or a
feeling of familiarity, leads to above-chance level FOK judgment and accuracy. Nevertheless, results also show that the influence of recollection on
FOK judgment and accuracy is significantly greater than that of familiarity.
This result supports the recollection hypothesis of episodic FOK, assuming
that the conscious recollection of what was experienced at the learning time
should lead to better FOK predictions. In a second experiment comparing
young and older adults, results shown that, contrary to the young adults,
older adults do not benefit from this recollection effect. This suggests a lack
in older adults in the quality of contextual details retrieved pertaining to
the unrecalled target that are required to make accurate FOK judgments.

C98
REMEMBERING OTHER PEOPLE’S POLITICAL VIEWS: AN FMRI
STUDY OF EMOTIONAL SOURCE MEMORY ENCODING Vijeth
Iyengar1, Erik Wing1, David Chou1, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke University — It is
well known that strongly agreeing or disagreeing with another person’s
political views can be quite arousing, and that arousal tends to enhance
subsequent memory. Yet, the effects of arousal on memory for political views and the underlying neural mechanisms for these memories are
largely unknown. To investigate these issues, we conducted an fMRI study
where we scanned participants in an alternating encoding-retrieval task.
During encoding, participants viewed unfamiliar faces paired with political statements (e.g., Believes the U.S. should prohibit the death penalty)
and rated the statements on a scale ranging from strongly disagree to
strongly agree. During retrieval, participants viewed previously encoded
faces paired with the original statements (intact trials) or with statements
previously paired with other faces (recombined trials) and responded with
an intact or recombined judgment, while also rating their confidence for
this decision. Retrieval responses were used to back-sort encoding trials
as subsequently remembered or forgotten. Behavioral findings showed a

112

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
U-shaped function with better source memory for statements with which
participants strongly agreed/disagreed in contrast to those eliciting more
moderate agree/disagree ratings. Subsequent memory effects (remembered>forgotten) were found in regions within the medial temporal lobes
including the parahippocampal gyrus and amygdala. Further, the effects
of subjective agreement/disagreement on encoding success were mediated
primarily by the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). This finding is consistent
with evidence linking mPFC with self-reference processing and emotional
evaluation. To our knowledge, this is the first evidence on the neural mechanisms of source memory for other people’s political views.

C99
UNITIZATION OF MULTIPLE CONTEXT DETAILS IN EPISODIC
MEMORY Hsiao-Wei Tu1, Rachel A. Diana1; 1Virginia Tech — In recognition
memory, recollection is defined as retrieval of the context associated with
an event, whereas familiarity is defined as retrieval based on item strength
alone. Both behavioral and neuroimaging investigations (Diana et al., 2008;
Ford et al., 2010; Haskins et al., 2008) have shown that conventional recollection-based tasks, in which context details are manipulated for source
memory assessment at test, can also rely on familiarity when context information is “unitized” with the relevant item information at encoding. Unlike
natural episodic memories that include many context details, previous
studies of unitization have manipulated only a single context detail. To further understand how unitization operates on item and context information,
we manipulated the encoding process used for two context details (font
size and background color) of each item and tested the contribution of recollection and familiarity to source recognition of each detail. Receiver operating characteristic curves showed that when only information about font
size was unitized, familiarity contributed more to the recognition of font
size than that of background color. However, when background color alone
was unitized, recognition of background color was not significantly based
on familiarity. When both font size and background color were unitized
for a single item, source recognition relied on familiarity more heavily than
would be expected if unitization of the individual details had an additive
effect. These findings suggest that source information may not be processed
independently in episodic memory.

C100
INTRINSIC DEFAULT MODE NETWORK CONNECTIVITY PREDICTS
SPONTANEOUS VERBAL DESCRIPTIONS OF AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORIES DURING SOCIAL PROCESSING Xiao-Fei Yang1, Julia
Bossmann2, Birte Schiffhauer3, Matthew Jordan1, Mary Helen Immordino-Yang1;
University of Southern California, 2University of Düsseldorf, 3University of Bielefeld — Neural systems activated in a coordinated way during rest, known as
the default mode network (DMN), also support autobiographical memory
(AM) retrieval and social processing/mentalizing. However, little is known
about how individual variability in reliance on personal memories during
social processing relates to individual differences in DMN functioning
during rest (intrinsic functional connectivity). Here we examined 18 participants’ spontaneous descriptions of autobiographical memories during a
two-hour, private, open-ended interview in which they reacted to a series
of true stories about real people’s social situations and responded to the
prompt, “how does this person’s story make you feel?” We classified these
descriptions as either containing factual information (“semantic” AMs) or
more elaborate descriptions of emotionally meaningful events (“episodic”
AMs). We also collected resting state fMRI scans from the participants
and related individual differences in frequency of described AMs to participants’ intrinsic functional connectivity within regions of the DMN. We
found that producing more descriptions of either memory type correlated
with stronger intrinsic connectivity in the parahippocampal and middle
temporal gyri. Additionally, episodic AM descriptions correlated with
connectivity in the bilateral hippocampi and medial prefrontal cortex, and
semantic memory descriptions correlated with connectivity in right inferior lateral parietal cortex. These findings suggest that in individuals who
naturally invoke more memories during social processing, brain regions
involved in memory retrieval and self/social processing are more strongly
coupled to the DMN during rest.
1

2013 Annual Meeting

C101
WHICH MEMORIES ENDURE? PREFERENTIAL CONSOLIDATION
THROUGH SLEEP REPLAY Delphine Oudiette1, James W Antony1, Jessica C
Creery1, Ken A Paller; 1Northwestern University — Only a very small number
of our daily experiences can be remembered later. Whereas most information storage in the brain fades over time, memories that are rehearsed tend
to be retained. Sleep may benefit memory because of a type of rehearsal
that involves the reactivation of newly learned material during sleep. Given
that information varies in value, this covert memory reactivation during
sleep may be responsible for the fundamental selectivity of memory storage. We propose that sleep preferentially enables the reactivation of information expected to be of high value in the future. Thirty young subjects
learned 72 object-location associations while hearing characteristic object
sounds. Their learning was influenced by potential rewards; a number on
each object indicated reward value during a future memory test. After a
90-min nap, recall accuracy declined to a greater extent for low-value than
for high-value objects (Experiment I). When reactivation of low-value items
was externally triggered by their associated sounds, change in memory
across the nap did not differ as a function of value (Experiment II). The evolution of stored information during a period that included sleep depended
systematically on the value accorded to the information. Although recall
accuracy benefitted less for information expected to be of low value, this
information could be rescued from forgetting using externally triggered
sleep reactivation. We thus conclude that sleep reactivation is a major factor
determining the selectivity of memory consolidation and, ultimately, the
fate of our memories as a function of future value.

C102
INDIVIDUAL VARIATION IN FORNIX MICROSTRUCTURE CORRELATES WITH SCENE, BUT NOT FACE, VISUAL DISCRIMINATION
ACCURACY Mark Postans1,2, Carl Hodgetts1, Matthew Mundy4, Andrew Lawrence1,3, Derek Jones2,3, Kim Graham1,3; 1Wales Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, School of Psychology, Cardiff University, UK, 2Cardiff University Brain
Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), School of Psychology, Cardiff University,
UK, 3Neuroscience and Mental Health Research Institute, Cardiff University, UK,
4
School of Psychology and Psychiatry, Monash University — Transection of
the non-human primate fornix has been shown to affect learning of configurations of spatial features (Buckley et al., 2004). Similarly, damage to the
fornix in humans results in memory impairment, although whether this
white matter pathway is selectively involved in scene memory (compared
to other visual categories) is currently unclear (Rudebeck & Lee, 2009). We
asked whether diffusion-MRI indices of fornix microstructure, in particular
fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD), would correlate with
the ability to make accurate discrimination decisions for scenes, but not
faces. Diffusion-weighted MR images were obtained from 21 healthy participants (age range: 18 – 22) who had completed a task in which they made
rapid same/different discriminations to two categories of highly visually
similar stimuli: (a) virtual reality scene pairs and (b) face pairs. Mean FA
and MD measures were then extracted from the entire fornix of each participant, which had been reconstructed using a deterministic white-matter tractography protocol. Both fornix FA and MD were significantly correlated (positively and negatively respectively) with overall discrimination
accuracy for the scene, but not face, pairs. This finding is consistent with
Buckley et al., and highlights a potential role for the fornix in discriminating between highly similar complex scenes.

C103
NEURAL CORRELATES OF PERCEPTUAL SEQUENCE LEARNING
AND PERCEPTUAL RECOGNITION MEMORY Clive R. Rosenthal1,
Stephen L. Hicks1, Christopher Kennard1, David Soto2; 1Univerity of Oxford,
2
Imperial College London — The learning of new information is determined
by how we attend. It is unknown, however, how activity in attention networks support visuospatial sequence learning, when attentional selection
occurs in the absence of motor-based representations. Here, we used blood
oxygenation level–dependent neuroimaging to examine changes in activity associated with perceptual sequence learning, and the relevance of
these changes for later perceptual recognition memory. Participants were
instructed to fixate and follow a higher-order sequence of visuospatial
stimuli, and thereby restrict their responses on the perceptual sequence

Poster Session C
learning and old/new recognition memory tasks to covert reorienting of
visuospatial attention. Eye position was continuously monitored inside the
MRI scanner to ensure that the participants maintained central fixation.
Learning was associated with activity within the frontotemporal pole, the
cingulate gyrus and premotor areas, and areas that implement early visual
processing (primary visual cortex). Interactions between frontal and visual
cortical areas supported perceptual sequence learning. Changes in activity
within these regions indicate important differences in attentional selection
between perceptual and motor sequence learning; these differences are
likely to reflect mechanisms that are related to predictive coding, visuomotor integration, and response selection. Perceptual recognition memory
was associated with activity in the precuneus, the supramarginal gyrus,
and post- and post-central gyrus, and thus did not readily overlap with
the regions identified in numerous prior studies of recognition memory.
Hence, the generality of these prior studies warrants close scrutiny because
the neural bases of recognition memory appear to be sensitive to the nature
of the retrieved information.

C104
BRAIN-DERIVED NEUROTROPHIC FACTOR VAL66MET POLYMORPHISM INFLUENCES THE MAGNITUDE OF HUMAN LONG-TERM
POTENTIATION WHICH PREDICTS MEMORY PERFORMANCE.
Chris Thompson1,7, Nicolas McNair2, Ushtana Antia3,7, Kieran Kennedy4,7,
Andrew Shelling5,7, Bruce Russell3,7, Jeff Hamm1,7, Karen Waldie1,7, Timothy
Teyler6, Ian Kirk1,7; 1Research Centre for Cognitive Neuroscience, School of Psychology, University of Auckland, New Zealand., 2Centre for Research in Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, School of Psychology, Plymouth University, United
Kingdom., 3School of Pharmacy, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand., 4School of Medicine, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand., 5Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology,
Faculty of medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New
Zealand., 6Medical Science, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID, USA., 7Centre for
Brain Research, University of Auckland, New Zealand. — Long term potentiation (LTP) is a long lasting enhancement of synaptic communication,
and is the principal candidate for the mechanism of memory. LTP has been
studied extensively at the cellular and molecular level in animals. Recently,
models been developed that allow in vivo induction and measurement
of LTP in humans. LTP involves a complex cascade of events, with brain
derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) identified as an important modulator
of synaptic plasticity in humans. A single nucleotide polymorphism in the
BDNF gene resulting in a valine-to-methionine substitution at codon 66
(val66met) has been shown to affect activity-dependent secretion of BDNF
and is associated with lower performance in memory tasks. The present
study tested whether the BDNF val66met polymorphism was associated
with induction of LTP-like changes in visual evoked potentials. We also
tested whether LTP-like changes and BDNF val66met polymorphism was
predictive of memory. Individuals containing met variants of the polymorphism had significantly lower LTP, as indexed by amplitude changes in
the late phase of the N1 component of visual-evoked potentials. Also, Val/
Met and Met/Met individuals performed significantly worse than Val/Val
individuals on measurements of visual memory as indexed by the Wechsler
Memory Scale. The degree of LTP and performance on visual memory tasks
were also significantly correlated. These results add further weight to the
suggestion that the LTP-like phenomena that is induced and measured by
visual stimuli is LTP, and provides further evidence for the suggestion that
polymorphisms for BDNF act on human memory processes via effects on
LTP.

C105
TEST-POTENTIATED ENCODING OF PAIRED ASSOCIATES AS
REVEALED BY FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
Peter Vestergren1,2, Lars Nyberg1,2; 1Umeå University, 2Umeå Center for Functional Brain Imaging — The goal of this study was to test the hypothesis
that previous testing potentiates the effectiveness of subsequent encoding
of the tested material. We predicted higher functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) contrast signal in
the medial temporal lobe and left prefrontal cortex for items that had been
previously tested compared to those that had been studied only. The experiment had a within-subjects design where participants studied 120 Swahili-Swedish word pairs five times during day 1. Day 2 started with one study
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

113

Poster Session C
session including all items, followed by a cued-recall task with no feedback
for one random half and another study session for the other half of the
items. All items were then restudied in a random order during an event-related fMRI-session, followed by cued-recall and multiple-choice recognition tests outside the scanner. Item-event categories were based upon recall
performance prior to and after fMRI. A linear contrast revealed that BOLD
activity was higher in left hippocampus and left inferior frontal cortex for
previously tested compared to studied-only items. Furthermore, the results
suggested that the activations were of equal magnitude for previously
recalled and non-recalled items. Similar effects were observed in bilateral
insular and bilateral inferior/mid occipital cortex. As hypothesized, the
findings suggest that previous testing potentiates subsequent encoding,
for both previously recalled and non-recalled items. These findings have
implications for research on the beneficial effects of testing and educational
practice alike.

C106
THE ROLE OF SLEEP AND REINFORCEMENT IN MEMORY INTEGRATION Denise Werchan1, Rebecca Gomez1; 1The University of Arizona —

Research has shown that sleep and reinforcement enhance memory consolidation. However, it is not well known how reinforcement and sleep impact
more complex forms of memory, such as inferential memory. Inferential
memory requires the integration of memory to make inferences and is often
tested using transitive inference or associative inference paradigms. Previous work using transitive inference suggests that reinforcement is critical
for the formation of inferences, and that sleep further enhances this effect
(Werchan & Gomez, 2012). However, the source of these effects are unclear,
as it is debated whether the formation of transitive inferences are a result
of memory integration (Eichenbaum et al., 1999; Zeithamova et al., 2012)
or due to differences in implicit reinforcement values of stimuli (Van Elzakker et al., 2003; Frank et al., 2003). Here we investigated whether reinforcement and sleep enhance inferences by facilitating memory integration
using an associative inference paradigm, which requires memory integration to make inferences and does not have alternative interpretations. Participants learned via reinforcement or observation then were tested after
sleep vs. wake. We found that: 1) reinforcement is required for the formation of inferences; 2) sleep enhances inferences only when reinforcement
occurs during learning. Only subjects who were reinforced during learning and who slept showed memory integration. These results suggest that
reinforcement and sleep enhance the formation of inferences by facilitating
memory integration, and provide intriguing possibilities for a potential role
of dopamine release during reinforcement learning in the transformation of
memories during sleep.

C107
ACTIVITY IN LEFT TEMPORAL-PARIETAL REGIONS CHARACTERIZES LONG-TERM RETENTION AFTER REPEATED TESTING Carola
Wiklund-Hörnqvist1,2, Linnea Karlsson1,2, Johan Eriksson1,2, Micael Andersson1,2,
Bert Jonsson1, Lars Nyberg1,2; 1Umeå University, Sweden, 2Umeå center for
Functional Brain Imaging (UFBI) — It is well established that retrieval practice
enhances long-term retention of the material being learned, a phenomenon
known as the “testing effect”. However, some material will inevitably be
forgotten even though retrieval was successfully practiced. The objective of
this study was to investigate the neurocognitive differences between words
remembered and those forgotten one week after successful retrieval practice, defined as the beneficial testing effect. Participants (n=14) underwent
event-related fMRI while being tested on 60 Swahili-Swedish word-pairs
three consecutive times. One week after the initial fMRI session, all participants returned for a follow-up fMRI session. Participants were again tested
on the word-pairs, but only once. Based on words successfully retrieved
three times day one, we examined the activity differences at the follow-up
session by contrasting words that were remembered at the 1-week follow-up test against words subsequently forgotten at the 1-week follow-up
test. Subjects remembered significantly more words than they forgot. Compared with forgotten words, remembered words showed higher activity
in several regions, including the left superior/inferior parietal cortex, left
mid/inferior temporal cortex and in a confined cluster within the left frontal region. These findings suggest that the beneficial testing effect is characterized by the engagement of regions involved in controlled retrieval of
long-term semantic knowledge, thus reflecting executive semantic process-

114

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
ing. The results generate novel information regarding the neurocognitive
mechanisms of the beneficial testing effect and thus contribute to bridge
the current gap between cognitive neuroscience and educational research.

C108
FALSE RECOGNITION OF OBJECTS FOLLOWING MTL DAMAGE
Lok-Kin Yeung1, Rachel N. Newsome1, Gillian Rowe1,2, Rosemary A. Cowell3,
Jennifer D. Ryan1,4, Morgan D. Barense1,4; 1Univesity of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
2
Baycrest, Toronto, ON, 3University of California at San Diego, San Diego CA,
4
Rotman Research Institute, Toronto ON — A recent rat study suggests that
recognition memory impairments following medial temporal lobe (MTL)
damage are caused by the misidentification of novel stimuli as familiar,
but this impairments can be eliminated by reducing perceptual interference (McTighe et al., 2010). This finding challenges a fundamental assumption underlying most accounts of amnesia – that memory impairments
arise because previously studied information is either lost rapidly, or
made inaccessible – and lends support to an alternative account in which
object-level representations in MTL are critical for recognition memory
because they shield from perceptual interference (Cowell et al., 2006 ). In
this study, we investigated whether these findings extend to humans with
focal MTL lesions. With eye movements recorded as an indirect measure of
perceived novelty (observers make more fixations to novel items), participants incidentally viewed familiar (previously studied) and novel (previously unstudied) objects from the same semantic category (e.g., lamps). The
novel objects were either perceptually similar (high-interference) or perceptually dissimilar (low-interference) to the familiar objects. An amnesic
individual with a unilateral temporal lobe resection showed normal novelty detection for low-interference novel objects, but false recognition for
high-interference novel objects. This supports the counterintuitive notion
that recognition memory impairments following MTL damage are driven
by the misidentification of novel items as familiar, rather than by the misidentification of familiar items as novel. This adds support to a ‘representational-hierarchical’ account of MTL amnesia, in which memory loss is
explained in terms of increased susceptibility to interference due to impoverished object-level representations in the MTL.

C109
PROCEDURAL LEARNING OF AUDITORY CATEGORIES: NEW
EVIDENCE FROM AN IMPLICIT MEASURE Yaﬁt Gabay1, Frederic K.
Dick2, Lori L. Holt1; 1Carnegie Mellon University, 2Birkbeck College, University
of London — Most studies of auditory category learning have used overt
categorization tasks with explicit feedback, but real-world category learning is typically more incidental. The current study investigated incidental auditory category learning in the context of a simple visual detection
task in which reaction time is measured. On each trial, a sound stimulus
preceded the appearance of the visual target. Unknown to participants,
these sounds were drawn from four distinct sound categories that were
consistently paired with one of four possible locations of the visual target.
Reaction times increased in trial blocks within which this consistent stimulus-response mapping was violated by random sound-location pairings,
but did not increase when novel exemplars drawn from the sound category
consistent with the learned mapping were presented. Both results suggest
participants learned the sound categories in the course of the simple visual
detection task by virtue of the sound-location correspondence. This conclusion is further supported by the fact that participants consistently categorized familiar and novel sound category exemplars in a later explicit
categorization task. These same sound categories have been shown to be
difficult to learn through passive exposure alone (Emberson et al., in press).
Thus, the results highlight the importance of consistent mapping relations
for acquiring knowledge about categorical properties of the input in incidental tasks.

C110
ROLE OF DORSAL SPEECH STREAM ACTIVATION TIMING IN
DETERMINING SPEECH REPRODUCTION ACCURACY. Alexander
Herman1, John Houde2, Sophia Vinogradov2,3, Srikantan Nagarajan1; 1Dept. of
Biomedical Imaging, Univ. of California, San Francisco, 2Dept. of Otolaryngology, Univ. of California, San Francisco, 3Dept. of Psychiatry, Univ. of California,
San Francisco, 4San Francisco VA Hospital — Despite significant research and
important clinical correlates, direct neural evidence for a phonological loop

2013 Annual Meeting
linking speech perception, short-term memory and production, remains
elusive. To investigate these processes, we acquired whole-head magnetoencephalographic (MEG) recordings from human subjects performing a
variable-length syllable sequence reproduction task. The MEG sensor data
was source-localized using a time-frequency spatially adaptive filter, and
we examined the time-courses of cortical oscillatory power and the correlations of oscillatory power with behavior, between onset of the audio
stimulus and the overt speech response. We found dissociations between
time-courses of behaviorally relevant activations in a network of regions
falling largely within the dorsal speech stream. In particular, verbal working memory load modulated high Υ power (HΥP) in both Sylvian-Parietal-Temporal (Spt) and Broca’s Areas. The time-courses of the correlations
between HΥP and subject performance clearly alternated between these
two regions throughout the task. Our results provide the first evidence of a
reverberating input-output buffer system in the dorsal stream underlying
speech sensorimotor integration, consistent with recent phonological loop,
competitive queuing and speech-motor control models. These findings also
shed new light on potential sources of speech dysfunction in aphasia and
neuropsychiatric disorders, identifying anatomically and behaviorally dissociable activation time-windows critical for successful speech reproduction.

C111
PERTURBED AUDITORY FEEDBACK AND RESTING STATE FUNCTIONAL NETWORKS IN TONE-DEAFNESS Janani Iyer1, Psyche Loui2,
Gus Halwani2, Mary Kathryn Abel2, Gottfried Schlaug2; 1UC Berkeley, 2Harvard
Medical School and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center — Although music
is perceived and produced ubiquitously from a young age, a subset of the
population cannot perceive and produce fine-grained differences in musical pitch, suggesting the inability to perceive feedback from one’s own
voice. Tone-deafness (TD), also known as congenital amusia, is a disorder
of pitch perception and production. The affected brain network includes
superior temporal gyrus (STG), middle temporal gyrus (MTG), and inferior
frontal (IFG) regions, connected by white matter in the arcuate fasciculus.
Here we ask whether TD subjects are affected in their ability to hear feedback from their own voice, and what task-related and intrinsic functional
neural substrates might be underlying the auditory feedback system and its
possible disruption. Thirty-one subjects (12 TD) performed a pitch-matching task under perturbed (pitch-shifted) and unperturbed (non-shifted)
auditory feedback conditions during sparse-temporal sampling fMRI. All
subjects showed significant activity in bilateral STG, MTG, and middle
and inferior posterior frontal gyri (MFG, IFG) during pitch production. In
the perturbed vs. unperturbed pitch production contrast, non-TD subjects
showed additional activity in left anterior STG, left precentral gyrus (PCG),
and left pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA). To identify possible
differences in baseline patterns of functional connectivity, 25 subjects (7
TD) underwent resting state functional connectivity MRI. Rs-fcMRI data
showed decreased functional connectivity in TD subjects between anterior
and posterior IFG (BA44 and BA45), and between posterior IFG and MTG.
Results support a distributed network of temporal and frontal regions that
is disrupted in tone-deaf individuals both intrinsically and while monitoring auditory feedback.

C112
RECRUITMENT OF RIGHT HEMISPHERIC ANALOGS FOR SPEECH
PERCEPTION IN MUSICIANS AS REVEALED BY EEG. McNeel Jantzen1, Bradley Howe1, Rebecca Scheurich1, KJ Jantzen1; 1Western Washington
University — Musical training may enhance the processing of acoustic information for speech sounds as musicians have demonstrated a more accurate
temporal and tonal representation of auditory stimuli than their non-musician counterparts (Kraus & Chandrasekaran, 2010; Parbery-Clark, Skoe,
& Kraus, 2009; Zendel & Alain, 2008; Musacchia, Sams, Skoe, & Kraus,
2007). Previous research has found that musicians are more sensitive to
acoustic features such as onset timing and frequency (Levitin, 2006). In the
current study, we sought to provide neural evidence that musicians process speech and music in a similar way. We hypothesized that for musicians, right hemisphere areas traditionally associated with music are also
engaged for the processing of speech sounds. In contrast we predicted that
in non-musicians processing of speech sounds would be localized to left
hemisphere language areas. Twenty-four subjects, twelve musicians and
twelve non-musicians, were presented with a voiced unaspirated stop con-

Poster Session C
sonant in one ear and a voiceless unaspirated stop consonant in the other
ear such that all combinations were presented. Through four dichotic listening tasks, subjects either indicated aural location for a specified speech
sound or identified a specific speech sound from a directed aural location.
Musical training effects and organization of acoustic features were reflected
in the EEG as observed by location and amplitude of the ERP’s. Results
show early neural response to the acoustic features was both faster and
greater in musicians compared to non-musicians. In addition, musicians
showed greater acoustic related processing in the right hemisphere.

C113
THE INTERACTION BETWEEN ATTENTION AND ACTION EXPECTATION. AN ERP STUDY. Alexander Jones1,2, Gethin Hughes3, Florian Waszak1,2;
1

Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 2CNRS (Laboratoire Psychologie de la Perception, UMR 8158), Paris, France, 3University
of Essex, United Kingdom — Performing a voluntary action involves the
anticipation of the intended effect of that action. Action-expected stimuli
have been shown to be attenuated compared to action-unexpected stimuli. Moreover, attention typically increases sensory processing for attended
compared to unattended stimuli. In other words, expectancy and attention
may produce opposite effects on stimulus processing. Here we use a novel
paradigm to investigate attention and action-expectancy orthogonally. In
an acquisition phase, high and low tones were associated with left and right
key presses. In the following test phase, high and low tones were presented
at random and participants attended to only one ear whilst ignoring tones
presented to the unattended ear. In the test phase a tone could therefore
be presented at the attended or unattended ear, as well as being expected
or unexpected based on prior action-effect learning. We demonstrate early
and late effects of auditory endogenous attention. Moreover, we showed
independent action-expectation effects at frontal areas with a larger P3a for
unexpected compared to expected stimuli. Interestingly we demonstrated
an intermediate interaction, showing action-expectancy effects for tones
which were unattended, whilst no effect for attended tones. This interaction pattern suggests attention and expectancy are not opposing processes
but can both operate to modulate prediction. As such, the present study
provides valuable new insight in to the relationship between attention and
expectation in the sensory processing of action effects.

C114
INVESTIGATING THE NEURAL BASIS OF VIDEO-GAME-BASED
CATEGORY LEARNING Sung-Joo Lim1,3, Julie A. Fiez2,3, Mark E. Wheeler2,3,
Lori L. Holt1,3; 1Carnegie Mellon University, 2University of Pittsburgh, 3Center
for the Neural Basis of Cognition — A video-game-based training paradigm
(Wade & Holt, 2005) has been shown to promote effective learning of both
novel non-speech and non-native speech categories (Lim & Holt, 2011). This
training is a significant departure from traditional explicit response-feedback paradigms in its implicit nature. The task does not require directed
attention to sounds and feedback is linked to game performance, not categorization per se. Moreover, the training is more naturalistic in that listeners
experience rich correlations among multimodal cues and the functional use
of sounds guides successful game actions. Using fMRI, we investigated the
neural basis of non-speech sound category learning in this paradigm. All
participants experienced a set of unidimensional sound categories differentiable without training and a set of complex high-dimensional sounds that
required training to categorize. One group played the videogame with the
complex sounds drawn from a linearly separable category space, whereas
the other heard similar sounds without an orderly structure. The different
organization of the sound category structure evoked differential engagement of a left middle temporal (LMT) region identified through a speech vs.
non-speech localizer contrast. During game play, this LMT region showed
greater activation for subjects who experienced an orderly vs. random category structure. Moreover, an orderly category space led to exhibit differential LMT responses to within- vs. between-category sounds under a habituation protocol, whereas experience with unstructured sounds exhibited an
effect of acoustic complexity. We conclude that implicit forms of learning
can successfully reshape the perceptual responses in speech-related regions
to form non-speech category representations.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

115

Poster Session C

C115
NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF AUDITORY OBJECT BOUNDARIES REVEALED BY EEG Amanda R. McMullan1, Matthew S. Tata1; 1University
of Lethbridge — One of the most complex tasks that the brain undertakes
is scene analysis. This includes segregating objects from their background
and perceiving the boundaries between them. Responses to different types
of boundaries have been well studied in vision science. However, responses
to analogous boundaries in auditory science are relative less understood.
In vision, objects that differ from their background in terms of luminosity
are termed first-order and objects that differ in terms of isoluminant color
or texture are termed second-order. In audition, first-order boundaries are
defined by energy transients and second-order boundaries can be defined
by differences in motion, pitch, or timbre. For example, research on auditory boundaries has considered mistuned harmonics, dichotic pitch, and
iterated rippled noise. Our goal was to further characterize the ways in
which the auditory system represents differenent kinds of boundaries in
the auditory scene. We used a discontinuous motion stimulus to create the
percept of new auditory objects. Each trial consisted of six 1000ms sweeps
of sound that panned 180 degrees spanning the midline. First-order sweeps
were preceded by a 500ms silent gap, while second-order sweeps were
continuous. Event-related potentials (ERPs) evoked by these two different
types of boundaries show increased amplitude for first-order compared to
second-order boundaries.

C116
MUSICAL TRAINING IN TEENAGERS WITH CONGENITAL AMUSIA
Genevieve Mignault Goulet1, Benjamin Rich Zendel1, Nicolas Robitaille1, Isabelle
Peretz1; 1University of Montreal — Congenital amusia is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by difficulties in processing music and pitch, and
is related to abnormal electrical brain responses. The goal of this study was
to measure brain plasticity via electroencephalography (EEG) in amusic
teenagers after three months of weekly guitar lessons. To this aim, guitar
tones corresponding to the E4, B3, C4 and D4 notes were presented while
the subject watched a silent subtitled movie. As a marker of brain plasticity,
we measured the P2 component of the auditory evoked response before
and after training. Since guitar training involves tuning strings to E4 and
B3, we predicted a P2 enhancement for these two pitches after training.
Eight amusic and eight matched controls (12-15 years old) were identified
using the Montreal Battery of Evaluation of Amusia and a singing task.
Four of the amusic participants were impaired in melodic and pitch perception while the other four were unable to sing in tune. Since both types
of amusia are believed to result from poor pitch representation, a larger P2
to the trained pitches (E4 and B3) would suggests that enhanced frequency
tuning is possible in the amusic brain. Accordingly, parallel improvements
in melodic perception and singing performance should also be observed
over time. Preliminary findings support this tendency and ongoing analysis will allow us to draw further conclusions regarding brain plasticity in
congenital amusia.

C117
GOAL-BASED AUDITORY PREDICTIONS OF SELF-PRODUCED
SPEECH Caroline A. Niziolek1, Srikantan S. Nagarajan1, John F. Houde1; 1Uni-

versity of California, San Francisco — Efference copy is thought to reflect the
expected sensation of self-produced motor acts, such as the auditory feedback heard while speaking. If the feedback matches the efference copy prediction, sensory responses are suppressed, a phenomenon known as speaking-induced suppression (SIS). Does the auditory prediction reflect precise
sensory consequences, or a higher-level, goal-based target? Production variability enables us to test these alternatives in natural speech. Here, we used
magnetoencephalography (MEG) to measure how SIS varied over repeated
word productions in two different contexts. In Experiment 1, subjects
produced three different vowels; in Experiment 2, subjects were cued by
tonal prompts to produce a single vowel on three different pitches. SIS was
defined as the suppression of the auditory M100 response to spoken vowels
relative to an audio playback condition. We found that SIS was reduced in
the productions farthest from the median formants. In other words, natural
vowel productions at the edges of the distribution appear more error-like,
suggesting that not all output variation is built into the neural prediction.
Furthermore, this reduction in SIS depends on task context. When comparing productions based on distance from the median pitch, we found that

116

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
SIS varied only in Experiment 2, in which pitch was an explicit target. These
results demonstrate that SIS varies across normal, unperturbed utterances
based on the goodness of the match with a task-specific target. This is consistent with a forward model in which the auditory prediction is goal-based
and articulatory variation is introduced downstream.

C118
MOTOR SIMULATION UNDERPINS TEMPORAL COORDINATION
IN JOINT ACTION. Giacomo Novembre1, Luca F Ticini1, Simone Schütz-Bosbach1, Peter E Keller1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — The interpersonal coordination of movements in
everyday life relies on one’s ability to represent and integrate simultaneous
self- and other-related behavior. The present study combined on-line brain
stimulation methods with a music performance task in order to investigate
whether this function is underpinned by motor simulation, i.e. the brain’s
capacity to represent a perceived action in terms of the neural resources
required to execute it. Ten pianists performed the right-hand part of a
piano piece in synchrony with a recording of the left-hand part, which had
(Trained) or had not (Untrained) been practiced beforehand. This manipulation was intended to call upon specific motor simulation processes
associated with the perception of actions that, through training, exist in an
individual’s motor repertoire. Pianists were required to adapt their performance to occasional tempo changes in the left-hand part. In critical conditions, tempo changes were preceded by double-pulse Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (dTMS) delivered over the right primary motor cortex.
Accuracy of tempo adaptation following dTMS or control TMS (sham stimulation) was compared in the Trained and Untrained conditions. Results
showed that dTMS impaired tempo adaptation accuracy only when the
left-hand part had been trained, suggesting that motor simulation processes
mediated temporal coordination. The magnitude of this interference-effect
was stronger in participants who had relatively high ‘perspective-taking’
scores on a questionnaire assessing empathy. Motor simulation therefore
provides a functional resource for the temporal coordination of one’s own
(goal-directed) behavior with others, thus serving as a fundamental component of successful joint action.

C119
INTERVAL TIMING IN GBA AND PARKIN MUTATION-CARRYING,
AND IDIOPATHIC PARKINSON’S DISEASE PATIENTS Brian C. Rakitin1, Llency Rosado1, Roy N. Alcalay1, Helen Mejia-Santana1, Karen Marder1;
Columbia University — Interval timing abilities were assessed in 42 fully
medicated Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients in order to determine whether
genetic heterogeneity contributes to timing deficits in PD patients. Patients
were recruited from the Consortium of Risk for Early PD (CORE-PD)
Columbia University center, assessed with the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) and classified as having mutations either in the
parkin (“parkin+”, n=18, age=47.5±9.5, AAO=31.6±8.2, UPDRS=39.7±8.6)
or glucocerebrosidase (“GBA”, n=14, age=59.6±8.1, AAO=50.1±10.7,
UPDRS=37.5±14.2) genes, or neither (“idiopathic”, n=10, age=55.2±12.6,
AAO=45.4±10.8, UPDRS=35.9±12.2) using denaturing high performance
liquid chromatography and multiplex polymerase chain reaction. In the
single-interval production (SIP) timing task, participants reproduced three
previously demonstrated and practiced intervals (1.1, 2.2 and 3.3 seconds
duration) without feedback in a randomized block design. Analyses of
timing accuracy (mean produced interval – target) indicated a statistically
significant interaction between target interval duration and mutation type,
F(4, 62) = 3.92, p < 0.05, such that the parkin+ group overestimated the
longer target intervals to a greater extent than the shorter ones. This tendency was much smaller in the GBA, and absent in the idiopathic groups,
and persisted after covarying for age, AAO, UPDRS, levodopa and dopamine agonist drug dose, within groups. These results suggest that timing
deficits in PD may be gene-specific phenotypes. The parkin mutation variant, while associated with slower disease course is also associated with
more severe dopamine pathology, supporting previous assertions that the
PD timing deficit is dopaminergic in nature.
1

2013 Annual Meeting

C120
SENSITIVITY ATTENUATION: SOMETHING MORE THAN SENSORY
ATTENUATION. Cédric Roussel1,2, Gethin Hughes1,2, Florian Waszak1,2; 1Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 2CNRS (Laboratoire Psychologie de la Perception, UMR 8158), Paris, France — The visual
system is subject to sensory attenuation and this is thought to be related to
motor based sensory prediction (Cardoso-Leite, et al 2010). In this study we
develop a model to account for how this prediction might be implemented
in the brain. This model supposes that the voluntary action selection
involves the preactivation of learnt action-effects (Waszak, Cardodo-Leite,
Hughes, 2011). By modeling motor induced preactivation in sensory pathways we predict that sensory attenuation is due to a nonlinear increase of
the internal response. One novel prediction of this model is that it should
result in a change of discrimination sensitivity. We tested this hypothesis
by conducting a contrast discrimination task, in EEG, for visual stimuli that
were either congruent or incongruent with previously learnt action-effect
contingencies. Participants selected on each trial which of two buttons to
press. Each button press was followed, by the presentation of either an A or
an H, at one of two contrast levels. Participants were required to report the
perceived contrast. We observed a significantly (F(1,14) =11.294, p <=0.005)
reduced contrast sensitivity for trials where the stimulus was congruent
(M=1.15 ) with the learnt action-effect contingency, compared to when it
was incongruent (M=1.47). This result was supported by ERPs. We isolated
a visual N1 component affected by contrast (F(1,14)= 4.83 p=0.045) and by
congruency (F(1,14)=8.01 p= 0.01). Hence the prediction made by our preactivation model was confirmed and provides a new way to consider how
the brain predicts the sensory consequences of the action.

C121
STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF
METACOGNITIVE ABILITIES DURING A VISUO-MOTOR TASK Indrit
Sinanaj1, Yann Cojan2, Patrik Vuilleumier1; 1Laboratory of Neurology and Imaging of Cognition, Department of Fundamental Neurosciences, University of
Geneva, Switzerland, 2Laboratorio de Neurociencia Integrativa Buenos Aires,
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina — Compelling evidence suggests
that we have a limited conscious knowledge of the monitoring of our own
motor corrections. Research in the perceptual decision–making domain
has suggested that such monitoring processes might implicate specific
metacognitive abilities. However, the brain and behavioral correlates of
metacognition during motor action monitoring remain poorly known.
Here we investigated the neural mechanisms of metacognitive monitoring
on a motor task. We employed a visuo-proprioceptive conflict-inducing
paradigm, adapted from Fourneret and Jeannerod (1998), where participants were required to draw straight trajectories toward a visual target
by moving a joystick with their right hand, while these trajectories were
variably and unpredictably perturbed by online-adjusted near-threshold
deviations. Participants had then to judge whether they detected any perturbation and rated the confidence level of their judgment. Behaviorally,
we replicate findings in perceptual-domain research that suggests that
subjective confidence correlates with objective accuracy despite lack of
veridical feedback. Metacognitive sensitivity was calculated using signal
detection theory measures and showed that participants were optimal in
monitoring their motor correction. Functional MRI results during this task
showed differential activations in motor, cingulate, and striatal networks in
relation to correct detection of deviation during visuomotor performance.
Structural MRI analyses showed that metacognitive sensitivity correlated
with gray-matter volume of both the right fusiform gyrus and right insula,
suggesting that accurate metacognitive judgments rely on both sensory-visual and internal-agency representations.

C122
MOTOR FUNCTIONING AND MOTOR LEARNING IN CHILDREN
WITH LEARNING DISABILITIES Bouwien Smits-Engelsman1, Katrijn Van
Aken1; 1Department of Kinesiology, K.U. Leuven, Belgium — Children with
intellectual disabilities and/or learning disabilities (LD) have problems
in acquiring motor skills (Smits-Engelsman et al. 2012). This substantiates that motor performance and cognitive development are interrelated.
They are intertwined at both cognitive and neurological levels, for instance
through the brain structures and networks associated with the cognitive

Poster Session C
processes involved in attention, executive function, visuomotor skill,
timing and learning. However, motor control studies in the population
of children with LD are scares. This study investigated underlying motor
control weaknesses, thereby questioning if a short term training led to
changes in performance on a rhythmical visuo-manual tracking task, and
how children with LD (mean IQ 70) responded to augmented visual and
auditory feedback to improve performance. The children with LD showed
impaired visuo-manual tracking performance. However, both groups (LD
group n=47 and control group n=100) improved their performance when
feedback was available. Additionally it is examined whether there was an
improvement in performance through repetitions of the task (short term
changes). None of the groups improved their tracking performance after
84 trials, possibly due to task difficulty or too few repetitions. (We are currently expanding the number of sessions). The movements of children with
LD were less fluent compared to the controls. They were also less accurate
in their timing of the movements, as shown in the significantly larger absolute time errors compared to the controls (F= 54.05; p<0.0001). Children
with LD moved faster than controls and did not seem to be able to change
their movement speed for accuracy.

C123
ERROR-RELATED NEGATIVITY ELICITED BY A CORRECT
RESPONSE WITHIN AN ERRONEOUS MOVEMENT SEQUENCE.
Jose J. Torres1, Samantha N. Habhab1, Lauren M. Eckles1, Mohamed-Ali
Sareini1, William J. Gehring1; 1University of Michigan — The error-related negativity (ERN) is an event-related potential component that reflects posterior
medial frontal cortex activity related to errors during choice reaction time
tasks. Theories of the ERN have failed to identify the motor representation
involved in the computation underlying the ERN. This study tests whether
the ERN elicited by a movement sequence corresponds to an abstract representation of the sequence vs. a representation of individual movements.
17 subjects performed a modified Eriksen flanker task in which each of 3
target letters (H,S,B) was assigned to a specific right hand finger response
sequence (Index; Index-Middle; Index-Middle-Ring). We focused on trials
in which the index-middle (two-movement) sequence was required but
flanking letters signaled only the index-finger movement. The reaction time
interval between the two movements was longer when incongruent flanker
letters signaled a single movement than when the flankers were congruent:
subjects initially programmed only the single movement, but then initiated
the second movement upon continued processing of the stimulus. ERP data
showed an ERN time-locked to the (correct) first movement on trials where
the interval between the two movements was long (>90th percentile). ERPs
time locked to the second (delayed) movement failed to show an ERN.
Because the index finger response eliciting the ERN was itself correct, but
the movement sequence at that point was not, the response representation
underlying the ERN must be more abstract than that corresponding to a
single effector. We suggest that the representation underlying the ERN corresponds to the accuracy of the entire movement sequence.

C124
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC AND MODELING EVIDENCE FOR
LEARNING-DRIVEN ATTENTIONAL CAPTURE Cameron D. Hassall1,
Olave E. Krigolson1; 1Dalhousie University — In order to maximize utility,
we pay attention to stimuli that predict reward, thus overcoming a limited
cognitive processing capability. Recent evidence suggests that this is done
in both a top-down (goal-directed) and bottom-up (automatic) fashion. In
the present study, we investigated the role of low-level medial-frontal reinforcement learning systems in controlling and changing the allocation of
visual attention towards valuable stimuli. Participants received rewards
and punishments in a two-armed bandit gambling task while electroencephalographic (EEG) and behavioral data were recorded. Following learning, we observed an increase in the amplitude of the N1, a component of the
human event-related brain potential (ERP) associated with the allocation of
attention in visual space. Importantly, the magnitude of the N1 contralateral to higher-valued stimuli increased with learning, and correlated with
changes in the feedback error-related negativity, an ERP component linked
to the processing of rewards and punishments by a reinforcement learning
system within medial-frontal cortex. We propose a combined reinforcement learning and attention model to account for our EEG and behavioral
data. The model reproduces the magnitude of the fERN (thought to reflect
a reinforcement learning prediction error), the N1, and human behavioral
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

117

Poster Session C
performance. In particular, our model learns optimal responses in a twoarmed bandit gambling task, and shifts its attentional allocation to higher-valued stimuli, a result that mirrors our empirical data. Taken together,
our EEG and modeling data suggest one possible mechanism through
which attention shifts with learning.

C125
SHAME AND EXCULPATION: INTEGRATING MODELING AND NEUROIMAGING APPROACHES TO SOCIAL EMOTIONS Ming Hsu1, Daniel
Walsh1, Taisuke Imai2, Takeshi Murooka1, Masataka Watanabe3; 1University of
California, Berkeley, 2California Institute of Technology, 3University of Tokyo —
Imagine just winning the lottery. How much would you give to friends and
acquaintances? Would your choice be different if no one knew you had
just won? For many people, choices depend upon not only the material
outcomes involved, but also on the beliefs and expectations of other people.
Violation of these social expectations may result in negative emotions such
as shame. Here we study behavior and neural responses to such expectations in the context of a simple economic game—the stochastic dictator
game. In the game, a dictator chooses to allocate money between herself
and an anonymous recipient while the pot of money available varies across
rounds. Crucially, whereas the dictator always knows the pot size, the
recipient can find out only with some probability. Behaviorally, we found
that dictators gave more to the recipient when there was a greater likelihood of the recipient finding out the true pot size. In addition, subjects indicated a preference to hide the pot size from the recipient when it was large,
but to reveal when the pot size was small. Using a model-based approach,
we characterized subjects’ preferences as a weighted combination of material payoffs, payoff inequity, and the risk of being shamed. Functional neuroimaging showed that shame risk was negatively correlated with activity
in the medial prefrontal cortex, whereas the relief of shame was positively
correlated with activity in the striatum. Taken together, these results shed
light on the cognitive processes underlying higher-order emotions, as well
as their neural substrates.

C126
THE NEURAL MECHANISMS OF SEQUENTIAL DECISION-MAKING AS REVEALED BY ALPHA-BAND OSCILLATIONS Shen-Mou
Hsu1; 1National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan (R.O.C.) — Great progress
has been made in characterizing the neural mechanisms underlying decision-making on single percepts. By contrast, much less is known about how
decisions on current percepts are affected by preceding material. The current study recorded magnetoencephalographic signals while participants
performed a binary categorization task on a sequence of facial expressions.
The expressions were continua of morphs from fear to neutral. To probe
decision-related neural signatures, I contrasted neural activity of the trials
in which the ambiguous expressions were reported as fear with the trials in
which the same ambiguous expressions were reported as neutral. The analysis showed that both oscillatory alpha activation at the parieto-occipital
sites and beta activation at the left frontal sites reflected perceptual decisions. Nevertheless, only alpha-band oscillations were found to be closely
correlated with the sequential effects revealed in the behavioural results, in
which current ambiguous morphs would be more likely to be categorized
as fear if immediately preceded by nearby fearful morphs as compared to
if preceded by fearful prototypes. This study thus suggests that preceding
stimuli may act on oscillatory alpha activity of the current percepts and in
turn influence final categorical decisions, whereas oscillatory beta activity
may simply represent general decision-making processes.

C127
NEURAL CORRELATES OF THE DECOY EFFECT IN DECISIONS Jianping Hu1, Shuangju Zhen1, Yanzhen Zhang1,2, Wei Zhang1; 1Department of Psychology,South China Normal University, 2Shantou University Medical College —
Human choices are remarkably susceptible to the context in which options
are presented. The so called “decoy effect” represents a striking violation
of the proposition that human decisions are “context-invariant”, although
its underlying neural mechanisms is not well understood. To elucidate
its neural basis, we used a novel gambling task in conjunction with functional magnetic resonance imaging. Participants were more likely to choose
‘target’ options whose subjective values were boosted by corresponding
decoy options. In the stimulus presentation phase, our data revealed that

118

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
inferior parietal gyrus was more active when no decoy was presented than
when decoy option was shown, whereas the occipital gyrus was more activated by decoy option trials, suggesting that the parietal based deliberation
process is switched to the intuition process which may involve the occipital
gyrus, when decoy option is available. In the response phase, the left anterior insula was more active when decoy boosted targets rather than decoy
irrelevant competitors were chosen. Moreover, across individuals, activity
in anterior cingulate cortex predicted a reduced susceptibility to the decoy
effect, suggesting that resisting decoy effect requires extra cognitive control. Our findings highlight the power of decoy effect in laboratory settings
and document its neural mechanisms of decoy effect.

C128
IMPORTANCE OF NUMERIC INFORMATION PROCESSING FOR
THE VALUATION OF MONETARY REWARDS Frank Kanayet1, John
Opfer1, Wil Cunningham1,2, Per Sederberg1; 1The Ohio State University, 2University of Toronto — Processing monetary rewards has been linked to activity in
OFC, striatum, and IPS (Kable & Glimcher, 2009), though the roles of each
area are still not well understood. One possibility is that interpreting the
value of money requires two distinct cortical systems: one for processing
the subjective value of stimuli (OFC and striatum) and another for processing the meaning of numbers (IPS). To test this hypothesis, we manipulated
the numeric magnitude, currency and valence to construct a range of economic rewards (e.g., +$1, +100¢, -$1, -100¢) received by participants after
a simple decision. Consistent with our hypothesis, BOLD activity in IPS
was related to changes in numeric magnitude, independent of the objective
monetary value, whereas activity in OFC, insula and striatum were associated with objective monetary value, independent of numeric magnitude.
Finally, by using representation similarity analysis, we found that the information represented in IPS was more consistent with the expected patterns
associated with processing numeric magnitude, whereas activity in OFC
was more consistent with patterns of information expected for monetary
value. Together, these findings show the importance of considering the
cognitive properties of numeric information processing for understanding
how the brain processes monetary rewards.

C129
MOTOR COSTS MODULATE PRIMARY MOTOR CORTEX EXCITABILITY Aysha Keisler1, Samantha Frank1, Eric Wassermann1; 1National Insti-

tutes of Health — Evaluation of costs and rewards is critical for identifying
optimal behaviors. Recent research shows that dopaminergic cortico-striatal circuitry plays a significant role process. However, while much progress
has been made elucidating the subcortical components of this network, we
know little about the cortical component. Here, we examined how motor
costs affect cortical excitability using transcranial magnetic stimulation.
Participants completed a visual discrimination task. To manipulate motor
costs, participants were required to make either a low-effort or a high-effort
motor movement with the left hand when responding on the discrimination task. Accuracy feedback was given on some trials and not on others.
Stimulation was applied to the left primary motor cortex shortly either (a)
before the response or (b) after reward onset. Motor evoked potentials were
recorded from the right hand. We found that accuracy feedback plays a
critical role in the modulation of cortical excitability. When participants
received feedback on their performance, excitability increased with motor
costs; importantly, however, the same motor movements do not affect
excitability when they are not associated with the visual task. Interestingly,
effort did not affect excitability in the absence of feedback. These data suggest that feedback triggers a state of effort sensitivity in the motor cortex.

C130
YOU WILL LIKE IT AS MUCH AS IT HURTS : INTERPLAY OF STRIATUM AND DACC DURING CHOICE-MAKING Hye-young Kim1, Yeonsoon Shin1, Sanghoon Han1; 1Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea — Although
post-choice attitude change phenomenon is relatively well-known, few
studies identified the actual neural mechanism of dissonance-induced
attitude change, especially focusing on the act of choosing. In an fMRI
study, 15 participants were scanned while performing a multiple-alternatives-forced-choice task. Participants first rated attractiveness on various
art posters, and 4 different choice sets were configured based on each individual’s rating (3 large sets with 4 alternatives and 1 small set with 2 alter-

2013 Annual Meeting
natives). Each participant chose one item among multiple alternatives in
a set and reported perceived choice difficulty and re-rated attractiveness
of every presented alternative. Trial-by-trial dissonance-induced attitude
change score was defined as difference between the increased attractiveness for a chosen item and the decreased attractiveness for rejected items.
Participants reported greater choice difficulty and attitude change when
choosing from large sets compared to small sets. Greater choice difficulty
was strongly related with larger attitude change. We found that choice
difficulty and attitude change on each trial are reliably predicted by activity levels in dACC & insula, and dorsal striatum respectively during
choice-making. The dACC and striatum showed stronger functional coupling while making a choice from large sets, which showed greater choice
difficulty and attitude change. The same regions were also hired more
actively among subjects with larger general attitude change. These results
demonstrate that higher choice difficulty leads to greater dissonance-induced attitude change and it is derived by interplay of striatum, dACC,
and insula. This adaptive process occurs simultaneously at the moment of
choice, not as post-choice rationalization.

C131
NEURAL COMPUTATIONS OF LEARNING WITHIN A SOCIAL HIERARCHY GAME Brooks King-Casas1,2,3,4,5, Lusha Zhu1,2, Pearl H. Chiu1,2,3,4;
1

Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute, 2Salem VA Medical Center, 3Department of Psychology, Virginia Tech., 4Department of Psychiatry, Virginia Tech
Carilion School of Medicine, 5VT-WFU School of Biomedical Engineering and
Sciences — Many social species organize within social hierarchies, including our own. Within such hierarches, preferences for dominance or submission can serve to motivate mobility within the hierarchy, or maintain
the extant hierarchy. In modern human society, however, social dominance
and aggression are often associated with violence and destructive behavior,
and are characteristic of significant psychopathologies including anti-social personality disorder and borderline personality disorder. Despite
extensive work in non-human species, relatively little is known about the
behavioral and especially neural mechanisms underlying social dominance
in humans. Here, we focused on the expression of dominance within an
iterated resource contest to examine the neural mechanisms underlying
how individuals learn and navigate within a social hierarchy, by combining
functional neuroimaging with computational modeling. We formulated a
Bayesian learning model, proposing that the dynamics of the limited social
hierarchy are shaped by the interplay between a player’s preference for
social dominance and ability to anticipate opponent’s future behavior. We
examined neural correlates of multiple prediction errors derived from our
computational model at a trial-by-trial basis. Our results suggest (1) social
outcomes are reinforced through multiple separable neural signals, including feedback for outcomes and feedback regarding the actions of opponents, and (2) there exists a tradeoff between these two neural prediction
errors across subjects, providing neuromechanistic insight into individual
differences in aggression and preference for dominance. The combination
of our experimental paradigm and neurobehavioral correlates suggests
a potentially useful approach for identifying quantitative biomarkers of
aggressive social behavior in a variety of mental and neurological disorder.

C132
DEVELOPMENT OF OPERATION MODULATION AND INVARIANT
NEURAL REPRESENTATION FOR ARITHMETIC PROBLEMS TingTing Chang1, Miriam Rosenberg-Lee1, Arron, W. S. Metcalfe1, Tianwen Chen1,
Vinod Menon1; 1Stanford University — Addition and subtraction are two complementary arithmetic operations with distinct problem solving strategies.
Although past imaging studies have demonstrated differential functional
engagement of posterior parietal cortex (PPC) for the two operations, the
underlying neural representations and their development is poorly understood. Here we investigate how maturation shapes brain responses during
addition and subtraction problem solving by comparing twenty-eight
adults (age 19-22) and twenty-eight children (age 7-10). We first conducted
conventional univariate analyses to assess activation levels for each operation and then used a novel multivariate representational similarity (RS)
analysis to examine invariance of neural representations across operations.
The results showed significant age-related differences in operation-specific
modulation of PPC with greater responses in adults than children. Critically, multivariate analysis revealed high levels of RS for addition and sub-

Poster Session C
traction problems not only in intraparietal sulcus and supramarginal gyrus
of PPC, but also in fusiform gyrus within ventral occipito-temporal cortex
and middle and superior frontal gyri of prefrontal cortex (PFC). RS between
the two operations was non-significant in children. These results suggest
that in PPC, the maturation of arithmetic problem solving skills is marked
not only by differential operation-specific functional engagement but also
by development of invariant neural representation. Furthermore, although
the relative functional engagement of ventral occipito-temporal cortex and
PFC mature by age 10, the underlying neural representations continue to
converge between operations beyond childhood into adulthood. Our findings provide novel insights into the maturation of neural representations
for arithmetic problem solving and highlight the importance of examining
multivariate representations in development.

C133
LONGITUDINAL CHANGES IN CHILDREN’S IPS RESPONSES ARE
NUMBER-SPECIFIC AND MATHEMATICS-RELATED Robert Emerson1, Vy Vo1, Jessica Cantlon1; 1University of Rochester — In this study we
examine longitudinal changes in children’s number-related IPS responses
over a 1-2 year delay. Children (4-9 years, Mean 6.6 years) were tested
on a matching task with numbers, faces, shapes, and words during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Number-related neural activity,
defined as greater responses during number matching than the other three
categories, included the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and the intraparietal sulcus
(IPS). Children then completed the same fMRI task 1 to 2 years later. In
the IPS, only the neural response amplitudes from the numerical stimuli
were correlated between the two testing sessions. Neural responses from
faces, shapes, and words were not correlated in the IPS. In contrast, longitudinal correlations in PFC activity were not specific to numerical stimuli and instead were observed for both words and numbers. Secondly, we
tested the hypothesis that longitudinal changes in number-related activity
predict changes in children’s math test scores. Children completed a standardized mathematics test (TEMA-3) outside of the scanner at both time
points. Children’s mathematics tests scores significantly improved over the
1 to 2 year delay (Average Raw Score Increase of 14 points, p < .0001). The
longitudinal changes in the right IPS response amplitudes correlated with
changes in children’s mathematics test scores, independently of age. In contrast, number-related response amplitudes in PFC did not correlate with
age or mathematics ability. These are the first longitudinal data to show a
consistent and specific involvement of the IPS in numerical processing as
children mature.

C134
SIZE MATTERS! AGE AND GENDER DIFFERENCES IN ERPS ELICITED BY FEEDBACK. Jill Grose-Fifer1,2, Renee Migliaccio1, Erica Twomey1,
Lillian Pena3, Tina Zottoli4; 1John Jay College of Criminal Justice, CUNY, 2The
Graduate Center, CUNY, 3Queen’s College, CUNY, 4St. Joseph’s College of New
York — Effective feedback processing is an important element in decision
making. However, relatively few developmental studies have examined
the neural basis of these mechanisms and most have focused on the feedback-related negativity (FRN). This study investigated whether there are
age and/or gender differences in the neural correlates of feedback processing in adolescents (13 –17 years) and adults (25 –35 years). The FRN
and feedback p3 (fP3) were measured in a simple monetary gambling task.
Consistent with previous studies, the FRN was larger for losses than for
wins, and larger in adolescents compared to adults. As we have reported
previously, the FRN in females was not modulated by the size of the win or
loss, whereas in males, large wins produced larger FRNs than small wins.
Boys also showed longer latency FRNs to large losses. The current analyses
also showed that the fP3 amplitude is larger for gains than for losses, but
unlike the FRN, it is not modulated by magnitude, age or gender. In general, the fP3 was later for losses than for wins, but this effect was qualified
by an interaction with gender and magnitude, such that in males large wins
elicited a relatively short latency fP3 compared to large losses, but low magnitude wins and losses elicited fP3s with similar latencies. Taken together,
the FRN and fP3 data suggest that large rewards are processed differently
by males (and especially adolescent males) compared to females and therefore, might help to explain greater risk taking in real-life situations.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

119

Poster Session C

C135
COGNITIVE NEUROCHEMISTRY: HOW NEUROCHEMICALS ARE
LINKED TO COGNITIVE ACHIEVEMENTS IN THE DEVELOPING
BRAIN OF GIRLS Beatrix Krause1, Roi Cohen Kadosh1, Claire Brown1, Julie
Shah1, Kathrin Cohen Kadosh1, James Near2, Charlotte Stagg1, Stuart Wilson1;
Oxford University, 2McGill University — Academic achievements impact an
individual’s future prospects greatly. A thorough understanding of the
underlying biological basis of learning is crucial in order to design early
identification and intervention methods for learning disabilities. Here we
examined the association between neurochemicals and one of the most
important academic abilities: mathematics. At younger ages, children primarily recruit the prefrontal cortex for mathematical processing, whereas
they recruit posterior brain regions, such as the parietal lobe later on. The
neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) modulates learning
via the formation of long-term potentiation and depression. We hypothesized that GABA would relate to mathematical achievement in the prefrontal cortex but not the parietal lobe during the early years of mathematical
education. Fifteen girls aged 7-10 years underwent magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (MRS). GABA concentrations were quantified in the left
inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and right intraparietal sulcus (IPS). Inferior
occipital gyrus (IOG) measures served as a baseline control. Mathematical
achievement was assessed using a standardized test (WIAT-II UK). Girls
with lower mathematical abilities showed higher levels of GABA in the IFG
than girls with higher scores. This negative correlation was not found in
the IPS, in line with the notion that parietal involvement might occur at a
later point in life. Notably, GABA concentrations in the IFG were specific
to mathematical achievement and did not correlate with working memory
or reading abilities. These results provide novel opportunities to examine
developmental cognitive changes with potential biomarkers for learning
disabilities and cognitive difficulties.
1

C136
NEURAL BASIS OF EXACT SUBTRACTION IN EARLY ELEMENTARY
SCHOOL CHILDREN Liane Moneta-Koehler1, Edward Hubbard2, Bruce
McCandliss1; 1Vanderbilt University, 2University of Wisconsin-Madison — fMRI
studies suggest exact and approximate numerical representations are mediated by different neural networks, with exact number processing recruiting
the angular gyrus (AG) and approximate number processing recruiting the
intraparietal sulcus (IPS). Recent developmental findings from our group,
however, suggest that increases in precision of approximate number abilities from K to 3rd grade coincide with the rise of exact number properties
in IPS responses for symbols (i.e. symbols 5-9). Here we examine whether
these findings extend beyond approximate number abilities to inferences
children can make about exact numbers, as in the case of exact non-symbolic subtraction. A cross-notation fMRI dishabituation study (55 children grades K-3rd) presented arrays of dots of an adapting quantity (6 or
8) interrupted by symbolic deviants (5 or 9). Adaptation dot arrays and
symbol deviant quantity were crossed to provide 1-away (exact dishabituation) versus 3-away (approximate dishabituation) fMRI responses. In a separate, non-symbolic task, individual differences in accuracy for exact subtraction was assessed for a similar range of numbers. Individual differences
in exact subtraction correlated with exact, but not approximate, dishabituation responses in bilateral AG, consistent with its role in exact number
processing. Importantly, exact subtraction also correlated with exact, but
not approximate, dishabituation in bilateral IPS. These results suggest that
sensitivity to exact quantities in each neural system contributes to exact
arithmetic ability in young children, and further suggests that a common
developmental process may underlie the precision of both brain networks.

C137
THE IMPACT OF ACUTE AND CHRONIC STRESS ON DECISION
MAKING AMONG OLDER ADULTS Georgina Moreno1, Whitney Strong2,
William Hedgcock1, Daniel Tranel1, Natalie Denburg1; 1University of Iowa, 2University of Nebraska-Lincoln — It is a well-known phenomenon that stress
can lead to hippocampal damage and a subsequent decline in anterograde
memory. We are now learning that stress may also damage the prefrontal
cortex (e.g., Lupien et al., 2009), a brain region involved in important everyday abilities such as divided attention, judgment, and decision making.
Interestingly, several of the brain regions vulnerable to increased levels of

120

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

stress, such as the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex, are also known to
undergo disproportionate decline during normal aging (e.g., Cabeza, Raz,
& Park, 2005; Gunning-Dixon, 2009). Therefore, it is surprising that no published research to date has examined the effects of stress on decision making
in the elderly. In order to address these gaps in the literature, we investigated how acute and chronic stress impact decision-making performance in
a healthy older adult sample. Acute stress was induced by the administration of the Trier Social Stress Test (TSST). Chronic stress was measured by:
chronic stress questionnaires, the UCLA Life Stress Interview, and diurnal
salivary cortisol. Decision-making performance was measured by tasks
that assess: 1) decision making under risk; 2) decision making under ambiguity; and 3) temporal discounting. Preliminary analyses suggest a trend
towards less risky decision-making among stressed older adults for the
Cups Task. Regarding chronic stress, negative correlations were observed
between measures of cognition and measures of chronic stress, including
the chronic stress questionnaires and interview.

Poster Session D
D1
PARENTING INTERACTS WITH DRD4 TO PREDICT YOUNG CHILDREN’S ATTENTION Alice M Graham1, Cameron S Laue1, Theodore A Bell1,
Helen J Neville1; 1University of Oregon — Previous research has identified
children carrying the 7r allele of the dopamine D4 receptor (DRD4) as
exhibiting higher levels of externalizing problems in the context of insensitive parenting (Bakermans-Kranenburg & van Ijzendoorn, 2006). Here, we
examine whether selective auditory attention, as indexed by event-related
potentials (ERPs), is more sensitive to variation in parenting attitudes for
children carrying the 7r allele of DRD4. We used a dichotic listening paradigm to compare selective auditory attention in children recruited from
Head Start preschool programs. ERPs were recorded to stimuli embedded in attended and unattended narrative stories. The Parental Modernity Scales (PMS) questionnaire was used to assess parents’ beliefs about
childrearing practices. The Parent Feelings Questionnaire (PFQ) was used
to assess parental affect toward the child. SES was computed using the
Hollingshead Index of Social Position (ISP), and buccal swab samples were
collected for DRD4, with coding based on the presence of the 7r allele. For
children with the 7R allele parental emphasis on control predicted greater
selective auditory attention in the lower SES group. The results are consistent with previous work on DRD4, but extend this work to domains of cognition and brain functions supporting attention. 7r carriers showed greater
sensitivity to environment in our analysis, suggesting the generalizability
of 7r sensitivity to parenting across various cognitive outcomes, as well as
suggesting that the magnitude of genetic effects may vary based on SES
(Turkheimer et al, 2003).

D2
COMPUTER-BASED COGNITIVE SKILLS TRAINING IMPROVES
COLLEGE STUDENTS’ ATTENTION Beth Rogowsky1, Pericles Papamichalis1, Sabine Heim1, Laura Villa1, Paula Tallal1; 1Rutgers University — This study
investigated the effect of Fast ForWord® “brain fitness” exercises on college
students’ cognitive skills, specifically selective and sustained attention. Fast
ForWord is a series of software programs (disguised as computer games)
that focus on building foundational cognitive skills (memory, attention,
processing rate, and sequencing) in the context of language/listening and
reading tasks. A pretest-posttest, randomized comparison group, crossover
experimental design was used. 76 college students were randomly assigned
to Training Group 1 (n = 39) or Training Group 2 (n = 37). During the first
training session, Training Group 1 was trained for 6-weeks using Fast ForWord Literacy (FFW-L) and Fast ForWord Reading Level 3, 4, and 5 (FFWR3, 4, 5) while Group 2 served as a waiting group control. Results from
the first training session showed that students in Group 1, who received
the training, made statistically greater improvement in attention (pre- vs.
posttest scores on the Mindstreams® Cognitive Assessment Attention
Scale) than the waiting control group (Group 2). During the second training session, the waiting control group (Training Group 2) received training
for 11-weeks using FFW-L and FFW-R 3, 4, and 5. Results from the second
training session replicated the previous results. That is, the trained group,
in this case Training Group 2, made statistically greater improvements in
attention after Fast ForWord training. Furthermore, Training Group 1, who
had made significant gains in attention immediately following their training, maintained these significant gains 4 months later, despite receiving no
additional training.

D3
THE ROLE OF OSCILLATORY DYNAMICS FOR THE FRONTO-PARIETAL ATTENTION NETWORK IN AUDITORY CATEGORIZATION
Mathias Scharinger1, Molly Henry1, Thomas Gunter2, Jonas Obleser1; 1Max
Planck Research Group ‘Auditory Cognition’, Max Planck Institute for Human
Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 2Department of Neuropsychology, Max
Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig — Feature-selective attention during auditory categorization is beneficial in demanding
listening situations, but the neural dynamics of auditory attention are not
well understood. Relative de- and increases in functional magnetic reso-

nance imaging (fMRI) have often been reported in a fronto-parietal network for visual attention tasks, but how does hemodynamic change relate
to direct measures of neural activity? In a simultaneous electroencephalography (EEG) and fMRI paradigm (N=7), listeners performed a behavioral
task that required categorization of multidimensional tones with varying
acoustic salience (determined as increased distance to the median, most
ambiguous stimulus) and differing quality (spectral degradation, introduced in the second half of the experiment). Intriguingly, BOLD in inferior
frontal gyrus [IFG] was increased for the spectrally degraded tones, while
the opposite pattern held for the inferior parietal sulcus [IPS]. As salience
decreased, post-stimulus theta/low-alpha power (4–10 Hz) increased at
right-central electrodes. These power changes were negatively correlated
with the BOLD signal in a bilateral frontal-parietal network similar to that
sensitive to spectral degradation (IFG and IPS). In a mixed-effect model
analysis using R, we examined the interrelationships between the acoustic stimulus, oscillatory dynamics, and hemodynamic changes: Acoustic
salience in a given trial could be recovered from theta/low-alpha power.
Crucially, a hemodynamic predictor (right IPS response) amplified the predictive effect of EEG theta power on salience. Given the extensive framework regarding oscillatory dynamics and functional inhibition, EEG can
help disambiguate the role of the frontal–parietal BOLD network in supporting selective attention to task-relevant acoustic features.

D4
THE CONTRIBUTION OF SPECTRAL AND TEMPORAL SPEECH
INFORMATION TO VOWEL LENGTH DISCRIMINATION: A MISMATCH NEGATIVITY STUDY Bogdana Ulytska1,2, Christian J. Fiebach1,2,
Thomas Lachmann3, Claudia Steinbrink3; 1IDeA Center for Individual Development and Adaptive Education, Frankfurt am Main, 2Department of Psychology,
Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, 3Department of Psychology, TU Kaiserslautern — Phoneme perception is critical for learning to read. In German,
correct vowel length perception is important for mapping phonemes onto
letter sequences representing long vs. short vowels, which is a meaningful
distinction in German. In naturally occurring speech, vowel length is signalled by both temporal and spectral information. We used event-related
brain potentials and the mismatch negativity (MMN) paradigm (n = 20)
to investigate the contribution of different perceptual features to vowel
length discrimination. We compared natural (i.e., spectrotemporal) vowel
length differences with (artificially modified) stimulus pairs varying only
in temporal or spectral characteristics. All conditions, i.e., spectrotemporal,
temporal, and spectral vowel length differences produced a reliable MMN
over central electrode sites, indicating that each speech cue in isolation is
sufficient for the perception of vowel length. However, MMNs in the temporal and spectral conditions had greater amplitudes than the MMN in the
spectrotemporal condition. This leads to the counter-intuitive interpretation that vowel length differences are less efficiently detected when more
relevant information is present in the speech signal. However, the speech
processing system is highly tolerant against variability in the speech signal,
which may lead to weaker mismatch responses in natural as compared to
artificial stimuli.

D5
AUDITORY FEATURE-SELECTIVE ATTENTION IN HUMANS AND
RHESUS MACAQUES Jessica Verhein1, Joshua Downer1, Kevin O’Connor1, Nigel Noriega1, Jeffrey Johnson1, Mitchell Sutter1; 1University of California, Davis — Research in auditory attention has mainly focused on sound
location and pitch. While the ability to attend to specific auditory features
within a given acoustic stimulus is also a crucial environmental skill, it is
not well understood. A comparison of human and macaque feature-selective auditory attention can lead to a better understanding of similarities
and differences between the species’ auditory perceptual and cognitive
abilities, and aid in developing a physiological model of auditory attention.
In this study, two rhesus macaques and three humans were visually cued
(by block) to selectively attend to one of two target features (amplitude
modulation or bandwidth restriction) within a broadband noise carrier in

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

121

Poster Session D
a choice task and to report the presence or absence of the cued feature.
Our results suggest macaques can selectively attend to specific auditory
features, as evidenced by increased detection of the cued feature when the
animals were presented with co-modulated stimuli. Preliminary results of
this cross-species study suggest similar response patterns in humans and
macaques. However, humans demonstrated higher accuracy in detecting the cued target and were less likely than macaques to show increased
responsiveness to the non-attended feature. This difference is likely driven
by humans’ greater cognitive capacity, but may arise from cross-species
perceptual differences as well (O’Connor et al 2011). These results provide support for the use of rhesus macaques as a model for studying how
auditory feature-selective attention modulates single neuron activity in the
auditory system.

D6
THE INFLUENCE OF ATTENTION ON NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL PROCESSING OF SPEECH-IN-NOISE Benjamin Rich Zendel1,2,3,4, Charles-David Tremblay4, Sylvie Belleville2,4, Isabelle Peretz1,3,4; 1International Laboratory
for Brain, Music and Sound Research (BRAMS), 2Centre de Recherche, Institut
Universitaire de Gériatrie de Montréal (CRIUGM), 3Centre for Research on Brain,
Language and Music (CRBLM), 4Université de Montréal — Understanding
a word in background noise requires both perceptual segregation of the
target word, followed by semantic processing of the perceptually segregated word. Without the presence of background noise, both these processes are relatively automatic. With the addition of background noise, it
is likely that increased attentional resources would be required for both
perceptual segregation and semantic processing of a word; however
the influence of attention on brain activity related to segregating speech
from background noise is not well understood. To examine this, auditory
event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded to words presented in three
levels of multi-talker babble noise (none, 15, and 0 dB signal-to-noise ratio),
in two listening conditions. In the active condition, participants repeated
the word aloud, while in the passive condition they watched a silent movie.
To focus on the influence of attention, the difference in ERPs between active
and passive listening was calculated. The amplitude of an early attention-dependant component that overlapped the N1-P2 response (N170)
was little affected by background noise, although its latency increased.
On the other hand, the amplitude of a second attention-dependent component (N400) increased and was delayed in the presence of background
noise. These results suggest that deployment of attentional resources to the
perceptual segregation of a word was slowed by background noise, while
the increased difficulty in understanding a word in background noise was
reflected in enhanced neural activity that was likely related to the semantic
processing of the word.

D7
FUNCTIONAL NEUROANATOMY OF VISUAL SEARCH FOR CONJUNCTIONS Neena K. Rao1, Michael A. Motes1, Bart Rypma1; 1Center for
BrainHealth, University of Texas at Dallas — In visual search, when a target
can be discriminated from distractors by a single feature (i.e., an elementary
search), search time is independent of the number of distractors, but when a
target can only be discriminated from distractors by the conjunction of two
or more features (i.e., a conjunction search), search time increases with the
number of distractors. Proposed models suggest that preattentive, parallel
processes mediate elementary searches but that additional “control” processes must be brought online to perform conjunction searches. We used
fMRI to examine the functional neuroanatomy mediating these two types of
visual search. Eighteen young adults completed a visual search task while
fMRI data were collected. In a rapid event-related design, they searched
for a green ‘T’ among a field of red T’s and red inversed T’s (i.e., elementary search) or for a green ‘T’ among a field of red T’s and green inversed
T’s (i.e., conjunction search). Two, eight, and 14 distractor set-sizes were
used. Reaction-time significantly increased with the number of distractors
for conjunction but not elementary searches, consistent with previous findings. Within occipital regions, BOLD signal-change significantly increased
with distractor set-size for both conjunction and elementary searches, but
within right dorso-lateral PFC, medial PFC, and bilateral parietal cortex,
BOLD signal-change significantly increased with distractor set-size only for
conjunction searches. Furthermore, within right dlPFC and mPFC, signifi-

122

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
cant BOLD signal-change was only detected for conjunction searches. The
results are consistent with frontal regions mediating the additional processes brought online to perform the conjunction search.

D8
A ROLE OF THE RIGHT MIDDLE FRONTAL GYRUS (RMFG) IN
ENDOGENOUS AND EXOGENOUS VISUAL ATTENTION: A CASE
STUDY Maureen Satyshur1, Shruti Japee1, Ikuko Mukai2, Leslie Ungerleider1;
1

Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, NIMH, NIH, 2Laureate Institute for Brain
Research — Previous research on neural mechanisms of visual attention
has identified a top-down goal-directed endogenous network, and a bottom-up, stimulus-driven exogenous network. It has been proposed that the
rMFG may serve as a node of interaction between these two networks (Corbetta et al. 2008, Chica et al. 2012). In this study, we examined the contribution of the rMFG to both endogenous and exogenous attention by comparing performance on an orientation discrimination task of a patient with
a rMFG resection and healthy controls. On endogenous attention trials, a
valid central cue predicted with 90% accuracy the location of a perithreshold Gabor patch. On the 10% invalid trials, the Gabor patch appeared in the
opposite location to the cue. On exogenous attention trials, a cue appeared
briefly at one of two peripheral locations, followed, after a variable interstimulus interval (ISI; range 0 to 700 ms), by a Gabor patch in either the
same (valid) or opposite location (invalid). Analysis of behavioral data
showed that for both patient and controls, valid cues facilitated faster reaction times compared to invalid cues, on endogenous and short ISI exogenous trials. However, at longer ISI exogenous trials, the patient was unable
to withhold his responses resulting in reduced performance compared to
controls. This may be related to the patient’s inability to reorient attention
in a top-down fashion after the effect of the exogenous cue has dissipated,
and suggests a putative role of the rMFG in switching between exogenous
and endogenous modes of attention. Supported by the NIMH IRP

D9
THE NEURAL BASIS OF STIMULUS LOCALIZATION IN A COMPETITION-BASED CHANGE DETECTION PARADIGM Daniel Schneider1,
Edmund Wascher1; 1Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and
Human Factors — Previous studies on selective visual attention mainly concentrated on how the intention to search for certain features or at certain
locations influences attentional selection. By means of event-related potentials (ERPs) of the electroencephalogram (EEG), the present study investigated modulations on attentional selection resulting from different action
intentions. Participants were instructed to react on a luminance change in
a fast sequence of two bilaterally arranged stimuli and ignore a randomly
occurring orientation change of these stimuli. In one block, they had to
localize the relevant luminance change, while in another block only the
presence or absence of the luminance change had to be reported. Both in
the localization and detection task, the lowest behavioral performance was
shown when the relevant luminance change and the orientation distractor
were presented contralateral to each other (spatial conflict condition). On
ERP level, a stronger posterior N1 asymmetry towards the luminance target
was shown in the localization compared to the detection task. This indicates that the action intention to localize a visual target enhances its spatial
representation already at an early processing stage. In the N2 time window,
a stronger posterior asymmetry towards the luminance change (N2pc) for
the localization task was attributable to a higher positivity ipsilateral to the
target compared with the detection task. Thus, the spatial selection of a
feature change requires a further inhibition of the neural activity not associated with target information.

D10
SUSTAINING ATTENTION FOR A PROLONGED PERIOD OF TIME
MAY DEPLETE RESOURCES OF TOP-DOWN CONTROL: EEG EVIDENCE Heleen A. Slagter1, Leon Reteig1, Sam Prinssen1, Ruud L. Van den
Brink1, Mike X Cohen1; 1Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam —
Mental fatigue is detrimental to our ability to remain attentive, though the
exact nature of this effect is still unclear. Recent behavioral studies indicate
that mental fatigue, as indexed by performance decrements after prolonged
time-on-task, results at least in part from depletion of cognitive resources.
This study examined what happens neurally during prolonged task performance to further insight into the mechanisms underlying the develop-

2013 Annual Meeting
ment of mental fatigue in sustained attention conditions. We reasoned that,
if mental fatigue is due to resource depletion, 1) performance decrements
should be accompanied by changes in well-known neural measures of topdown attentional control, and 2) an unexpected monetary incentive introduced after prolonged performance, aimed at motivating subjects to do
their utmost best, should not be able to revive performance and neural topdown control to initial levels. Participants performed a sustained attention
task for 80 minutes without breaks, while their brain activity was recorded
with EEG. 60 minutes into the task, they received the monetary incentive.
Behavioral analyses showed a rapid decline in performance with time
on task, a short-lived boost in performance after the monetary incentive,
followed by a continuing decline in performance during the last part of
the task, despite equal initial and post-incentive self-reported motivation
levels. Notably, EEG analyses revealed a tight correlation between this
behavioral pattern and neural measures of attentional control and stability.
These findings indicate that mental fatigue is accompanied by a reduction
in cognitive resources, and that high motivation can only briefly bring these
resources back online.

D11
RIGHTWARD REPRESENTATIONAL BIASES INCREASE WITH
LONGER INTERSTIMULUS INTERVAL Izabela Szelest1, Nicole Mulenga-Woo1, Stephanie Kennedy1, Lorin Elias1; 1University of Saskatchewan — Lateral biases while performing visuospatial tasks have been attributed to perceptual and attention mechanisms. Recently, evidence has been put forth
indicating that asymmetries are also evident in memory processes, known
as representational pseudoneglect. In our study we investigated whether
inter-stimulus time interval and stimulus masking impacts the direction or
magnitude of such bias. In a brightness judgment task, participants selected
an array which they perceived to be overall darker despite that the two
arrays were equiluminant. The results showed significant leftward biases
dependent on the position and orientation of the array. These effects were
increased with an increased inter-stimulus interval to 1 second. Our findings show asymmetries in later processing of information possibly utilizing
working memory processes. Furthermore, although our findings indicate
that these asymmetries are representational in nature, they show to differ
from those found in representational pseudoneglect. The obtained results
can be explained using the activation-orientation hypothesis indicating that
this hypothesis may be also applicable in explaining biases occurring at
later stages of visuo-spatial processing, such as memory.

D12
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF ATTENTION-SPREADING BASED ON TASK-IRRELEVANT SHAPE SIMILARITY AND
LUMINANCE SIMILARITY Ryuji Takeya1, Tetsuko Kasai1; 1Hokkaido university — It has recently been shown that attention spreads from a task-relevant object to others when they have common features. We previously
found that attention spreads based on size similarity, independent of
connectedness, in the results of P1, N1, and N2 spatial attention effects of
event-related potentials (ERPs). The present study examined how attention
spreads when bilateral stimuli are similar in two feature dimensions (luminance, shape). Bilateral two stimuli (white or black circles or squares) with
a gap involved an orthogonal combination of luminance similarity and
shape similarity (L+S+, L+S-, L-S+, L-S-). ERPs were recorded from 16 participants who were covertly attending to one hemifield and responded for
infrequent stimuli with a shorter gap while ignoring the other during rapid
stimulus presentations. ERP attention effects were defined as amplitude
enhancement at electrodes contralateral to the attended visual fields. We
observed attention-spreading effects (ASE) as reduction of attention effects
in similar conditions, compared with those in dissimilar conditions. ASE
based on luminance similarity was found in the N1 latency range (150-200
ms poststimulus) most prominently at parieto-occipital sites. In contrast,
ASE based on shape similarity was most prominent at posterior temporo-occipital sites, and the magnitude was greater for L- in the N1 latency,
and for L+ in the N2 latency (200-240 ms). These results suggest that, due
to task-irrelevant feature similarity, attention spreads over spatial neural
representations that are specialized for luminance or shape, and attention-spreading based on shape similarity depends on luminance similarity.

Poster Session D

D13
ATTENTIONAL STATE TRAINING IN TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY
Alana Vernon1,2, Christina Marini1, Sawsan Dabit1, Jose Gallegos1, Ativ Zomet1,3,
Joseph DeGutis4, Anthony Chen2, Michael Merzenich1,5, Thomas Van Vleet1,2;
1
Brain Plasticity Institute, 2VA Medical Center, Martinez, 3Tel-Aviv University,
Israel, 4VA Medical Center, Boston, 5University of California, San Francisco
— Patients with traumatic brain injury (TBI) often have difficulties regulating fundamental aspects of attention and may exhibit hypo or hyper
states of alertness. Attention deficits may underlie or exacerbate higher
order executive dysfunction. Recent studies indicate that computerized
cognitive training, focused on attentional control and alertness, can ameliorate poor intrinsic regulation of alertness evident in patients with TBI
or acquired brain injury. The current study examined effects of training in
seven patients with a history of mild-to-moderate TBI. Patients engaged
in several hours of Tonic and Phasic Alertness Training (TAPAT), a program previously shown to improve attention regulation in individuals with
acquired brain injury. To evaluate potential consistencies in the training
effect, individual’s progress in training as well as performance on standard neuropsychological measures of attention, executive functions, and
mood were evaluated pre and post training. On the computerized cognitive training program, patients demonstrated increased response inhibition, as well as decreased omission errors and overall variability in reaction
time across sessions over time. Associated with improvements on TAPAT,
improvements were also seen on neuropsychological outcome mesaures,
including higher-order executive functions and overall emotion regulation.
In particular, results suggested improvements in areas of attention, working memory, set-shifting, verbal fluency, and processing speed, as well
as responses to emotinonal stressors. Patients’ performances on TAPAT
and neuropsychological outcome measures suggest that improvements
in attention regulation facilitate improvements in higher-order executive
functions. Results from the current study offer promising insight into the
development of treatments for attentional deficits among patients with TBI.

D14
INCREASED VISUAL CORTICAL NOISE DECREASES CUED
VISUAL ATTENTION DISTRIBUTION Zachery Greenberg1, Navdeep Gill1,
Shai Porat1, Jason Samaha1, Tahim Kader1, Bradley Voytek1, Adam Gazzaley1,2;
1
Department of Neurology, Physiology and Psychiatry, University of California,
San Francisco, 2UCSF Center for Integrative Neuroscience, University of California, San Francisco — When driving we can focus on the car ahead or spread
our attention broadly as we approach an intersection. Despite the commonality of this behavior we know relatively little about the limits of and neural
mechanisms behind spatial attention distribution. Here we created a visual
attention distribution task wherein participants are visually cued regarding
the location of an ensuing target. A cue provides either 100%, 75%, 50%, or
0% information about the certainty of the location of the target that could
appear in either the left or right hemifield. In the 100% conditions the target
appeared directly to the left or right on the horizontal. For the 75% and
50% conditions the target appeared in the cued hemifield in a 90-degree
or 180-degree arc around the horizontal, respectively. For the 0% condition the target appeared anywhere along a 360-degree circle spanning both
hemifields. As uncertainty increased participant response times increased
and accuracy decreased. We used lateralized transcranial direct current
stimulation (tDCS) of the visual extrastriate to test the hypothesis that cued
spatial attention emerges from focal top-down enhancement of visual cortical neurons encoding the region of space to be attended. Anodal tDCS to
visual extrastriate parametrically increased response times for more focal
conditions only when cued to the hemifield contralateral to the stimulation
site. These results suggest that when faced with expected spatial uncertainty, top-down mechanisms prime visual cortical neurons representing
the region of space to-be-attended and that stimulation of a broad cortical
territory increases noise and decreases focal enhancement.

D15
BRAIN SYSTEMS MEDIATING TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP
ATTENTIONAL CONTROL NETWORKS IN ACTION VIDEO GAME
PLAYERS Julia Föcker1,2, Daniel Cole2, Daphne Bavelier1,2; 1Department of
Psychology and Educational Sciences, University of Geneva, 2Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester — Recent studies suggest enhanced

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

123

Poster Session D
top-down attentional control in action video game players (VGPs). VGPs
more efficiently suppress sources of distraction and better anticipate the
pull of exogenous distractors. To characterize attentional control, a crossmodal cueing-paradigm was used concurrently with fMRI. On a trial-bytrial basis, a voice indicated the most likely location for a subsequent gaborpatch target. Participants had to decide on the orientation of the gabor-patch.
Bottom-up attention was engaged on a small percentage of trials by presenting the target at unattended locations or with high-contrast distractors.
A group of VGPs was compared to non-video-game-players (NVGPs).
Overall, NVGPs and VGPs recruited typical attention-related areas. Interestingly, NVGPs revealed enhanced activation during cue processing and
target preparation, whereas VGPs showed higher activation during target
processing. NVGPs showed greater insula and anterior cingulate recruitment during the preparation period (Cue-SOA). By contrast, VGPs showed
greater left temporal parietal junction (TPJ) recruitment during target processing as well as stronger activations of visual and reward-related areas
(striatum). Furthermore, on rare no-go catch trials, VGPs showed less false
alarms and enhanced recruitment of the middle frontal gyrus in contrast
to NVGPs in which only visual areas showed stronger activation. VGPs
are known to benefit from greater top-down attentional control. This work
points to reduced activation of top-down networks during attention preparation but increased recruitment during target processing as a possible signature of greater attentional efficiency.

D16
THE NEURONAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING BOTH INSTRUCTED
AND SPONTANEOUS EMOTION REGULATION Yanbo Hu1, Ignazio
Puzzo1, Birthe Henne1, Tom Johnstone1; 1Centre for Integrative Neuroscience
and Neurodynamics — This study aimed to measure the extent to which
prefrontal brain regions involved in intentional, reappraisal-based emotion
regulation overlap with those involved in spontaneous top-down regulation of emotion. 20 participants completed an instructed, reappraisal-based
emotion regulation task and an N-back working memory task under threat
of shock while undergoing BOLD imaging in a 3T MRI scanner. For the
Instructed Regulation task, BOLD signal in response to aversive pictures
was contrasted between a condition in which participants decreased their
emotional responses using reappraisal and a control condition in which
they maintained attention to the pictures. For the N-back task, BOLD signal
was compared between the threat and no threat conditions as a measure of
engagement of prefrontal cortex as participants spontaneously regulated
threat-induced anxiety in order to perform the working memory task. Activation for intentional regulation but not for spontaneous regulation was
seen in dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC) and dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). Activation was seen for spontaneous regulation
but not for intentional regulation in rostral anterior cingulate cortex (rACC)
extending to anterior medial prefrontal cortex. Two regions of activation
common to both tasks were the left middle frontal gyrus (lMFG) and left
ventral lateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC). In summary, while medial prefrontal regions were differently involved in instructed and spontaneous
top-down regulation of emotion, lateral prefrontal cortical regions seem to
support processes common to both types of emotion regulation, a hypothesis that will be directly tested with FMRI-guided TMS.

D17
A FMRI STUDY OF BRAIN ACTIVATIONS IN VIEWING TAIWANESE AND CAUCASIAN EMOTIONAL FACES Shih-Tseng T. Huang1,
Liwen Lee1, Hsu-Huei Weng2,3,4, Mei-Yu Yeh2, Ho-Ling Liu2,3, Sigmund Hsiao1;
1
National Chung-Cheng University, 2Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Chiayi,
3
Chang Gung University, 4Chang Gung University of Science and Technology
— The present study investigated the role of culture in mediating emotional processes through evaluation of the brain areas associated. Twenty
Taiwanese participants (10 males and 10 females, age ranged from 19 to 29)
with normal or corrected normal vision and reported no abnormal neurological history participated. Pictures of happy, angry, fearful, and neutral
expressions of Taiwaneses and Caucasians and non-face pictures were presented in eight event-related functional runs, with 40 trials in each. The
order of stimuli was randomized within and between functional runs. Participants were asked to view the pictures with attention while undergoing
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scanning. The contrast in
blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) signals when viewing Taiwanese

124

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
and Caucasian pictures was calculated and analyzed with the SPM5 software to evaluate the brain activations. The results found higher responses
in left post-central and inferior parietal cortex, right middle and superior
temporal cortex, right middle frontal cortex, and left amygdala in viewing
the Taiwanese faces than viewing the Caucasian faces, suggesting a cultural specificity effect. It was also found a culture and gender interaction
with higher activations in the left post-central cortex, left middle occipital
cortex, bilateral superior frontal cortex, right medial frontal cortex, and left
fusiform. Results supported a cultural specificity hypothesis and suggested
that higher activations were found not only in the primary areas related
with emotions and faces but also in frontal, parietal, and occipital cortex
when viewing emotional expressions of one’s own culture than to faces
from people of other cultural group.

D18
THE BRAIN ACTIVATIONS OF MEG IN PROCESSING EMOTION
EXPRESSIONS AND IDENTITY OF FACES Daisy L. Hung1,2, Ovid J.-L.
Tzeng2,3, Shih-tseng T. Huang4, Denise H. Wu1,2, Pei-Shu Tsai2, Ming-Chun Lee4;
1
National Central University, 2National Yang-Ming University, 3Academia Sinica,
4
National Chung-Cheng University — Facial identity and expressions were
proposed to be processed in parallel pathways by the visual system and
therefore with different brain activations. The present study attempted to
test the hypothesis of independence by using MEG in measuring the brain
activations in performing tasks of identity of person and emotional expression. The participants were twenty adults (10 males and 10 females, age
ranged from 19 to 29) with normal or corrected normal vision and reported
no abnormal neurological history. In the study, faces of seven basic emotions were tested in separate blocks and presented in pairs. The participants were asked to judge if the two faces in each trial were identical as in
the same emotion or as from the same person. The results found the brain
activation of person identity task was significant higher than those of the
emotion task, and the activations of the second faces were higher than those
of the first faces. There was also found a marginal significant interaction
between task and the order of faces. The follow-up analysis found person
identity task was significant higher than the activation of the emotion task
in the processes of the first face, suggesting that the differentiation between
the two tasks occurred early in processing of the first face. Furthermore, a
marginal three-way interaction found when two faces in a trail were different, a higher activation in processing the second female faces. Results
suggested task specificity and a possibility of gender effects in brain activations.

D19
NEURAL CORRELATES OF AROUSAL AND VALENCE-RELATED
EFFECTS OF EMOTIONAL DISTRACTION ON WORKING MEMORY
Alexandru D. Iordan1, Weiqi Zhao1, Sanda Dolcos1, Florin Dolcos1; 1University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Previous investigations have shown that
the impact of task-irrelevant emotional distraction on working memory
(WM) is linked to increased activity in regions of a ventral neural system,
associated with “hot” emotion processing (HotEmo system), and concomitant decreased activity in regions of a dorsal system, associated with “cold”
executive processing (ColdEx system). However, these previous investigations used high-arousing negative distracters and hence it is not known
whether similar effects are also produced by positive distracters, or further dissociations linked to emotional arousal and valence exist. The present study investigated these issues using event-related fMRI in 18 young
female participants, who performed a WM task with distraction that manipulated both the arousal (high vs. low) and valence (positive vs. negative)
of emotional distracters. Overall, results identified brain regions showing
overlapping effects of arousal and valence as well as regions showing specificity to arousal or to valence, linked to different levels of processing. Lower-level perceptual processing (fusiform gyrus) and basic HotEmo regions
(amygdala) showed overlapping arousal and valence-driven effects. On
the other hand, higher-level processing regions involved in emotion integration/regulation and executive control from both HotEmo and ColdEx
systems showed either arousal-driven effects (ventrolateral and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex – PFC, respectively) or specificity to positive (anterior
medial PFC) or negative valence (posterior medial PFC and anterior cingulate cortex). Collectively, these findings suggest that while “bottom-up”

2013 Annual Meeting
responses to emotional distraction engage mechanisms jointly sensitive
to arousal and valence, “top-down” responses are more specialized, with
clearer dissociations between brain regions sensitive to arousal or valence.

D20
FACE-SPECIFIC N170 IS MODULATED BY EMOTION: EVIDENCE
FROM ADULTS WITH CURRENT AND REMITTED DEPRESSION
Linda Isaac1,2, Constance Vissers3,4, Eni Becker5, Anne Speckens6; 1Stanford
University, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, USA, 2Palo Alto
Veterans Affairs, USA, 3Centre of Excellence for Neuropsychiatry, Vincent van
Gogh Institute for Psychiatry, Venray, The Netherlands, 4Donders Institute for
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Centre for Cognition, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 5Clinical Psychology and Behavioural Science Institute,
Radboud University, The Netherlands, 6Department of Psychiatry, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, The Netherlands — According to the twostage model of face processing, the face-specific N170 event-related potential (ERP) maximal over occipital-temporal electrodes is linked to structural
encoding of face stimuli, whereas later ERP components are thought to
index processing of facial affect.We employed an event-related potential
(ERP) methodology to examine neural activity associated with the pre-attentive and obligatory N170 response to emotional human faces in three
groups: currently depressed (N = 10), remitted depressed (N = 16) and
healthy controls (N= 17). Participants were instructed to view emotional
faces. There were two main goals. First, to examine whether the N170 component is influenced by emotion even at this attention-independent stage of
face processing. Second, to examine if currently depressed patients differed
from both the remitted and never-depressed groups on early detection of
negative emotional faces (angry faces) compared to both neutral and happy
faces.We found a main effect of emotion (p = .01) for N170 to angry faces,
only.A group x emotion interaction analysis did not reach significance(p
= .22) suggesting that early vigilance for threatening faces is not linked to
clinical status(current or remitted depression).Parallel encoding of faces
sensitive to both structural and emotional content of faces appears to be
characteristic of both clinical and healthy conditions.This finding suggests
that N170 processes linked to structural analysis of faces do not necessarily
precede analysis of emotional expression, and instead may reflect early topdown modulation from neural systems involved in rapid emotional processing, especially when confronted with threat in the environment such
as angry faces.

D21
INDEPENDENT INFLUENCE OF VALENCE AND PREDICTABILITY ON TASK-DEPENDENT P3 MODULATION Amishi Jha1, Martin
Paczynski1, Shruti Baijal1; 1University of Miami — Recent work by Shackman
et al. (2011) demonstrated that threat can enhance perceptual processing, as
indexed by the N1 ERP component and suppress the amplitude of the P3,
an ERP component associated with decision making. Our study sought to
determine whether this suppression generalizes to non-threatening aversive stimuli and the extent to which the suppression may be modulated
by predictability of occurrence. One hundred and twenty soldiers viewed
images which were either neutral or negative (war scenes). These images
were followed by a simple, non-affective decision task. Each image was
preceded by a cue which predicted affective valence of upcoming target
with 75% validity. For the N1 Component, the amplitude of the N1 evoked
by images was greater for negative compared to neutral targets. There
was no main effect of cue validity nor did cue validity interact with image
valence, suggesting that N1 modulations were driven by bottom-up processes. On the other hand, there significant main effects of both valence
and cue validity on P3 amplitude. Both negative valence and unexpected
affective content suppressed the P3. No significant interaction was found
between valence and cue validity, implying that P3 suppression may be
driven by two separable neural processes related to valence and expectancy. Our findings suggest that even non-threatening aversive stimuli
may impair decision making and that this effect may be exacerbated when
the aversive stimuli are unexpected. Indeed, our findings suggest that even
stimuli devoid of strong emotional content may impair decision making
when they are unexpected.

Poster Session D

D22
ASYMMETRIES IN PREFRONTAL CONTROL OVER EMOTIONAL
STIMULUS PROCESSING – EFFECTS OF TARGETED CORTICAL
INHIBITION BY CONTINUOUS THETA BURST STIMULATION ON
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS AND FIELDS Kati Keuper1,2, Christian
Dobel1,2, Torge Dellert1, Annuschka Eden1, Inga Laeger3, Peter Zwanzger3;
1
Institute for Biomagnetism and Biosignalanalysis, University of Münster, 2Otto
Creutzfeldt Center for Cognitive and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of Münster, 3Department for Psychiatry, University Hospital Münster — Basic research
suggests that the dorsolatereal prefrontal cortext (DLPFC) contributes to
emotional affect and emotional stimulus categorization. In order to investigate the causal influence of lateralized prefrontal structures on emotion-related neural networks and processes (Davidson, 1992), left vs. right DLPFC
activity was selectively reduced by means of inhibitory continuous theta
burst stimulation (cTBS, Huang et al., 2005). After the stimulation protocol, participants passively viewed low-arousing neutral and high-arousing
positive and negative German nouns while EEG and MEG were recorded.
We hypothesized the stimulation site to influence ERPs/ERFs and behavioral performance (valence rating, surprise free recall) in a valence-specific
way. The data reveal the typical processing advantage for both positive
and negative compared to neutral stimuli in ERPs/ERFs (200 and 600ms:
Early Posterior Negativity (EPN/EPNm), Late Positive Complex (LPC/
LPCm)) and in behavioral data. Importantly, ERPs (P1, EPN, LPC), ERFs
(EPNm, LPCm) and behavioral data converge in the finding of a differential influence of the stimulation site on the processing of negative compared
to positive words: In line with Davidson (1992), left frontal inhibition led
to enhanced activity and better behavioral performance in response to negative stimuli whereas right frontal inhibition caused the reverse pattern.
The MEG interaction effects were localized in the right occipital lobe (200250ms) and the right temporoparietal junction (510-560ms). Based on these
findings, we conclude that lateralized prefrontal structures control early
stages of emotional stimulus processing by modulating neural networks
related to perception and attention in a valence-specific manner.

D23
BRAIN ACTIVITIES ASSOCIATED WITH GAME IMAGES IN DIABLO
III PLAYERS Shin Ah Kim1, Hyeon Min Ahn1, Sang Hee Kim1; 1Department of

Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea — Excessive
game players have shown increased neural activity while viewing game-related images in several brain regions including striatum, amygdala, orbitofrontal cortex and dorsolateral prefrontal regions. However, little is
known as to whether neural activity to game-related images is modulated
by individual differences in gaming experience. To address this issue, we
conducted a functional neuroimaging study where 14 men (mean age 25.2,
SD = 2.2) with differing degrees of experience in Diablo III viewed images
taken from Diablo III inside an fMRI scanner. They also viewed control
images taken from a fantasy drama (Drama) and from Korea University
Affective Picture System (Neutral). Participants completed Young’s Internet Addiction Test (IAT) outside the scanner. Brain images were analyzed
in SPM 8. Statistical parametric maps of t values were created for (Game
– Neutral) and (Game – Drama) contrasts and one-sample t test was conducted at the group level. Game images in contrast to neutral images activated brain regions including the left caudate, left hippocampus, right thalamus, right fusiform gyrus, left middle frontal gyrus (BA6), and superior
frontal gyrus (BA8). Game images in contrast to Drama controls activated
the left hippocampus, right parahippocampus, right thalamus, left superior
gyrus (BA6), and middle frontal gyrus (BA9). Brain activity in the superior
frontal gyrus for game images was negatively correlated with IAT scores.
Our preliminary results suggest that game images elicit activations in a set
of neural areas and the degrees of activation in part of the network are
modulated by individual differences in online gaming experiences.

D24
SENSITIVITY TO REWARD AND PUNISHMENT MODULATE NEURAL
PROCESSING OF REINFORCEMENT Sang Hee Kim1, Heung Sik Yoon1,
Hyeon Guk Kang1, Hyeon Min Ahn1, Hackjin Kim1, Stephan Hamann2; 1Korea
University, 2Emory University — Reinforcement learning is critical for our
survival in the environment. A large volume of studies has identified dopaminergic brain structures such as the midbrain, striatum, amygdala, orbiCognitive Neuroscience Society

125

Poster Session D
tofrontal and medial prefrontal regions playing key roles in reinforcement
learning. However little is known about how individual difference in reinforcement sensitivity is related to the neural processing of reinforcement.
To address this question we recruited 17 healthy men and women to participate in a functional neuroimaging study. Inside the scanner, participants
completed a monetary instrumental delay task where they viewed a series
of pairs of fractals and were asked to choose one of them to win monetary
reward or to avoid monetary loss. Participants also completed the Behavioral Inhibition/ Behavioral Activation Scales to indicate their sensitivity to
reward and punishment. Brain imaging data were analyzed using SPM8.
We found increased activation in the ventral striatum during anticipation
of reward whereas the dorsal part was more dominantly involved in anticipation of loss avoidance. Both the dorsal and ventral striatum activated
during reception of monetary feedback. Individuals with greater sensitivity to punishment showed reduced activation in the striatum and lateral
prefrontal cortex while expecting avoidance of monetary loss. Whereas,
individuals with greater sensitivity to reward showed increased activation
in the right striatum while receiving monetary reward. These findings indicate that individual differences in reward or punishment sensitivity may
play distinct roles in neural processing of reinforcement.

D25
THE EFFECT OF THE ETHNIC BACKGROUND ON THE NEURAL
CORRELATES OF OBSERVING SOCIAL INTERACTIONS: A BRAIN
IMAGING INVESTIGATION Suhkyung Kim1, Yuta Katsumi2, Keen Sung3,
Florin Dolcos1, Sanda Dolcos1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
2
Berea College, 3University of Massachusetts — Social neuroscience studies identified a network of brain regions (social cognition network-SCN)
involved in the evaluation of others’ actions and intentions. However, little
is known about the impact of the interaction partners’ ethnicity on such
evaluations, and the associated neural correlates. We investigated these
issues using fMRI recording, while 15 Caucasian participants watched
and rated movies displaying non-verbal guest-host interactions. The hosts
displayed behaviors that either encouraged (Approach condition) or discouraged (Avoid condition) further social interactions. The ethnic background of the hosts was separated into 50% Caucasian (in-group) and 50%
Non-Caucasian (out-group) trials. Analyses identified specific SCN regions
showing common and dissociable responses to in-group and out-group
hosts. The right amygdala (AMY), bilateral superior temporal sulcus and
lateral prefrontal cortex were commonly engaged by in-group and outgroup hosts, while the left AMY and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) showed
increased sensitivity to in-group hosts. Further investigation of these effects
showed that activity in the AMY and IFG was driven by the response to
Approach behaviors of in-group hosts. Interestingly, the same left AMY
region showed an opposite pattern of response, with increased specificity
to Avoidance behaviors displayed by the out-group hosts. A similar effect
was also observed in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). These findings
provide evidence that dissociable responses to Approach and Avoidance behaviors displayed by in-group and out-group interaction partners
involve brain areas associated with basic emotion processing (AMY), emotion regulation (IFG), and conflict detection/resolution (ACC), and shed
light on the role of ethnic background in evaluating non-verbal behaviors.

D26
MOTIVATIONAL CHARACTERISTICS OF YOUNG CHILDREN ARE
ASSOCIATED WITH ERROR-RELATED BRAIN ACTIVITY Matthew H
Kim1, Loren M Marulis1, Jennie K Grammer2, Melisa Carrasco3, Frederick J Morrison1, William J Gehring1; 1University of Michigan, 2Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, 3University of Rochester Medical Center — Recent research on cognitive control has focused on the neurological processes that occur when
people make errors. The error-related negativity (ERN) is elicited when a
subject makes an error on target discrimination tasks (Falkenstein et al.,
1991). The error positivity (Pe) reflects an affective response to or conscious
awareness of the error (Overbeek, Nieuwenhuis, & Ridderinkhof, 2005).
While experimentally manipulating motivational contexts modulates the
ERN, the association between motivation as a multidimensional individual-level characteristic and error-related brain activity (ERN and Pe) needs
to be elucidated. The goal of the study was to explore this association in
young children. Motivational characteristics of 36 children (12 females,
M=5.4 years; N=23 for EEG data) were assessed through direct assessments

126

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
and parent report. Children completed a Go/No-Go task during which EEG
data were acquired. Most children were performance-oriented, exhibited
high persistence, and had high competence and value beliefs. Parents rated
their children low on avoidance motivation and moderate on approach
motivation. A 3 (FCz/Cz/Pz) x 2 (Correct/Error) ANOVA yielded significant interactions for the ERN and Pe. Mastery orientation was associated
with larger Pe, approach motivation was positively related to both the ERN
and Pe, and the Pe was positively correlated with competence beliefs and
negatively correlated with value beliefs. These results suggest that different
aspects of motivation are related to different aspects of error-related brain
activity. This is consistent with research suggesting that the motivational
processes of young children are domain specific, and that the ERN and Pe
represent different aspects/stages of error processing.

D27
DRD2 GENE ASSOCIATED WITH FASTER PROCESSING OF NEGATIVE SELF-REFERENTIAL INFORMATION Alex Kline1, Seth Disner1,
John E. McGeary2, W. Todd Maddox1, Christopher G. Beevers1; 1University of
Texas at Austin, 2Providence VA Medical Center — The dopamine receptor
D2 gene (DRD2) is a common target in gene-by-environment research due
to its effects on dopaminergic activity in the brain. The A2 allele has been
linked to vulnerability for disorders such as substance abuse, PTSD, and
depression (Noble, 2000; Bhaskar, Thangaraj, Non, Singh, & Rao, 2010;
Voisey, et al. 2008; Elovainio, et al., 2007). Depression in particular has
been linked to maladaptive cognitive patterns such as faster processing of
negative self-referential information, which is associated with activation of
negative self-referential schemas (Alloy, Abramson, Murray, Whitehouse,
& Hogan, 1997). The current study investigates the relationship between
the A2 allele of the DRD2 gene and self-referential information processing.
Seventy healthy participants provided saliva samples for genetic assay, and
completed the Self-Referent Encoding Task (SRET; Derry & Kuiper, 1981).
The SRET measures participants’ reaction time as they make self-reference
judgments about positive and negative adjectives. Although data collection
is ongoing, mixed effect regression models identified a significant three
way interaction between DRD2 genotype, self-reference, and emotional
valence, X2(2) = 6.91, p = 0.03. Specifically, carriers of the A2 allele were significantly faster when identifying negative, self-referential adjectives compared to positive or non self-referential adjectives, even when controlling
for current depression symptoms. These findings link the DRD2 gene with
faster response time towards negative self-referential stimuli, which likely
reflects facilitated activation of negative self-referential schemas. These
vulnerability factors likely increase sensitivity to negative elements in the
environment, increasing the risk of depression and anxiety.

D28
EXPECTATION OF PLACEBO ANALGESIA ENHANCES ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MARKERS OF ERROR PROCESSING Leonie
Koban1,2, Marcel Brass3, Margaret Lynn3, Gilles Pourtois3; 1University of
Geneva, 2University of Colorado Boulder, 3Ghent University — Placebo analgesia (PA) is usually accompanied by decreased activity in pain-related brain
regions, but also by greater prefrontal cortex (PFC) activation. Previous
studies have proposed that the PFC could play an important role in PA by
implementing increases in top-down control and regulation of pain. Here
we test whether PA is associated with altered prefrontal monitoring and
control functions that could be necessary in order to adjust to a mismatch
between expected and experienced pain. Using a within-subject cross-over
design, we recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) for error commission
in a speeded go/nogo task during placebo vs. a matched control condition.
Error commission was associated with two well-described components, the
error-related negativity (ERN) and the error positivity (Pe). Results show
that only the Pe, but not the ERN, was selectivity amplified during PA compared to the control condition, with neural sources in the lateral and medial
PFC. This Pe effect was driven by participants showing a placebo-induced
change in pain tolerance, but was absent in the group of non-responders.
Our results shed new light on the possible functional mechanisms underlying PA, suggesting a placebo-induced transient change in prefrontal error
monitoring functions. More specifically, an altered processing of errors
could be necessary to implement top-down changes in pain sensitivity in
order to regulate a mismatch between expected pain and nociceptive input.

2013 Annual Meeting

D29
ALTERATIONS IN EMOTION AND EXECUTIVE PROCESSING IN
ADOLESCENTS WITH MENTAL HEALTH DISORDERS: AN FMRI
INVESTIGATION. Marisa Kostiuk1, Andrea T. Shafer2, K. Jessica Van Vliet3,
Sunita Vohra4, Lihong Wang5, Florin Dolcos2,6, Anthony Singhal1,2; 1Department of Psychology, University of Alberta, 2Centre for Neuroscience, University of Alberta, 3Department of Educational Psychology, University of Alberta,
4
Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta, 5Department of Psychiatry,
Duke University, 6Department of Psychology, Neuroscience Program, and Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Emotion processing (EP) and attentional control (AC) are sub-served by two separate, but
integrated neural networks. EP is associated with more ventral structures
(e.g. amygdala) and AC with more dorsal structures (e.g. dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, dlPFC; lateral parietal cortex, LPC). Notably, AC is active
in both goal-relevant processing and inhibition of emotional distraction.
For example, research examining emotion-attention interactions in adolescents suggests reduced emotional distraction inhibition due to late development of the AC network, and findings from adults with affective disorders suggest a heightened emotional response due to AC dysfunction. EP
and AC have been investigated separately in healthy adolescents and clinical adults, but their interaction in adolescents with affective disorders is
unclear. This was investigated with clinical adolescents (CAs) and controls
using an emotional oddball task with infrequent task-irrelevant distracters (negative, neutral images) and task-relevant targets presented amongst
frequent phase-scrambled images, while fMRI data were recorded. Results
show altered EP in CAs with faster responses to distracters and greater
and more generalized neural response when processing distracters. Controls exhibited response specificity to fear distracters in behavior and in
EP regions including amygdala. Results also show AC dysfunction with
decreased accuracy and activation in LPC to targets in CAs. Furthermore,
behavioral differences to targets were modulated by the preceding distracter in CAs only: responses to targets-after-fear were faster than to targets-after-neutral, and dlPFC showed greater deactivation during fear processing. Findings extend the role of AC dysfunction to clinical adolescents,
while showing elevated generalized response to pictures and attenuated
emotional response.

D30
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL INVESTIGATION ON CONSCIOUS
AND NON-CONSCIOUS EMOTION I-Chen Chou1, Tsung-Han Yang1, Po-Yu
Wu1, Bo-An Chuang1, Wei-Ting Hsieh1, Nai-Shing Yen1,2,3; 1Department of Psychology, National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Research Center for
Mind, Brain, and Learning, National Chengchi University, 3Taiwan Mind & Brain
Imaging Center, TMBIC — The current study directly compared emotion
regulation effects between conscious and non-conscious awareness and
its temporal dynamics to fill the gap of the current literature that focused
mostly on conscious and deliberate control strategies such as cognitive
reappraisal and suppression. Fifty six participants were randomly assigned
to (1) conscious reappraisal, (2) conscious suppression, (3) non-conscious
reappraisal, and (4) non-conscious suppression groups. In the first part of
the study, we asked participants to passively viewing positive, neutral, and
negative pictures. After a short break, we either asked participants to regulate their emotions (conscious group) or primed the regulated goals to them
(non-conscious group) while viewing different set of emotional pictures.
We investigated the role of consciousness on two emotion regulation strategies by comparing late positive potentials (LPP) and their subjective ratings
on valence between first and second part of the studies across four groups.
Our main findings included (1) Participants regulated positive emotions
(300-1300 ms) better than neutral and negative ones (ps .042).(2) Among
two conscious groups, the regulation effect was stronger using reappraisal
than suppression strategy between 1300-2300ms (ps .064).(3) Participants
in non-conscious regulation group had better outcome than conscious regulation group between 3700-4000 ms (ps .005) disregard of strategies. Our
results lined up with previous findings (Bargh et al., 2001; 2009; Mauss et
al., 2007) and showed practicability and advantages of non-conscious emotion regulations.

Poster Session D

D31
VICARIOUS EXTINCTION BLOCKS THE RETURN OF LEARNED
FEAR Armita Golkar1, Ida Selbing1, Oskar Flygare1, Andreas Olsson1; 1Kar-

olinska Institutet — Information about what is dangerous and safe in our
environment is often transferred from other individuals through social
forms of learning, such as observation. Past research has focused on the
observational, or vicarious, acquisition of fears, but little is known about
how learned fears can be attenuated vicariously. To address this, we studied the effects of vicarious extinction learning on the recovery of conditioned fear as measured by skin conductance responses. After a standard
conditioning procedure, both a Direct extinction and a Vicarious extinction group watched a movie involving unreinforced presentations of the
conditioned stimuli (CS). For the Vicarious extinction group, a learning
model was depicted in the video as also watching the CS presentations.
We showed that, as compared to direct extinction, vicarious extinction promoted better extinction and blocked the recovery of fear during a subsequent reinstatement test. We then confirmed that these effects could not
be attributable to the presence of the learning model per se by comparing
the Vicarious extinction group to a separate group of subjects; the Vicarious reinforcement group, which differed from the Vicarious extinction
group only in that the learning model received shocks coupled to the presentations of the previously reinforced CS. Critically, vicarious extinction
resulted in less reinstatement as compared to the Vicarious reinforcement
group. Taken together, our results demonstrated that vicarious extinction
efficiently blocked the expression of previously learned fear responses.
These findings have implications for research on emotional learning, social
affective processes, and clinical practice.

D32
INSULA AND POSTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX RESPOND TO
NEGATIVE AFFECT AFTER REWARD OMISSION Steven R. Green1,
Sharlene D. Newman1, Joshua W. Brown1; 1Indiana University — Recent imaging studies have implicated the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and insula
in processing negative affect after task performance failure. Based on
these results, a possible role for the dACC and insula may be in processing negative affect. However, these studies have focused on the negative
affect following task failure and have not evaluated their involvement in
negative affect after reward omission. Reward omission is of interest for
negative affect, as frustration theory has hypothesized that the omission
of an expected reward can evoke the emotion of frustration. The current
study developed an aversive task manipulating negative affect through the
effort required to finish a trial and also the probability of omission while
collecting self-reports of frustration after each trial. After performing a
whole brain cluster-corrected analysis contrasting trials in which a reward
was omitted relative to trials where reward was received, we found left
insula and posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) activation. Furthermore, subjects reported greater levels of frustration after reward omission relative
to reward. These results indicate that reward omission is frustrating and
that the insula and the PCC activation may in part be mediating this negative affective response. Our conclusion is consistent with previous studies
establishing a relationship between PCC and insula with negative affect.
The results expand upon previous work by showing that reward omission
is associated with frustration. Future analyses will focus on establishing a
tighter association between PCC and insula with reports of frustration to
confirm these roles in affective processing after a negative outcome.

D33
MODULATION OF ANTICIPATORY THREAT ACTIVITY BY TEMPORAL
PREDICTABILITY IN COMBAT-EXPOSED VETERANS WITH AND
WITHOUT PTSD Dan W Grupe1, Emma Seppala1, Richard J Davidson1, Jack
B Nitschke1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison — Research on the neurobiology of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) emphasizes alterations to the
medial prefrontal cortex, extended amygdala, and hippocampus. Although
much attention has been paid to altered fear learning and extinction in
PTSD, here we investigated involvement of this circuitry in an instructed
threat anticipation task in combat-exposed Operation Iraqi Freedom/Operation Enduring Freedom veterans. During fMRI scanning, 7 veterans with
PTSD and 8 veterans without PTSD viewed colored squares indicating
either threat of shock or safety from shock. These squares were followed by

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

127

Poster Session D
a variable-length anticipation period that terminated with a tone occurring
either predictably or unpredictably. On 30% of the threat trials, aversive
electric shock was delivered concurrently with the tone. Analyses focused
on the modulation of anticipatory activity by the factors of threat condition
and temporal predictability. Threat of shock resulted in robust anticipatory
activity in the anterior mid-cingulate cortex (aMCC) and bilateral extended
amygdala. In contrast, this condition resulted in deactivation in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), basal amygdala, and anterior hippocampus. The temporal profile of aMCC activity showed qualitative differences
for predictable and unpredictable threat trials, with the former showing
increasing activity at the expected time of shock and the latter showing
sustained activity throughout the anticipatory period. In the vmPFC and
amygdala/hippocampus, greater deactivation was observed for unpredictable relative to predictable threat trials. While similar patterns of activity
were observed across groups, further analysis with additional subjects is
needed to better understand the integrity of this circuitry in combat-exposed veterans with and without PTSD.

D34
MINDFULNESS-BASED TRAINING ALTERS BRAIN ACTIVATION
DURING AN EMOTION FACE PROCESSING TASK IN INFANTRY
MARINES. Lori Haase1, Akanksha Shukla1, Douglas C. Johnson1,2, Nate J.
Thom2, Elizabeth A. Stanley3, Alan N. Simmons1,4, Martin P. Paulus1,4; 1University of California, San Diego, 2Warﬁghter Performance Department, Navel Health
Research Center, San Diego, CA, 3Mind Fitness Training Institute, Alexandria, VA,
4
VA San Diego Healthcare System — The neural basis of mindfulness training (MT) is poorly understood but both cognitive control and interoceptive
neural systems have been implicated. Thus, not surprisingly, recruitment
of anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and insula has been consistently documented in tasks involving mindfulness meditation. Understanding the
neural mechanisms underlying MT is a first step to develop more targeted
interventions or to assess the degree to which MT alters cognitive and affective processing in individuals. This study aimed to investigate whether MT
modulates the brains response to an emotion face matching task. Infantry
Marines scheduled to undergo pre-deployment training and deployment,
were examined in this experiment, and were divided into two groups: individuals who received a 20-hour Mindfulness-Based Mind Fitness Training
(MMFT) and individuals who received training as usual (control). All subjects completed an emotion face matching task during functional magnetic
resonance imaging at: 1) baseline, 2) post-MMFT training, and 3) post-deployment. MMFT group, relative to the control group, demonstrated significantly less activation in the amygdala, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC),
and fusiform gyrus. Approximately 1-year following MMFT intervention,
significant group differences in brain activation emerged, such that the
MMFT group had attenuated brain activation in the anterior insula, ACC,
and caudate, relative to the control group. The present findings indicate
that MMFT intervention modulates the brains response during an emotion
recognition task in regions involved in interoception, attention and emotion
processing. There is also evidence to suggest differential time-course effects
of MMFT modulation on brain activation during emotion processing.

D35
ENHANCING CULTURALLY CONGRUENT SELF-CONSTRUALS
DECREASES EMPATHIC NEURAL RESPONSES Shihui Han1, Chao
Jiang1, Michael Varnum1, Youyang Hou1; 1Peking University — Behavioral
research suggests differences in both self-construal and empathy for others
between Westerners and East Asians. However, it remains unclear whether
there is a causal relationship between self-construal and empathy. The
present study examined whether and how making culturally congruent
vs. incongruent self-construals salient affects empathic neural responses.
We recorded event related brain potentials to perceived pain after Chinese and Westerners had been primed with independent or interdependent self-construals. Perception of painful vs. non-painful stimuli applied
to hands of unknown others elicited a positive shift over the fronto-central area at 232-332 ms post-stimulus in a control condition. Such neural
responses to perceived pain were decreased by interdependent self-construal priming among Chinese and by independent self-construal priming among Westerners. Our findings suggest that reinforcing culturally

128

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
predominant self-construal decreases the sensitivity to perceived pain in
unknown others possibly by highlighting the boundary between the culturally defined “self” and others.

D36
FUNCTIONAL ROLE OF AMYGDALA: A HIGH-RESOLUTION
FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE STUDY OF EMOTIONAL
PROCESSING. Stanislau Hrybouski1, Andrea T. Shafer1, Tyler Rolheiser1,
Christopher R. Madan1, Corey A. Baron1, Peter Seres1, Fraser Olsen1, Nikolai
Malykhin1; 1University of Alberta — The neuroanatomical substrate of emotional processing has been studied using functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) for a number of years. While much of this research has
focused on the amygdala, most studies have not had the spatial resolution
required to isolate the amygdala proper from the surrounding structures
in the medial temporal lobe. In addition, partial volume effects from the
adjacent vasculature and white matter have also prevented accurate localization of the BOLD response within the amygdala itself. In the present
study we developed a high-resolution fMRI scanning and analysis protocol aimed at elucidating the functional significance of the amygdala in
emotional processing. Healthy volunteers rated images of varying levels
of emotional arousal (high, medium, low, and neutral) in an event-related
fMRI task. T2*-weighted EPI volumes were acquired on a Varian Inova 4.7T
scanner (30 axial slices, TE = 19ms, TR = 2000ms, 74 volumes, resolution =
1.5mm × 1.5mm × 1.5mm). An ultra-high resolution structural T2-weighted
2D Fast Spin Echo (FSE) scan (90 coronal slices, TE = 39ms, TR = 11000ms,
resolution = 0.52mm × 0.68mm × 1.0mm) was also acquired for high-precision manual anatomical tracing of the amygdala using a reliable volumetric protocol developed by our group. Results show that BOLD signal
change co-varied with the emotional arousal level of the image in bilateral
amygdala, with some individual variability based on the subjective ratings
of emotional arousal. In conclusion, we report bilateral amygdalar modulation based on the emotional demands of a task using high-field imaging
techniques.

D37
DIFFERENTIAL REWARD SYSTEM PROCESSING OF VIOLENT AND
NON-VIOLENT SUCCESS IN A VIDEO GAME Martin Klasen1,2, Krystyna
A. Mathiak1,2, Mikhail Zvyagintsev1,2, Michael Schwenzer1,2, Pegah Sarkheil1,2,
René Weber3, Klaus Mathiak1,2; 1RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany,
2
JARA Translational Brain Medicine, Aachen/Jülich, Germany, 3University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA — Violent video games are popular and
perceived as highly rewarding. Gaming has been shown to activate striatal
reward system areas (Klasen et al., 2011), and recent research addressed the
role of game success and failure on reward system responses (Mathiak et
al., 2011). However, no study so far has separated effects of virtual violence
from those of game success in general. In an fMRI study, eighteen healthy
male subjects were measured during free playing of a violent video game
where the player drives a vehicle and has the task of killing as many pedestrians as possible. As a comparison, we introduced a non-violent modification without pedestrians where the task of the player was to collect colorful
icons. The game content was recorded and employed for fMRI data analysis according to different types of game events. Violent success activated
bilateral putamen. Event-related time course analyses revealed an initial
excitation phase for anticipated violent success, followed by a subsequent
deactivation if the player failed. Nonviolent success events were characterized by bilateral nucleus accumbens activation. These results show for the
first time a differential effect of violent and non-violent success on dorsal
and ventral parts of the reward system. Activity in the nucleus accumbens
is likely to reflect reward anticipation (Knutson et al., 2001), whereas the
putamen pattern suggests reward-based learning (Haruno & Kawato,
2005). Our findings indicate that violent success in a game is not per se
more rewarding than non-violent success, but may foster learning processes specifically associated with game violence.

D38
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THE USE OF SHAPE INFORMATION
FOR FACE RECOGNITION Juergen M. Kaufmann1, Claudia Schulz1,2, Stefan
R. Schweinberger1; 1Friedrich Schiller University of Jena, Germany, 2University Hospital of Münster, Germany — Previous findings demonstrated that
increasing facial distinctiveness by means of spatial caricaturing improves

2013 Annual Meeting
face learning, and results in modulations of event-related-potential (ERP)
components associated with the processing of typical shape information
(P200) and with face learning and recognition (N250). The current study
investigated individual differences in the effects of spatial caricaturing. A
modified version of the Bielefelder Famous Faces Test (BFFT) was applied
to subdivide a non-clinical group of 28 participants into good and poor face
recognizers. Overall, a learning benefit was seen for caricatured compared
to veridical faces. In addition, for learned faces we found larger caricaturing effects in response times, inverse efficiency scores and P200 and N250
amplitudes in poor face recognizers, indicating that these individuals profited disproportionately from exaggerated idiosyncratic face shape. During
learning and for novel faces at test, good and poor recognizers showed
similar caricaturing effects. We suggest that spatial caricaturing helps good
and poor face recognizers accessing critical idiosyncratic shape information that supports identity processing and learning of unfamiliar faces. For
familiarized faces, good face recognizers might depend less on exaggerated
shape and make better use of texture information than poor recognizers.
These results may be relevant for developing training-programmes for
people with difficulties in face recognition.

D39
SITUATIONAL DISCOUNTING OF POSITIVE OUTGROUP BEHAVIORS Jennifer Kubota1, Tobias Brosch2, Rachel Mojdehbakhsh1, James
Uleman1, Elizabeth Phelps1; 1New York University, 2University of Geneva —
Individuals have a propensity to ignore contextual (situational) information when explaining others’ behavior; instead individuals default to personality (dispositional) explanations. This is known as the fundamental
attribution error (FAE). It has been suggested that incorporating situational
information into causal attributions requires an additional controlled correctional step. Consistent with this, recent neuroimaging results find that
incorporating situational information into attributions is associated with
increases in activity in DLPFC, a region known to play a role in cognitive
control. In the current study, we extended these findings to intergroup
attributions. The Ultimate Attribution Error (UAE) represents a systematic
ethnocentric bias whereby positive outgroup and negative ingroup behaviors are attributed to situational causes, whereas positive ingroup and negative outgroup behaviors are attributed to dispositional causes. To assess
this, participants provided attribution ratings for Black and White targets
during fMRI. For each target, participants read a positive or a negative
behavior, as well as qualifying situational information. Overall, we found
mixed support for the UAE. For positive behaviors and consistent with the
UAE, individuals made more situational attributions for outgroups than
ingroups. However, for negative behaviors, dispositional attributions were
similar for ingroups and outgroups. Our findings suggest that biased intergroup attributions were more common in positive than negative scenarios. For positive behaviors, when outgroup members behave in stereotype
inconsistent ways, situational information is incorporated into judgments,
and this most likely occurs through an additional controlled correctional
step in the attribution process.

D40
PAST BEHAVIOR AFFECTS FUTURE INVESTMENT DECISIONS
AND MODULATES ACTIVITY IN PERSON PERCEPTION AND DECISION-MAKING BRAIN REGIONS Victoria K. Lee1, Elizabeth H. Thompson1, Rachel E. Kranton1, Lasana T. Harris1; 1Duke University — Social psychology demonstrates people infer traits about others from “thin slices”
of behavior—brief single acts—as well as from faces and photographs
(Ambady, 2010). These inferences activate a reliable person perception
brain network and allow for generalizations about the person that may help
guide behavior in future interactions (Brown & Brüne, 2012). Behavioral
economics demonstrates brief descriptions of past behavior affect social
decision-making and modulates brain activity in networks associated
with decision-making processes including valuation and prediction error
(Rilling & Sanfey, 2011). However, no study has examined the complete
process of making inferences from behavior leading to generalization, then
social decision-making across different domains. Here, we investigate the
mechanisms underlying these generalizations for predicting behavior in
person perception domains warmth and competence, and examine effects
on future behavior in both domains. A database of participants completed a
competence (time-estimation game) and a warmth task (charity donations).

Poster Session D
A separate group of participants then viewed accuracy and generosity
information for database participants in the fMRI scanner before predicting and investing in the person’s performance on an unrelated competence
(guessing rocks in a jar) or warmth task (trust game). This allows us to
test whether behavior in one game affects decision-making in a separate
economic game, and whether this is mediated by the inferences made from
the initial behavior. We show that inferences of trait warmth and competence are formed from prior behavior and affect investment decisions in
both contexts, modulating activity in brain regions implicated in both decision-making and person perception.

D41
READING WHAT THE MIND THINKS FROM HOW THE EYE SEES
Daniel H. Lee1, Reza Mirza1, John G. Flanagan1, Adam K. Anderson1; 1University
of Toronto — The eyes can convey a variety of complex social and emotional
information. However, it remains unknown which specific features of the
eyes convey such complex states, and how that came to be. Here we posit
that this ability originates from simple optical principles related to how
facial expressive eye-widening versus narrowing gathers and focuses light,
optimizing visual sensitivity versus discrimination. We first grounded our
investigation in basic expressions of fear, disgust, and neutral. Using standard tests of visual sensitivity and acuity, we show that fear eye-widening
enhanced light gathering for greater sensitivity relative to neutral and disgust, while disgust eye-narrowing more sharply focused light to enhance
discrimination relative to neutral and fear, in direct trade-off with one
another as optics predict. Next, using multivariate analyses relating perceived mental states based on structural eye features, we show that these
opposing optical effects also communicate opposing mental states denoting
sensitivity versus discrimination (e.g., awe versus suspicion). These results
show that emotional expressions are specifically shaped to serve opposing visual functions and that one organizing principle of the eyes’ external
reflection of internal mental states, and the human capacity to read them,
arises from how the eye sees.

D42
THE IMPACT OF FAMILIARITY AND CHILDHOOD EXPOSURE ON
THE NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF RACE PERCEPTION Tianyi Li1, Joshua
Correll2, Jasmin Cloutier1; 1University of Chicago, 2University of Colorado
Boulder — The current study investigated the impact of familiarity on the
perception of Black and White faces. Forty-seven Caucasian American participants took part in the study. Following familiarity training (requiring
the individuation of Black and White male faces), participants took part
in an event-related fMRI session during which they were presented with
familiar and novel Black and White faces. Measures of childhood exposure
to out-group members and of prejudice towards Black individuals were
collected at the end of the study. Analyses focused on brain regions of interest believed to support person evaluation (amygdala and ventral medial
prefrontal cortex). The results reveal an interaction between familiarity and
race in the left amygdala, such that familiarity reduced left amygdala activity to greater extent for Black compared to White faces. Increased childhood
exposure to Black individuals, when accounting for level of prejudice, was
associated with greater differences in left amygdala activity when perceiving novel and familiar Black faces. Furthermore, greater childhood exposure, once again accounting for level of prejudice, was found to predict
reduced differences in ventral medial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) activity
during the perception of familiar Black and familiar White faces. The implications of these results are discussed in the context of the factors believed
to shape evaluative processes in person perception.

D43
IN RACE ERASED? KNOWLEDGE OF POLITICAL IDEOLOGY
REDUCES INFLUENCE OF RACE ON NEURAL UNDERPINNINGS
OF IMITATION Elizabeth Reynolds Losin1,2, Marco Iacoboni1, Mirella
Dapretto1; 1University of California, Los Angeles, 2University of Colorado,
Boulder — People preferentially imitate those who are self-similar or high
in social status, biases thought to increase the efficiency of cultural learning. Although race can suggest self-similarity and social status and it is
also known to influence whom people imitate, other social categories are
often better indicators of these characteristics. We previously found that
race modulates the neural circuitry underlying imitation. Here we tested

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

129

Poster Session D
whether these race effects would be diminished when a social category
more diagnostic of belief similarity and orthogonal to race, political affiliation, was also present. Two matched groups of European American young
adults performed identical fMRI tasks in which they imitated models from
three racial groups performing meaningless hand gestures. Critically, one
group of participants learned fictitious information about models’ political
affiliations prior to scanning and the other did not. When participants had
knowledge of models’ political affiliations, their ratings of models’ self-similarity were based primarily on those affiliations, while the effects of the
model’s race were diminished. While the model’s race always modulated
neural activity in visual regions, race only significantly modulated activity within fronto-parietal regions associated with imitation when models’
political affiliations were unknown. Furthermore, this fronto-parietal modulaton by the model’s race was significantly greater than when models’
affiliations were known, while no between-group differences were seen in
visual regions. These data suggest that while race effects in visual areas are
likely due to the model’s physical appearance, race effects in imitation-related regions more likely reflects flexible processes of group identification
important for cultural learning.

D44
DIAGNOSTIC VALUE UNDERLIES ASYMMETRIC UPDATING OF
IMPRESSIONS IN THE MORALITY AND ABILITY DOMAINS Peter
Mende-Siedlecki1, Sean Baron1, Alex Todorov1; 1Princeton University — While
positive behavioral information is diagnostic when evaluating a person’s
abilities, negative information is diagnostic when evaluating morality.
While this may suggest that different rules govern impression formation
in the two domains, one parsimonious principle can potentially account
for this asymmetry—the statistical value of a specific behavior. As highly
competent and immoral actions occur less frequently in real life than their
counterparts, they provide more diagnostic information for impression formation. We compared the neural dynamics of updating impressions based
on ability and morality information, and tested whether the same principle guides impression updating on a neural level. If so, the diagnosticity
of behavioral information, rather than its content (morality vs. ability) or
valence, should drive neural responses associated with impression updating. While undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), 23
participants encountered individuals varying on either the ability or morality domain, across five behaviors. These individuals behaved consistently
during the first three trials (F3), but their behaviors switched valence during
the last two trials (L2). A test of the diagnositicity hypothesis showed that
activity in bilateral vlPFC, left IFG, and left anterior STS, increased during
L2 trials only when information was diagnostically valuable: immoral and
competent behaviors in the morality and ability domains, respectively.
Additional analyses observed no content- or valence-specific increases in
updating. Taken together, our results suggest that the same statistical principle underlies impression updating in both the ability and the morality
domains—the informational value of behavior.

D45
DNA METHYLATION OF THE OXYTOCIN RECEPTOR GENE IS
ASSOCIATED WITH CORTICAL AND SUBCORTICAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO EMOTIONAL FACE PERCEPTION James Morris1, Allison
Jack2, Jessica Connelly1; 1University of Virginia, 2Yale University — Social
perception facilitates affiliative behavior, protects against social isolation
and as a result, helps mitigate the impact of stressful life events. Oxytocin is a nonapeptide hormone with known anxiolytic effects that acts as
a neurotransmitter in the mammalian brain. We are investigating how
epigenetic variability of the oxytocin receptor (OXTR) may impact neural
systems supporting social perception. DNA methylation is an epigenetic
modification that can result in changes in gene function through changes
in gene expression. Prior work from our group has established that DNA
methylation of OXTR is associated with autism spectrum disorder and variability within neurotypical volunteers predicts neural response to socially
meaningful stimuli. Here we test the hypothesis that OXTR methylation
may influence the degree of ‘fear-related’ neural activity during emotional
face expression. Forty-one neurologically normal volunteers submitted
blood samples and were scanned while performing a common emotional
face-matching task. DNA from peripheral blood mononuclear cells was isolated from each subject and assayed for percent DNA methylation at sites

130

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
within OXTR that control gene expression in the brain. Higher degrees of
methylation predicted greater response in cortical regions including posterior superior temporal sulcus, middle temporal gyrus and angular gyrus as
well as subcortical regions including brain stem, thalamus and putamen.
An ROI approach demonstrated a significant relationship between OXTR
methylation and amygdala reactivity, whereby higher degrees of methylation were associated with greater reactivity to emotional facial expressions.
Future work will continue to consider how molecular mechanisms shape
social perception and impact our ability to regulate stress.

D46
NEURAL CORRELATES OF THE OTHER-RACE EFFECT IN ADULTHOOD: EFFECTS OF EXPOSURE Margaret Moulson1, Abdel Elshiekh1,
Nicole Sugden1; 1Ryerson University — Adults are poorer at discriminating
and remembering faces of other races compared to faces of their own race
(Meissner & Brigham, 2001). This “other-race effect” (ORE) appears during
the first year of life (Kelly et al., 2007; 2009), but there is some evidence that
the ORE can be modified by experience received in childhood or adulthood
(e.g., Sangrigoli et al., 2005; Hancock & Rhodes, 2008). However, the full
extent of plasticity in the face processing system in adults is unknown. In
the current study we are investigating the neural correlates of the ORE in
Caucasian adults, and Chinese adults who have varying exposure to other-race faces because they have spent differing amounts of time in Canada.
Participants view upright and inverted Caucasian and Chinese faces and
perform an orientation judgment while their brain activity is recorded
using high-density event-related potentials (ERPs). To date, we have analyzed data from 25 Caucasian participants. We found that the face-sensitive
N170 component was larger in amplitude and longer in latency for inverted
than upright faces. This inversion effect, a hallmark of face expertise, was
found for both Caucasian and Chinese faces. However, the inversion effect
was smaller for Chinese than Caucasian faces, indicating that Caucasians
have less expertise with Chinese faces. We are currently testing Chinese
adults to determine whether the size of their neural ORE differs depending
on how long they have spent in Canada. These findings will have important
implications for understanding the plasticity of the face processing system
beyond infancy.

D47
ADAPTIVE CHANGE IN THE NEURAL DYNAMICS OF OLDER
ADULTS IS RELATED TO PHYSICAL EXERCISE Jennifer Heisz1,2,
Anthony R. McIntosh1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, 2University of
Toronto — The human brain undergoes marked structural changes with
age. These changes compromise brain processes and can have detrimental
effects on cognitive function. While the brain can functionally reorganize to
compensate for some of this structural loss, there are interesting individual
differences in cognitive outcome. The present study examined age-related
changes in neural network dynamics as revealed by electroencephalogram
while participants performed a working memory task. We observe an
age-related shift in brain signal variability such that older adults displayed
less distributed variability and more local variability than younger adults.
Individual differences in task performance and lifestyle suggest that this
age-related shift in variability is adaptive. High performing older adults
had more local variability and less distributed variability than lower performing older adults. Moreover, a healthy lifestyle (with increased exercise
behaviour) was related to more local variability and better task performance. In other words, physical exercise seems to facilitate the age-related
shift in neural network dynamics, enhancing local variability for better cognitive function. In the face of structural changes, the neural flexibility that
is promoted by a physically active lifestyle may help older adults maintain
cognitive health longer into their lifespan.

D48
FUNCTIONAL MEASURES OF PREFRONTAL REGULATION IN
ADOLESCENTS EXPERIENCING EARLY DEPRIVATION Ruskin H.
Hunt1, Raquel A. Gabbitas-Cowell1, Megan R. Gunnar1, Kathleen M. Thomas1;
1
University of Minnesota — Background: Children reared in orphanages
experience deprivation as a result of inadequate physical care, and/or lack
of cognitive and socio-emotional stimulation. Some domains improve following adoption; however, cognitive and emotional problems often persist.
Neuroimaging studies suggest altered structure and function of the amyg-

2013 Annual Meeting
dala. Few studies have addressed development of prefrontal regulatory
systems. The current study examined behavioral and neuroimaging measures of prefrontal function in post-institutionalized (PI) youth, emphasizing the effects of duration of deprivation. Methods: Forty-four PI youth
(12-14 yrs.) and 22 non-adopted controls performed a cognitive conflict task
involving motor relearning during functional MRI scanning. PI youth were
either early-adopted (N=22) or later-adopted (N=22). Participants pressed
buttons in response to visually presented numbers, with instruction screens
periodically changing the mapping between fingers and numbers. Mappings ranged from low conflict (intuitive mapping) to high conflict (less
intuitive mapping). Previous studies have shown that high conflict trials
are more effortful and engage prefrontal regulatory systems in typical controls. Results: Later-adopted youth showed poorer performance (lower
accuracy and longer reaction times) than early-adopted youth or controls.
PI youth showed increased activation of bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex relative to non-adopted controls for high conflict compared to low
conflict trials. Early- but not late-adopted youth showed increased activation of medial prefrontal, cingulate, and insula regions during high conflict
trials. Conclusions: Behavioral and functional imaging results support the
hypothesis that early deprivation is associated with long-term alterations in
the development of prefrontal circuitry, and that developmental outcomes
vary with individual differences in early experience.

D49
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN WHITE MATTER IN FRONTO-PARIETAL AND FRONTO-STRIATAL TRACTS ARE ASSOCIATED WITH
DISTINCT MEASURES OF COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY Frini Karayanidis1,
Todd Jolly1, Pat Michie1, Christopher Levi1, Mark Parsons1, Andrew Heathcote1;
1
University of Newcastle, Australia — Distinct fronto-striatal networks have
been shown to modulate response conservativeness on a trial-by-trial basis
depending on the type of cue information (Mansfield et al., J Neurosci
2011). In young adults, individual variability in the structural integrity
of these pathways is associated with the tendency to adopt a more risky
or cautious strategy in a cued-trials switching paradigm (Mansfield et al.,
CNS abstract). Older adults show a preference for cautious responding
and, in a perceptual decision-making task, this is associated with reduction
of white matter (WM) integrity in fronto-striatal tracts (Forstmann et al., J
Neurosci 2011). Age-related disruption of WM in fronto-parietal tracts has
also been shown to relate to slowed decision rate (Madden et al., J Cogn
Neuro, 2009). In this study, we examine whether aging-related variability
in WM severity and multiple diffusion tensor imaging measures of WM
integrity in fronto-striatal and fronto-parietal pathways is associated with
performance and decision-related latent processes on a cued task-switching paradigm. Healthy elderly (n=33) and patients who recovered a mild
cerebrovascular event (n=25) completed single-task and mixed-task blocks
of 2-choice tasks under prepared and unprepared conditions. Participants
showed mild to moderate radiological findings of hyperintense WM
regions in T2-weighted MRI scans. Early analyses showed distinct associations between mixing cost (repeat trials in mixed-task vs. single-task block)
and switch cost (switch vs. repeat trials in mixed-task block) performance
and WM disruption in frontal-parietal, frontostriatal pathways as well as
the cingulum bundle. These findings are interpreted within the framework
of multiple process models of cognitive control.

D50
INDUCED POSITIVE AFFECT IMPROVES TASK-SWITCHING ABILITIES IN OLDER ADULTS Julia Karbach1, Kerstin Unger1; 1Saarland University — Recent evidence indicated that induced positive affect improved
executive control in healthy young adults and reward-based learning processes in patients suffering from Parkinson’s disease. These effects have
been attributed to transient boots in midbrain and striatal dopaminergic
activity. However, so far there is no evidence for the effects of induced positive affect on executive control in healthy older adults. In the present study,
we investigated 40 older adults (mean age = 72.4 years). In order to assess
baseline cognitive abilities, participants first performed a battery of cognitive tasks, including measures for perceptual speed, sematic knowledge,
working memory, and fluid intelligence. Afterwards, they watched a short
video clip (about 7 minutes). Half of the subjects saw classic cartoons and
the other half documentaries. Finally, all participants performed switching
task without external task cues, allowing the assessment of two domains of

Poster Session D
executive control (goal maintenance and switching). Before and after the
switching task, subjects completed a questionnaire assessing their affective states. Our analyses showed no differences in cognitive baseline performance between the participants reporting an increase in positive affect
after seeing the video clips and those who did not. Importantly, data of
the switching task showed no between-group differences in terms of goal
maintenance, but participants with increased positive affect were more efficient in terms of task switching. The finding that induced positive affect
modulates flexibility and but not maintenance is consistent with data from
young adults and is likely to be caused by dopaminergic increases in the
striatum.

D51
CORTICAL GREY-MATTER THINNING IS ASSOCIATED WITH
AGE-RELATED IMPROVEMENTS ON EXECUTIVE FUNCTION
TASKS Maria Kharitonova1, Rebecca E. Martin2, John D.E. Gabrieli3, Margaret
A. Sheridan1; 1Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
Columbia University, New York, NY, 3Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA — Across development children show great improvement
in their executive functions, including the ability to hold information in
working memory and to deploy cognitive control, allowing them to ignore
prepotent responses in favor of newly learned behaviors. How does the
brain support these age-related improvements? Cortical grey-matter thinning, which is thought to be a correlate of increases in myelination and synaptic pruning, is one potential explanation for age-related improvements
on measures of executive function. Here we used structural MRI to estimate
cortical thickness using the morphometric procedures from the FreeSurfer
image analysis suite. We investigated the association between cortical
thickness in three a priori defined cortical regions and age-related changes
in cognitive control and working memory tasks in 5-10 year old children
(N = 32) and adults (N = 10). There were significant associations between
reductions in cortical thickness and improvements in task performance
across age for both tasks. Specifically, we observed a double-dissociation
across thickness of neural regions that are related to changes in cognitive
control (right Inferior Frontal gyrus and Anterior Cingulate cortex) and
working memory span (Superior Parietal cortex), and performance on cognitive control and working memory tasks. These data add to our growing
understanding of how the structural maturation of the brain supports vast
behavioral changes in executive functions observed across childhood. In
addition, our findings inform an ongoing debate regarding the functional
role of the right Inferior Frontal Gyrus and suggest that its main role lies in
attentional context monitoring, rather than in response inhibition.
2

D52
AN EIGHT MONTH EXERCISE INTERVENTION ALTERS BRAIN
ACTIVATION DURING COGNITIVE CONTROL IN OVERWEIGHT
CHILDREN Cynthia Krafft1, Abby Weinberger1, Nicolette Schwarz1, Lingxi
Chi1, David Schaeffer1, Jordan Pierce1, Amanda Rodrigue1, Nathan Yanasak2,
Jerry Allison2, Catherine Davis2, Jennifer McDowell1; 1University of Georgia,
2
Medical College of Georgia — Children who are more overweight or less fit
tend to have worse performance on tests of cognitive control (CC). We have
shown that regular exercise has cognitive benefits in overweight children
and that it can alter brain activation as measured by functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). The current study compared brain activation
between an exercise intervention and attention control group. Forty sedentary, overweight (body mass index ≥ 85th percentile) children 8-11 years
old were randomly divided into either an aerobic exercise (n=23) or attention control group (n=17). The exercise group underwent 40 min/day of
instructor-led aerobic exercise, while the control group underwent 40 min/
day of instructor-led sedentary activities. Programs were offered every
school day for 8 months. At baseline and post-intervention, both groups
completed a flanker task during fMRI. The flanker task requires response
selection within the context of response-congruent and -incongruent information. fMRI data were analyzed using standard procedures and the group
by time interaction was investigated using a whole-brain ANOVA. Results
demonstrate significant alterations in several regions that are important
for flanker performance. For instance, the incongruent versus congruent
contrast showed a significant difference between the groups in the superior frontal gyrus, where the exercise group showed increased activation
compared to the control group from baseline to post-test. This could reflect
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

131

Poster Session D
more flexible modulation of neural resources, which may be related to the
cognitive improvements that have been observed with exercise in previous
studies.

D53
COGNITIVE BENEFITS OF MUSIC AND ART TRAINING IN HEALTHY
OLDER ADULTS: BEHAVIOURAL AND ERP STUDIES Sylvain Moreno1,
Yunjo Lee1, Gavin Bidelman2, Aline Moussard1, Claude Alain1; 1Rotman Research
Institute, 2University of Memphis — It is well documented that music training offers a variety of cognitive benefits. Emerging evidence suggests that
musical activity late into life may preserve cognitive functioning in old
age. Cognitive aging is associated with inhibitory deficits: older adults
show difficulties attending to relevant information while ignoring irrelevant information. Considering the rapidly growing aging population, it is
crucial to study the effects of music or other types of training as a way
to intervene such cognitive decline. Here we explore whether short-term
engagement with different forms of training (music and visual arts) can
provide the aging brain with cognitive benefits. Specifically we assess
whether or not training can improve attention and inhibitory control. Based
on age, education and IQ, older adults (age range: 58-82 years) were pseudo-randomly assigned to either a music training group (n=18) or a visual
art training group (n=19). Each group received either music or visual art
lessons with a professional teacher for three months. Cognitive skills were
assessed behaviorally with a neuropsychological test battery and a visual
Go/NoGo task during electroencephalographic recording before and
immediately after training. Following training, both groups improved in
Digit Symbol, Stroop, and Cattell. Additionally, the visual art group was
faster in color naming compare to pre-training (a subtest of Stroop). Evoked
brain responses showed enhanced P3 amplitude in frontal channels of both
groups but larger in the art group suggesting enhanced attention and inhibitory control. Results suggests the possibility that music and art training
can be an effective intervention for cognitive aging.

D54
REAL-TIME STRATEGY VIDEO GAME TRAINING INCREASES
FRONTO-PARIETAL CORTICAL THICKNESS, DEFAULT MODE NETWORK CONNECTIVITY, AND REASONING ABILITY IN HEALTHY
OLDER ADULTS William McGarry1, Maren Strenziok1, Dean Cisler1, Ellen
Clarke1, Sophia Santa Cruz1, James Thompson1, Raja Parasuraman1, Pamela
Greenwood1; 1George Mason University — Several studies found cognitive
training in older people transfers to untrained tasks like reasoning, but
the neural correlates of such effects are uncertain. Method of Loci training in older adults increased cortical thickness (CT) in fusiform and lateral
orbitofrontal cortices, and improved source memory. Based on evidence
that strategy videogame training increased functional connectivity in the
default mode network (DMN), we hypothesized that real-time strategy
training would induce an integrated change in gray and white matter altered cortical thickness, increased DMN connectivity, and transfer to reasoning ability in older adults. Seven participants aged 60 to 85 underwent
structural MRI (mprage: 160 slices; 1x1x.94 mm3; TR=2300ms; TE=3ms)
and resting state scanning (BOLD: 42 slices; 3mm3; TE=30ms; TR=2500ms)
before and after a six-week “no contact” period. Participants then learned
and practiced a strategy videogame (8 weeks, 1 hour/day, 6 days/week).
After training, they were scanned again. Reasoning ability for finding word
patterns was assessed before and after training using the Word Series task.
Whole-brain longitudinal analyses (FreeSurfer) indicated significantly
greater thickening during the training versus control period in superior
parietal, lateral inferior frontal, motor, and fusiform cortices (p<.05, cluster-corrected). Seed-based correlations revealed greater functional connectivity between the posterior parietal cortex and angular gyrus post-training
compared to pre-training (p=.07). Accuracy on the Word Series task was
also higher post-training (p<.01). Transfer of strategy training to reasoning
may result from a combination of altered DMN connectivity, involved in
self-referential cognition and consolidation processes, and a thicker cortex
in fronto-parietal attention networks.

132

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

D55
FEEDBACK BLUNTING AS A MECHANISM OF SLEEP LOSS
IMPACT John Hinson1, Paul Whitney1, Melinda Jackson2, Hans Van Dongen1;
1

Washington State University, 2Victoria University, Melbourne, Australia —
The adverse impact of sleep loss on critical decisions in the real world is
well-documented. Nonetheless, laboratory studies of sleep deprivation
often show small or inconsistent effects on decision making performance
in controlled settings. Laboratory decision tasks typically involve a series
of independent decisions on well-specified outcomes, but many of the real
world contexts in which sleep deprivation produces errors in decision
making require that critical information must be acquired over time and
updated based on feedback. No sleep deprivation research to date has used
decision making tasks that allow isolation of the ability to utilize feedback
to guide decisions. The present study examined sleep deprivation effects
on the utilization of feedback in a decision task involving both uncertainty
and time pressure. In our study sleep deprivation eliminated the ability
to use accuracy feedback from previous trials to improve performance on
future trials. Skin conductance responses revealed that the ineffectiveness
of feedback was associated with a blunted affective reaction to feedback.
The feedback blunting observed in this study is not attributable to the most
well established mechanism of sleep loss effects, that is, occasional lapsing
or interruptions in the bottom up flow of sensory and perceptual information. Discovery of the novel mechanism of feedback blunting allows prediction about when and where sleep deprivation will produce catastrophic
decision making outcomes in real world settings.

D56
BOTTLENECK-FUNCTION OF THE LEFT INFERIOR PARIETAL
CORTEX IN DUAL-TASKING REVEALED BY REPETITIVE TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION Houpand Horoufchin1, Britta
Worringer1, Antonello Pellicano1, Harshal Patel1, Iring Koch2, Ferdinand Binkofski1; 1Division of Clinical and Cognitive Neurosciences, Medical Faculty, RWTH
Aachen University, Germany, 2Institute of Psychology, RWTH Aachen University,
Germany — Previous dual-task studies found activation in the left inferior
parietal-cortex that was associated with delayed processing of the second
task in dual-tasking. Presumably, this reflects competition for neuronal
resources (bottleneck; Sigman & Dehaene, 2008). We hypothesized that
a “virtual lesion” induced in the left inferior parietal-cortex will result in
decreased performance of the second task. The dual-task in the present
study consisted of a colour- (yellow vs. blue) and a shape-discrimination
task (triangle vs. circle). We used stimulus onset asynchronies (SOA) of
0ms (strong interference), 300ms (moderate interference), and 900ms (no
interference). Two groups were tested. Both first performed a baseline measurement block (no stimulation) and then an experimental block with either
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS group) or sham stimulation (sham
group). We used a continuous theta-burst stimulation paradigm (Huang et
al., 2005) to induce a “virtual lesion” of the left inferior parietal lobe. Preliminary results (12 participants) already show a significant 3-way interaction
between SOA, TMS/sham and block (p<0.05). In the experimental block,
the TMS group showed increased dual-task interference in the second task
at short SOA relative to the sham group, whereas performance in both
groups did not differ in the baseline block. These results reveal a causal
relationship between the role of the left inferior parietal cortex and the performance of the second task in dual-tasking. They further corroborate our
hypothesis that the inferior parietal region plays a crucial role in the serial
processing of dual-tasks, most probably in form of a bottleneck.

D57
PAIN, CONGRUENCY, AND SURPRISE: PREDICTION VIOLATION
ACROSS DOMAINS IN THE ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX Andrew
Jahn1, Will Alexander1, Derek Nee2, Joshua Brown1; 1Indiana University, 2University of California, Berkeley — Previous research has suggested that the
Anterior Cingulate Cortex (ACC) is functionally segregated into a cognitive
component associated with dorsal ACC (dACC) and an emotional component associated with medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). However, recent
reviews have shown that the ACC is less functionally distinct than originally thought (Etkin et al, 2011), and a recent meta-analysis has shown
significant regions of overlap in the dACC in response to negative affect,
pain, and cognitive control (Shackman et al, 2011). Here we use FMRI to

2013 Annual Meeting
test whether the ACC shows a similar functional homogeneity in response
to prediction violations for both pain and cognitive control. To test this,
we used a factorial design consisting of cues signaling the probability of
receiving either aversive or non-aversive levels of electrical stimulation,
and cues signaling the probability of receiving a congruent or incongruent
spatial stroop. Our results show overlapping activations in the dACC for
violations of predicting upcoming levels of pain and upcoming levels of
required cognitive control. Furthermore, post-hoc analyses revealed that
the observed effects for both surprising pain and surprising spatial stroops
were driven by outcomes that were worse than expected and outcomes that
were better than expected, in contrast to predictions from Reinforcement
Learning theory (Holroyd & Coles, 2002) and instead supporting predictions by the PRO model (Alexander & Brown, 2011).

D58
THE USEFULNESS OF DISTRIBUTIONAL ANALYSIS TO ASSESS
COGNITIVE CONTROL EFFICIENCY AND SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
IMPULSIVE REACTIONS Jennifer Joyce1, Karen Davranche2; 1University of
Limerick, Ireland, 2Aix-Marseille Université et CNRS, France — The ability to
resist interference and inhibit incorrect activation is an essential aspect of
cognitive control which can be assessed using the Simon task. The classical
version required participants to respond, as quickly and accurately as possible, according to the relevant feature of a stimulus (the color) and inhibit
the irrelevant feature (the spatial location) of the same stimulus. Reaction
time performances are usually reported to be worse when relevant and
irrelevant information are mapped to different responses, than when corresponding to the same response. According to dual-route models, there
is a conflict between an automatic response triggered by the spatial location, and a slower, controlled response related to the relevant information.
The automatic activation is initially strong but gradually decreases over
time with the strengthening of a slow and incremental inhibition. Then,
a suppression mechanism counteracts the automatic activation and facilitates the occurrence of the correct response. The analyses of the percentage
of correct responses (conditional accuracy functions, CAF) and the magnitude of the interference effect (delta curve) as a function of the latency
of the response are powerful statistical methods. These analyses allow for
the assessment of the initial phase related to an individual’s susceptibility
to making fast impulsive errors, and the later phase associated with the
efficiency of the cognitive control. The usefulness of distributional analysis
will be illustrated through experimental data showing an impairment of
cognitive control with time on task, and the risky strategy of young adults
compared to the elderly.

D59
MEG TIME-FREQUENCY ACTIVITY DURING STROOP CONFLICT IN
TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Tracy L. Luks1, Corby L. Dale1, Leighton B.
Hinkley1, Phiroz E. Tarapore1, Shelly R. Cooper1, Sara C. LaHue1, Anne M. Findlay1, Hana A. Lee1, Suzanne M. Honma1, Danielle Mizuiri1, Srikantan S. Nagarajan1, Pratik Mukherjee1; 1UCSF — Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) patients
often have persistent cognitive deficits, particularly in attention and
executive function. We used Magnetoencephalography (MEG) to examine the timecourse of neural activity during a Color Naming Stroop Task
with beamforming source localization. Data were acquired from 19 adult
patients with chronic symptomatic mild or moderate TBI and 14 healthy
controls using a 275-channel whole-head biomagnetometer (CTF Systems,
Vancouver BC) and analyzed in the time-frequency domain using Nutmeg
(bil.ucsf.edu/nutmeg). Activity was defined as power fluctuations in each
voxel over time in theta (4-7 Hz), alpha (8-12 Hz), beta (12-30 Hz), low
gamma (30-55 Hz), and high gamma (63-117 Hz) bands for Incongruent
versus Congruent trials and submitted to within- and between-group analyses. Control subjects had significant conflict-related activity in prefrontal
and temporal regions in all frequency bands, including Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex (DLPFC) and Anterior Cingulate Cortex (ACC), beginning
at 50 msec post-stimulus and extending throughout a 700 msec window. In
all regions exhibiting significant conflict-related activity in healthy controls,
TBI patients had equivalent or reduced activity. However, TBI patients
had extensive significantly increased activity in other frontal, temporal
and occipital brain regions in each frequency band. High Gamma activity, in right prefrontal cortex from 350-450 msec and right ACC from 350400 msec, was associated with conflict processing scores in TBI patients.

Poster Session D
This activity in right prefrontal cortex was correlated with the Extended
Glasgow Outcome Scale, a measure of clinical status. These results suggest
large scale compensatory reorganization due to TBI within the oscillatory
networks subserving conflict.

D60
VOLUNTARY INHIBITION OF PAIN AVOIDANCE BEHAVIOR Margaret Lynn1, Jelle Demanet1, Ruth Krebs1, Marcel Brass1; 1Ghent University —
Behavioral inhibition has classically been considered to rely upon a neural
network centered at the right inferior frontal cortex (rIFC; Aron et al., 2003).
However, the vast majority of inhibition studies have entailed exogenous
stop signals instructing participants to withhold responding. More recent
work has begun to examine the neural underpinnings of endogenous inhibition, revealing a distinct cortical basis in the dorsal fronto-median cortext
(dFMC; Brass & Haggard, 2007; Kühn, Brass, & Haggard, 2009). Yet, contrary to everyday experiences of voluntary behavioral suppression, the paradigms employed to investigate action inhibition have thus far been somewhat artificial, and involve little persuasive motivation to act. Accordingly,
the present fMRI study seeks to compare and contrast intentional with
instructed inhibition in a novel pain paradigm that recruits ‘hot’ incentive
response systems. Participants (N=21) received increasing thermal stimulation to their inner wrists, and were required to occasionally withhold
their natural impulse to withdraw from the visceral pain sensation at peak
temperature, in both instructed and free-choice conditions. Consistent with
previous research, we observed activation of the rIFC related to instructed
inhibition. Intentional inhibition, on the other hand, yielded additional striatal activation centered on the caudate nucleus. These data extend previous
research by demonstrating that under ecologically valid conditions with
a strong motivation to act, brain regions in addition to the dFMC become
relevant for voluntary inhibition. On a larger scale, these findings are concordant with recent models of inhibitory control suggesting discrete neural
pathways for the suppression of behavior (Aron, 2011).

D61
RESOURCE-SHARING BETWEEN INTERNAL MAINTENANCE AND
EXTERNAL SELECTION UNDERLIES THE CAPTURE OF ATTENTION
BY WORKING MEMORY CONTENT Anastasia Kiyonaga1, Tobias Egner1;
Duke University — The precise relationship between working memory
(WM) and attention is poorly understood. We examined the hypothesis
that WM represents internally allocated attention. WM and visual attention
should accordingly display a ‘push-pull’ relationship, due to their reliance
on a single resource. We tested a strong prediction of this model, namely
that WM content will (involuntarily) guide visual attention, but only
when there is sufficient time for attention to internally refresh that WM
content. If refreshing is prevented, WM content cannot be maintained and
thus cannot guide external attention. We therefore examined whether the
amount of unoccupied time during a WM delay could impact the magnitude of attentional capture by WM contents, as well as retention of that content. Participants were presented with a series of visual search trials while
they maintained a WM cue for a delayed-recognition test. WM cues could
coincide with the search target, a distracter, or neither. We varied both the
number of searches to be performed, and the amount of available time to
perform them. In support of the shared-resource hypothesis, the slowing of visual search by a WM matching distracter—and facilitation by a
matching target—were curtailed when the delay was filled with fast-paced
(refreshing-preventing) search trials. WM accuracy was also impaired by
fast-paced search sequences, independent of the total duration of the delay.
WM content may, thus, only capture visual attention during refreshing,
demonstrating that internal (WM) and external (visual) attention demands
mutually impact one another because they share a limited resource.

1

D62
TRACES OF EXPECTANCY BREACHES IN SEQUENTIAL EVENTS:
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN DESTABILIZED AND ADAPTED PREDICTIONS Anne B. Kühn1, Ricarda I. Schubotz1,2; 1Max Planck Institute for
Neurological Research, Cologne, 2Department of Psychology, Westfälische
Wilhelms-Universität, Münster — The fMRI-study aimed to investigate how
and by the help of which cortical areas the frontomedian cortex succeeds
in prediction of events despite continually and rapidly changing events. A
former study observed the frontomedian cortex to be activated if a sequenCognitive Neuroscience Society

133

Poster Session D
tial event could be predicted well, whereas a reduction of that activation
was present when prediction was destabilized by a preceding change of
that event. If this reduction of frontomedian activity is a neural signature
of destabilization only or of adaptation to altered events as well should be
clarified here. Furthermore, we hypothesized parietal or temporal areas to
reflect adaptation to altered events. In a pre-fMRI session subjects (n = 21)
learned a sequence of 24 digits. During the fMRI session this sequence was
repeatedly presented digit by digit. Unexpectedly digits were omitted and
subjects had to indicate these sequential changes by key presses. Half of
all omissions were repeated (double omissions) and half were not (single
omissions). If events can be predicted well, i.e. in non-destabilized events
(NDE) the frontomedian cortex was activated. This activity was reduced
in destabilized events after single omissions (DES) as known but almost
reached the activity level as in NDE in destabilized events after double
omissions (DED). Thus, the frontomedian activity reduction might only be
a signature of destabilization. DED compared to DES revealed an activation
increase in temporal and frontal areas. This might be a cortical signature of
breaking through a beginning adaption and of “repairing the known event
syntax” after repeated event-alterations.

D63
SEARCHING FOR TARGETS WITHIN VISUAL SHORT-TERM
MEMORY VERSUS PERCEPTUAL REPRESENTATIONS: A MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAHIC STUDY Bo-Cheng Kuo1,2, Duncan E. Astle2,3,
Gaia Scerif2, Mark W. Woolrich2, Anna Christina Nobre2; 1National Chengchi
University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, United
Kingdom — Recent event-related potential (ERP) studies have revealed
that searching for relevant items from within visual short-term memory
(VSTM) representations involves spatiotopically specific top-down biasing
of neural activity in a manner similar to that occurs during visual search
for items within perceptual representations. However, the underlying
neural substrates of VSTM and perceptual search were not fully investigated. Here our aim was to localise the neural source of brain activity
associated with spatiotopic selection of targets in VSTM representations by
using magnetoencephalograhy (MEG). Participants (N = 11) performed a
visual and VSTM search task. Participants viewed a sample shape and a
search array of different shapes. Their task was to respond whether the
sample shape was present in the search array. In visual search trials, the
sample shape appeared before the search array, and participants searched
for the target item within the perceptual array. In VSTM trials, the sample
shape appeared after the search array, and participants searched for the
target item within representations held in VSTM. In accordance with previous ERP findings, we found the mN2pc for both VSTM and visual search
from event-related magnetic field recording. MEG source localization using
beamforming analysis revealed that the mN2pc was related to posterior
visual areas for both search tasks. Moreover, the mN2pc for VSTM search
also reflected neural activity in the frontal cortex. Taken together, these
findings bolster the notion that top-down biasing in VSTM may share properties with spatially specific attentional mechanisms that bias perceptual
processing in favour of the relevant information.

D64
WITHIN-CATEGORY DECODING OF ATTENDED VS. UNATTENDED
ITEMS IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY Joshua J. LaRocque1, Adam C. Riggall1, Stephen M. Emrich1, Bradley R. Postle1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison — It has long been believed that short-term memory (STM) is accomplished by sustained, elevated neural activity, termed the “active trace.”
Recently, several studies (Lewis-Peacock et al., 2012; LaRocque et al., in
press) have suggested that this active trace corresponds to attention, not
STM, per se. In these studies, participants were retroactively cued to attend
to one of two items in STM. Using multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA)
applied to delay-period neural activity, the category of the cued memory
items was decoded successfully. However, uncued memory items could
not be decoded, suggesting that items in STM are accompanied by an
active neural trace only when they are in the focus of attention. A caveat
about this interpretation stems from the fact that these two studies decoded
memory items at the level of stimulus category (i.e., visually, semantically,
or phonologically encoded stimuli). This leaves open the possibility that a
category-agnostic but item-specific active trace supports the retention of

134

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
information outside the focus of attention. To test this alternative, we collected fMRI data while subjects performed the retrocuing STM task with
items drawn from the same category: coherent motion. With MVPA we
could decode STM for cued items. Decoding was unsuccessful, however,
for uncued items, despite the fact that they could be recognized on a subsequent memory probe. These results add to the mounting evidence that an
active neural trace reflects the focus of attention, not the contents of STM.

D65
HIGHER OMEGA-3 FATTY ACID EXPOSURE MITIGATES EFFECTS
OF LOW PHYSICAL ACTIVITY ON COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE
Regina Leckie1, Neha Bhattacharjee1, Stephen Manuck1, Matthew Muldoon1,2,
Kirk Erickson1; 1Univerisity of Pittsburgh, 2University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center — Lower levels of physical activity are associated with poorer working memory and executive function. However, there is significant variation
in the extent to which any individual benefits from participation in physical
activity, raising the possibility that its effects might be attenuated or augmented by other moderating factors. One potential moderator of physical
activity on cognition is long-chain omega-3 fatty acid intake. The balance
between the omega-3 fatty acid, docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), and the
omega-6 fatty acid, arachidonic acid (AA), has been associated with multiple domains of executive function and shares several molecular pathways
with physical activity. The present study examined whether the AA:DHA
ratio in serum phospholipids moderated the effects of physical activity
on the Trail Making Task, Logical Memory Task, and a Spatial and Letter
N-Back task. Participants were 358 healthy adults, 30-55 y/o not taking fish
oil supplements. Physical activity was measured by the Paffenbarger questionnaire. Multiple regression analyses covarying age, sex, and education
revealed a significant interaction between Physical Activity and AA:DHA
for scores on both the Trail Making and N-Back tasks. Specifically, higher
proportions of DHA offset the negative effects of lower amounts of physical activity on cognitive performance, whereas low levels of both physical
activity and DHA was associated with the worst cognitive performance.
Our results suggest that a high proportion of omega-3 fatty acids mitigates
the negative effects of sedentary lifestyle on cognitive performance.

D66
MEMORY UPDATING OPERATION IS HIGHLY CORRELATED WITH
MULTIPLICATION PERFORMANCE Chia-Yuan Lin1,2, Cheng-Ching Han2,3,
Daniele Didino4, Brian Butterworth4, Nai Shing Yen1,2,3; 1Department of Psychology, National Chengchi University, Taiwan, 2Research Center for Mind, Brain,
and Learning, Taiwan, 3Taiwan Mind & Brain Imaging Center, TMBIC, 4Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, UK — Although approximate number system (ANS) has widely seen as the key factor to predict
math ability, we had recently found memory updating (continual adding
and subtracting numbers) capacity to be a stronger predictor to multiplication performance. However, one could argue that these results were due to
the similarity across two tasks as both memory updating and multiplication tasks required participants to be engaged in mathematic calculation.
To examine this potential confound, we added three control conditions
including (1) numerical memory updating task (remembering the larger
number shown on screen, no addition and subtraction required), (2) word
memory updating task (remembering the animal name that is smaller in
size), (3) spatial memory updating task (remembering the spatial location
after dot movements) in addition to (4) the original memory updating task,
(5) an ANS task (select the panel with more dots) and (6) a multiplication task. Thirty-four college students were recruited to participate in all
six tasks. Our preliminary results were consistent with previous findings
that showed no correlations between ANS and multiplication task performance. Correlation between numerical memory updating and multiplication performance was relatively low, but performance in all the three other
memory updating tasks was significantly correlated with performance in
multiplication task (rs > 0.6), suggesting high correlations in performances
we had found between memory updating and multiplication tasks was not
due to the presence of numbers in both tasks. We therefore concluded that
operation in memory updating was the key component to explain multiplication performance, not numbers per se.

2013 Annual Meeting

D67
FRACTIONATING THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF INDIVIDUAL
WORKING MEMORY COMPONENTS UNDERLYING PROBLEM
SOLVING SKILLS IN YOUNG CHILDREN Arron W. S. Metcalfe1,
Miriam Rosenberg-Lee1, Sarit Ashkenazi2, Vinod Menon1; 1Stanford University,
2
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem- Mt. Scopus — Baddeley and Hitch’s
multi-component working memory (WM) model has played an enduring
and influential role in our understanding of cognitive abilities in adults.
Little is known, however, about how WM components impact behavior
and brain response underlying cognitive abilities in children. We investigate the role of the model’s core central executive, phonological and
visuo-spatial abilities during a demanding mental arithmetic task in 7-9
year olds (n=74). Using a combination of neuropsychological assessments
of math ability and working memory, and functional neuroimaging during
arithmetic problem-solving, we test the hypothesis that behavior and brain
responses are independently predicted by the multi-component model.
Individual differences in visuo-spatial ability were the only significant predictor of math ability and were associated with increased task-related brain
responses in right ventrolateral and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and
bilateral intra-parietal sulcus and supramarginal gyrus. Individual differences in visuo-spatial, phonological and central executive components correlated with brain response in largely distinct brain areas. Overlap between
visuo-spatial and central executive correlations was observed in left
supramarginal gyrus. Left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex correlations with
visuo-spatial ability were mediated by central executive and phonological
ability; no overlap resulted for visuo-spatial and phonological abilities.
These results point to distinct patterns of brain response underlying the
central role of visuo-spatial WM for arithmetic problem-solving in young
children. Our findings reveal a striking concordance between cognitively
derived fractionation of working memory and task-related functional brain
activity and suggest that complex problem-solving tasks are fertile ground
for bridging cognitive constructs with developmental cognitive neuroscience findings.

D68
STRUCTURAL PLASTICITY RESULTING FROM PHONETIC CATEGORY TRAINING Stephanie Del Tufo1,2, Laura Mesite3, Emily Myers1,2,3; 1University of Connecticut, 2Haskins Laboratories, 3Brown University — Changes in
both gray and white matter have been shown to occur as a result of learning, even in adulthood. When learning a new language, functional recruitment of new brain areas for the new language may over time be accompanied by structural changes in the brain. Previous findings have shown
that brain structure differences in the left auditory cortex, bilaterally in the
parietal cortices and in the left inferior frontal cortex predict individual differences in the perception of foreign speech sounds (Golestani et al., 2002;
2007). Moreover, years of experience as a phonetician correlates with the
size of the left pars opercularis (Golestani et al., 2011), and recent work
suggests that structural changes may be seen following several months of
learning a second language (Stein et al., 2012). Taken together, these studies
suggest that extensive language experience results in structural plasticity.
What is less clear is whether these changes can be observed after shorter-term training, that is, over two weeks. In the current study, participants
were trained for ten days to categorize non-native phonemes taken from a
dental-retroflex continuum. Structural data was analyzed with FSL using
voxel-based morphometry (Douaud et al., 2007). Preliminary whole brain
analyses show anatomical differences in the right parietal cortex. Isolation
of this region using a post-training functional activation mask, betweenvs. within-category contrasts on the dental-retroflex continuum, confirmed
greater white matter density in the right parietal cortex after training. This
provides initial evidence of training-induced structural plasticity for the
perception of non-native speech sounds.

D69
ARE THERE DIFFERENT BRAIN MECHANISMS FOR LETTER,
SYMBOL AND DIGIT POSITION CODING? FMRI EVIDENCE FOR
ORTHOGRAPHIC SPECIFICITY Jon Andoni Duñabeitia1, Ileana Quiñones1,
Manuel Carreiras1,2,3; 1Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language (BCBL),
2
Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, 3University of the Basque Country
— Do within-string character position coding processes differ for different

Poster Session D
types of characters? Recent behavioral and electrophysiological data from
transposed-character manipulations in the perceptual matching task show
that this is the case. Deciding that two strings containing transposed-letters are different from each other (e.g., CVSN-CSVN) is much harder
than taking a similar decision for strings containing transposed-digits or
transposed-symbols. Besides, these effects follow a different time course,
with letters showing stronger and earlier effects than digits and symbols.
It remains unclear whether or not these differences are due to qualitative
or quantitative differences in position coding (different brain sources vs.
different time courses). Here we present an event-related fMRI study using
the same transposed-character manipulation within letter, symbol and digit
strings and a perceptual matching task. Results showed different brain networks associated with the processing of the different types of characters
(e.g., activation in the reading network only for letter strings). The discrimination cost between transposed-character references and targets was associated with an increase of activation in a bilateral fronto-parietal network
(attentional monitoring system). Critically, these results also showed that
position-coding differences for letters, symbols and digits were associated
with clearly different neural regions. While symbol-position coding effects
led to activation differences in areas associated with semantic processing
(e.g., posterior middle temporal cortex), digit-position coding cost effects
were found in the angular gyrus and the inferior parietal cortex, and the
cost in letter-position coding was associated with activation differences in
the fusiform gyrus, the pars opercularis and the supramarginal cortex.

D70
THE ROLE OF MORPHOLOGICAL STRUCTURE IN PHONEME PREDICTION: EVIDENCE FROM MEG Allyson Ettinger1, Tal Linzen1, Alec
Marantz1; 1New York University — Reaction times in auditory word recognition show effects not only of the point at which a morphologically complex
word becomes uniquely distinguishable from all other words in the language, whether morphologically related or unrelated (“kindly” from “kite”
and “kindness”), but also of the point at which its stem (“kind-”) becomes
distinguishable from other stems (“kindly” from “kite”). These results
weigh against full-form models of word processing in favor of models
assuming a role for obligatory morphological decomposition. Furthermore,
it has been suggested that this effect of morphological structure is mediated
by its involvement in prediction of upcoming phonemes. The present study
leverages the temporal resolution of magnetoencephalography (MEG) to
probe the role of morphology in phoneme prediction. Subjects performed a
lexical decision task on stimuli consisting of a) bimorphemic words paired
according to initial morpheme (“clockwise”, “clockwork”), and b) monomorphemic words paired according to shared phonological material starting at onset (“bourbon”, “burble”). Phoneme predictability was quantified
using the information theoretic concept of surprisal. Correlational analysis
of activation in the left transverse temporal gyrus revealed that less predictable phonemes were associated with higher processing cost both in simple
and in complex words. Importantly, morphological complexity enhanced
the effect of phoneme surprisal over and above the local informativity of
the phonemes, consistent with the hypothesis that morphological decomposition plays a role in predicting upcoming phonemes. The significant
effect of phoneme surprisal furthermore supports the viability of millisecond-by-millisecond analysis of information theoretic stimulus variables in
MEG data.

D71
DIFFERENTIAL PROCESSING OF LITERAL AND FIGURATIVE
MEANING IN THE LEFT AND RIGHT CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES
Smolka Eva1; 1Department of Linguistics, University of Konstanz — This study
investigated whether literal and figurative language is processed differently in the left and right cerebral hemispheres. For this purpose, we combined a visual sentence-priming experiment with visual half-field presentation of target associations. Sentences were either ambiguous idiomatic
sentences, that is, sentences featuring both literal and figurative meaning,
or literal control sentences. Seventy right-handed participants made lexical decisions about nouns that were associated with either the literal or
figurative meaning of the ambiguous idiomatic sentences. Sentences were
presented word-by-word in the central visual field (CVF), followed by the
target presentation in either the left (LVF) or right visual field (RVF). Our
results showed a strong interaction between visual field and association
type. Relative to the literal control sentences, in the RVF, only associations
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

135

Poster Session D
with the literal meaning of the sentence were activated, whereas in the LVF
associations with the figurative meaning of the sentence were activated.
These results indicate differential processing strategies in the left and right
hemispheres with respect to literal and non-literal language: The left hemisphere processes salient (literal) meanings of phrases while the right hemisphere is required to process figurative (non-salient) meanings.

D72
EFFECTS OF SLEEP AND NUMBER OF REPETITIONS ON NOVEL
SPOKEN WORD LEARNING: FMRI EVIDENCE Max Garagnani12, Yury
Shtyrov1, Matt Davis1; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge
(UK), 2University of Plymouth, Plymouth (UK) — The brain mechanisms underlying our ability to learn words are still not well understood. Previous evidence indicates that the newly learnt items acquire lexical status only after a
period of sleep, during which cortical consolidation processes are believed
to occur. Recent findings, however, indicate that many exposures to a novel
word during a short time may lead to a faster formation of cortical memory
traces. To investigate the effects of sleep and number of exposures on word
acquisition, we presented our volunteers with spoken familiar words and
novel pseudowords during two behavioural training sessions taking place
on two consecutive days (day1, day2). The number of times each item was
repeated (20 vs 150) varied orthogonally to the day-of-training. After the
training (on day 2), we used fMRI to measure brain responses to these
trained and, as a further control, to previously unheard (untrained) items.
We found that brain responses to words and pseudowords in the left STG
were differentially modulated by day/training. While word responses
were generally smaller and mostly unaffected by training, we found that
untrained, day2-trained, and day1-trained pseudowords exhibited increasingly smaller responses (i.e., gradually becoming more and more like real
word ones). This is line with previous results, indicating that sleep leads to
consolidation of newly acquired representations. When pulling apart data
for 20- and 150-times-repeated pseudowords, however, the effects of sleep
appeared limited mostly to the latter items, suggesting a critical role for the
number of repetitions required to set off consolidation and word learning
processes.

D73
PERCEPTION OF AMERICAN ENGLISH VOWELS BY ADULT BILINGUAL SPANISH SPEAKERS: AN EEG STUDY Paula Garcia1, Karen
Froud1; 1Teachers College Columbia Unicersity — Adult cross-language studies demonstrate that learning of a second language (L2) is influenced by
the native language (L1) phonological system, with L2 learners assimilating non-native sounds to native phonemes (Best, 1995; Flege, 1995). Adult
sequential bilingual Spanish-English speakers face perceptual challenges
in acquiring American English (AE) vowel contrasts, because these are
often signaled by multiple acoustic cues that may not be present in their
L1. Research on English vowel perception in L1-Spanish adults has focused
on the English vowel contrast /i/, /Ι/ (as in sheep, ship) because discrimination errors between these two vowels are common (Flege, Bohn & Jang,
1997; Fox, Flege & Munro, 1995). However, other vowel contrasts such as
/α/-/Λ/ and /а/-/æ/ are also known to present perceptual challenges
for Spanish listeners (Flege, Munro & MacKay, 1994; Escudero & Chládková, 2010). This study examined neurophysiological responses (ERPs) of
adult sequential Spanish-English bilinguals, compared to English-speaking
controls, in a task requiring perceptual discrimination of AE vowel contrasts /α/-/Λ, /а/-/æ/ under two listening conditions: (1) natural vowel
duration and (2) neutral vowel duration. MMN / P300 responses were
observed for all participants, indicating that Spanish and English listeners
were able to discriminate these vowels. However, Spanish speakers did not
show behavioral indices of discrimination between AE vowels, since accuracy and reaction time differed significantly between Spanish and English
groups. Directional asymmetries were observed only for the L1-Spanish
listeners. These findings provide more evidence on the neural correlates of
Spanish-speaking adults’ perceptual organizational abilities for identification of L2 vowel contrasts.

136

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

D74
THE FUNCTIONAL NEUROANATOMY OF ADULT SECOND LANGUAGE: AN ACTIVATION LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION META-ANALYSIS Sarah Grey1, Kaitlyn M. Tagarelli1, Peter E. Turkeltaub1, Michael T. Ullman1;
Georgetown University — Numerous fMRI and PET studies have investigated the neuroanatomical bases of second language (L2) learning and
processing. Although a number of review papers have examined this literature, the lack of quantitative statistics precludes determining the actual
patterns of L2 neural activity and how they compare to first language (L1)
processing. For example, it is difficult for qualitative reviews to take into
account study-specific features such as sample size. In this study we conducted a comprehensive quantitative meta-analysis of the functional neuroanatomy of L2 processing, focusing on lexical/semantics and grammar.
We used Activation Likelihood Estimation (ALE), a probabilistic method
for quantifying spatial reproducibility in neuroimaging studies. One hundred and thirty five fMRI and PET studies of L2 were identified, 34 of
which focused on lexical/semantics and/or grammatical processing, and
qualified for ALE analysis (based on several criteria, including examination
of the whole brain and reporting of stereotactic coordinates). Preliminary
ALE analyses revealed the following. L2 showed more activation than L1
both for lexical/semantics and for grammar. L2 and L1 showed both shared
and distinct brain areas for both lexical/semantics and for grammar. However, L2 grammar overlapped more with L1 lexical/semantics than with
L1 grammar. These and other results provide a quantitative fine-grained
analysis of the functional neuroanatomy of L2 and its relation with L1, and
constrain the theoretical landscape of the brain bases of L2.
1

D75
NATIVE LANGUAGE EXPERIENCE INFLUENCES THE NEURAL
SYNCHRONIZATION OF AUDITORY SPEECH PROCESSING: A
CROSS-LANGUAGE MMN STUDY USING TIME-FREQUENCY
ANALYSIS Chang Gu1, Yuliya Yoncheva1, Reyna Gordon1, Hua Shu2, Bruce
McCandliss1; 1Vanderbilt University, 2Beijing Normal University — Processing
speech in one’s native language might rely on enhanced neural sensitivity
with high temporal precision, which can be complimentarily measured in
EEG by power change and phase alignment to the speech onset. Here we
investigated how one’s language experience may tune the oscillatory synchronization of neural activity to achieve superior processing of native relative to non-native speech. In a cross-language experiment, we presented
the same sets of Mandarin and English syllable stimuli to Mandarin-speaking and English-speaking adults and measured their mismatch negativity
(MMN) response. We found that both the inter-trial coherence (ITC), which
indexes the EEG phase-locking to deviant stimuli, and the event-related
spectral perturbation (ERSP), which indexes the overall power change
of EEG, varied as a function of the native language of the subject. In line
with previous cross-linguistic MMN studies, we first applied conventional
event-related potential (ERP) analysis and found that, in both language
groups, the native contrasts elicited significantly larger MMN (160-220ms)
and P3a (280-320ms) ERP amplitudes than the non-native contrasts. Furthermore, time-frequency analysis revealed that this enhanced ERP to
native speech stems from a significant increase of ITC (P<0.01) and ERSP
(P<0.05) for the single-trial EEG in theta (4-7 Hz) and low-frequency alpha
(8-10 Hz) bands from 150 to 300ms. These results indicate that an individual’s heightened brain processing of native relative to non-native speech,
as evidenced by enhanced neural sensitivity and temporal precision, might
be driven by language experience tuning auditory neural synchronization
over the course of development.

D76
USING FTCD TO EXAMINE LANGUAGE LATERALISATION DURING
PHONOLOGICAL AND SEMANTIC FLUENCY TASKS Eva Gutierrez1,
Heather Payne1, Anna Safar2, Mairead MacSweeney1; 1Deafness, Cognition &
Language Research Centre & Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University
College London, 2Radboud University Nijmegen — Functional transcranial
Doppler sonography (fTCD) is a non-invasive, fast and safe way of establishing hemispheric dominance during cognitive tasks (see Deppe et al.,
2004; Bishop et al., 2009).The gold standard task for demonstrating lateralisation during speech production is phonological fluency (PF). Due to
concerns about artefacts induced during overt production, previous stud-

2013 Annual Meeting
ies have required covert production. In this study we tested this assumption by contrasting lateralisation during both covert and overt production.
We also tested semantic fluency (SF) to assess consistency of hemispheric
dominance across different language tasks. Nineteen right-handed English
speakers were tested in four conditions: PF–overt; PF-covert; SF-overt;
SF-covert. Laterality indices (LIs) for 12 participants who had sufficient
remaining trials following artefact rejection were calculated for each task.
Those with LIs significantly different from zero were classed as left or right
lateralised, as appropriate. The remainder were classed as ‘bilateral’. Our
data showed an increase of rejected epochs for the overt conditions. In
covert tasks, the strength of lateralisation correlated with the number of
words produced. Additionally, we observed a larger percentage of participants and stronger lateralization for PF than SF. Our results demonstrate
that lateralization can be assessed with fTCD during overt tasks, allowing
a more naturalistic experimental situation and concurrent measure of production, although more trials should be included to compensate for artefacts. More research is needed to fully understand the nature of within
individual variation in language lateralisation during language tasks with
different demands.

D77
COMPLEMENTARITY OF LINGUSITIC AND EMOTIONAL PROCESSING Victoria Harms1, Lorin Elias1; 1University of Saskatchewan — Clear

evidence suggests a division of functional processing between the left and
right hemispheres; the left hemisphere is known to be dominant for linguistic processing whereas the right hemisphere is found to be dominant
in emotional processing. These population-level biases in linguistic and
emotional processing suggest a complementary organization of these two
functions. It is commonly assumed that this complementary pattern reflects
a causal relationship in lateralization where the asymmetrical lateralization
of language processing to the left hemisphere drives emotional processing
to be lateralized the right hemisphere. However, little research has tested
this assumption by assessing whether this pattern of hemispheric asymmetry still holds when both functions are measured within subjects. Using
52 healthy, right-handed participants we examined whether the degree of
lateralization on the Fused Words task is correlated with the degree of lateralization on an emotional sounds task at the level of the individual using
the dichotic listening method. When laterality scores for the two tasks were
compared within individuals, only 59% of participants showed a complementary pattern of lateralization. The remaining 41% showed same-side
lateralization for both tasks. An overall complementary pattern of lateralization was observed at the population level, but no significant relationship
was found for degree of lateralization of linguistic and emotional processing within individuals. These results provide evidence against the assumption of a causal relationship between left- and right-lateralized functions;
rather, the observed pattern provides support for the view that functions in
the left and right hemispheres are independently lateralized.

D78
THE FUNCTIONAL ROLE OF THE UNCINATE FASCICULUS IN
SEMANTIC CONTROL: CONVERGING EVIDENCE FROM STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY MEASURES Denise Y.
Harvey1, Tao Wei1, Timothy M. Ellmore2, A. Cris Hamilton1, Tatiana T. Schnur1;
Rice University, 2The City College of New York — Language comprehension
impairments following stroke result potentially from a loss of cognitive
control during access to semantic knowledge. An increasingly popular
hypothesis proposes that the left inferior frontal gyrus supports this form
of control, directing activation of semantic knowledge underpinned by the
anterior temporal lobes. Further, a white matter tract, the uncinate fasciculus (UF), connects these regions. This study aimed to examine whether the
connectivity profiles of areas hypothesized to be important for semantic
processing predicts aphasic speakers’ comprehension impairments. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and resting-state functional magnetic resonance
imaging (rs-fMRI) data were collected from patients to assess the functional role of three ventral tracts: the UF, inferior longitudinal fasciculus
(ILF), and inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus (IFOF). Functional connectivity analyses were conducted on regions located in close proximity to the
ventral tracts. Based on its projections, we hypothesized that UF structural
integrity relates to semantic control performance. We assessed pathway
functional significance by correlating performance on word comprehen-

1

Poster Session D
sion tasks requiring semantic control with indices of pathway structural
integrity and the functional connectivity strengths of regions they connect. Both the structural integrity of the UF and the functional connectivity
strength of regions it connects predicted patients’ performance, while the
connectivity profiles of other subcortical and cortical structures did not.
We conclude that the UF mediates semantic control during comprehension
by connecting regions important for cognitive control with those storing
meaning. These findings also support a relationship between structural and
functional connectivity measures, as the DTI and rs-fMRI results provide
converging evidence.

D79
NEURAL SUBSTRATES UNDERLYING IMAGERY-BASED FOREIGN
WORD LEARNING Arturo Hernandez1, Kailyn Bradley1; 1University of Hous-

ton — The purpose of this study was to investigate whether an interactive
imagery-based learning paradigm would facilitate foreign word learning
beyond picture association. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
was used to examine the cognitive constructs underlying these pedagogies.
English monolinguals were trained on novel German vocabulary using two
different imagery-based learning techniques for four consecutive days. Picture imagery training required participants to visualize the picture of an
object presented with a novel word, whereas interactive training required
visualization of a first-person interaction with the object. After training,
participants were scanned during a preattentive listening task where all
60 learned and 30 novel words were presented. Two weeks post-scan,
vocabulary retention was assessed. Behavioral results revealed that participants learned more words through picture imagery. Additionally, imaging
results revealed distinct neural patterns related to the different learning
techniques. Words learned through picture imagery strongly activated
basic visual processing regions, whereas activity for words learned through
interactive imagery was greatly reduced and present in the anterior cingulate and SMA. The lack of activity for words learned through interactive
imagery suggests greater individual variability in the neural mechanisms
recruited in this paradigm. The simpler picture association learning technique was less taxing, and resulted in more homogeneous activation of
areas associated with visual processing, whereas individual differences
contributed to the wider range of learning outcomes in interactive imagery training. Taken together, these findings support the conclusion that it
is more difficult for adults to adapt to using interactive imagery to learn
vocabulary.

D80
THE DYNAMICS OF BRAIN ACTIVATION IN SEMANTIC PRIMING:
A STUDY COMBINING ERP AND EVENT-RELATED OPTICAL SIGNALS Jian Huang1, Suiping Wang1, Shiwei Jia2, Deyuan Mo2, Hsuan-Chih Chen2;
1

South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China, 2Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong S.A.R., China — Previous studies have revealed three different processes in semantic priming: automatic spread activation, strategic
retrieval and inhibition. However, the neural dynamics of these processes
remain unclear. In this study, we used the Event-Related Optical Signal
(EROS) technique that has both high temporal and spatial resolution to
examine the dynamics of brain activation in semantic priming. Fourteen
participants read pairs of words and made a lexical decision to the second
word in each pair. Words were presented sequentially with short(250ms)
and long(1000ms) SOAs in separated blocks. EROS responses were
recorded simultaneously with ERPs time-locked to the second words. ERP
results showed the N400 amplitude was modulated by the priming effect
in both short and long SOA conditions. And EROS results revealed activation in left superior/middle temporal gyrus(LS/MTG) in the early time
window(192 to 256 ms)for the short SOA condition, and in LS/MTG and
left anterior inferior frontal gyrus(LaIFG) in the N400 time windows. For
the long SOA condition, activation in LpIFG in the early time window(160
to 192 ms), and activation in the LMTG, LaIFG and left inferior temporal
gyrus/fusiform gyrus in the N400 time window. More interestingly, the
primed condition has larger activation in the LMTG from 384 to 448ms.
These results suggest that spread activation and strategic inhibition occur
very early and strategic retrieval exists in the N400 time window. Moreover, in the long SOA primed condition there is more rely on semantic
information while in unprimed condition the orthographic information is
more important to the lexical decision task.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

137

Poster Session D

D81
FROM IMPLICIT TO EXPLICIT: THE CONVENTIONALIZATION OF
NOVEL METAPHORS Jie Yang1, Manali Khadilkar1, Steven L Small1; 1Brain
Circuits Laboratory, Department of Neurology, University of California Irvine,
USA — Metaphors provide a poetic flourish to communicate ideas. In conventional metaphors the figurative meaning supersedes the literal meaning
while in novel metaphors the opposite is true. Despite known differences
in the biological basis of conventional and novel metaphor comprehension,
the process of conventionalization of a novel metaphor has not been investigated. In this fMRI study, six participants passively listened to 28 novel
metaphors (e.g., to brush one’s belly), each repeated 5 times in different sentential contexts, leading the figurative meaning to become more dominant
than the literal meaning (i.e., conventionalization). As a control condition,
participants heard identically configured repetitions of literal phrases (e.g.,
to beat octagonal drums). After each of five runs, participants completed a
short comprehension test to ensure attention to the stimuli. Bilateral superior temporal gyrus was activated in both metaphor and literal conditions.
Compared with literal phrases, novel metaphors showed increased bilateral activation in the anterior temporal lobes, possibly suggesting a stronger need for context integration in the metaphor condition. Repetition of
novel metaphors led to decreased activation in the right inferior frontal,
right inferior temporal, bilateral middle frontal, and bilateral anterior and
middle cingulate gyri. Repetition of literal phrases led to decreased activation in the angular gyri, precentral gyri, insulae, and medial frontal cortices bilaterally. Although conventionalization and familiarization elicited
decreased activation, they have different neural substrates: the right frontal
and temporal regions are more involved when the metaphor is novel, and
this possibly indicates that the right hemisphere is important for coarse
semantic coding.

D82
LOCALIZATION OF NEURAL NETWORKS FOR SEMANTIC AND
SYNTACTIC PROCESSING USING MEG Aneta Kielar1,2,3, Lily Panamsky1,2, Jed A. Meltzer1,2,3; 1Rotman Research Institute, 2Baycrest Center,
3
University of Toronto — Introduction: Language processing depends on
the interactions between frontal and temporal brain regions. These interactions are mediated by a ventral temporal-frontal route processing semantic
information, and a dorsal parietal-frontal pathway subserving syntax and
phonology. In the present study, we mapped the neural networks that generate electrophysiological responses to semantic and syntactic anomalies
using Magnetoencephalography (MEG). Methods: Experimental items consisted of 400 sentences selected from a set of normed materials. The semantic anomalies were created by substituting the final word of the sentence
with an unexpected completion (e.g., She will go to the bakery for a loaf of
books). The syntactic anomalies were elicited by introducing a grammatical
error in the verb tense or agreement earlier in the sentence (e.g., She will
going to the bakery for a loaf of bread). Participants performed a sentence
acceptability judgement task. Results: Oscillatory changes in MEG event
related synchronization/desynchronization (ERS/ERD) in alpha and beta
frequency bands (8-30 Hz) were localized using beamforming and synthetic
aperture magnetometry (SAM) in both time and frequency domains. The
results indicated that ERD in the 8 to 30 Hz frequency band was observed
in the temporal-frontal regions for both semantic and syntactic anomalies.
In addition, syntactic anomalies engaged bilateral parietal and precentral
areas more strongly. Conclusions: The neural generators of responses to
violations were mapped using MEG beamforming of 8-30 Hz ERD. As predicted, semantic and syntactic responses were localized to the brain regions
within ventral and dorsal language networks.

D83
EVENTS ALONG THE GARDEN PATH: NO N400 EFFECT AND A
P600 EFFECT TO SEMANTICALLY REVERSIBLE EVENTS IN DISCOURSE Gina Kuperberg1,2, Kristina Fanucci1,2; 1Tufts University, 2Mass.
General Hospital — During language comprehension, we can draw upon
semantic knowledge, stored at multiple levels/grains of representation, to
generate ‘best guesses’ (predictions) about the message being conveyed,
even before incremental combinatorial analysis is complete (Paczynski &
Kuperberg, 2012). Predictions can facilitate semantic access, reflected by an
attenuation of the N400 event-related potential (ERP), but if they mismatch

138

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
the message that is output by full combinatorial analysis, the resulting prediction error triggers additional analysis, reflected by a semantic P600 effect
(Kuperberg, 2007). Here we asked whether we predict on the basis of simple
schema-based associations, or more structured event representations? We
measured ERPs as participants viewed four types of two-clause sentences,
linked by the causal connector, ‘because’: (1) Coherent (e.g. Katrina took
her temperature because she was feverish…); (2) Unassociated incoherent (...because she was re-elected…); (3) Schema-associated incoherent (…
because she was healthy...), and (4) Event-associated incoherent (Katrina
was feverish because she took her temperature...). Unassociated critical
words produced N400 effects, but no P600 effects. Schema-associated critical words generated both N400 and P600 effects. Event-associated critical
words failed to evoke an N400 effect, but produced a robust P600 effect.
These data suggest that comprehenders predicted whole event sequences
(\), ahead of encountering the critical word, and independently of its combinatorial integration. We suggest that the activation of these stored event
sequences was further boosted by the Event-associated and the Schema-associated, but not the Unassociated, critical words, and that these coherent
event-sequence representations conflicted with the combinatorially-determined representation to trigger a P600.

D84
PREDICTIVE SEMANTIC FACILITATION IN SCHIZOPHRENIA:
A MULTIMODAL IMAGING INVESTIGATION Ellen Lau1,2,3, Kirsten
Weber2,3, Nate Delaney-Busch2,3, Candida Ustine2,3, Kristina Fanucci2,3, Matti
Hamalainen3, Gina Kuperberg2,3; 1University of Maryland, 2Tufts University, 3Massachusetts General Hospital — Language deficits in schizophrenia are often
characterized as impairments in the use of semantic context. It is unclear,
however, whether these abnormalities result from problems in using context to predict and facilitate the processing of upcoming words on the basis
of stored semantic information, or from problems in combinatorially integrating incoming words into their context. Here, we aimed to isolate the
effects of predictive semantic facilitation in schizophrenia using a semantic
priming paradigm. We varied predictive validity by manipulating the proportion of related pairs, but kept the context simple and constant across
conditions. A multimodal MEG/EEG/fMRI approach allowed us isolate
neural activity between 300-500ms following target onset. Our prior work
in young healthy controls showed maximal attenuation of the N400 component (ERP) and of activity within anterior temporal cortex (MEG and fMRI)
in the high proportion predictive condition. Our initial findings in schizophrenia (n=14) and demographically matched controls (n=15) suggest that,
in the predictive condition, patients show just as much reduced semantic
activity as controls between 300-500ms. These findings suggest that, when
the context is simple and combinatorial integration demands are minimal,
schizophrenia patients have the capacity to use top-down strategies to predict and facilitate the processing of upcoming words. We hypothesize that
abnormalities in using context to process language in schizophrenia do not
arise from impairments in using semantic information to predict and facilitate the processing of expected words, but rather from a failure to engage in
prolonged combinatorial processing when incoming words mismatch these
predictions.

D85
NEUROMAGNETIC TIME COURSE OF SEMANTIC ACCESS AND
INTEGRATION OF SPOKEN LANGUAGE: ULTRA-RAPID AUTOMATIC ACCESS PRECEDES A CASCADE OF ATTENTION-MODULATED PROCESSES Lucy J MacGregor1, Yury Shtyrov1; 1MRC Cognition
and Brain Sciences Unit — What are the neural dynamics of the access and
integration of semantic information during spoken language processing,
and how are they affected by attention and the nature of language-oriented
task? To address these questions we measured listeners’ neuromagnetic
brain responses to auditorily presented prime-target word pairs that were
either semantically related or unrelated. Listeners performed three tasks
designed to manipulate attentional focus on the stimuli (counterbalanced
across participants): (1) passive listening where volunteers were engaged in
a non-linguistic visual distracter task, (2) a semantic task where volunteers
judged whether word pairs were related or unrelated, and (3) a phonological task where they listened for an unnaturally extended closure time in one
of the words. MEG was recorded and event-related fields were calculated
relative to the onset of the target word uniqueness point, which coincided

2013 Annual Meeting
with the onset of the stimulus-final unvoiced plosive. Amplitude differences between brain responses to the target words (related>unrelated)
were first observed in a very early transient peak at approximately 60 ms.
Notably, the effect was seen even in the passive listening condition, indicating its resilience to attention withdrawal. Effects in a second short-lived
response (unrelated>related), at approximately 130 ms, were largest in the
phonological task. A longer-lasting N400-like effect (unrelated>related),
emerging around 220 ms, was observed in all conditions. Results support
a cascade of neuro-cognitive processes underpinning the access and integration of semantic information. We suggest that context drives very rapid
(<100 ms) automatic activation of related semantic information, which is
followed by attention-modulated integration processes.

D86
OLDER ADULTS WITH EPILEPSY EXHIBIT SIGNIFICANTLY
GREATER EXECUTIVE DYSFUNCTION THAN THEIR MATCHED
PEERS WITH CORTICALLY-BASED NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASE H. Allison Bender1, Martin Goldstein1, Stephanie Towns1, Marta Krajniak1, Agnieszka Mlodnicka1, Lara Marcuse1, Madeline Fields1, Amy Aloysi1,
Sonja Schuetz1, Laili Soleimani1, Samuel Gandy1, Anna Miley-Akerstedt1; 1Mt.
Sinai School of Medicine — Neurocognitive profiles of reduced confrontation naming and diminished memory are frequently present in older adults
with epilepsy and those with cortical neurodegenerative disorders (e.g.,
Alzheimer’s disease (AD)). Yet, neuropathogenesis of these deficits differ.
Research is needed to identify cognitive characteristics of each group to
improve diagnosis. We matched 11 patients with confirmed diagnoses of
epilepsy and 11 with either amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or
AD, aged 55-84 (M=70.3; SD=10.5), by age, education and gender. Neuropsychological testing evaluating attention, executive function, language,
motor speed, learning and memory was administered. Frequency of scores
falling in “Impaired” range was calculated for each test based on agematched standardization samples. Relationship among cognitive function,
neuroimaging, and EEG data was also explored. Performance on tasks of
new learning, delayed recall, and fine motor coordination were areas of
greatest weakness in the studied sample. Significant differences between
groups emerged on tasks of sustained and divided attention (Trails A&B,
p=.042 and p=.037, respectively), as well as fine motor coordination of the
non-dominant hand (p=.023). Older adults with epilepsy exhibited greater
impairment than those with primary neurodegenerative disorders. White
matter disease was also more common in the MCI/AD group than the epilepsy group. No EEG variable (e.g., localization, lateralization) correlated
with neurocognitive test data. Findings suggest that executive dysfunction
is a prominent deficit in older adults with epilepsy as compared to those
with cortical neurodegenerative disorders (MCI/AD). Impairment in this
population are not limited to temporal lobe functions, such as memory, but
may extend to extratemporally-mediated cognitive domains.

D87
MAGNITUDE OF PRACTICE EFFECTS IN ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY
IS RELATED TO THE VOLUME OF CA3-4/DENTATE GYRUS IN
HEALTHY MIDDLE-AGED AND OLDER ADULTS Andrew R. Bender1,
Ana M. Daugherty1, Naftali Raz1; 1Wayne State University — Repeated administration of cognitive tasks usually results in improved performance over
time. Practice effects that may obscure age-related change may provide
a useful method for investigating the anatomical correlates of long-term
memory. Functional and volumetric imaging points at the hippocampal
subregion CA3-4/dentate gyrus (DG) as an anatomical substrate of associative memory. We hypothesized that individual differences in CA3-4/DG
volume would predict the magnitude of practice effects on an associative
memory task over repetitions separated by considerable delays. We tested
associative memory in 49 healthy adults, (age 52 to 82 years, mean = 60.84,
SD = 9.59 years) on three occasions separated by mean delays of 24.76 and
31.31 months. At the third testing, participants underwent high-resolution
(.4×.4 mm in plane) MRI for manual delineation of hippocampal subfields:
CA1-2, subiculum, and CA3-4/DG. Latent growth models (LGM) included
Age, associative memory performance at each occasion, and CA1-2 and
CA3-4/DG subfield volumes; subiculum volume was unrelated to other
variables and was omitted from the final model. LGM analyses showed
that the magnitude of practice effects was related to individual differences
in CA3-4/DG volume: participants with larger CA3-4/DG volumes at the

Poster Session D
third occasion experienced greater benefit from repeated test administrations. In contrast, baseline performance was associated with age, but not
subfield volume. The effects were unchanged after controlling for history
of hypertension. Thus, the volume of the CA3-4/DG subfields, presumably
indicating its structural integrity, may serve as an important indicator of
long-term memory for associations.

D88
OVERLEARNING IMPROVES LONG-TERM RECALL IN OLDER
ADULTS Katherine E. Bercovitz1, Stephanie Traulsen1, Bonnie Given1, Matthew
C. Bell1, Patricia M. Simone1; 1Santa Clara University — With older adults
constituting the most rapidly growing age demographic, recent efforts
have been directed at better understanding the optimal conditions of
encoding and retrieval for this population. The purpose of this study is to
determine if overlearning combined with spacing can improve long-term
recall in older adults. Since older adults have demonstrated slowed processing and decreased attentional abilities (Salthouse, 1991), it is possible
that improving encoding could significantly improve long-term recall in
this demographic. Alternatively, overlearning (high encoding) may impair
recall since it could make the task too easy and discourage participants
from deeper processing. In a within-subjects study, 20 older adults (Mage=
71.4 years, SDage=6.61) learned English/English word pairs. Word pairs
were randomly assigned to two conditions: massed/spaced and high/
low encoding. Words in the massed condition were practiced immediately
after initial encoding and tested again 10 days later, whereas those in the
spaced condition were practiced 24 hours after encoding. Words in the
low encoding condition required the participants to correctly recall twice
during encoding, while those in the high encoding condition required the
participants to correctly recall the pairs 10 times. Participants were significantly more likely to remember the high encoding words and more likely
to remember words practiced 24 hrs later (Mmassed/overlearned = .41,
Mspaced/overlearned = .52, Mmassed/control = .21 Mspaced/control =
.20). Our results suggest that, as demonstrated in younger adults, overlearning can enhance learning in older adults and that further research
should focus on improving encoding to further benefit the effect of spacing.

D89
INFLUENCE OF HIPPOCAMPAL VOLUME AND CONNECTIVITY
WITH THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX ON MEMORY ABILITY IN EARLY
CHILDHOOD Sarah Blankenship1, Elizabeth Redcay1, Tracy Riggins1; 1Uni-

versity of Maryland, College Park — Recent magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) studies have revealed the importance of medial temporal lobe (MTL)
structures, such as the hippocampus, and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC) for memory ability. These regions make independent contributions to memory, and increased functional connectivity between them has
been associated with better memory performance during late childhood
and adolescence. Little is known about the neural correlates of memory
during early childhood. We investigated the influence of MTL and PFC
structure and function on memory development in 4- and 6-year-old children and adults. We examined the volume and connectivity of memory-related regions using anatomical and resting-state functional MRIs. To date,
we have collected MRI data from 10 4-year-old and 23 6-year-old children
and 23 adults. As a measure of memory ability, participants completed a
picture recall task which required them to view multiple lists of pictures
and subsequently recall as many pictures as possible. Structural analyses
revealed that, in children, left and right hippocampal volume was positively correlated with performance on the picture recall task (r(31)=.397, p <
.02 and r(31) = .481, p < .005, respectively). In adults, whole-brain functional
connectivity analyses revealed positive correlations between memory performance and left and right hippocampal connectivity with DLPFC. In children, correlations were observed between the hippocampus bilaterally and
the Medial Frontal Gyrus, a different, more ventral and medial, region of
PFC. These results suggest that, although the hippocampus and PFC are
involved in memory during early childhood, the cortical network engaged
may differ from that in adults.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

139

Poster Session D

D90
THE NEURAL CORRELATES MEDIATING AGE DEFICITS IN NOVELTY DETECTION Caitlin R. Bowman1, Nancy A. Dennis1; 1The Pennsylvania

State University — Past research finds age-related increases in false recognitions, indicative of a general deficit in novelty detection. This deficit
increases when novel items are semantically or perceptually related to
items from study. However, little work has examined the neural mechanisms older adults (OAs) engage to avoid false recognitions and identify
new information as novel. The present study scanned young adults (YAs)
and OAs during a retrieval task in which new items were exemplars from
studied categories (related novelty) or exemplars of unstudied categories
(unrelated novelty) in order to detect age-related differences in the neural
correlates mediating novelty detection of related and unrelated items.
Results from related novelty detection indicated that YAs engaged a network of regions including bilateral visual, parietal, and prefrontal cortex
more so than OAs. Instead, OAs showed increases only in left occipitoparietal cortex compared to YAs for related novelty detection. This suggests
that OAs engage visuospatial attention to support related novelty detection
but show a reduced sensory signal and less cognitive control, diminishing
their ability to make subtle distinctions between related items. Regarding
unrelated novelty detection, YAs showed engagement of lateral temporal
regions and inferior parietal cortex while OAs showed increased activity in
early visual regions and fusiform gyrus. These results suggest that while
YAs can identify novel unrelated items based on categorical information
alone, OAs engage sensory processing and object recognition. Therefore,
age-related deficits in related novelty detection may be due to both deficits
in cognitive control processes as well as a reduced specificity of sensory
processing.

D91
AGE-GRADED DIFFERENCES IN NEURAL CORRELATES OF MNEMONIC TRAINING Yvonne Brehmer1,3, Lars Bäckman3, Hauke Heekeren2,
Ulman Lindenberger1, Yee Lee Shing1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 2Freie Universität Berlin, 3Karolinska Institute — Episodic memory (EM)
performance increases during childhood, and decreases in adulthood, with
accelerated decline in old age. Older adults generally profit less from mnemonic training than children and younger adults. We recently proposed a
two-component framework of lifespan changes in EM functioning, distinguishing between two evolving and interacting components, one strategic
and the other associative (Shing et al., 2008). The associative component
relies primarily on the medial temporal lobes (MTL), whereas the strategic component depends primarily on the prefrontal cortex (PFC). Initial
evidence suggests that the relative contributions of MTL and PFC to EM
performance differ by age. However, this hypothesis has not been investigated in mnemonic training thus far. Here, we examine training-induced
changes in neural correlates of EM among children aged 10-12, younger
adults aged 20-25, and older adults aged 63-68 years. We used a multi-session training procedure with fMRI assessments (Siemens T3) at pretest and
posttest while participants were memorizing word pairs. Trained participants showed greater performance gains from pretest to posttest than
controls, regardless of age. Preliminary analyses of younger adults (N =
34) revealed activation increases in MTL and PFC with training, which correlated with performance gains. Based on the two-component framework,
we expect that older adults will show fewer activation increases than children and younger adults, reflecting senescent changes in MTL and PFC
regions. Furthermore, younger adults and children are expected to show
greater training-induced increases in functional connectivity between PFC
and MTL than older adults, allowing for more effective memory encoding
after training.

D92
EXPLORING THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF ITEM FAMILIARIZATION IN NOVELTY DETECTION OF ASSOCIATIVE INFORMATION
Christina E. Johnson1, Kristina M. Peterson1, Nancy A. Dennis1; 1The Pennsylvania State University — Novelty detection is critical to everyday cognition.
It is not currently evident, however, what role familiarization plays in the
process of novelty detection. The goal of this study was to elucidate the
neural correlates of novelty detection across different degrees of familiarity. During training, participants became highly familiarized with individual faces and scenes. They then completed an associative encoding

140

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
task including face-scene pairings composed of familiar items from the
training phase, as well as pairs of new, unfamiliar items not included in
training. Finally, participants completed an associative recognition test
involving novel pairs created by recombining previous familiar (trained
on) or unfamiliar (not trained on) pairs. Analyses centered on participants’
ability to correctly detect novel recombinations, examining associative novelty detection based on levels of familiarization with the component items
within recombined pairs. Behavioral results indicated that memory was
facilitated by the familiarization process, in which one’s ability to correctly
reject novel recombinations was enhanced when individual items of novel
pairs were previously familiarized with. Functional MRI analysis showed
greater activity in posterior parahippocampal gyrus (PHG), a region associated with familiarity, for familiar versus unfamiliar recombinations. In
contrast, novelty detection of recombined pairs composed of unfamiliar
items was associated with greater activity in anterior PHG, a region associated with detecting novel, unfamiliar information. Our results suggest that,
although all recombined pairs of items in the current analysis were indeed
novel, novelty detection may be mediated by discrete regions within the
medial temporal lobe when processing information within different levels
of familiarity.

D93
TRUE MEMORY AND FALSE MEMORY FOR MOTION DIFFERENTIALLY ACTIVATE THE HIPPOCAMPUS AND THE PARAHIPPOCAMPAL CORTEX Jessica M. Karanian1, Scott D. Slotnick1; 1Boston College —

The hippocampus has been associated with both true memory and false
memory. While the parahippocampal cortex has also been associated with
true memory and false memory, there is some evidence that this region
is preferentially associated with true memory (which is thought to reflect
greater sensory contextual processing). However, relatively few studies
have investigated the role(s) of medial temporal lobe sub-regions during
true memory and false memory. In the present study, we used functional
magnetic resonance imaging to measure activity in these sub-regions
during true memory and false memory for motion. At encoding, participants viewed moving or stationary abstract shapes. At retrieval, participants classified shapes from encoding as previously in motion or previously stationary. A random effect general linear model analysis was
conducted. Consistent with previous findings, the contrast of true memory
(“moving”/moving) versus false memory (“moving”/stationary) and the
reverse contrast produced distinct activations in the hippocampus; however, the number of activations was greater for the true memory versus
false memory contrast. In direct opposition to previous work, the contrast
of false memory versus true memory produced bilateral activity in the parahippocampal cortex, while the reverse contrast produced no activity in
this region. Considered with previous evidence, our results suggest that the
role of the parahippocampal cortex during true memory and false memory
is task dependent. More broadly, the present findings suggest that the parahippocampal cortex mediates higher-level contextual processing rather
than lower-level sensory processing during all forms of memory.

D94
COMBINED GENE EFFECTS ON HIPPOCAMPAL MNEMONIC
PROCESSING: A LARGE-SCALE IMAGING-GENETICS STUDY OF
APOE, BDNF, KIBRA, AND CLSTN2 Karolina Kauppi1, Lars-Göran Nilsson2, Rolf Adolfsson1, Lars Nyberg1; 1Umeå University, Sweden, 2Stockholm
University, Sweden — Twin studies have revealed that memory and related
brain functions are highly heritable traits, but putative candidate genes
have shown small and inconsistent effects –referred to as “the missing heritability”. Little is known about the combined effect of several genes on
brain function: whether the presence of one “risk” variant hides the effect of
another, interacts with it, or increases the risk in an additive -or even multiplicative –way. In a large fMRI sample we explored the combined effect of
polymorphisms with documented impact on brain activation in the medial
temporal lobe (MTL) during episodic memory encoding or retrieval. Analyses of the effects of individual genes revealed decreased MTL activation
for ApoE ε4 and BDNF Met alleles during encoding, and for Kibra CC
and the CLSTN2 T allele during retrieval. Analyses of combined effects
revealed that, during encoding, carriers of both the ApoE ε4 and the BDNF
Met allele had lowest MTL activation, whereas non-carriers of both alleles
had the highest activation in several MTL clusters. For most clusters, step-

2013 Annual Meeting
wise regression analyses revealed that the addition of a second polymorphism increased the percentage of explained variance in BOLD signal. Similar clusters were seen for the combination of Kibra and CLSTN2 genotypes
during retrieval, but here the difference in BOLD activation was mainly
driven by one of the polymorphisms. In conclusion, our results highlight
the importance of simultaneously considering several genetic variants.

D95
CLASSIFICATION AIDED ANALYSIS OF OSCILLATORY SIGNATURES IN CONTROLLED RETRIEVAL Nicholas Ketz1, Tim Curran1, Randall O’Reilly1; 1University Colorado, Boulder — Control over memory retrieval
is a ubiquitous process within humans, yet this process and its implications
are not yet well understood. The current work, inspired by a similar fMRI
design (Detre, Natarajan, Gershman, & Norman, in press), uses a modified
Think/No-Think(TNT) paradigm to investigate the neural signatures of
volition over enhancing and suppressing memory retrieval. Previous studies in this domain have shown a memory enhancement when well learned
stimulus-pairs are restudied in cued recall (‘Think of studied pair item’),
and a degradation in memory performance when restudied with cued suppression (‘Don’t think of studied pair item’). As is the case in the current
study, this memory effect has been somewhat difficult to replicate (Bulevich, Roediger, Balota, & Butler, 2006). We address these issues by using category based (faces vs. scenes) multivariate classification of Electroencephalography within a modified TNT paradigm to determine if individuals
were successfully able to retrieve or suppress retrieval of the target pair
image. A logistic regression using classifier determined retrieval success
as a predictor for subsequent memory reveals the classic TNT pattern of
enhanced memory for successful cued-retrieval and degraded memory for
unsuccessful cued-retrieval. Further, this classification process allowed for
a parametric investigation into the time-frequency signatures of cognitive
control over retrieval. Current results, using a cluster based analysis, show
Theta oscillations (3 to 8 Hz) as more prominent in controlled retrieval, and
Alpha/Beta oscillations (8 to 20 Hz) as more prominent in controlled suppression. These results suggest contrasting roles for these frequency bands
in episodic retrieval.

D96
SUCCESSFUL RETRIEVAL EFFECTS IN LATERAL POSTERIOR
PARIETAL CORTEX DURING RECOGNITION OF PERCEIVED AND
IMAGINED EVENTS UNDER HIGH AND LOW TARGET PROBABILITY CONDITIONS Danielle King1, Misty Schubert1, Jeanne Li1, Michael
Miller1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara — The lateral posterior parietal cortex (PPC) has been shown to be associated with successful retrieval,
although the precise functional contributions of this region to recognition
memory remain uncertain. In two previous studies, we found that lateral
PPC is sensitive to source, exhibiting significantly greater activity during
retrieval of perceived compared to imagined events. This region has also
been shown to be sensitive to target probability manipulations. Successful
retrieval effects were more robust under low target probability conditions,
when subjects tended to adopt a conservative response criterion, responding “old” only when they were fairly certain that items were studied, compared to high target probability conditions, when subjects tended to adopt
a more liberal response criterion. Because individuals typically adopt a
more conservative response criterion when making judgments about perceived compared to imagined events, we examined whether this difference
in criterion placement could account for source-based differences in activity in lateral PPC. Subjects were scanned while making old/new recognition memory judgments about previously perceived and imagined events
under conditions of low (30%) and high (70%) target probability conditions.
The results revealed that lateral PPC is sensitive to both source as well as
target probability. However, differences in criterion placement alone could
not account for source-based differences in parietal activity. Supported by
the Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies through grant W911NF-090001 from the U.S. Army Research Office. The content of the information
does not necessarily reflect the position or the policy of the Government,
and no official endorsement should be inferred.

Poster Session D

D97
EXPECTATIONS MODULATE ERP INDICES OF FAMILIARITY AND
RECOLLECTION Emily Knight1, Ian Dobbins2, Logan Trujillo1, Antonio
Jaeger2, David Schnyer1; 1University of Texas at Austin, 2Washington University in St Louis — Multiple event-related potential components have been
identified that differentiate items previously experienced from novel
items. fMRI findings by O’Connor, et al (2010) suggest that some old/new
effects could be explained by subject expectations about an item’s status
in memory. This experiment examines the effects of cued expectations on
ERP indices of memory. 64 channels of EEG were recorded from 24 participants while they engaged in a cued recognition memory task. Participants
studied 50 words, followed by a test phase with old/new judgments to 100
words (50 old/ 50 new). Prior to memory probes, participants saw cues for
1500ms indicating if the upcoming word was “likely new” (LN), “likely
old” (LO) or “unknown” (UN). Participants were explicitly informed that
75% of cues were valid. Mean amplitudes following the presentation of
probe words were tested for two windows: 300-400ms and 500-700ms. Old
probes elicited more positive waveforms than new probes in each range for
all cue conditions at all scalp sites tested (left/right x anterior/posterior).
Left posterior sites showed a significant interaction of probe type and cue
type from 300-400ms, and a main effect of probe type from 500-700ms. This
suggests that a component in an interval previously associated with familiarity is sensitive to expectations about memory. However, the later component (similar to ones previously associated with recollection) responds
primarily on the basis of episodic content, indicating that at least one old/
new effect is not driven exclusively by the successful retrieval of episodic
content, but by congruence between expectations and retrieval outcomes.

D98
HUMAN HIPPOCAMPAL INTRACRANIAL RECORDINGS DURING
SPATIAL NAVIGATION SUGGEST ALPHA OSCILLATIONS MAY BE
AN INDICATOR OF BEING LOST Branden Kolarik1,3, Andrew Watrous2,3,
Itzhak Fried4, Arne Ekstrom1,3; 1Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis, 2Neuroscience Graduate Group, University of California, Davis,
3
Center for Neuroscience, University of California, Davis, 4Department of Neurosurgery, David Geffen School of Medicine and Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, UCLA — Previous findings have demonstrated
the importance of hippocampal delta and theta activity (humans: 1-8Hz)
in memory and navigation. Less is understood about the possible role of
alpha oscillations (8-12 Hz) in the human hippocampus during navigation.
Recordings in human cortical areas suggests alpha plays a role in idling
or inhibitory states, although this idea has not been tested or addressed
directly in the human hippocampus. We recorded local field potentials
from 198 hippocampal electrodes in 8 patients undergoing seizure monitoring while they played a virtual taxicab game requiring them to deliver passengers to designated targets in the environment. Learning was assessed
based on excess path, which was calculated from the deviation from the
most direct path from the passenger to the target location. These values
were then used to categorize trials as either high or low excess path and
served as a proxy for being lost. Analyses were conducted on times when
the patient was moving in the virtual environment, ensuring engagement
in the task. A bootstrapped t-distribution of mean power values at frequencies below 12Hz was used to calculate the number of electrodes with
increased power for high>low excess path trials. We found significantly
greater numbers of electrodes showing increases in alpha band power for
high compared to low-excess path trials (63 and 23 electrodes respectively,
χ2(1,N=86)=18.60 p< .0001). Our results suggest that alpha activity in the
human hippocampus during navigation may serve as an indictor of being
lost, possibly due to inhibition or disruption of the current representation.

D99
NEURAL CORRELATES OF MNEMONIC EXPERTISE

Boris Nikolai
Konrad1, Martin Dresler1,2, Kristina Hennig-Fast3, Victor Spoormaker1, Axel Steiger1, Michael Czisch1; 1Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, 2Stanford
University, 3Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich — Memory athletes try to
maximize the amount of data (f.e. digits or words) stored in given time
periods using mnemonic techniques. These techniques make use of meaningful encoding by applying visual imagery that is associated with prelearned retrieval structures, usually spatial locations. 25 athletes ranked at

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

141

Poster Session D
least Top 50 in the memory sports World Rankings took part in our study.
All of them trained mnemonics for years and credited their memory performance solely on them. In contrast to Maguire et al. (2003) we found
high intelligence (IQ 131 ± 12) in the athletes. The performance in a mental
speed task was even more supreme compared to matched control subjects.
We investigated the effect of intense learning on sleep and found that the
sleep of memory athletes does not differ in any typical sleep EEG measure including spindle activity from the controls and remains unaffected
by intense learning. We discuss that memory athletes have a deeper processing of information on top of the increased capacity based on cognitive
test results and fMRI findings, which suggest that this is due to direct storage in long-term memory structures: Memory athletes learned 120 binary
digits days before the fMRI scan, 120 binaries while being scanned and sets
of only six binaries while being scanned. The fMRI results show that the
last condition without mnemonics is distinct in brain activation to the two
other conditions. Congruently, athletes only had superior recall, when they
applied mnemonics in a direct forgetting paradigm.

D100
SELECTIVE AND CHRONIC CONFABULATION IN PERSONAL TEMPORALITY: A FOUR YEAR FOLLOW-UP STUDY Valentina La Corte1,2,3,
Pascale Pradat-Diehl1,2,3,4, Nathalie George1,2,3, Gianfranco Dalla Barba1,2,3,5,6;
1
Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris6, Centre de Recherche de l’Institut du
Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, UMR-S975, Paris, France, 2Inserm, 3Cnrs,
UMR 7225, Paris,, 4AP-HP, Hôpital de La Pitié-La Salpêtrière, Service de médecine physique et de réadaptation, Paris, France, 5AP-HP, Hôpital Henri Mondor,
Service de Neurologie, Créteil, France,, 6Dipartimento di Psicologia, Università
degli Studi di Trieste, Italy — Clinical evidences show that confabulating
patients retrieve personal habits or repeated events and mistake them for
actually unique events (Habit Confabulations La Corte, 2010). According to
the Memory, Consciousness and Temporality Theory (MCTT, Dalla Barba,
2002), this pathological condition does not reflect a pure memory disorder,
but a disorder involving temporal consciousness (TC). TC means to become
aware of something as part of a personal past, present or future. Confabulation is usually a transient phenomenon whereas amnesia often persists. In
this study we report a patient, TA, who developed a chronic amnesic-confabulatory syndrome four years ago, following rupture of the right internal
carotid siphon aneurysm. Our principal aim was to study the evolution of
the amnesic-confabulatory syndrome. Confabulations were collected with
the Confabulation Battery (Dalla Barba, 1993), which comprises 169 questions tapping various aspects of semantic and episodic memory. TA’s confabulations were selective to the personal temporality (i.e questions concerning the personal past, present and future) over different evaluations; in
contrast he never confabulated in questions tapping impersonal semantic
knowledge. At qualitative level most confabulations consisted of Habits
Confabulations. TA’s brain MRI showed lesions involving right hippocampus, thalamus, fornix, mammillary bodies and parahippocampus. Moreover TA showed sub-cortical lesions in bilateral caudate nucleus, which has
been rarely described in amnesic-confabulatory syndrome. In conclusion
TA’s confabulation reflects a chronic and selective pathological awareness
of personal temporality. These findings are discussed within the framework of the different theories proposed to explain mechanisms underling
confabulation and in particular within the MCTT.

D101
VISUAL IMAGERY ABILITY AND THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF
RECOLLECTION Emily Leiker1, Jeffrey D. Johnson1; 1University of Missouri
— One aspect of episodic memory research that remains largely unexplored is whether general cognitive abilities that differ across individuals
might be indicative of episodic retrieval (‘recollection’) performance. Here,
we investigated the relationship between recollection-related brain activity
and the ability to form vivid mental images, which is likely a pre-requisite for recollection. In particular, we focus on activity in left lateral parietal cortex that has been consistently linked to recollection as well to the
amount of information retrieved. Subjects encoded words in the context
of three tasks and two presentation durations, with the latter manipulation providing a means to encode different amounts (or presumably, vividness) of episodic information. On a later memory retrieval test, words
were segregated according to whether or not they were accompanied by
the recollection of any specific details. fMRI data acquired during both of

142

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
these phases allowed for analysis of the task-related encoding information
that was reactivated during retrieval. In a final experimental phase, subjects
completed a questionnaire about visual imagery that has been previously
shown to correlate with visual cortical activity. As expected, analysis of the
fMRI data confirmed that left parietal activity was sensitive to recollection
and, furthermore, to the amount/vividness of information encoded. Composite scores on the imagery questionnaire correlated with both of these
effects as well as with the magnitude of reactivation present at retrieval.
These findings provide initial support for a relationship between individuals’ imagery abilities and the potential neural mechanism by which these
abilities might aid episodic memory retrieval.

D102
HIPPOCAMPAL VOLUME CORRELATES WITH CHINESE VERBAL
LEARNING TEST Josiah K. Leong1, Allen K. Lee1, Jennifer S. Yokoyama1,
Joel H. Kramer1, Bruce L. Miller1, Howard J. Rosen1; 1University of California,
San Francisco — Previously developed tests for assessing memory impairment in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
were predominantly written in English and administered to English speaking subjects. These tests were validated by converging evidence from other
neuropsychological measures and brain imaging data. Out of this framework the Chinese Verbal Learning Test (ChVLT) was developed to examine
memory consolidation in Chinese speakers. The goal of this analysis was
to demonstrate the relationship between ChVLT scores and hippocampal volume. The ChVLT consists of nine two-character nouns presented
orally over four learning trials, with immediate recall after each learning
trial. Recall is then assessed after a 30-second delay and a 10-minute delay.
We administered the ChVLT to 12 MCI and 6 AD patients and obtained
cortical volumes of regions of interest using the FreeSurfer processing
stream on T1-weighted MRI images. A linear regression model including
immediate recall performance after the last learning trial, overall level of
cognitive impairment, years of education, age, volumes of cortical regions
implicated in AD, and left hippocampal volume was predictive of list recall
performance after a 10 minute delay (R2 = 0.82, p < 0.01), with hippocampal
volume explaining 9.4% of the variance in delayed list recall performance.
These results suggest that the ChVLT is sensitive to hippocampal function.
Moreover, the ChVLT provides a new measure for detecting involvement
of the hippocampus in degenerative disease and monitoring hippocampal
function over time.

D103
THE TIME COURSE OF EPISODIC ASSOCIATIVE RETRIEVAL: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF CUED RECALL OF UNIMODAL AND CROSSMODAL PAIR ASSOCIATE LEARNING Daniel A.
Levy1, Roni Tibon1; 1Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya — We recorded event-related scalp potentials during episodic cued recall following pair associate
learning of unimodal object-picture pairs and crossmodal object-picture
and sound pairs. In this paradigm, designed to minimize recognition process confounds, successful recall was characterized by scalp potential differences over pre-frontal areas as early as 150 ms post-cue presentation, as
well as later differences recorded over frontal and parietal areas. Notably,
cued recall success divergences over frontal areas were apparent in a time
window generally assumed to reflect familiarity but not recollection, challenging that assumption. Furthermore, parietal scalp recall success differences did not distinguish between cross-modal and unimodal conditions,
a convergence that may support attention-capture or buffer accounts of
posterior parietal mnemonic function but not focal attention or representational accounts.

D104
AN ERP STUDY OF EPISODIC RETRIEVAL IN AMNESTIC MILD
COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT AND NORMAL ELDERLY WITH MATCHED
PERFORMANCE Juan Li1, Xin Li1; 1Institute of Psychology Chinese Acad-

emy of Sciences — Introduction: Impairments in episodic memory have
been found to be the core features of amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment
(aMCI) patients. The current study aimed to explore the underlying neutral
correlates for their deficits in episodic retrieval Methods: A source memory
task was conducted on 15 normal controls (NC) and 16 aMCIs. ERPs were
recorded during test phases. Difficulty was manipulated by varying the
number of items presented for each study-test run. Results: Memory per-

2013 Annual Meeting

Poster Session D

formances were matched under easy condition between the two groups.
Consistent with previous studies (e.g., Li etal, 2004), in NC group a mainly
right parietal distributed, positive going old-new effect was observed
around 400-800ms, while a reversed old-new effect (old items more negative going than new items) was discerned starting from 800ms till the
end of epoch, which was left laterally distributed and proposed to reflect a
perceptual-based retrieval strategy. In contrast, for aMCI group, the earlier
parietal old-new effects parietal diminished, while the later left-lateralized
negative effect was greatly enhanced, and even extended to the right hemisphere. Conclusions: These results indicated that aMCI patients, compared
with normal older adults, used more perceptual details as retrieval cues,
suggesting that their encoding may not deep enough so that their retrieval
could not be carried out at a conceptual level. In addition, given that the
ERP effects were different between the two groups despite of their comparable behavioral performances, these ERP effects may serve as neuromarkers which are more sensitive than behavioral measures for the early
detection of AD.

D105
TOP-DOWN VS. BOTTOMS-UP? INTERMEDIATE PHENOTYPES
FOR COGNITIVE CONTROL AND PERSONALITY MEDIATE THE
EXPRESSION OF DOPAMINE GENES IN ADDICTION Travis Baker1,
Tim Stockwell1, Gordon Barnes1, Roderick Haesevoets1, Clay Holroyd1; 1University of Victoria — Introduction: The development and expression of the midbrain dopamine system is determined in part by genetic factors that vary
across individuals such that dopamine-related genes are partly responsible
for addiction vulnerability. However, a complete account of how dopamine-related genes predispose individuals to drug addiction remains to be
developed. Adopting an intermediate phenotype (IP) approach, we investigated whether behavioral and electrophysiological measures of reinforcement learning and cognitive control as well as personality risk factors for
substance dependence mediate the influence of multiple dopamine-related
genetic polymorphisms over substance use. Methods: We explored whether
six candidate IPs —an electrophysiological measure of a cortical mechanism for reward processing and cognitive control, a behavioral index of
a subcortical mechanism for reinforcement learning, and four personality
risk factors associated with drug addiction (impulsivity, novelty seeking,
depression proneness and anxiety sensitivity)—mediate the effect of nine
dopamine-related genetic polymorphisms on substance dependence. Substance dependence data, together with data associated with personality risk
factors, were collected from 812 undergraduate students. 196 returned on
a subsequent day to participate in an electrophysiological and behavioral
experiment and to provide saliva samples for DNA analysis. Results: Several dopamine-related neural pathways underlying individual differences
in substance dependence were identified and statistically modeled, including its biological, cognitive, and personality manifestations. Conclusion:
This study presents a theoretical framework for bridging the gap between
genes and behavior in substance dependence and illustrates how future
interventions might be individually tailored for specific genetic, cognitive
and personality profiles.

D106
MISMATCHED NEGATIVITY AND BINGE DRINKING Barbara

Banz1,
Alana Campbell , Deana Davalos ; Colorado State University, UNC - School
of Medicine — Alcohol intoxication influences how the brain responds to
stimuli and is able to gate out stimuli. Research assessing early occurring
measures of brain physiology, specifically the mismatch negativity (MMN),
suggests that acute alcohol intoxication in non-alcoholics is associated with
significant suppression of the MMN. In contrast, chronic alcohol use has
been associated with increased MMN amplitude. The question remains
as to how binge drinking, a behavior which is characterized by episodes
of intoxication, but not necessarily associated with later alcohol abuse, is
characterized neurophysiologically. Specifically, do binge drinkers have a
neurocognitive profile more similar to chronic alcohol abusers and does
this profile suggest differences in orienting and attention from their non
drinking peers. In the current study, college aged participants had their
brain waves recorded in response to an auditory MMN task in order to
investigate these possible differences. Participants were categorized based
on the frequency and patterns of binge drinking. Participants who reported
greater binge drinking tendencies showed a difference in MMN compared
to their peers that did not report such habits.
1,2

1 1

2

D107
NOVEL EPIDERMAL ELECTRONICS (EES) METHODOLOGY TO
CAPTURE EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIALS (ERP) Todd Coleman1, Rui Ma1, Raynard Fung2, Michael Bajema1, Thomas Albright2, John
Rogers3, Ricardo Gil da Costa2; 1University of California, San Diego, 2Salk Institute, 3University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign — Recently, we reported the
development and potential applications of an epidermal electronics system
(EES) that uses ultrathin silicon islands interconnected by serpentine-like
wires resting on a biologically inert flexible polymer. The EES is no thicker
than a human hair, is flexible and stretchable, and is mechanically matched
to the skin. It can measure and transmit information of activity produced
by the heart, skeletal muscles and the brain. As such, there is great potential for a wide range of applications across clinical and scientific domains.
Here, we further investigated the use of the EES, testing its ability to detect
event-related brain potentials (ERPs). Specifically, the detection of: i) a sensory visual evoked potential (VEP) as elicited by a flickering checkerboard
and ii) a P300 ERP in an attention modulation task, using natural images.
The P300 ERP amplitude is inversely correlated with an item’s subjective probability of occurrence, and has been widely used in visual target
detection tasks. We recorded brain activity using either a conventional
electroencephalography system (rigid electrodes) or an epidermal electronics system (EES) coupled to an external amplifier. Our results show that
while the EES failed to adequately detect the sensory VEPs elicited by the
flickering checkerboard, it was able to accurately detect the modulation of
the P300 ERP responses to “target” vs. “distractor” images. This is the first
report of the use of epidermal electronics for detection of ERPs, presenting
EES as a viable and appealing alternative to conventional EEG systems for
brain-machine interfaces related to cognitive processing.

D108
THE AUDITORY CONTRALATERAL ADVANTAGE AS A MODEL
SYSTEM FOR STUDYING CONNECTIVITY Doug Davidson1, Phil Monahan1, Ainhoa Bastarrika1; 1Basque Center on Cognition, Brain, and Language —
Previous M/EEG studies have successfully used dynamic causal modelling
(DCM) for evoked responses to model connectivity networks, but there are
few models of already-established connectivity differences in the auditory
system. We studied whether DCM for M/EEG can effectively model the
well-established asymmetrical response to left/right auditory stimulation.
Participants (n=3) heard monaural pure tones on either the right or the
left ear, and responses were recorded using MEG. To analyze these data,
DCM models were constructed with single equivalent current dipole (ECD)
sources in left and right auditory cortex, using a single-shell sphere model.
We compared models with separate input to each source, versus models
with a unitary input to both sources, and also models with and without lateral connections between the sources. Model comparison showed that the
DCM without lateral connections, but with separate inputs to left and right
cortex was the best account. This was true in both the planar gradiometer
data, as well as the magnetometer data. These preliminary results suggest
that DCM for M/EEG is an effective model for connectivity for the auditory
evoked field.

D109
A MATLAB TOOL FOR SIMULTANEOUS EYE TRACKING AND EEG
Olaf Dimigen1, Ulrich Reinacher1; 1Humboldt University at Berlin, Germany —
Although natural vision involves several eye movements per second, EEG
data is usually recorded during steady fixation. An alternative approach to
signal analysis, used in several recent studies (for review see Dimigen et al,
2011, JEP:General, 140, 552-72), is to time-lock the EEG to the onsets of saccades or fixations in unconstrained viewing situations. However, recording
high-resolution eye movements with the EEG is also useful for other purposes: controlling fixation, detecting signal distortions from microsaccades,
measuring saccadic reaction times, improving ocular artifact correction,
gaze-contingent stimulus presentation (c.f., Dimigen, Kliegl & Sommer,
2012, Neuroimage, 62, 381-93), or coregistration of pupil diameter. To facilitate joint analyses of oculomotor and electrophysiological data, we wrote
a plugin to the popular open source MATLAB toolbox EEGLAB, which
imports and synchronizes eye tracking data and adds it as additional channels to the EEG. Saccades and fixations are either detected with an extended
version of the velocity-based algorithm by Engbert & Mergenthaler (2006)
or imported from the raw EDF file and then added to the existing EEGLAB
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

143

Poster Session D
event structure. Additionally, ocular ICA components can be objectively
rejected based on their covariance with the electrically independent eye
track. Currently, eye trackers from SR Research (EyeLink) and SMI (e.g.,
IView X) are supported. Usage of the plugin is exemplified for an experiment investigating the relative contributions of visual, extraretinal, and
oculomotor signals to fixation-related brain potentials (FRPs) during picture viewing.

D110
EXPECTATIONS ABOUT ACTION OUTCOME MODULATE ERP
RESPONSES TO OBSERVED ACTIONS Ashley R. Drew1, Lorna C.
Quandt1, Peter J. Marshall1; 1Temple University — There is increasing interest
in the determinants of anticipatory components in event-related potentials
(ERPs) elicited to the observation of others’ actions. In previous work we
found differential changes in sensorimotor EEG rhythms during observation of reaches to similar different-colored objects that participants expected
to be either heavy or light. In the current analysis, we examined whether
effects of expected weight were also present in ERPs elicited to the onset of
observed reaches. Prior work has not generally examined whether anticipatory ERPs to observed actions might vary with the expected outcome of
the actions. In the current study, undergraduate participants (N=25) were
given experience grasping and lifting a pair of cylindrical objects varying in
weight (80g vs 1200g) and color (yellow/blue). EEG was recorded during
the viewing of videos showing a hand reaching towards, grasping, and lifting the expected-heavy or expected-light objects. ERPs were computed for
frontal and central sites for the 500 ms following the onset of reaching, relative to a pretrial baseline. The grand means showed a negative-going peak
which may be a form of readiness potential or part of the contingent negative variation. While no differences were found at central sites, there was
a significant main effect of expected weight for mean amplitude at frontal
sites (F3/F4) with more positive mean amplitudes for the expected-light
object. This effect of expected weight may indicate an anticipatory response
related to the expected motor consequences of an observed action, which
constitutes a potentially novel finding that suggests directions for future
work.

D111
REMOVING INDEPENDENT EFFECTS OF THE PRIME ON TARGET
ERPS IN MASKED PRIMING PARADIGMS Marianna Eddy1,3, Jonathan
Grainger2, Phillip Holcomb3; 1U.S. Army NSRDEC, 2CNRS and Aix-Marseille University, 3Tufts University — A concern in neuro-cognitive paradigms is how
to untangle overlapping effects resulting from the presentation of multiple
stimuli. By design, the masked priming technique compounds this problem
by rapidly and consecutively presenting primes and masks immediately
before the target. In ERP paradigms this close temporal proximity results in
overlapping waveforms generated to consecutive events. Because temporal
jittering of the prime-target presentation is not possible (an exact SOA is an
important variable), little can be done to lessen the prime/mask impact on
the target ERPs. We explored an alternative approach for removing activity
from prime/mask events on target word ERPs. In this study we employed
a masked priming paradigm with a forward mask (300 ms), word prime (50
ms), backward mask (20 ms), and word target (300ms) presented consecutively. Additional trials with the same primes as in the priming trials were
presented using the same parameters; however no target stimulus was presented. This allowed us to create ERP waveforms reflecting processing of
the prime + mask and then use this waveform to “subtract” the effect of the
prime + mask from the priming trials which had prime + mask + targets.
While the shape of the ERP components changed when subtracting out the
effects of the prime + mask, the overall priming effects did not change, suggesting that this is a viable method for removing the independent influence
of prime stimuli on target ERPs in experiments where primes necessarily
differ across conditions.

D112
WORKING MEMORY IN TODDLERS WITH A HISTORY OF PVL: AN
EEG POWER SPECTRUM ANALYSIS Maria Luisa Garcia Gomar1, Efrain
Santiago Rodriguez2, Thalia Harmony1; 1Unidad de Investigación en Neurodesarrollo “Dr. Augusto Fernández Guardiola”, Departamento de Neurobiología
Conductual y Cognitiva, 2Neuroclin — Periventricular leukomalacia (PVL) is
defined as white matter damage although it has also been described grey

144

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
matter affection to structures like mediodorsal nucleus related to working memory (WM). WM is the active retention of information for a prospective action. It has been found that toddlers present more theta-alpha
activity during WM tasks. The aim was to study WM in toddlers with a
history of PVL and compare them with controls. 10 toddlers with a history
of PVL and 10 controls between 24 and 27 months old were included in
the study. Toddlers were assessed with a visuospatial delayed response
task with synchronic EEG record. There were not significant differences
in correct answers between controls (67.5%) and toddlers with a history of
PVL (57.1%). To evaluate differences in the narrow band power spectrum
between groups and during baseline, attention and memory a two way
ANOVA was used. In the healthy group, it was recorded increased power
on memory in comparison to attention on 2.34 Hz over bilateral frontal
and right temporooccipital regions, on 15.23 Hz over right parieto-occipital regions (p 0.05). In PVL group it was recorded increased power
on memory in comparison to attention on 1.56 Hz over bilateral frontal
regions, and from 9.37 to 11.33 Hz over bilateral frontal and left centro-temporal regions (p 0.05). Although no behavioral differences were found in
WM task, significant differences were found in brain electrical oscillations.
Toddlers with PVL have a different electric pattern secondary to anatomic
damage characteristic of PVL.

D113
THE SITUATED MEANING OF MATHEMATICAL SYMBOLS: ERPS
TO MATHEMATICAL EQUATIONS ARE MODULATED BY THE RELATION BETWEEN ACCOMPANYING SPEECH AND GESTURE Seana
Coulson1, Tyler Marghetis1, Susan Cook2, Susan Goldin-Meadow3; 1UC San
Diego, 2University of Iowa, 3University of Chicago — When children explain
their mathematical reasoning, they combine speech and gesture to communicate their problem-solving strategies, often pointing to co-situated
equations. Children sometimes convey different strategies in gesture than
in speech; these speech-gesture “mismatches” are known to predict when
a child is ready-to-learn. Here we used event-related potentials to study
whether the relation between speech and gesture affects the processing
of associated equations. In Experiment 1, participants viewed naturalistic video-recordings of children explaining their solutions to mathematical equivalence problems, followed by a still image of the correct solution
(e.g., “8+2+3=8+5”). The children in the videos either solved the problems
correctly or incorrectly, and the strategies expressed in speech and gesture
either matched or mismatched, producing a 2 (Correctness) x 2 (Match)
within-participants design. The correct solution was followed by a list of
strategies; participants’ task was to indicate which strategies the child used
to solve the problem. ERPs were time-locked to the onset of the still of the
correct equation. The relation between speech and gesture affected the
semantic processing of the equation: Equations following Mismatch videos
elicited a larger N400 component than Match videos. Experiment 2 was
identical to Experiment 1 except participants had to indicate whether the
child had solved the problem correctly. Unlike Experiment 1, ERPs revealed
no effect of gesture-speech Match. Thus, processing of mathematical equations was modulated by the relation between speech and gesture—but only
when participants attended to the reasoning process (the child’s strategy)
rather than the outcome (whether the child was correct).

D114
SENSORIMOTOR DEFICIT IN UNILATERAL NEGLECT AS
REVEALED IN A MENTAL ROTATION TASK Luca De Simone1, Stefania
Riggi1, Tomasino Barbara2, Passarini Laura3, Aiello Marilena1, Eleopra Roberto4,
Vallar Giuseppe5, Rumiati Raffaella1; 1SISSA - International School for Advanced
Studies — Unilateral neglect (UN) patients may fail to report sensory events
occurring in the contralesional side of space or to explore through motor
acts that portion of the space. In the present study we tested 20 patients
with right-brain damage, 10 of whom with and 10 without UN. Patients
performed two mental rotation tasks by either applying an effector- based
(sensorimotor) transformation or an object-based (visuo-spatial) transformation. In the effector-based transformation, patients were asked to decide
whether a rotated hand was left or right, while in the object-based transformation, they were asked to decide if a red dot was on the left or right
side of a hand. Stimuli could be either left or right hands presented in a
palm or back perspective, and could appear either on the left, on the right
or on the center of a computer screen. The key result shows that patients

2013 Annual Meeting

Poster Session D

with UN were impaired when they performed mental rotation using the
effector-based transformation on left hands. The present finding suggests
that UN is associated with a deficit in coupling visual information with
proprioceptive signals arising from the left side of the body which, being
affected, selectively reduces the patients’ ability to apply sensorimotor
transformations.

activation for AV speech. The results of experiment (ii) demonstrate an
activation profile inconsistent with multisensory integration: activation
in motor speech regions (regions showing response to subvocal articulation) was strongest for visual speech with almost no activation for auditory
speech. The combined results suggest that the processing of visual speech
does not rely on the speech production system.

D115
MULTISENSORY INTEGRATION OF VISUAL AND MOTION CUES
IN A MOTION SIMULATOR: AN ANALYSIS OF THE P3 EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL COMPONENT John G. Grundy1, Martin v. Mohren-

D118
TWO PLUS BLUE EQUALS GREEN: THE MINIMAL COST OF DOING
MATH WITH COLORS IN GRAPHEME-COLOR SYNESTHESIA J.

schildt , Stefan A. Nazar , Judith M. Shedden ; McMaster University — We
used event-related potentials (ERP) to examine brain responses to visual
and motion cues in a motion simulator. The P3 is an ERP component associated with higher-order cognitive processing in the detection of important or novel events. This component is a reliable index for the integrity of
sensory systems and can be informative in revealing processes involved
in multi-sensory integration. A robust P3 component has recently been
observed in response to self-motion cues as experienced in a motion simulator. Here, we examine the integration of visual and motion cues and
show a P3 component that is distinct in both amplitude and topography
from the P3 elicited by visual or motion cues alone. Multisensory integration and practical implications for training operations in a motion simulator
are discussed.
1

1

1

1

D116
SENSORY ATTENUATION FOR JOINTLY-PRODUCED ACTION
EFFECTS Janeen Loehr1; 1University of Saskatchewan — Successful interpersonal coordination often requires people to distinguish between their
own and others’ contributions to a shared task. One mechanism that is
thought to underlie a self-other distinction is sensory attenuation, whereby
the sensory consequences of one’s own actions are reduced compared to
other sensory events. Previous research has shown that the auditory N1
event-related potential (ERP) is reduced for self-initiated compared to
externally-generated tones. The current study examined whether attenuation also occurs for jointly-initiated tones, which require two people to
coordinate their actions to produce a single tone. ERP responses were measured when participants generated tones alone (tone onset immediately followed the participant’s button press) or with a partner (tone onset immediately followed the participant’s or the partner’s near-simultaneous button
press, whichever occurred last). N1 attenuation was smaller for jointly-initiated tones compared to self-initiated tones. Furthermore, for jointly-initiated tones, smaller delays between the participant’s button press and tone
onset were associated with greater attenuation. These findings indicate that
sensory attenuation differentiates between one’s own and others’ contributions to sensory events, even when two people act together to produce a
single shared effect.

D117
THE MOTOR SYSTEM DOES NOT PLAY A ROLE IN AV INTEGRATION: EVIDENCE FROM THE MCGURK EFFECT UNDER ARTICULATORY SUPPRESSION AND FMRI William Matchin1, Greg Hickok1; 1Univer-

sity of California, Irvine — Visual speech influences the perception of heard
speech. A classic example of this is the McGurk effect, whereby an auditory /pa/ overlaid onto a visual /ka/ induces the fusion percept of /ta/.
Recent behavioral and neuroimaging research has highlighted the importance of both articulatory representations and motor speech regions of the
brain, particularly Broca’s area, in processing visual speech. We assessed
the claims regarding the involvement of the motor system in visual speech
in two experiments: (i) examining the effect of articulatory suppression on
the McGurk effect, and (ii) comparing the activation in frontal-motor brain
regions for auditory, visual, audiovisual and McGurk speech to articulatory rehearsal using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). The
hypothesis regarding experiment (i) is that if the motor system plays a
substantial role in McGurk fusion, distracting the motor system through
articulatory suppression should result in a reduction of McGurk fusion.
The results of experiment (i) showed no such reduction. The hypothesis
of experiment (ii) is that if motor speech regions are responsible for the
McGurk effect, they should show a response profile consistent with AV
integration: activation for both auditory and visual speech, with enhanced

Daniel McCarthy1, Lianne N. Barnes1, Gideon Paul Caplovitz1; 1University of
Nevada, Reno — In grapheme-color synesthesia, graphemes (e.g., numbers
or letters) evoke color experiences. Synesthesia is generally considered to
be a unidirectional phenomenon: graphemes can activate experiences of
color, but colors will not generate experiences of graphemes or the symbolic information they represent. However, recent research using implicit
measures has provided some evidence that colors can elicit symbolic representations of the associated grapheme. Here, we examine the degree to
which such elicited representations can be cognitively accessed. Using a
mathematical verification task (e.g., 2 + 3 = 5, true/false?) replacing one or
more of graphemes with color patches, we find that synesthetes can verify
such problems with colors as fast and accurately as with graphemes. Moreover, we find no measurable cost for switching between equations formed
with graphemes and colors. This demonstrates that given specific task
demands, synesthetes can cognitively access symbolic information elicited
by physical colors as effectively and efficiently as with specific graphemes.

D119
MANIPULATING ACTION IN THE MIRROR BOX ILLUSION

Jared
Medina1, Priya Khurana2, H. Branch Coslett3; 1University of Delaware, 2Haverford College, 3University of Pennsylvania — We examined the role of vision
and action in representing limb position by manipulating body position
and movement using a novel mirror tapping illusion. We placed participants in a modified mirror box, in which they viewed their left hand and
a reflection of their left hand (which looked like their right hand) in the
mirror. Participants placed their index fingers against the mirror, and were
instructed to tap on the mirror with both hands either synchronously or
asynchronously. Between blocks, we manipulated the distance of the
hidden right hand from the mirror (0, 6, and 12 inches). After one minute
of tapping or no movement, participants reported the perceived location
of their right hand, relative to the mirror. In all conditions, visual feedback
created the illusion that the right hand was touching the mirror. In the 6
and 12 inch conditions, participants consistently felt that their right hand
was closer to the mirror compared to its actual position. This illusory displacement was significantly greater after synchronous tapping compared
to asynchronous tapping and no movement. Participants also filled out a
questionnaire on the illusion, including perceived location, ownership of
the mirrored hand, deafference, and affect. High ratings of limb ownership
were correlated with greater displacement towards the mirror in the synchronous tapping condition. However, in the asynchronous condition, high
ratings of limb deafference were correlated with greater illusory displacement. These results provide evidence regarding how action information is
integrated with higher-order body representations to provide estimates of
limb position.

D120
MORPHOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS MODULATE THE EFFECTS OF
TOOL USE ON BODY REPRESENTATIONS Luke E. Miller1,2, Matthew R.
Longo3, Ayse P. Saygin1,2; 1University of California, San Diego, 2Kavli Institute
for Brain and Mind, 3Birkbeck College, University of London — Research over
the past decade has established that tools can become incorporated into
representations of the user’s body. Using a long grabber lead to a systematic mislocalization of touch distally along the user’s arm (Cardinali et al.,
2009, CB), suggesting that tool use elongates the user’s arm representation.
However, no change in the length of the hand representation was found.
One possible explanation for the lack of modulation comes from the body
model hypothesis (Tsakiris, 2010 EBR), which states that visual similarity
between an object and body part is a necessary condition for plasticity to
occur. According to this hypothesis, the lack of visual similarity between
the grabber and the hand might have been the reason plasticity did not

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

145

Poster Session D
occur on the hand. To test this hypothesis, we administered a tactile distance judgment task before and after tool use in two experiments. Wooden
points at variable distances were used to touch an experimental (dorsum of
hand) and a control (forehead) site. Subjects made judgments about which
stimulus had the greatest distance between the two points. In the first
experiment, subjects used a dynamic hand-shaped tool to pick up objects.
Use of the hand-shaped tool significantly modulated the shape of the hand
representation as measured by anisotropy of tactile size perception. In contrast, no change was found in the second experiment, when subjects used
a long grabber. These findings demonstrate that the visual form of the tool
plays a mediating role in whether tool use leads to plasticity to body representations.

D121
WHAT DETERMINES WHEN: THE VISUAL AREAS THAT ARE CRITICAL BOTTLENECKS FOR RAPID, FINE DISCRIMINATION OF
SHAPE IN TWO AND THREE DIMENSIONS. Justin Ales1, Benoit R.
Cottereau2, Anthony M. Norcia1; 1Stanford University, 2Centre de Recherche
Cerveau et Cognition (CerCo) — The ability to discriminate between different shapes underlies our ability to recognize an enormous range of objects
across many environments. Information about the shape of an object is carried both by the object’s 2D boundary, defined by texture discontinuities,
as well as its 3D boundary specified by disparity. Here we used fMRI-informed EEG source-imaging to localize the cortical areas responsible for
two fine perceptual discriminations, one involving 2-D shape discrimination and the other 3-D disparity discrimination. For both tasks, contrasting
stimulus-locked responses from trials containing changes that were correctly detected (hits) with trials in which no change occurred (correct-rejects) revealed stimulus-locked, target-selective activity in several occipital visual areas. During the 3-D disparity discrimination task, activity first
appeared in the V4 and V3A regions of interest (ROI) and subsequently in
the lateral occipital complex (LOC) ROIs. During the 2-D boundary discrimination however, activity first appeared in the LOC ROI and subsequently in the V4 and V3A ROIs. The V1 ROI did not show target-selective
responses in either task. We next used response-locked analysis to analyze
the timing and source distribution of evoked responses that predicted the
timing of the behavioral response. In the 3-D task, activity appeared first
in the V4 ROI, while for the 2-D task activity first appeared in the LOC
ROI, consistent with the stimulus-locked results. Our results indicate that
although the same network of three visual areas is activated for both 2-D
and 3-D discriminations, the task determines which visual area acts as the
critical bottleneck.

D122
FURTHER EVIDENCE OF WHORFIAN EFFECTS TO THE RIGHT
VISUAL FIELD IN PRESENT-ABSENT AND POP OUT TASKS Abdulrahman Al-rasheed1, Drivonikou Vicky2, Ian Davies2; 1Department of Psychology.
University of King Saud. Riyadh, KSU., 2Department of Psychology. University of
Surrey. Guildford. UK. — Abdulrahman S. Al-Rasheed1,Drivonikou2, V, and
Ian R. L. Davies2. 1Department of Psychology. University of King Saud.
Riyadh, KSU. 2Department of Psychology. University of Surrey. Guildford.
UK. The Left Hemisphere (LH) bias in colour Categorical Perception (CP)
has been related to the linguistic nature of the LH and converging evidence
to support this hypothesis has been presented (e.g., Gilbert et al. 2006; Drivonikou et al. 2007 a & b; Roberson et al. 2008; Tan, Chan, Kay, Khong, Yip
& Luke, 2008; Liu et al. 2009). However, So far, all studies that tested the
lateralised CP effect have used either the visual search task of Gilbert et al
(2006) or the target detection task of Drivonikou et al (2007) with most of
these tasks involving a spatial decision about whether the target is on the
left or the right, and it is important to establish that the effect is independent of the detailed methods used. Here, we extended the investigation to
include two other types of tasks: First, varying the number of distractors
affects lateralised CP (Experiment 1) and then whether removing the spatial decision (left or right of fixation) affects lateralised CP (Experiment 2).
Forty native English-speaking undergraduates recruited from the student
population of the University of Surrey the UK were participated in this
study. The results showed that the pattern of lateralisation was independent of the number of distractors, confirming that, detecting a target colour
amongst differently coloured distractors is a ‘pop-out’ task, and confirming
that the LH bias is invariant across basic changes in the nature of the task.

146

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

D123
PREDICTING MULTIPLE STIMULUS FEATURES IS ASSOCIATED
WITH PROCESSING COSTS Magda Altman1, David Melcher1,2, Uri
Hasson1,2; 1University of Trento, 2Center for Mind/Brain Sciences (CIMeC), University of Trento — The brain’s ability to encode environmental regularities
licenses predictions regarding upcoming events and enables appropriate
anticipatory behaviors. A core question is whether prediction-related processes are mediated by systems specialized for predictions about specific
stimulus dimensions, or via a general system that mediates predictions
about different dimensions. To address this issue, we examined whether
being able to predict both the category of a forthcoming image and its location (i.e., ‘what’ and ‘where’) results in decreased performance as compared
to conditions where either the location or category could be predicted, but
not both. We constructed 4 types of stochastic series where participants
could predict the location of the next image, the image category, both location and category, or neither feature. Series were presented while participants performed an incidental task. Eye tracking investigated how regularities influence the temporal and spatial coordinates of eye movements.
Location regularities improved various performance metrics including predictive positioning prior to stimulus onset, earlier saccade latencies to targets, more efficient saccade dynamics, earlier fixation onsets and better performance in both detection and memory. Several benefits were also found
for series with category regularities. Crucially, the condition in which both
category and location were predictable incurred costs relative to the condition where only location was predictable: it interfered with predictive
positioning, increased target dwell times, and reduced performance in the
incidental task. We conclude that parallel encoding of independent location
and category regularities is possible, but incurs costs in terms of prediction
as well as online and offline processing/information consolidation.

D124
DIFFERENTIAL CONNECTIVITY WITHIN THE PARAHIPPOCAMPAL
PLACE AREA Christopher Baldassano1, Diane M. Beck2, Li Fei-Fei1; 1Stanford
University, 2University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — The Parahippocampal Place Area (PPA) has traditionally been considered a homogeneous
region of interest, but recent evidence from both human studies and animal
models has suggested that PPA may be composed of functionally distinct
subunits. Macaque parahippocampal cortex exhibits distinctive changes in
connectivity along the anterior-posterior axis, suggesting that anterior and
posterior segments of human PPA might also have differential connectivity
properties. To investigate this hypothesis, we utilize a functional connectivity measure for fMRI that can estimate connectivity differences at the voxel
level. Applying this method to whole-brain data from two experiments,
we provide the first direct evidence that anterior and posterior PPA exhibit
distinct connectivity patterns. Anterior PPA is more strongly connected to
regions in the default mode network, including the parieto-medial temporal pathway consisting of the caudal Inferior Parietal Lobule (cIPL) and
Retrosplenial Cortex (RSC). Posterior PPA is more strongly connected to
occipital visual regions, including the Lateral Occipital Complex (LOC) and
the Transverse Occipital Sulcus (TOS). We further show that object sensitivity in PPA also has an anterior-posterior gradient, with stronger responses
to images of abstract sculptures in posterior PPA than in anterior PPA. Our
findings not only reinforce the link between PPA and macaque parahippocampal regions, but also demonstrate that PPA is actually composed of at
least two regions operating on different types of visual information, shedding new light on the controversy over its functional properties.

D125
FUNCTIONAL AND EFFECTIVE CONNECTIVITY DYNAMICS OF
SEMANTIC PROCESSING DURING WORD READING Nicolas Bedo1,
Lawrence Ward1,2; 1University of British Columbia, Department of Psychology,
2
UBC Brain Research Centre — Many neural processes underlying word
reading remain obscure. Importantly, the flow of information within and
between language networks during word reading has not been adequately
explored. One such network involves semantic processing. Semantic network ROIs have been identified in reading, but how this network engages
with other reading networks remains unclear. We investigated differences
in functional and effective connectivity when reading letter strings with
semantic content (words), as opposed to letter strings absent of seman-

2013 Annual Meeting
tic content (consonant strings). EEG was recorded from healthy volunteers with no reported learning or reading disabilities, during a reading
task. Participants viewed sequences of three letters, each followed by
either a three-letter word or a consonant string. Participants responded
as to whether or not the string matched the letter sequence. Independent
component analysis of the EEG data followed by dipole fitting of single
dipole topographic maps identified many sources of neural activation
previously associated with word reading, including the visual word form
area (VWFA), left STG, angular gyrus (Wernicke’s area), and left IFG (Broca’s area). As expected, strings with semantic content produced a more
extended pattern of theta-band phase synchronization over time and brain
regions compared with consonant strings. Analyses of directed information
transfer indicated extensive information transfer beyond the VWFA into
semantic processing areas for words, whereas consonant strings produced
little information flow to to these regions. These results begin to extend our
knowledge of reading in the brain beyond the functional anatomy into the
dynamics of information transfer among brain networks.

D126
SYNESTHETIC GRAPHEME-COLOR PERCEPTS EXIST FOR NEWLY
ENCOUNTERED HEBREW, DEVANEGARI, ARMENIAN AND CYRILLIC GRAPHEMES Christopher Blair1, Marian Berryhill1; 1University of Nevada,
Reno — Those with grapheme-color synesthesia experience specific color
percepts when viewing symbols. For most synesthetes, these experiences
have been present for as long as they can remember. Are such associations formed in the brain during a critical period early in development, or
can new associations be formed and/or changed with appropriate exposure? Grapheme-color synesthete MC2 studied abroad in India where she
was exposed to the Devanegari alphabet for the first time. During her six
months abroad, her color associations for Devanegari, Latin, and Hebrew
(with which she had no prior experience and no exposure) alphabets were
regularly tested. We later longitudinally tested MC2, another synesthete,
DN, and two non-synesthetic controls on Cyrillic and Armenian graphemes. When presented with Cyrillic letters, participants heard the letter
name to test for the effect of phonemic information on the development of
grapheme-color associations. These studies showed the following: synesthetes can form synesthetic color percepts for graphemes first encountered
during adulthood, these percepts are present from the first exposure, and
synesthetic percepts stabilize over time but this is not facilitated by phonemic information. Control participants never matched the synesthetes’
performance. These findings confirm that synesthetic color-grapheme associations are not dependent on a critical period of early childhood development. They also suggest the existence of a general grapheme-color association mechanism in color-grapheme synesthetes.

D127
HEMISPHERE-SPECIFIC CONTRIBUTIONS OF RHYTHMIC FRONTAL ACTIVITY TO HUMAN VISUAL PERFORMANCE: A TMS STUDY
Lorena Chanes1, Romain Quentin1, Antoni Valero-Cabre1,2,3; 1Université Pierre
et Marie Curie, CNRS UMR 7225-INSERM UMRS S975-ICM, Paris, France,
2
Laboratory for Cerebral Dynamics Plasticity & Rehabilitation, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, USA, 3Cognitive Neuroscience and Information Technology Research Program, Open University of Catalonia (UOC),
Barcelona, Spain — Despites growing evidence of the fundamental role
played by cerebral oscillations in neural signaling and processing, the
region- and hemisphere-specific contributions of brain oscillatory activity
to human visual cognition remains to be causally explored. In two groups
of participants, we applied 4-pulse real or sham TMS bursts either to the
left or the right Frontal Eye Field (FEF) to induce rhythmic activity patterns and study the impact on the visual detection and categorization of
low-contrast near-threshold targets. In separate experimental blocks, and
in order to assess the effects of frequency, frequency-specific (rhythmic)
TMS bursts at a high-beta (30 Hz) frequency were compared to non-frequency-specific (arrhythmic) patterns, matched in duration and number
of pulses. Our interventions revealed hemisphere-specific modulations of
frontal oscillatory activity on the visual detection task. More specifically,
the right FEF frequency-specific high-beta TMS bursts enhanced perceptual
sensitivity (d’) as compared to sham, whereas no visual performance effects
derived from the use of non-frequency-specific patterns. In contrast, on the
left FEF, only the non-frequency-specific TMS pattern yielded significant

Poster Session D
perceptual sensitivity (d’) improvements, whereas no visual performance
effects emerged from the use of frequency-specific high-beta bursts. No
significant modulations were observed for the categorization task for any
of the TMS patterns used. Our results provide causal evidence in favor of
hemisphere-specific frontal contributions to the modulation of visual performance and suggest different oscillation-based mechanisms for the right
and the left FEF in such phenomena.

D128
LATERALIZATION OF THE N170 FOR ACTIONS THAT ENGAGE THE
VENTRAL VISUAL STREAM Leanna Cruikshank1, Jeremy Caplan1, Anthony
Singhal1; 1University of Alberta — The N170 event-related potential (ERP)
component is elicited in response to visual stimuli, and is thought to signify
early perceptual processing and classification of visual objects. Recently,
it was suggested that the N170 may reflect more general ventral stream
processes, and evidence has linked this component to motor planning and
perception for action (Cruikshank et al., 2012). Specifically, the N170 was
more negative in amplitude when participants reached towards targets
that were occluded, compared to directly visually available. These types of
actions rely on previously stored perceptual representations and are often
referred to as memory-guided actions. The enhancement of the N170 over
the contralateral hemisphere for memory-guided actions supports a theory
that the N170 may be a marker of neural activity within the ventral stream.
However, in the aforementioned study, only right-handed actions were
examined. If the N170 does indeed reflect ventral stream activity, it should
also be more negative in amplitude over the right hemisphere for lefthanded memory-guided actions. To test this hypothesis, participants were
auditorily cued to touch target dots on a touchscreen. Two viewing conditions varied with respect to the contribution of the ventral stream during
response initiation. In condition 1, the target disappeared with movement
initiation. In condition 2, it disappeared with the cue to respond. The N170
was larger in amplitude for condition 2 over both hemispheres; however, a
laterality effect was found only for condition 2. These results further support the theory that the N170 is an electrophysiological marker of ventral
stream activity.

D129
TO CROSS OR NOT TO CROSS: MONITORING DECISIONS BASED
ON EVERYDAY LIFE EXPERIENCE IN A SIMULATED TRAFFIC TASK
Evelien Kostermans12, Renske Spijkerman12, Rutger C.M.S Engels2, Harold
Bekkering1, Ellen R.A de Bruijn3; 1Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Nijmegen, the Netherlands, 22Radboud
University Nijmegen, Behavioral Science Institute, Nijmegen, the Netherlands,
3
Leiden University, Institute of Psychology, Unit of Clinical Psychology and
Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, Leiden, the Netherlands — ERP studies have identified the feedback-related negativity (FRN) component in
relation to processing feedback which indicates that a particular outcome
was worse than expected. In addition, according to the conflict-monitoring
theory the stimulus-locked N2 reflects pre-response conflict. Although formulated around different principles, these theories share the notion that
both conflict and error-signals function as a warning signal to improve
behavior. Assumptions of these theories have been made on the basis of
relatively simple response-mapping tasks, rather than more complex decision-making processes associated with everyday situations. The question
remains whether expectancies and conflicts induced by everyday knowledge similarly affect decision-making processes. To answer this question, participants in the current study had to engage in a simulated traffic task that varied high and low ambiguous situations at an intersection
by presenting multiple varying traffic light combinations. The tendency
to cross was more pronounced for traffic light combinations that in reallife are associated with proceeding, as opposed to more ambiguous traffic
light combinations not uniquely associated with a specific response. On a
neurophysiological level, the stimulus-locked N2 was enhanced on trials
that induced experience-based conflict. Although the FRN was more pronounced for negative as compared to positive feedback, this component
did not differ as a function of everyday expectancies in relation to traffic
rules. The current study shows that well-learned everyday rules may influence decision-making processes in situations that are associated with the
application of these rules, even if responding accordingly does not lead to
the intended outcomes.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

147

Poster Session D

D130
NEURAL CORRELATES OF ABSTRACTION AND EXEMPLAR BASED
CATEGORY LEARNING Robert Lech1,2, Onur Güntürkün1,2, Boris Suchan1,2;
1

Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Ruhr University Bochum, 2International
Graduate School of Neuroscience, Ruhr University Bochum — Categorical
learning in humans can be based on abstraction or exemplar based learning
of stimuli. The aim of this study was to examine the contributions of different brain structures to these two processes using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Twenty healthy right-handed subjects were scanned
in a 3T magnetic resonance scanner while performing a categorization task.
Fourteen circular stimuli with six color dimensions were divided into two
families, each family consisting of a prototype, five typical stimuli differing
in only one dimension, and one exception that shared more dimensions
with the other family. The participants had to decide if a stimulus belongs
to family one or two, receiving feedback after every trial. Behavioral data
shows a replication of previous findings, with a faster learning of prototypes and typical stimuli, and a switch from an abstraction based to an
exemplar based categorization for exceptions in the later learning phases.
Imaging data reveals activation in the PFC, striatum, cingulate cortex,
medial temporal lobe and parietal lobe for the categorization of exceptions.
Moreover, an interaction of stimulus type and learning phase (learned vs.
unlearned stimuli) yields activation in the prefrontal cortex, showing its
involvement in category learning and strategy switching. These results
suggest differing neural substrates for abstraction and exemplar based category learning and an involvement of widespread cortical and subcortical
networks, especially the PFC.

D131
DISTORTION OF PROPORTION ESTIMATION IN SENSORY JUDGMENT Ya Hsuan Liu1, Shih Wei Wu1,2, Chun I Yeh3; 1Institute of Neuroscience,
National Yang-Ming University, 2Brain Research Center,National Yang-Ming University, 3Department of Psychology, National Taiwan University — In many
situations, in order to make a decision, the organisms have to go through
a two-step process. First, they need to analyze information coming from
the environment and second, they need to use the result of their analysis to guide decision computations. While it has been well documented
that humans distort information during decision making (step 2), less is
known how and to what extent information is distorted in the analysis of
sensory information (step 1). In a sensory judgment task, the subjects were
presented with a rectangular patch filled with black and white squares on
a gray background and were asked to estimate the proportion of either the
black or white squares in the stimulus. There were 7 different proportions
(40 trials each). On half of the trials, subjects were asked to estimate the
proportion of black squares and to estimate the proportion of white on
the other half of trials. The subjects were not given feedback on the actual
proportion during the experiment. We found that the subjects (n=10) on
average showed patterned deviation in their proportion judgment. When
the actual proportion of black was below 0.3, the subjects overestimated
the proportion, with the peak of deviation at around 0.1. On other hand,
the subjects tended to underestimate proportion of black when the actual
proportion was greater than 0.3 with the maximum underestimation taking
place at around 0.7. This suggested that distortion of information could
take place during sensory judgment prior to decision making.

D132
GENDER DIFFERENCES IN OXYTOCIN-ASSOCIATED DISRUPTION
OF DECISION BIAS DURING EMOTION PERCEPTION Spencer Lynn1,
Elizabeth Hoge2, Laura Fischer2, Lisa Feldman Barrett1,2, Naomi Simon2; 1Northeastern University, 2Massachusetts General Hospital — Oxytocin is associated
with differences in the perception of and response to socially mediated
information, such as facial expressions. Across studies, however, oxytocin’s
effect on emotion perception has been inconsistent. Outside the laboratory,
emotion perception involves interpretation of perceptual uncertainty and
assessment of behavioral risk. An account of these factors is largely missing
from studies of oxytocin’s effect on emotion perception and might explain
some inconsistency of results. Of relevance, studies of oxytocin’s effect on
learning and decision-making indicate that oxytocin attenuates risk aversion. We used the probability of encountering angry faces and the cost of
misidentifying them as not angry to create a risky environment wherein a

148

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
bias to categorize faces as angry would maximize point earnings. Forty participants (45% women) received 30 IU intranasal oxytocin or placebo before
testing. Oxytocin was hypothesized to be associated with insufficient bias,
due to an underestimation of the factors creating risk, the encounter rate
and cost. Men given oxytocin were less influenced by cost and base rate,
exhibiting a less liberal (i.e., worse) response bias, than men given placebo (p<0.037). Oxytocin did not influence women’s performance. These
results suggest that oxytocin may impair men’s ability to adapt to changes
in risk and uncertainty when introduced to novel or changing social environments. Oxytocin pharmacotherapy may only be helpful when patients
exhibit an overly-liberal threat detection bias. Because oxytocin also influences behavior in non-social realms, oxytocin pharmacotherapy could have
unintended consequences (i.e., risk-prone decision-making) while nonetheless normalizing pathological social interaction.

D133
PERSONALITY INFLUENCES INTERTEMPORAL CHOICE: BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN EVIDENCE Joshua Manning1, Trey Hedden2, Drazen
Prelec1, John Gabrieli1; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Massachusetts
General Hospital — We investigated how personality is associated with individual differences in temporal discounting and neural activity. Participants
completed a Big-Five personality inventory. In a functional magnetic resonance imaging scanner, participants then completed a discounting task
where they chose between a series of two options of monetary rewards,
a smaller monetary reward with a shorter delay and a larger monetary
reward with a longer delay. Discount functions were estimated for each
individual using a hyperbolic discount function. We correlated each participant’s personality scores with the discount parameter. Higher discount
parameters represent a relative preference for shorter delays and lower
discount parameters represent a relative preference for longer delays. Conscientiousness was significantly correlated with lower discount parameters
and neuroticism with higher discount parameters. Next we correlated each
individual’s subjective value (SV) of the reward and personality to neural
activity. When choosing the shorter delay, SV and conscientiousness were
correlated with greater activations in the bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (DLPFC), bilateral frontal BA10, left insula, and bilateral parietal
cortex. There were no correlations with neuroticism. When choosing the
longer delay, SV and neuroticism were correlated with greater activations
in the bilateral DLPFC, left frontal BA10, bilateral insula, bilateral parietal
cortex, and ventral striatum. There were no correlations with conscientiousness. Overlapping areas of these two contrasts reveal areas that are
associated with cognition and executive control. These areas are engaged
when choosing the option that is relatively less preferred for each personality type (i.e. high conscientiousness with short delays and high neuroticism
with long delays).

D134
AMBIGUITY DEMANDS INCREASED COGNITIVE CONTROL:
ENGAGEMENT OF THE LATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX UNDERLIES DECISIONS OF MAXIMAL UNCERTAINTY Elizabeth M Martin1,
Anastasia Christakou1, Judi A Ellis1, Carien M van Reekum1; 1Centre for Integrative Neuroscience and Neurodynamics, School of Psychology and Clinical
Language Sciences, University of Reading. — Everyday decisions are invariably made with imperfect information about the potential consequences
of an action. The brain mechanisms that deal with conditions of ambiguity and levels of uncertainty critically involve the prefrontal cortex (PFC),
but are incompletely understood. In this study we collected echo-planar
magnetic resonance imaging from 20 participants whilst they performed
a simple decision-making task, an adaptation of the Cambridge Gambling
Task. We examined decisions under risk (varying explicit probabilities of
success) and ambiguity (50% probability of success), with temporal separation between the decision and a confidence rating. The confidence rating
for each trial was incorporated into the model as a modulator of the decision-making regressor. Bilateral activation in anterior cingulate (BA24/32)
and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC, BA10) scaled with the level
of risk during decisions. The increased uncertainty of the ambiguous condition additionally recruited left ventrolateral (BA10), right anterolateral
(BA9/10) and right dorsolateral PFC (BA8). We suggest that recruitment of
the vmPFC when the probability of success was explicit reflects reliance on
affective inputs when making such decisions. However, at maximal uncer-

2013 Annual Meeting
tainty, the information demands of the decision appears to modulate the
prefrontal cortical networks recruited, with the engagement of both medial
and more lateral prefrontal cortical regions, presumably reflecting integration of affective and cognitive inputs. These findings provide evidence that
additional, rather than alternate, cortical regions are recruited when information is lacking and confidence in the decision itself is low.

D135
FACEBOOK USE POSITIVELY CORRELATES WITH NUCLEUS
ACCUMBENS RESPONSE TO POSITIVE SOCIAL FEEDBACK Dar
Meshi1, Carmen Morawetz1, Hauke R. Heekeren1; 1Freie Universität Berlin,
Germany — People use Facebook, an online social networking platform, to
maintain and sometimes increase their “social capital” (i.e. reputation) (Ellison et al., 2007). The neural processing of gains in one’s reputation occurs in
the ventral striatum (Izuma et al., 2008). Thus, we hypothesized that there is
a relation between one’s degree of Facebook use and the neural processing
of one’s reputation. The study consisted of an on-camera interview on Day
1, and an fMRI (Siemens, 3T) session on Day 2. Participants (n = 31) believed
that 10 anonymous “reviewers” watched their interview and used 10-15
words to describe the participant. In the scanner, participants discovered
the words that the reviewers used to describe them (only pre-determined
positive words), as well as played a card-game to obtain monetary reward.
Our results demonstrate an overlap of BOLD signal change in the ventral
striatum due to monetary reward and positive social feedback regarding
participants’ reputation (Z>2.3, p<0.05, cluster corrected). Importantly,
activity due to positive social feedback in the left nucleus accumbens positively correlated with Facebook use across individuals (r=0.450, p=0.011).
Conversely, activity due to monetary reward in the same region of interest did not correlate with Facebook use (r=-0.249, p=0.176). These correlations were significantly different from each other (William’s T2(28)=3.06,
p<0.005). Furthermore, a control step-wise regression analysis showed that
Facebook use primarily explains our results when considered with other
personality traits (Adjusted R2=0.378, F(2,28)=10.104, p<0.001, beta=0.561).
To note, we have not addressed causality, therefore these results should be
interpreted with this consideration.

D136
BENEFITS OF COGNITIVE TRAINING IN INDIVIDUALS WITH MILD
COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT Raksha Mudar1,2, Hsueh-Sheng Chiang2, Justin
Eroh2, Audette Rackley2, Erin Venza2, Kristin Martin-Cook3, Kyle Womack3, John
Hart, Jr.2,3, Sandra Chapman2; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2The
Univesity of Texas at Dallas, 3Universiy of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas — Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) frequently represents a prodromal stage of dementia. There is impetus to identify pharmacological and
non-pharmacological treatments that can slow and hopefully prevent progression from MCI to dementia to minimize its societal impact. In this pilot
study we compared immediate benefits of two forms of cognitive training
programs (strategy-based gist-reasoning training and information-based
brain health workshop) on cognitive functions (measures of abstraction,
strategic attention, memory, and executive function) and brain mechanics using event-related potentials (ERPs) in 36 participants with MCI in a
random assignment design (18 in each group). Participants in both groups
were comparable in age, MMSE and episodic memory scores at baseline.
Both groups received 8-hours of training over a period of 4 weeks. Preliminary analysis of the data showed significant improvement (p .05) in the
gist-reasoning training group on experimental measures of abstraction and
strategic attention, and on standardized measures of memory (immediate
and delayed recall on Logical Memory subtest) and abstract verbal reasoning (Similarities subtest), whereas participants in the brain health workshop
showed significant improvements in discourse memory measure and Digit
Span Backwards. The gist training group also showed significant changes
in ERPs involving tasks that examined semantic integration and semantic abstraction. These findings suggest that cognitive training in general
has beneficial impact of cognitive abilities in individuals with MCI. More
importantly, training that targets higher order cognitive functions appears
to have a broader impact on cognitive and neural functions, providing compelling motivation to further examine sustenance of benefits.

Poster Session D

D137
THE INFLUENCES OF THE APOE VARIANT ON FRONTAL BRAIN
ACTIVATION EVOKED BY THE VERBAL FLUENCY TEST Laura D.
Mueller1, Marcel Feher1, Thomas Dresler2, Julia B.M. Zeller1, Thomas Polak1,
Martin Lauer1, Andreas Reif1, Jürgen Deckert1, Martin J. Herrmann1; 1University
of Wuerzburg (Germany), 2University of Tuebingen (Germany) — The Apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 allele so far represents the most influential genetic risk
factor for Alzheimer’s disease (AD), whereas the ε2 allele may be considered as a protective factor. Carriers of the ε4 allele preclinically show structural as well as functional brain differences when compared to non-carriers
and in some cognitive domains even deviant behavioural performances.
However, the exact nature of these differences is still being intensively discussed, especially since most studies only compare ε4 carriers with non-carriers. Therefore this study investigated prefrontal brain activity of healthy
elderly subjects with different APOE variants. Three genetic groups were
differentiated, consisting of a risk group (ε4/ ε3 and ε4/ ε4 carriers), a
protective group (ε2/ ε3 and ε2/ ε2 carriers) and a control group (ε3/ ε3
carriers). The prefrontal brain activation evoked by a verbal fluency test
(VFT) was measured with functional Near-infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS)
using a 52-channel probe set. The VFT is a commonly applied early diagnostic test for AD involving semantic and phonemic word generation. On
the behavioural level, in both conditions no significant differences between
groups were found. The fNIRS results showed prefrontal activations in line
with earlier studies. Furthermore a difference in brain activation between
the APOE groups was found. To our knowledge these are the first results
demonstrating the effects of the APOE status on the brain activity evoked
by the VFT and can thereby contribute to the understanding of APOE as a
risk factor for AD.

D138
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN THE EFFECT OF STATISTICAL
STRUCTURE ON LEARNING IN A SEQUENTIALLY-CUED PREDICTION TASK. Kendra Seaman1, Alissa Forman-Alberti1, Jason Rights1, Darlene
Howard2, James Howard, Jr.1,2; 1The Catholic University of America, 2Georgetown University — Age-related deficits in risky decision making have been
linked to learning in older adults (Mata, Josef, Samanez-Larkin, & Hertwig, 2011) and studies of sequence learning suggest older adults are less
sensitive to the predictive relationships in their environments (Howard
& Howard, 1997; Howard, Howard, Dennis, & Kelly, 2008). Research has
indicated that predictive relationships are more easily learned between
temporally adjacent events than for those separated by random events.
Additionally, learning is better in young adults than older adults (Stillman,
Howard & Howard, 2011). Here we investigate age differences in the effect
of statistical structure on learning to predict outcomes using the Triplets
Prediction Task (TPT). In the TPT, subjects see two successive visual cues
and predict which target will follow. Unknown to subjects, there is a relationship between one of the cues and the target such that each of four cues
predicts one of four targets 80 percent of the time. In the first-order structure, the predictive cue (Cue 2) was the cue adjacent to the target event. In
the second-order structure, the predictive cue (Cue 1) was the cue separated from the target event by a random event. In addition to the expected
age differences in overall performance, we found that learning was better
for second-order structure than first-order structure in young adults. In
contrast, for older adults learning was marginally better for first-order
than second-order structure. Collectively, these results reveal age-related
differences in the ability to learn environmental regularities with different
temporal structures.

D139
LINKING SUBITIZING FLUENCY WITH NEURAL SYSTEMS FOR
EXACT QUANTITY Gillian Starkey1, Edward Hubbard2, Bruce McCandliss1;
Vanderbilt University, 2University of Wisconsin-Madison — Developmental
studies have established that subitizing (the rapid enumeration of small
quantities) is a precursor to success in addition and multiplication. Mental
representations of these quantities increase precision with development.
Research in cognitive neuroscience has revealed a neural network for representing exact quantities, including the temporo-parietal junction (TPJ),
which is involved in representing subitizable quantities. To explore the
relationship between subitizing and the precision of numerical represen-

1

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

149

Poster Session D
tations in the TPJ, we measured fMRI responses in 48 children in grades
K-3. Using an fMRI-adaptation paradigm, children viewed dot arrays of an
adapting quantity, interspersed with presentations of Arabic numerals that
were numerically close (one away) or far (three away) from the adapting
quantity. As an index of precision, we calculated the difference between
neural responses for close and far deviant numerosities: a small difference
in response indicates greater precision because even close deviants cause
dishabituation. Children also performed an enumeration task in which they
viewed arrays of dots and named the total. Individual reaction time slopes
across set sizes 1-3 were calculated as a measure of subitizing fluency: flat
slopes indicate more fluent subitizing. Individual differences in subitizing
slope correlated with decreasing distance effects in the TPJ: children with
smaller distance effects had flatter subitizing slopes. This result indicates
that the precision of number representations in the TPJ contributes to individual differences in subitizing fluency. Since subitizing is a critical building block for arithmetic, this finding suggests that neural changes in the TPJ
contribute to the development of math competence.

D140
GRADUATE EDUCATION LEVEL PREDICTS EPISODIC METAMEMORY, BUT NOT MEMORY ACCURACY IN HEALTHY AGING AND
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Jacquelyn Szajer1, Claire Murphy1,2; 1San Diego
State University, 2University of California San Diego — Episodic memory is
known to decline in healthy aging and Alzheimer’s disease (AD), however,
these declines in are heterogeneous, influenced by cognitive-reserve factors like education (Batterham, Mackinnon, & Christensen, 2011). Another
factor shown to influence aging episodic memory is metamemory (Mm),
which plays an essential role in strategies used for encoding and retrieval
of information, as well as the control of memory output. A potential link
between the effects of education and Mm on episodic memory is that more
education is associated with fewer age effects on frontal-dependent activities like strategy use and switching tasks (Plumet, Gil, & Gaonac’h, 2005).
Because Mm abilities are frontal-dependent (Chua, Schacter, & Sperling,
2009), higher levels of education may also influence age- and AD-related
declines in Mm-accuracy. Thus, the main aim of the current study was to
investigate the effect of education level on Mm-accuracy in healthy aging
and AD. Using a sample of 143 controls and 143 patients with AD, predictors of the accuracy of retrospective Mm judgments of an episodic recognition-memory task were analyzed. Education level had a significant effect
on Mm-accuracy for incorrect-responses: those with a graduate education
reported more accurate Mm than those with a college education or less.
Neither education nor Mm-accuracy was related to performance on the
episodic memory task. More research is needed to fully elucidate the relationships between education, Mm, and episodic memory in aging and AD.
Supported by NIH grants #AG04085-25 to CM and #AG005131-28 to the
UCSD ADRC from the National Institute on Aging.

150

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E
E1
AGE-RELATED REDUCTION OF DIFFERENTIATED NEURAL
RESPONSES TO DIFFERENT STIMULUS TYPES Katherine Mott1,
Brittany Alperin1, Tatyana Zhuravleva1, Phillip Holcomb2, Dorene Rentz1, Kirk
Daffner1; 1Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 2Tufts University — The dedifferentiation theory of cognitive aging stresses the failure
of older adults to recruit specialized neural mechanisms, often viewed as
being due to a common underlying process that uniformly disrupts cognitive functions. Here, ERPs were employed to determine if there is an age-related reduction in generating differentiated neural responses to target and
standard stimuli. Twelve young (mean age 23), 14 middle-aged (mean age
51), 15 young-old (mean age 74), and 23 old-old (mean age 85) well-matched,
cognitively high-performing adults responded to rare visual target letters
under low and high memory load. The anterior P3a was used as an index
of orienting/executive control, and the posterior P3b as an index of categorization/memory updating. For both the P3a and P3b components, the
difference in amplitude between targets and standards decreased substantially as a function of age. Advancing age predicted decreasing size of the
P3b to targets and increasing size of the P3a to standards. The magnitude
of these age-associated differences was similar under low and high load
conditions. These findings indicate that older adults generate increasingly
less differentiated neural responses to target and standard stimuli. The
age-related reduction in P3b to targets may reflect attenuation of the categorization process, whereas the age-associated increase in P3a to standards
may represent compensatory frontal-executive activity to support the task
of distinguishing between different stimulus types. This pattern of results
does not suggest a ubiquitous process of dedifferentiation, but may be the
consequence of different kinds of mechanisms across various cognitive
operations.

E2
THE EFFECTS OF VISUAL ATTENTION ON AGE-RELATED PATTERNS OF OBSTACLE AVOIDANCE BEHAVIOUR Lindsay Nagamatsu1,
Craig Chapman1, Teresa Liu-Ambrose1, Todd Handy1; 1University of British
Columbia — Previous research has found that older adults show decrements in visually attending to the left side of space. To what extent might
such deficits actually impact our behaviours? In the following study, we
used a novel obstacle avoidance task to examine this question. We had
young and older adults complete a manual reaching task, where they were
required to reach their dominant hand to a target location on a table. Physical objects were placed on the table between the participant and the target,
with distance (close together versus far apart) and number of objects (one
versus two) counterbalanced between trials. Using an advanced motion
tracking system, we measured the trajectories of participants’ reaching
motions for each trial. We found that compared to young adults, older participants did not show the expected avoidance trajectory patterns towards
obstacles placed on the left side of the environment. Rather, older participants appeared to “ignore” objects placed on the left, without adjusting
their trajectory away from these obstacles. These results are consistent with
the prevailing notion that older adults have impaired visual-spatial attention to the left side of visual space, and support the idea that underlying
right hemispheric deficits may be characteristic of aging. Our results have
implications for safe navigation and mobility in older adults, where failing to notice obstacles and hazards in the environment may result in an
increased risk for falls.

E3
LONG-TERM VISION LOSS AFTER MACULAR DEGENERATION
RESULTS IN ENHANCED VISUAL CORTEX ACTIVITY ASSOCIATED
WITH PREPARING FOR A VISUAL TASK, BUT NOT PROCESSING
VISUAL INPUT. Rodolphe Nenert1, Lesley Ross1, Dawn Decarlo1, Martha
Graham1, Kristina Visscher1; 1University of Alabama at Birmingham — Macular
degeneration (MD) results in loss of central vision, and with it the high
acuity necessary for reading, driving and recognizing faces. Some patients

with MD are able to learn to use their eccentric visual field to perform these
tasks. Some studies suggest that, after retinal lesions, cortical resources
once used for processing information from central vision are remapped to
process peripheral vision. However, several studies have challenged this
idea. The goal of this study is to reconcile these two sets of data. We compare brain activity in participants with MD and matched controls during a
task requiring visual attention. We use an experiment design that allows
separation of stimulus-driven effects from effects driven by attention.
Analyses were made on anatomically defined brain regions of interest corresponding to: central vision, peripheral vision, and hand motor cortex.
Stimulus-driven BOLD responses in visual areas were consistent with the
impoverished visual inputs of the participants with MD, and not consistent
with a remapping of cortical resources. However, visual cortical responses
reflecting attention were stronger in participants with MD than controls.
No differences were found in the motor regions, indicating that this was
specific to the visual regions. No evidence of cortical remapping was found.
However, the data provide evidence that MD participants make more use
of visual cortex to set up the attentional state required to perform a visual
task. This is evidence that MD participants may make more efficient use of
attentional resources as a partial compensation for visual loss.

E4
DISRUPTED SALIENCE NETWORK ARE CORRELATED TO COGNITIVE DECLINE WITH AGING: RESTING-STATE FMRI STUDY
Keiichi Onoda1, Masaki Ishihara1, Shuhei Yamaguchi1; 1Shimane University —
Salience network consisted of anterior cingulate cortex and bilateral insula,
play important role in identifying the most homeostatistically relevant
event and integrating highly processed sensory data. Our previous work
reported that disrupted salience network attributes cognitive decline with
aging. In this study, we investigated whether functional connectivities
between the salience network and other brain regions are associated with
cognitive decline in aging. Healthy middle-aged and elderly people (n=193,
mean age: 60.1, sd: 12.1, range: 34-87 male/female ratio: 78/115) participated in MRI examination and underwent a neuropsychological assessment (mini-mental state examination, frontal assessment battery, and Kohs
block design test, etc). In the functional MRI analysis, we first selected three
region-of-interests (ROIs) as seeds: anterior cingulate cortex, left insula,
right insula. We performed seed-to-seed and seed-to-voxel analyses. The
results showed that (1) the connectivities between the anterior cingulate
cortex and bilateral insula negatively correlated with age, (2) the connectivity between the anterior cingulate cortex and left lateral parietal cortex
was negatively correlated with the Kohs block design test score even after
controlling age, and (3) the connectivity between the salience and thalamus
was also negatively correlated with the score. These results strengthen the
idea that the disrupted salience network is one of the reasons for the cognitive decline with aging.

E5
INATTENTIONAL BLINDNESS AND PERCEPTUAL CAPACITY IN
AUTISM SPECTRUM CONDITION Anna Remington1, John Swettenham2,
Nilli Lavie2; 1University of Oxford, 2University College London — Our research
examines selective attention in Autism Spectrum Condition (ASC) using
Load Theory (Lavie et al 2004). Load theory states that distractor processing depends on the extent to which a task engages full capacity (high load
conditions) or leaves spare capacity that ‘spills over’ resulting in distractor
processing. Our previous results showed that as perceptual load increases,
distractor stimuli continue to be processed in adults with ASC but not controls, suggesting higher perceptual capacity in the condition (Remington et
al 2009; 2011). Here we test the implication of this finding for inattentional
blindness (IB) in ASC. IB, the failure to notice an unexpected task-irrelevant stimulus, is greater under higher perceptual load (Cartwright-Finch
& Lavie, 2007). Our hypothesis of increased perceptual capacity in ASC
leads to the counterintuitive prediction that children with ASC will show
less IB than typically developing (TD) controls in tasks with higher perceptual load, because these will be insufficient to exhaust their higher capacity. Participants performed a line-length judgement task (high load: lines

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

151

Poster Session E
similar; low load: lines dissimilar in length), with an unexpected stimulus
presented on final trial. As predicted, rates of noticing the task-irrelevant
stimulus were reduced by increasing perceptual load in TD children but
not in children with ASC. The ASC group showed equally high stimulus-detection in both load conditions, and higher detection-rates than TD
group overall. These results support the hypothesis that individuals with
ASC have a higher perceptual capacity than neurotypical controls, and
show this effect for the first time in children.

E6
ATTENTIONAL BIAS SHIFTS THE POINT OF SUBJECTIVE EQUALITY IN VISUAL MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION. Nele Demeyere1, Lixia He2,
Elitsa Slavkova1, Glyn W Humphreys1; 1University of Oxford, 2Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing — We assessed whether visual neglect and/or
extinction affect magnitude estimation, or whether magnitude estimation
is unaffected by the perceptual and attentional changes in these patients.
We report data on an estimation task, where groups of patients with left
neglect and/or extinction (patients were selected on their clinical symptoms and had lesions centred on right posterior parietal cortex), controls
and left-hemisphere lesioned patients were asked to compare displays of
dots presented to both visual fields. We manipulated the distance to the
reference quantity, and computed psychometric functions when the target
was on the left and the reference on the right and vice versa. In a first experiment where participants are asked to determine which location has more
elements, psychometric functions demonstrate a clear rightward shift of the
PSE (point of subjective equality) when the test stimulus appears on the left,
for patients with left neglect. This is indicative of gross underestimations
of the quantities presented to their inattentive side. Right sided test stimuli
are also overestimated when compared to reference. In contrast, left hemisphere damaged patients who do not demonstrate behavioural neglect,
showed a small overestimation for left side stimuli. Follow up experiments
demonstrate that this effect cannot be explained by response bias (in an
experiment which asks for the ‘least’ amount of dots, similar function fittings are found), or extinction (when stimuli are presented sequentially,
rather than simultaneously). We conclude that magnitude estimation is
affected by perceptual and attentional change contingent on right posterior
parietal damage.

E7
ATTENTIONAL SELECTION FOR SHORT-TERM MEMORY: GAZE-DIRECTION PREDICTS RETRIEVAL ACTIVITY IN FRONTO-PARIETAL
CORTEX Simona Arianna Di Francesco1,2, Valerio Santangelo2,3, Davide
Nardo2, Emiliano Macaluso2; 1Sapienza University of Rome, Italy, 2Santa
Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy, 3University of Perugia, Italy — In everyday
life short-term memory involves processing of complex and unrepeated
environments, which is in striking contrast with standard experimental
paradigms typically utilizing highly stereotyped, simple and repeated
stimuli. Remembering of complex visual stimuli demands a tight interplay
between memory functions and attentional selection. Here, we examined
this interplay during free-viewing of complex and dynamic visual scenes
(8 videos, approx. 5 min each). Each video was characterized by 8 different
actors/actresses who entered twice into the scene, at unpredictable times:
the first appearance corresponded to the memory “encoding” phase, while
the second presentation represented the memory “retrieval” phase. Participants were asked to watch the videos without any specific task-requirement. During fMRI scanning, we monitored gaze-direction and we used the
tendency of the subjects to look towards each actor/actress as an index of
attentional selection. Accordingly, we categorised each actors/actresses as:
“high probability of selection/encoding”, when subjects fixated the actor
more during the first than the second presentation; versus “low probability
of selection/encoding”, when subjects fixated the actor more during the
second than the first presentation. The fMRI analyses considered the second
presentation of the actors/actresses (i.e. the memory retrieval phase) and
compared activity for actors with “high versus low” indexes of selection.
This revealed activation of fronto-parietal regions, including the inferior
frontal gyrus and the intra-parietal sulcus, plus the middle temporal complex (MT+). We conclude that differential patterns of eye-movements can
predict retrieval-related activation in fronto-parietal regions during passive
viewing of complex and dynamic visual environments.

152

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

E8
ATTENTIONAL DYNAMICS MEDIATED BY SUBCORTICAL MECHANISMS Shai Gabay1, Marlene Behrmann1; 1Carnegie Mellon University — Fol-

lowing a salient cue that attracts attention to a specific spatial location, perceptual processing of information at that location is facilitated if the interval
between cue and target is brief, or is inhibited if the interval between cue
and target is long. The mechanisms mediating these attentional dynamics
continue to be the subject on ongoing debate. According to the classic reorienting theory, IOR and facilitation are two ends of a continuum, generated
by the same underlying mechanism. We report data from an experiment in
which a cue and its ensuing target are presented to the same or different
eyes at varying cue-target intervals. Whereas facilitation was observed only
when the cue and target shared the eye-of-origin, IOR was present in all
conditions. This finding not only reveals a dissociation between facilitation
and IOR but is consistent with the view of facilitation emerging at subcortical levels of the visual pathways.

E9
ATTENTIONAL STATE TRAINING IMPROVES SPATIAL AND
NON-SPATIAL ATTENTION DEFICITS IN PATIENTS WITH HEMISPATIAL NEGLECT Jose Gallegos1, Ativ Zomet1,4, Christina Marini1, Alana
Vernon1,2, Sawsan Dabit1, Michael Merzenich1,3, Thomas Van Vleet1,2; 1Brain
Plasticity Institute, 2VA Medical Center, Martinez, 3University of California, San
Francisco, 4Tel-Aviv University, Israel — Several recent studies suggest that
cognitive training focused on the promotion of a more optimal state of
attention can improve deficits in attention and higher-order cognitive function (e.g., working memory and executive control) in patients with hemispatial neglect. One method (Tonic and Phasic Alertness Training, TAPAT)
that targets executive control functions, such as inhibition and sustained
attention, has been shown to produce such benefits that endure for days
to weeks following completion of 5 hours of training. Given the debilitating effect of deficits in attention and higher-order cognitive operations and
the need to identify enduring treatment options, in the current study we
examined the effects of 10 hours of multimodal TAPAT training (i.e., visual,
auditory, spatial). Twenty one patients with hemispatial neglect, due a
wide variety of etiologies (e.g., stroke, TBI, tumor resection) were assessed
on standardized and experimental neuropsychological measures of attention, working memory and executive function before being randomly
assigned to either 10 hours of TAPAT training or an active control training
condition (online computer games: Sporcle.com). Post-training, changes in
performance on the outcome measures revealed significant improvement
in attention, working memory and executive function in the TAPAT group
vs. the active control training group that endured throughout the extended
post-training follow-up period. The results suggest that training to achieve
a more optimal state of attention may benefit spatial and non-spatial deficits in attention, as well as higher-order cognitive operations in neglect.

E10
NEURAL ACTIVITY ASSOCIATED WITH ATTENTIONAL SUPPRESSION PREDICTS VISUAL WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY John
Gaspar1, Gregory Christie1, John McDonald1; 1Simon Fraser University — The
finite capacity of visual short-term memory (VSTM) necessitates that attentional processes govern which items gain preferential access to the VSTM
system. This access may involve enhancement of task-relevant items or
suppression of task irrelevant information. Consistent with a suppression-based mechanism, it has been shown that individuals with high VSTM
capacity are better able to prevent irrelevant stimuli from accessing VSTM.
Using event-related potential recordings, we investigated whether individual VSTM capacity scores (k) relate to the suppression of salient distractors
as indexed by the PD (distractor positivity), an ERP component associated
with suppression of irrelevant visual items. Here, participants searched for
a yellow target within a visual search array, with either a high-salience or
low-salience singleton present on most trials. Consistent with prior work,
only high-salient distractors elicited a PD. The amplitude of this PD correlated positively with k, suggesting that individuals who suppress distractors more efficiently have higher visual working memory capacities.
These findings substantiate a role for suppression in the VSTM system and
provide evidence that the PD may be an important neural mechanism for
efficient VSTM processing.

2013 Annual Meeting

E11
CONGRUENCY AND DISTANCE EFFECTS ARE OBSERVED WHEN
ARROWS AND NUMBER CUES ARE COMBINED Laura Gibson1,
Daphne Maurer1; 1McMaster University — Low numbers (e.g., 1-4) and downwards-pointing arrows cue attention downwards, while high numbers
(e.g., 6-9) and upwards-pointing arrows cue attention upwards (Schwarz
& Keus, 2004; Hommel et al., 2001). We designed a task in which these two
cues were combined in a congruent (e.g., a low number superimposed on a
downwards-pointing arrow) or incongruent (e.g., a high number superimposed on a downwards-pointing arrow) manner. Participants (n=21) made
a speeded judgment concerning whether number magnitude (greater or
less than 5) and arrow direction were congruent. We predicted that congruent trials would elicit faster responses than incongruent trials; further,
based on the distance effect (Lorch & Myers, 1990), we predicted that the
effect of congruency would be more pronounced on trials in which numbers further from 5 (e.g., 1 and 9) were presented. There was a significant
effect of Congruency, F(1,20)=162.119, p<0.001, such that congruent trials
were responded to significantly faster than incongruent trials, t(20)=-5.544,
p<0.001. As predicted, there was also an interaction of Congruency and
Number Magnitude, F(1,20)=32.214, p<0.001, as congruent trials were
responded to significantly faster for numbers further from 5 than numbers
closer to 5, t(20)=5.360, p<0.001. Overall, these data suggest that the presence of two congruent directional cues decrease, while competing directional cues increase, RTs; further, the distance effect is still manifest even
when an additional direction cue is added to that of number magnitude.

E12
FUNCTIONAL SPECIALIZATION OF SPATIAL ATTENTION IN PARIETAL CORTEX: A CYTOARCHITECTONIC MAPPING STUDY Celine
R. Gillebert1,2, Dante Mantini1,2,3, Ronald Peeters4, Patrick Dupont2, Rik Vandenberghe2,4; 1University of Oxford, UK, 2KU Leuven, Belgium, 3ETH Zurich,
Switzerland, 4University Hospitals Leuven, Belgium — Parietal coordinates
associated with attentional reorienting and selection between competing
stimuli are widely variable across studies. Here we used a cytoarchitectonic reference frame to contrast these two spatial attentional processes
by means of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in a total of 26
healthy volunteers. In a spatial cueing paradigm, the target was presented
at the cued location either alone or in combination with a contralateral distracter, or at a location opposite to the cued location. The expectancy rate of
‘double stimulation trials’ and ‘invalidly cued trials’ (each occurring in 20%
of trials) was matched. In areas hIP1 and hIP3, double stimulation trials
exerted a significantly stronger attentional effect than invalidly cued trials.
Conversely, area PF in the right hemisphere showed an invalidity effect in
the absence of competition effect. A third type of response was found in
areas PFm and PGa which showed both an invalidity and a competition
effect. In addition, hierarchical clustering analysis revealed that the areas
could be subdivided based on their resting-state activity. Specifically, right
PF showed a temporal profile dissimilar from other areas; a second cluster
contained PGa, and a third cluster included hIP1, hIP3 and PFm. To conclude, we demonstrated within a same experiment a functional dissociation
between two spatial attentional processes in parietal cortex. Furthermore,
the use of a cytoarchitectonic reference frame and the combined study
of attentional reorienting and selection enabled us to resolve the wide
between-study variance in inferior parietal coordinates associated with the
invalidity effect.

E13
THE DEVELOPMENTAL MISMATCH IN STRUCTURAL BRAIN MATURATION DURING ADOLESCENCE Kathryn Mills1,2, Anne-Lise Goddings1,3, Liv S Clasen2, Sarah-Jayne Blakemore1, Jay N Giedd2; 1Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, London, UK, 2Child Psychiatry Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD, USA, 3Institute of
Child Health, University College London, London, UK — Regions of the human
brain develop at different rates across the first two decades of life, with
some maturing before others. It has been hypothesized that a mismatch
in the timing of maturation between evolutionarily older structures within
the limbic cortex, and relatively newer regions within the prefrontal cortex,
underlies the increase in risk-taking and sensation-seeking behaviors
observed in human adolescents. However, most support for this “dual-sys-

Poster Session E
tems” hypothesis relies on cross-sectional data, and it is not known if this
pattern can be observed on an individual level. This study utilizes longitudinal structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data to describe the
developmental trajectories of structures associated with risk-taking and
sensation-seeking behaviors, the amygdala, nucleus accumbens (NAcc) and
prefrontal cortex, across adolescence. Structural trajectories of grey matter
volumes were analyzed using Freesurfer in 32 participants (148 scans), aged
7-30 years. Each individual in this sample had at least three high-quality
MRI scans spanning three developmental periods: before puberty, during
puberty, and after puberty. We assessed the developmental trajectories
between the amygdala, NAcc, and prefrontal cortex. The majority of individuals in our sample showed relatively earlier maturation in the amygdala
and/or NAcc, compared to the prefrontal cortex, providing evidence for a
mismatch in the timing of maturation between these structures.

E14
AN FMRI STUDY OF FEATURES OF BORDERLINE PERSONALITY
DISORDER, STRESS, AND RISKY-DECISION MAKING Ahrareh
Rahdar1, Adriana Galván1,2; 1The University of California Los Angeles, Department of Psychology, 2The University of California Los Angeles, Brain Research
Institute — Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is characterized by
risky and impulsive behaviors. Previous research has found a high level
of comorbidity between BPD, pathological gambling, substance abuse,
and a history of sexually transmitted diseases (Genna et al., 2011; Sacco
et al., 2007; Trull et al., 2000). Moreover, stress has been found to exacerbate these symptoms. Based on these findings, it is plausible that having
greater features of BPD may lead to risky decision-making, particularly
when stressed. BPD is rarely examined during adolescence, some arguing
that symptoms of BPD too closely resemble typical adolescent behaviors.
One implication of this is that very little is known about the development
of BPD. The goal of this study was to address this question and associated
neural correlates. Twenty adolescents and nineteen adults were tested on
a self-reported high-stress day and low-stress day. Participants completed
a screening instrument for BPD. During fMRI, participants chose between
a potentially risky (greater monetary gain or loss/no win or loss) or a nonrisky decision (certain monetary gain or loss). Greater BPD features predicted risky decision-making (β = .40, p < .05), particularly during loss trials
on high-stress days (β = .45, p < .05). fMRI analyses are ongoing, but preliminary results suggest greater limbic activation during risky choice as a
function of BPD features. These findings are consistent with previous work
demonstrating a relationship between BPD and risky-decision making. The
current research adds to extant literature by examining this relationship
using fMRI in a subclinical population, across genders and ages.

E15
NEURAL CORRELATES OF RESPONSE-MONITORING IN ADOLESCENTS DURING AN EMOTIONAL FLANKER TASK. Rebecca Reed1,
Renee Migliaccio2, Jill Grose-Fifer1,2; 1The Graduate Center, CUNY, 2John Jay
College of Criminal Justice, CUNY — Research suggests that response-monitoring is still developing during adolescence. However, most studies investigating the development of the neural correlates of this behavior have not
used emotional stimuli in their tasks. In this study, we used event-related
potentials (ERPs), to examine brain activity associated with response-monitoring and error detection in a flanker task using happy and fearful
emotional faces. We compared amplitude and latency differences of the
error-related negativity (ERN) and the correct-related negativity (CRN) in
adults (25-35 years) and adolescents (13-18 years) between an emotional
face flanker task and a traditional letter flanker task. We found that the
ERN was larger for letter stimuli than for face stimuli in both adults and
adolescents, and adults had larger ERNs than adolescents for both tasks.
However, there were no age-related or stimulus-related differences for the
CRN. Behaviorally, both groups were faster and more accurate on congruent than on incongruent trials, and more accurate on the letter than the face
task. Adolescents were less accurate than adults in general. These data suggest that although the CRN is relatively mature in adolescence, the ERN is
still developing. Since the ERN is thought to be useful in signaling the need
to adjust future behavior, these data may help to explain why adolescents
were less accurate than adults on these flanker tasks.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

153

Poster Session E

E16
THE DEVELOPMENT OF IMPULSE CONTROL AND ASSOCIATED
CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN VMPFC-DLPFC PREDICTS AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN INTERTEMPORAL CHOICE DURING CHILDHOOD. Nikolaus Steinbeis1, Johannes Haushofer2,3, Ernst Fehr2, Tania
Singer1,2; 1Max-Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences,
Leipzig., 2Laboratory for Social and Economic Systems Research, University of
Zurich, 3Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL), Massachusetts Institute
of Technology — Forgoing immediate pleasure for the sake of a delayed
but larger reward is necessary for the successful pursuit of long-term
goals. This ability to resist temptation improves with age, but the precise
neurocognitive mechanisms underlying its development remain elusive.
Whereas some argue that less value is placed on immediate rewards with
age others state that age-related improvements in impulse control help to
delay gratification. To test both hypotheses, we studied twenty children
(age range: 6.6-12.7 years; mean age: 9.7 years) using a valuation task (VT)
and an intertemporal choice task (ICT) in and outside the scanner. In the
VT children had to rate individually presented options varying in reward
magnitude and delay. In the ICT children had to choose between two
options differing in reward magnitude and delay, which always consisted
of a small immediate reward and an alternative larger delayed reward. We
found no age differences in the valuation of individual options. Instead,
there was a strong developmental decrease in discounting future rewards,
which was also highly correlated with a measure of impulse control. The
imaging data showed ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) to track subjective value of presented options, a region that also correlated with individual differences in temporal discounting. Using this region as seed for a
connectivity analysis, we found functional coupling with left dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) to increase significantly as a function of age and
impulse control. These data suggest that delaying gratification with age
relies on the maturation of neural networks dedicated to impulse control.

E17
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN ANTERIOR CINGULATE-INSULA
CONNECTIVITY ARE ASSOCIATED WITH THE FRONTO-EXECUTIVE
BUT NOT EMOTIONAL SALIENCY NETWORK Matthew Sutterer1,3,4,
Michelle Voss2,4, Merry Mani2, Chelsea Wong5,6, Gillian Cooke5, Amy Belﬁ1,3,4,
Timothy Weng2, Daniel Tranel1,4, Edward McAuley7, Arthur Kramer5; 1University of Iowa, Department of Neurology, 2University of Iowa, Department of
Psychology, 3University of Iowa, Department of Neurosurgery, 4University of
Iowa, Department of Neuroscience, 5University of Illinois, Beckman Institute for
Advanced Science and Technology, 6University of Illinois, Department of Neuroscience, 7University of Illinois, Department of Kinesiology — Research has
shown that healthy aging is accompanied by declines in executive functioning, but enhanced emotion processing and regulation. The neural architecture hypothesized to underlie these processes has a high degree of shared
regions. Studies of intrinsic connectivity networks, which look at temporally correlated patterns of activity across separate brain regions, may provide insight as to how aging is associated with differential changes in brain
networks involved in executive function and emotional processing. The
present study examined resting state functional MRI data from a group of
60 healthy adults between the ages of 19 and 83. We used a region of interest
(ROI) approach to look at networks related to executive function and emotional processes, the fronto-executive network and the emotional saliency
network, respectively. Because these networks share ROIs in the dorsal
anterior cingulate (dACC) and the left and right insular cortex, we further
examined age-related differences in network correlation strength between
subsets of these networks that do not contain the overlapping regions.
Age was associated with less connectivity strength in the fronto-executive
network only when the dACC and insular cortex regions were included.
Age was not associated with the functional integration of the dACC and
insula with the salience network. Thus fronto-executive network changes
appear to be driven by selectively lower connectivity between the dACC
and insular cortices within the fronto-executive network in older adults.
Preserved connectivity of the salience network in aging adults may reflect
older adults’ greater focus on emotion regulation and attending to positive
affective information.

154

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

E18
SEX DIFFERENCES DURING HUMOR APPRECIATION IN CHILD
SIBLING-PAIRS Pascal Vrticka1, Michelle Neely1, Elizabeth Walter1, Jessica M. Black1,2, Allan L. Reiss1,3; 1Center for Interdisciplinary Brain Sciences
Research (CIBSR), Dept. of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, School of Medicine, Stanford University, 2Graduate School of Social Work, Boston College,
3
Dept. of Radiology and Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Stanford University
— The developmental origin of sex differences in adult brain function is
poorly understood. Elucidating neural mechanisms underlying comparable cognitive functionality in both children and adults is required to address
this gap. Humor appreciation represents a particularly relevant target for
such developmental research because explanatory theories apply across the
life span and underlying neurocircuitry shows sex differences in adults.
As a positive mood state, humor is also of interest due to sex differences
in rates of depression, a disorder afflicting twice as many women as men.
In this study, we employed fMRI to investigate brain responses to funny,
positive and neutral video clips in 22 children ages 6 to 13 years, including
8 sibling pairs. Prominent sex differences in brain responses to humor were
observed indicating early developmental sex divergence in reward expectation and stimulus salience. These findings are discussed in the context of
evolutionary and developmental theories of humor function.

E19
THE EFFECTS OF PRENATAL TOBACCO EXPOSURE ON DELAY
TOLERANCE IN EARLY CHILDHOOD Sandra Wiebe1, Nicolas Chevalier2,
Craig Johnson3, Hua Fang4, Kimberly Andrews Espy3,5; 1University of Alberta,
2
University of Colorado, 3University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 4University of Massachussetts Medical School, 5University of Oregon — Smoking during pregnancy is associated with childhood self-regulation, including externalizing
behaviour problems and difficulty delaying gratification. Animal studies
have shown that nicotine has neurotoxic effects on dopaminergic and
serotonergic systems, implicated in self-regulation, at doses insufficient
to cause preterm birth and low birthweight. The present study examined
self-regulation in early childhood in a longitudinal follow-up of a prospective sample of prenatally-tobacco-exposed (PTE) infants. The sample
included 159 three-year-old children (M age = 3 years 25 days; SD = 26
days; 84 PTE, 74 non-exposed). Children completed a battery of self-regulation tasks including two measures of delay tolerance, the Delay Frustration
Task (where children played a computer game that periodically “froze” so
that they had to wait for the game to resume) and Snack Delay (where children had to wait 4.5 minutes to eat a candy treat). Hierarchical regression
was used to examine the effect of PTE on delay tolerance after controlling
for potential confounds, including propensity scores reflecting risk factors
related to mothers’ risk for smoking during pregnancy, birth weight and
concurrent tobacco exposure. Children’s frustration and coping behaviours
during the Delay Frustration Task were related to birth weight but not to
PTE. PTE predicted children’s inability to wait for a delayed reward in the
Snack Delay task: 39% of tobacco-exposed children ate the snack during
the delay, compared to 21% of non-exposed controls. PTE’s impact on children’s ability to tolerate delay was observed in the context of reward but
not frustration.

E20
LANGUAGE AND SOCIABILITY IN CHILDREN WITH PERINATAL
STROKE DURING THE COOKIE THEFT PICTURE DESCRIPTION
TASK Philip Lai1,2,3, Wenny Wong1,3, Doris Trauner3, Ursula Bellugi1, Judy
Reilly2; 1The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 2San Diego State University,
3
University of California San Diego — Investigating development in children
with Perinatal Stroke (PS) provides insight on how an insult early in life
impacts brain, cognitive, and behavioral development. It has long been recognized that the consequences of a stroke are greatly reduced in children
relative to adults, presumably due to the plasticity of the developing brain.
This study investigates both language and sociability, to see how lesion
site influences expression in two communicative domains. Participants
included children (ages 7-14) with PS, 11 with left hemisphere injury (LHI),
16 with right hemisphere injury (RHI), and typically developing children
(TD, n=30). Children described the Cookie Theft Picture from the Boston
Diagnostic Aphasia Examination. As a measure of language production,
the number of words for both oral and written portions were tabulated.

2013 Annual Meeting
Sociability was measured through eye contact to the experimenter. There
were no differences in language production across groups. However for
sociability, the RHI group spent less time engaging in eye contact to the
experimenter compared to the TD group, while no differences were found
between the LHI and TD groups. Although children with PS were using
language comparably to controls, with respect to sociability (eye contact),
children with RHI were less engaged with the experimenter. Such findings
regarding social behavior mirror the adult right hemisphere lesion profile
and together suggest varying degrees of neuroplasticity across communicative domains. Investigating both the behavior and the brain of children
with PS provide opportunities to explore the extent and limitations of neuroplasticity within these communicative domains.

E21
THE INFLUENCE OF CONDITIONED THREAT EXPECTANCY ON
TIME PERCEPTION Jessica Lake1, Warren Meck1, Kevin LaBar1; 1Duke Uni-

versity — The anticipation of an aversive event can distort our subjective
experience of time, suggesting that such temporal distortions may inform
the study of threat-related processes. This study investigated how conditioned threat expectancy influences the perceived duration of an intervening neutral stimulus. Participants first completed a trace conditioning
experiment in which two visual cues were followed (50% rate for each cue)
by brief aversive electrical stimulation or non-aversive tactile stimulation.
A duration discrimination task was then administered during which participants decided if a comparison tone (200-600 ms) was “longer” or “shorter”
in duration than a preceding standard tone (400 ms). To assess whether
conditioned threat expectancy can modulate time perception, conditioned
cues were presented in between the standard and comparison tones. Skin
conductance responses (SCRs) and state-trait anxiety scores were collected
as a dependent measure of conditioned fear and as individual difference
variables, respectively. Higher SCRs to the cue predicting electrical stimulation (CS+) relative to the control cue (CS-) indicated successful fear conditioning. The duration discrimination task findings showed that comparison
tone durations were underestimated on CS+ compared to CS- trials, suggesting that threat expectancy directs attention away from temporal processing. The magnitude of this underestimation was positively correlated
with trait anxiety. These findings demonstrate that temporal distortions
can result from learned associations, potentially implicating hippocampaland amygdala-dependent plasticity in threat-modulated time perception.
The trait anxiety correlation further suggests that affective time perception
studies may provide insight into the nature of anxiety and anxiety-related
disorders.

E22
AN ERP STUDY OF THE ANGRY AND SURPRISED PHONOLOGICAL
PROSODY IN SENTENCE PROCESSING Ming-Chun Lee1, Shih-tseng T.
Huang1; 1National Chung-Cheng University — The present study used ERP
to investigate the auditory sentence processing of the angry and surprised
prosody. Twenty young adults participated. Sentences varied with neutral
and emotional tone were presented (80% of neutral tone versus 20% of
angry or surprised emotion) in an event-related potential procedure. ERP
responses were recorded by the 64 channels of the SynAmps2 brain-wave
recording system of Compumedics NeuroScan. Data were analyzed in in
the temporal phases of initial (N170, 100-300 msec) and morpho-syntactic
(P3, 300-500 msec). The results found that on PO8, the N170 of angry prosody latency was longer than N170s evoked by the surprised prosody. It
was also found female participants had longer N170 latency on Cz while
listening to the emotional prosody than listening to the neutral sentence.
Analysis on the P3 difference of mean amplitudes (MAs) in between the
emotional prosody and neutral sentence on PO8 found that female participants had greater difference than their male counterparts. The results
suggested that emotional prosody was processed early with differentiation
of emotional content. N170 evoked by angry prosody was later than the
N170 to surprised prosody suggesting that the subcortical feedback loop
of angry prosody may activate a larger underlying neuronal network. The
gender differences that females outperformed their male counterparts were
consistent with previous research findings. The results of the present study
suggested that females performed with longer and stronger activations in
both initial and later phases.

Poster Session E

E23
MODULATION OF MEMORY SYSTEMS BY OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER AND STRESS REACTIVITY Winifred Limmer1, Valerie
Voon1, Neil Harrison2, Christian Doeller3, Barbara Sahakian1; 1MRC/Wellcome
Trust Behavioural and Clinical Neurosciences Institute, University of Cambridge,
2
Clinical Imaging Sciences Centre, Brighton & Sussex Medical School, 3Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen —
Schwabe (2007) proposed that stress functions as a “switch” between the
basal ganglia(BG) and hippocampal(HC) memory systems. They observed
enhanced BG-mediated “habit” learning at the expense of HC-mediated
“cognitive” learning resulting from acute and chronic stress. This theory
may be a useful model of obsessive-compulsive disorder(OCD). Indeed, BG
hyperactivity – of which compulsions may be a behavioural manifestation
– and impaired HC functioning have been documented in individuals with
OCD. We propose: (1) Schwabe’s theory would unify these seemingly unrelated findings; (2) stress interacts with OCD to “flip the switch”. In the present study, chronic stress questionnaires and a computerised object-location
memory task were administered to individuals with OCD and controls.
They learned the locations of several objects relative to either a boundary
or landmark. In an fMRI study, boundary- and landmark-related learning
were supported by the HC and BG memory systems, respectively, and each
system’s influence on learning was proportional to its level of activation.
Concordant with those of a study of subclinical OCD (Limmer,2012), the
present results indicate that landmark had a greater influence on learning than boundary, indicating greater activation of the BG relative to the
HC. The OCD – and previously the subclinical – group reported increased
stress reactivity – the duration and magnitude of a stress reaction. Reliance
on landmark-related learning may reflect compensation for (1) long-term
downregulation of HC activity owing to increased stress reactivity and
resulting alterations of the HPA axis and/or (2) down/dysregulation of
HC activity owing to OCD itself.

E24
THE IMPACT OF STIMULUS VALUE ON GOAL-DIRECTED AVERSIVE REINFORCEMENT LEARNING Björn Lindström1, Armita Golkar1,
Andreas Olsson1; 1Karolinska Institutet, Sweden — Associations between
stimuli with intrinsic negative value (e.g., threatening faces) and naturally
aversive events (e.g., electric shocks) are more easily learned than between
stimuli lacking such value. Such preferential learning has mainly been
shown in the context of classical conditioning. In spite of its importance to
real-world behavior, it is unclear if this learning bias generalizes to goal-directed reinforcement learning in humans. In the first experiment, we used
a paradigm where participants learned to choose the option (pictures of
angry or happy faces) that minimized the amount of electric shocks they
received. We manipulated the risk of electric shocks for each option using
a 2 (Phase: Initial/Reversal) x 2 (Group: HappyToAngry/AngryToHappy)
design, where the happy face for one group initially represented the optimal choice (P(Shock|Happy) = .25), but subsequently changed to be the
sub-optimal choice (P (Shock|Happy) = .75) during the reversal phase. This
design allowed us to disentangle stimulus-driven and goal-directed processes in their impact on reinforcement learning. The results showed that
the value inherit in the stimuli powerfully impacted reinforcement learning. As predicted, we observed facilitated learning when the angry face was
most predictive of electric shocks, relative to when the happy face was most
predictive of electric shocks. In the second experiment, we aimed to extend
the effect to the social domain, using the same paradigm, but with stimuli
signifying social group belonging (black and white faces shown to white
participants). Taken together, these experiments show that stimulus value
has a powerful impact on goal-directed reinforcement learning.

E25
WHITE MATTER CONNECTIVITY REFLECTS INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THE CHILL RESPONSE TO MUSIC Matthew Sachs1, Robert
Ellis1, Gottfried Schlaug1, Psyche Loui1; 1Harvard Medical School, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center — The experience of chills in response to music
is widely documented, but poorly understood. Although individual differences exist in the tendency to experience chills in response to music, little
is known about neurobiological mechanisms underlying such individual
differences. Here, we show that individual differences in strong emotional

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

155

Poster Session E
responses to music are linked to differences in auditory-frontal white
matter connectivity. Previous functional imaging research has shown that
the anterior insula (AI) is activated during the experience of chills, and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) is activated in tasks involving aesthetic judgment.
Therefore, we predicted that people who frequently perceive chills during
music listening would have increased structural connectivity between these
frontal regions and secondary auditory processing regions in the Superior
Temporal Gyrus (STG). We conducted large-scale screening (n = 237) using
a musical aesthetic experience questionnaire, from which we identified 10
chill responders and 10 controls matched in demographics, musical training, and personality factors. In these two groups we obtained diffusion
tensor imaging data and behavioral ratings, heart rate, and skin conductance during music perception. We used DTI to trace white matter pathways between STG, OFC, and AI. Results showed increased tract volume
among chill responders in white matter volume connecting STG, OFC, and
AI. Furthermore, tract volume was significantly correlated with heart rate
during perception of chills in music. Our findings provide the first evidence
that individual differences in the emotional response to music are associated with connectivity differences between sensory and emotional processing networks in the brain.

E26
EMOTIONAL AROUSAL DISRUPTS ASSOCIATIVE LEARNING:
EVIDENCE FROM SIMULTANEOUS FMRI AND EYETRACKING
Christopher R Madan1,2, Jeremy B Caplan1, Esther Fujiwara1, Tobias Sommer2;
1
University of Alberta, 2University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf — Emotional experiences are often remembered better than neutral ones. Due to
the self-important nature of emotional experiences, one might also expect
it would be adaptive to remember information related to emotional better
than information related to neutral experiences. However, behavioral studies are now finding that association-memory is in fact impaired by emotional arousal. We hypothesized that this reduced association-memory is
caused by reduced hippocampal engagement during study of emotional
pairs compared to neutral pairs. We tested for this pattern of influence on
hippocampal, as well as amygdalar, engagement during picture-association-learning with fMRI, and on fixation patterns with concurrent eyetracking. Behavioral results replicated the impairment of pairs of emotional
items relative to pairs of neutral items using image stimuli and a 5-alternative forced choice associative recognition task. Subsequent memory effect
(SME) analyses showed that the hippocampus was engaged less for correctly recognized emotional than neutral pairs. No SME was found in the
amygdala for emotional pairs. The eye-fixation patterns showed a SME:
Association-memory was better when participants made more saccades
between the two images of a pair. Saccades between images may reflect
a participant trying to relate to-be-associated items to one another. Additionally, participants made fewer saccades between the items of emotional
pairs than neutral pairs. Taken together, effects of emotional arousal led
to decreased hippocampal engagement and in-turn impaired learning of
emotional than neutral pairs. Results further suggest that impaired association-memory due to arousal may be driven by modulating distribution of
attentional allocation during association learning.

E27
CULTURAL AND RACIAL INFLUENCES ON THE NEURAL BASIS
IN EMOTIONAL FACE PROCESSING: AN FMRI STUDY Yoko Mano1,
Tokiko Harada2, Hidetsugu Komeda3, Lisa A. Hechtman1, Todd B. Parrish1,
Norihiro Sadato2, Tetsuya Iidaka4, Joan Y. Chiao1; 1Northwestern University,
2
National Institute for Physiological Sciences, 3Carnegie Mellon University,
4
Nagoya University — In previous cross-cultural studies, activity of bilateral
amygdala has been shown to vary as a function of environmental and social
context. However, prior neuroscience studies demonstrating the influence
of culture and race on amygdala response have not systematically examined independent contributions of culture and race, treating participants
of different races from the same culture or participants of the same race
from different cultures without distinction. Here we examined cultural
(Caucasian-American; CA vs. Japanese-American; JA) and racial (JA vs.
Native-Japanese; JP) influence on neural basis of emotional face processing.
Participants completed an emotional face processing task, including stimuli
of Caucasian and Japanese actors’ faces (CFace and JFace consisting with
emotional faces of fear or angry), and a shape matching task (Shape) as a

156

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
control. Fifty participants were scanned with an fMRI while completed a
match-to-sample task, specifically chose a face/shape that was of the same
face/shape as the target face/shape. The task was consisted with 2 kinds
of functional runs (CFace and Shape, JFace and Shape). Across both functional runs, activation of bilateral amygdala was observed in all groups
and activation of right parahippocampal gyrus was observed in JP {(JFace
- Shape) - (CFace - Shape)}. The results suggest that bilateral amygdala is
associated with emotional face expression across cultures, and parahippocampal gyrus is associated with the in-group emotional face expression in
JP. Taken together, the results of cultural and racial effects show that the
emotional face processing depends on environmental and social context,
such as culture and race.

E28
DIFFERENTIAL RESPONSE PATTERNS ON INDIRECT MEASURES
OF IMPLICIT BIAS. David March1, Reiko Graham1; 1Texas State University
- San Marcos — Systemic racial and ethnic biases permeate the American
social order, often manifesting without an individual’s awareness. In this
study, we examined implicit biases against Hispanics using two indirect
measures, the startle eyeblink paradigm and the Implicit Association Test
(IAT), as well as an explicit self-report measure. During the startle task,
non-Hispanic Caucasian (White) and Hispanic participants viewed photo
primes of White and Hispanic males, a random subset of which were
accompanied by an auditory probe. The IAT utilized White and Hispanic
male faces as exemplars. Startle data revealed larger eyeblink amplitudes
during Hispanic vs. White primes, with no significant between-groups difference. IAT reaction times were longer in Hispanic + good compared to
Hispanic + bad trials for both groups. However, there was a significant
interaction wherein Hispanic participants were significantly faster on Hispanic + good trials than Whites. Correlational analyses revealed no significant relationships between the three measures, suggesting that each may
be tapping into a different aspect of ethnic attitudes. This study extends
prior research by demonstrating that findings from Black/White studies of
implicit racial biases are generalizable across race and ethnicity.

E29
THE ROLE OF FRONTOPARIETAL CONNECTIVITY IN HIGH-STAKES
CHOKING DEPENDS ON TRAIT RUMINATION Andrew Mattarella-Micke1, Sian L. Beilock2; 1Vanderbilt University, 2University of Chicago — In
high-stakes tests, the pressure to succeed can cause students to perform
below their ability (or “choke under pressure”) instead. Behavioral studies trace the source of choking under pressure to a disruption of working
memory (WM). In a first neuroimaging study, we extended this hypothesis, showing that individual differences in choking on a high-stakes math
test can be predicted by task-related BOLD response in a frontoparietal
WM network. Connectivity analyses also revealed a subset of WM-related
regions decouple from the larger network during high-stakes performance.
Greater uncoupling in one such region, the ventromedial prefrontal cortex
(vmPFC), lead to improved performance under pressure. While previous
research associates the vmPFC with emotion processing and internal rumination, its exact role in high-stakes performance remains speculative. In the
current study, we explicitly investigate the underlying basis for the relationship between vmPFC connectivity and choking under pressure. Participants answered math problems under conditions of high and low-stakes
incentive, and also completed a trait measure of rumination. Consistent
with previous results, activity in the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) predicted
which individuals choked on WM demanding problems. Critically, individual differences in trait rumination moderated the previously reported
relationship between vmPFC connectivity and performance. For individuals high in trait rumination, increased connectivity between the IPS and
vmPFC resulted in worse performance on WM demanding math problems.
This did not hold for individuals low in trait rumination. Thus, choking
under pressure may be related to negative ruminative content communicated from the vmPFC to other WM regions.

E30
SEX DIFFERENCES IN NEURAL CORRELATES OF EMOTIONAL
MEMORY VS. VISUO-SPATIAL PROCESSING IN SCHIZOPHRENIA
Adrianna Mendrek1,2,3, Nadia Lakis2, Josiane Bourque3; 1Department of Psychology, Bishop’s University, 2Centre de recherche Fernand-Seguin, 3Department of

2013 Annual Meeting
Psychiatry, Universite de Montreal — Sex differences in the prevalence and
clinical course of schizophrenia have been well documented. More recently
differences in structural and functional neuroanatomy between male and
female patients have been reported. In our previous study of visuo-spatial
processing we observed significantly diminished brain activations in male
patients and significantly greater activations in female patients, relative
to the same-sex controls. The purpose of the present investigation was to
determine if the aforementioned effect reflected a generalized neurofunctional deficit in male patients and thus would be also apparent during
emotional memory task. Forty-two schizophrenia patients (21 women)
and 42 healthy controls (21 women) underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while performing an emotional memory task. The
task consisted of the recognition of pleasant, unpleasant and neutral photographic pictures (scenes, faces, objects). The fMRI data analysis revealed
significantly stronger activations in male patients relative to control men
in several brain regions associated with processing of emotional memories, during recognition of both positive and negative images. In contrast,
female patients exhibited significantly weaker activations than control
women during recognition of emotional stimuli. The results of the preset
study show that the previously observed reversal of normal sexual dimorphism in schizophrenia patients could not be explained by a generalized
deficit in neurocognitive function of male patients, but is task-dependent.
In fact, sex differences in patients’ cerebral activations during emotional
memory were in the opposite direction to what we had observed during
mental rotation in the same cohort of participants.

E31
BRAIN RESPONSES DURING EXTINCTION OF LEARNED FEAR TO
RACIAL IN-GROUP AND OUT-GROUP FACES Tanaz Molapour1, Armita
Golkar1, Carlos Navarrete2, Olof Hjort1, Andreas Olsson1; 1Karolinska Institutet, 2Michigan State University — Previous research has shown that conditioned fear responses (CRs) to images of members of racial out-groups, as
compared to in-groups, are more resistant to extinction. Much is known
about the neural processes underlying the acquisition of CRs, involving a
network of brain regions, such as the amygdala, anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC), anterior insula (AI), and the extinction of CRs, involving the amygdala and prefrontal cortex (PFC). However, the neural mechanisms supporting the racial learning bias remains unexplored. The amygdala, AI and
ACC have also been implicated during viewing of members of out-groups
and stigmatized groups, providing a link to the research on fear learning.
Here, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate the neural correlates of CRs to male Black and White faces in white
participants. We found that during extinction, CRs to Black vs White faces
showed greater activity in the fear conditioning network and the fusiform
face area, which is known to be relatively enhanced during the perception
of emotionally relevant faces. In addition, CRs to Black vs White faces were
linked to increased activity in the PFC. Taken together, these results suggest that, relative to in-group faces, the persistence of CR to out-group faces
might depend on an impaired down-regulation of the fear conditioning
network and heightened perceptual processing in face specific regions. Our
findings might help to explain the basic mechanisms underlying the acquisition and maintenance of aversions towards out-group individuals.

E32
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN REGIONS OF EMOTION PROCESSING
NETWORK AND PERSONALITY TRAITS INDEXING EMOTIONAL
AROUSABILITY, EXPRESSIVITY, AND CONTROL: A VOLUMETRIC
APPROACH Matthew Moore1, Yifan Hu1, Sarah Woo1, Alexandru D. Iordan1,
Florin Dolcos1, Sanda Dolcos1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (IL),
USA — Functional brain imaging studies of emotion have identified a network of cortical (including frontal, parietal, occipital, and medial temporal)
and subcortical (basal ganglia) brain regions associated with various aspects
of emotion processing. Here, we investigated the relationship between the
gray matter volume of emotion processing network areas and personality
traits indexing three aspects of emotion processing: Arousability, Expressivity, and Control. Automatic parcellation volumes obtained with Freesurfer were investigated in relation to ratings from the Scale of Emotional
Arousability (SEA), Berkeley Expressivity Questionnaire (BEQ), Emotion
Regulation Questionnaire (ERQ), and Barratt Impulsivity Scale (BIS) in 45
healthy subjects who underwent structural MRI scanning of their brains.

Poster Session E
Although overall there was little overlap in brain regions that volumetrically correlated across the scales, areas showing such overlaps included
the entorhinal cortex (EC) and striatum. Specifically, the right entorhinal
cortex (EC) negatively correlated with SEA-Lack of Control and with BEQ
Positive Expressivity, while the left EC negatively correlated with BIS-Attentional Impulsivity, BIS-Attention, and BIS-Perseverance; in the striatum,
BIS-Attention negatively correlated with bilateral caudate and SEA-General Emotionality negatively correlated with the right caudate. Despite the
absence of relationships between gray matter volume and our scales in
frontal areas, the right EC volume negatively correlated with the volume
of lateral prefrontal cortical (PFC) areas. These findings suggests that the
EC may act as a multimodal hub that integrates various levels of emotion
processing, from sensitivity and arousal to expressivity and control, and is
susceptible to modulatory influences from PFC areas involved in higher-order of emotion processing integration.

E33
AFFECTIVE PRIMING BY BIOLOGICAL MOTION

Edward Nguyen1,
Ayse P. Saygin1; 1University of California, San Diego — Emotion is a pervasive and important aspect of human experience. Although it is well known
that body movements can convey emotional information, relatively little
is known about the mechanisms underlying the perception of emotional
biological motion, despite its inherent presence and influence in our daily
interactions with others. Here, we employed the affective priming paradigm using point-light biological motion animations as emotional primes.
Subjects were presented with affective point-light arm movements that conveyed anger, happiness or neutral affect. They subsequently were asked to
make affective judgments on target word stimuli that were either positive
or negative in valence. Responses in affectively congruent trials were significantly faster than those in incongruent and neutral trials, while no significant difference was found between reaction times for incongruent and
neutral trials. These results indicate that a positive priming effect occurs
for affective priming of emotional words by affective biological motion. In
a second experiment, the point-light displays were spatially scrambled to
have no coherent form while retaining the same local motion; no significant
difference was found between any of the prime-target conditions, indicating that the global form of the biological motion stimuli, rather than local
motion are likely to be driving the affective priming effect. These results
suggest that body movements expressing emotion are effective enough signals to influence responses to incoming emotional stimuli, a finding that
adds onto the literature of both emotional biological motion and affective
priming research.

E34
DIFFERENTIAL ELECTROCORTICAL PROCESSING IN THE PRESENCE OF STEREOTYPE-INCONSISTENT INFORMATION Sierra
P. Niblett1, Eric D. Splan1, Avi Ben-Zeev1, Mark W. Geisler1; 1San Francisco
State University — Electrocortical processing during person perception is
affected by stereotypic information that cues social category membership,
such as race and gender. When information violates expected stereotypes,
the subsequent response is frequently an increase in affective arousal,
cortical processing, and working memory updating, reflected in larger
amplitudes for later positive event-related brain potential (ERP) components (e.g., P3) (Bartholow et al., 2001; Osterhout, Bersick, & McLaughlin,
1997). Early sensory and attentional ERP components (e.g., N2) also show
increases in amplitude for stereotype-violating information, as opposed
to stereotype-confirming information (Dickter & Gyurovski, 2012). The
current study is derived from Dickter & Gyurovski (2012) and adapted to
include the standard oddball paradigm in order to better elicit the P3 ERP
component in conjunction with an electrophysiological “surprise” response
during a computer-identification task. Participants viewed either faces that
differed in gender or faces that differed in race and were asked to indicate
via button press when a target face appeared on the screen. Prior to the presentation of the faces, participants were primed with cues that were either
stereotypic or counter-stereotypic in nature. Preliminary results indicate
that differential processing, indexed by early attentional ERP component
amplitudes and the P3 ERP component amplitudes, occurred in the presence of information that was counter-stereotypic as opposed to stereotypic
of the target face. This line of research adds to the literature on the emergence of stereotypic biases during person perception.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

157

Poster Session E

E35
PHARMACOLOGICAL MANIPULATION OF EMPATHY USING
OXAZEPAM Gustav Nilsonne1,2, Sandra Tamm1, Armita Golkar1, Katarina
Gospic1, Andreas Olsson1, Martin Ingvar1, Predrag Petrovic1; 1Karolinska
Institutet, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, 2Stockholm University, Stress
Research Institute — Background: Violent criminals are reported to sometimes self-medicate with benzodiazepines in order to release inhibitions
against violent behavior. Aims: We investigated the effect of Oxazepam on
self-reported and psychophysiological measures of empathy. Methods: 66
healthy male experimental subjects were randomized to 25 mg oral Oxazepam or placebo, in a double-blind design. Subjects were introduced to an
assistant who pretended to also be an experimental subject. Subjects completed questionnaires for dispositional empathy (IRI), alexithymia (TAS20), and anxiety (STAI-T), as well as pain titration using a skin electrode to
find pain thresholds of VAS 10 and VAS 80. Subjects were then seated next
to the assistant so they could see only the other’s hands. The experimental
paradigm consisted of alternating electrical shocks to the subject and to the
assistant, although the latter only pretended to receive pain stimulation.
Cues were given on a screen. After each shock, the subject rated the intensity and unpleasantness of the stimulation. Skin conductance was recorded.
Results: The Oxazepam group showed increased reaction times, reflecting
the sedative effect of the drug (p=0.02), as well as lower self-reported anxiety after the experiment, reflecting the anxiolytic effect of the drug (p=0.01).
Subjects were unable to guess treatment group, confirming integrity of the
blinding. Oxazepam did not significantly decrease ratings of pain nor galvanic skin responses to others’ pain. Self-rated unpleasantness to others’
pain was significantly correlated to rated trait empathy using the Interpersonal Reactivity Index. Conclusions: 25 mg Oxazepam did not cause a significant decrease in empathy for pain.

E36
INTERACTION OF EMOTIONAL EXPRESSION AND EYE GAZE: AN
EVENT RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Jason S. Nomi1, Candice Frances2,
Maia T. Nguyen1, Stephanie Bastidas1, Lucy J. Troup1; 1Colorado State University, 2New College of Florida — The current study examined the interaction of emotional expression and eye gaze in order to test the evolutionary
theory predicting fearful averted-gaze expressions are prioritized over
angry averted-gaze expressions while angry straight-gaze expressions
are prioritized over fearful straight-gaze expressions. ERPs were acquired
from 22 participants fitted with 19 electrodes (10-20 international system) in
response to four emotions (happy, angry, fearful, neutral) each displaying
three gaze-directions (left, straight, right; a total of 12 experimental conditions). Participants viewed trials consisting of a neutral image (700ms)
followed by a fixation cross (500ms) and a target image (1000ms). Six blocks
of 112 trials consisted of 96 target faces (8 for each condition) and 16 scrambled faces presented as targets; participants were instructed to press “1”
whenever they saw a scrambled face. Repeated Measures ANOVAs were
run on mean amplitudes for electrodes 01, 02, T5, and T6 with factors Emotion (happy, angry, fearful, neutral) and Hemisphere (left, right) for each
gaze direction (left, straight, right) across three time windows (80-120ms,
120-200ms, 200-400ms). The overall results demonstrated that leftward
gaze significantly interacted with expression from 120-200ms while rightward gaze significantly interacted with expression from 200-400ms. Additionally, fearful faces elicited significantly larger N170 mean amplitudes
than angry faces for leftward and straight gazes. The results demonstrate
that the interaction of leftward gaze and expression is temporally processed
before the interaction of rightward gaze and expression. Further, fearful
faces were preferentially processed over angry faces regardless of gaze
direction; in opposition to what was predicted by evolutionary theory.

E37
META-ANALYSIS OF NEURAL CORRELATES OF EMPATHY AND
REWARD: EVIDENCE FOR AN OVERLAP Garret O’Connell1, Thom B
Sims2, Bhismadev Chakrabarti3; 1University of Reading — As humans, we
generally find social stimuli more rewarding than non-social stimuli. An
emerging account suggests that this sense of reward in response to social
stimuli underlies our higher-level social capacities such as empathy (i.e. the
ability to understand the emotions and mental states of others). This has
led to the hypothesis that people with autism do not empathise with social

158

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
stimuli because they do not find them rewarding. Considerable evidence
from social psychological and lesion studies in animals suggests an overlap
between processes of empathy and reward. To examine if this overlap is
observed neurally, we conducted a meta-analysis of functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) studies investigating these processes. Coordinates of brain activity from scans of 1168 healthy people from 35 empathy
and 40 reward papers were analysed using two meta-analytic techniques
(Activation Likelihood Estimation and Multi-Kernel Density Analysis). The
results show overlap in the (pre)supplementary motor area, inferior frontal
gyrus (IFG), dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, anterior insula, and putamen.
Further analysis show brain regions related to reward were more selectively activated by automatic emotional empathy (e.g. facial mimicry, vicarious pain) compared to controlled cognitive empathy (e.g. Theory of Mind,
emotion recognition), χ2 = 4.47, p = .035. The spatial map defined by the
empathy-reward overlap could be used as a template to focus the search for
neural abnormalities underlying deficits in these processes in ASC. Overall,
this meta-analytic evidence adds a level of support from fMRI for the link
between empathy and the reward processes.

E38
MAKING SENSE OF OTHERS: THE NEURAL CORRELATS OF PERCEIVING PERSON INTERACTIONS Susanne Quadﬂieg1,2, Francesco Gentile2, Bruno Rossion2; 1New York University Abu Dhabi, 2University of Louvain
— How social expectations shape our perception of people surrounding us
has long been considered a core issue in vision science. What has not yet
attracted widespread empirical attention, is the question of how perceivers
make sense of others who are not encountered in isolation. Put differently,
whether people shake hands, take a walk, or have a conversation, they are
often witnessed in each other’s company. At what stage in the person perception process does sensitivity to such interactions (and their inherent narrative) arise? To explore this issue, we used functional magnetic resonance
imaging to measure neural activity while participants viewed images of
two people presented on a uniform background. The shown agents were
either interacting socially (e.g., involved in a marriage proposal or saying
goodbye to each other) or not interacting. Non-interactions were created
by presenting the exact same agents as in the interaction condition but not
facing each other or by randomly pairing agents facing each other. Compared to these two control conditions, meaningful social interactions elicited reduced activity in cortical areas associated with person perception
(e.g., the posterior temporal sulcus) and person understanding (e.g., the
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex). In line with neural models of predictive
coding facilitating information processing, these results support the view
that social expectations shape the way our brains make sense of interacting
others not only at an inferential level but also at a perceptual processing
stage. More generally, these findings begin to elucidate the perception of
person interactions in the human brain.

E39
NEUROPEPTIDE-S RECEPTOR GENE - MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHIC CORRELATES OF ITS INFLUENCE ON VISUAL PROCESSING Maimu A Rehbein1, Peter Zwanzger1, Katharina Domschke2,
Andreas Reif2, Jürgen Deckert2, Markus Junghoefer1; 1University of Muenster,
Muenster, Germany, 2University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany — Recent
functional magnetic resonance imaging studies suggest a role of the neuropeptide-S receptor (NPSR1) gene in the processing of emotional material,
with NPSR1 rs324981 T allele carriers showing altered activation patterns
in cortical and sub-cortical brain areas in response to fearful stimuli. However, it remains unclear whether such functional alterations remain qualitatively similar during different stages of visual processing and whether
they are specific for emotional, in particular fearful stimuli. In the present study, 60 healthy participants genotyped for the functional NPSR1
rs324981 A/T (Asn107Ile) polymorphism viewed faces varying in valence
(fearful, neutral) and gender (male, female). Visual evoked magnetic fields
were acquired using high-density whole-head magnetoencephalography
(MEG) and compared with regard to differences between risk (AT/TT) and
non-risk (AA) genotype groups and stimulus conditions (valence, gender).
In the face-selective MEG component, the M170, T allele carriers showed
enhanced responses to fearful compared to neutral faces and differential
responses to stimuli varying in gender at secondary visual cortex regions.
An overall group effect was observed, indicating greater brain activation

2013 Annual Meeting
in the risk group irrespective of stimulus condition. Groups did not differ
in behavioral measures assessing subjective ratings or reaction time. Our
results are consistent with previous findings revealing enhanced visual
processing of fear-related stimuli in risk allele carriers. Furthermore, our
findings suggest that not only fear-specific, but also more general processing differences are conferred by NPSR1 gene variation that should be
subject to future investigations. [This research was supported by the DFG:
SFB-TRR 58 projects C01 and Z02]

E40
AN EEG STUDY OF MU FREQUENCY BAND ACTIVITY IN AUTISM
SPECTRUM DISORDERS Rheanna Remmel1, Amy V. Van Hecke1, Sheryl
Stevens1, Audrey M. Carson1, Bridget Dolan1, Jeffrey S. Karst1, Kirsten A.
Schohl1, Noelle Fritz1, Jenna Kahne1, Grand McDonald1, Alexandra Reveles1,
Janel Wasisco1; 1Marquette University — The goal of this study was to determine if there are differences in EEG mu band (8-13 Hz) power between a
group of adolescents with autism spectrum disorders (ASD; n=10) and a
group of typically developing adolescents (TDG; n=10). Mu band power
is representative of mirror neuron system activity, thought to be impaired
in people with autism spectrum disorders. While EEG data was recorded,
subjects watched a three-minute video of an adolescent delivering an autobiographical monologue. Movement artifacts were manually removed
from EEG data before analysis with Neuroscan. The mu frequency band
was isolated and averaged to obtain power for left and right hemispheres
over the sensorimotor cortex, including electrodes C3 and C4 in the 10-20
system. Differences between groups and between hemispheres were
explored using mixed repeated analysis of variance (ANOVA). Significant
differences emerged between hemispheres, but not between groups. Power
was significantly higher in the right hemisphere, F(1,18) = 5.705, p< .05.
Neither age (ASD: M=12.7, SD=1.636; TDG: M=12.8, SD=1.398) nor fullscale IQ (ASD: M=102.7, SD=18.684; TDG: M=107, SD=20.005) were significantly different between groups. In further analyses, the sample size of
each group will be increased. The results of this pilot testing suggest that,
contrary to the “broken mirror theory” of autism, no difference in mirror
neuron system activity arises between ASD and TDG groups when both
groups engage in watching an adolescent speak, simulating a social situation.

E41
PERFORMANCE ON A NOVEL SPONTANEOUS THEORY OF MIND
TASK CORRELATES WITH CORTICAL SURFACE AREA AND THICKNESS OF SOCIAL BRAIN REGIONS Katherine Rice1, Brieana Viscomi1,
Tracy Riggins1, Elizabeth Redcay1; 1University of Maryland — Research on the
neural correlates of theory of mind (ToM) in adults has primarily employed
simple story tasks, making it difficult to understand individual differences
in unconstrained social settings. We developed a novel task to measure differences in spontaneous conceptualization of others’ mental states. Given
evidence that ToM develops into late adolescence, a sample of 31 young
adults, aged 18 to 22 years, completed the novel ToM task and a battery
of validated ToM measures. The novel task involved watching and then
describing two silent film clips. Coders rated each participant’s written
responses to provide a ratio score of internal state phrases (i.e., describing
emotions, intentions and beliefs) divided by total statements. After controlling for general memory and language ability, greater use of internal
state phrases was significantly correlated with higher-order ToM comprehension and better pragmatic skills. A subset of 18 individuals underwent a
structural MRI and their data were analyzed using FreeSurfer. Controlling
for age, IQ, and total gray matter, spontaneous ToM scores were positively
correlated with the surface area of anatomically defined social brain regions
(including right mOFC, right IFG and insula), but not with control regions
(e.g., visual areas). Whole-brain and region-based analyses revealed negative correlations with cortical thickness, although this effect was less specific
to social regions. This novel measure of the spontaneous representation of
others’ beliefs, emotions, and desires captures meaningful behavioral and
neuroanatomical variation. Further, these findings have implications for
understanding brain-behavior relationships in autism, where deficits are
more pronounced in unconstrained social situations.

Poster Session E

E42
EXERCISE FREQUENCY PREDICTS BETTER INHIBITORY CONTROL
AND BRAIN BLOOD FLOW REGULATION IN HEALTHY YOUNG
ADULTS Liana Machado1, Hayley Guiney1, Samuel Lucas1, James Cotter1;
University of Otago — Young adults are presumed to be in their developmental prime, yet emerging evidence indicates that regular engagement in
physical exercise could still benefit their executive functioning. However,
little is known about which executive functions benefit from exercise or
how the benefits might come about. To address this knowledge gap, we
examined in 55 healthy young adults performance on a range of executive
function tasks in relation to aerobic fitness, habitual physical activity, and
cerebrovascular function (assessed using transcranial Doppler ultrasound).
Multiple regression analyses revealed that more frequent physical activity, and to some extent higher aerobic fitness, predicted both better cerebrovascular function (evidenced by brain blood flow responses to changes
in carbon dioxide levels) and superior inhibitory control. Cerebrovascular
function also predicted better inhibitory control. Moreover, mediation analyses indicated that participation in frequent physical activity may bring
about improvements in inhibitory control through improved brain blood
flow regulation. These results provide novel insight into the cognitive and
cerebrovascular benefits that may be gained with regular exercise, even
in high-functioning populations. Importantly, they also point to a specific
mechanism that may drive the exercise-cognition benefits.

1

E43
YOUNG CHILDREN’S INHIBITORY CONTROL SKILLS ARE ASSOCIATED WITH ERROR-RELATED BRAIN ACTIVITY Loren M. Marulis1,
Matthew H. Kim1, Jennie K. Grammer2, Melisa Carrasco3, Frederick J. Morrison1, William J. Gehring1; 1The University of Michigan, 2Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, 3University of Rochester Medical Center — Executive functioning
(EF) comprises a set of skills (cognitive flexibility, inhibitory control, and
working memory) important for complex, goal-directed activity. Neurological processes related to errors may be implicated in EF and inhibitory control (IC) in particular, as both are conceptually related and influenced by
development and often recruited to avoid making errors. The error-related
negativity (ERN) reflects processes involved in detecting errors or response
conflict (Gehring et al., 2012), while the error positivity (Pe) may reflect
conscious awareness of errors and self-regulatory capacities (Overbeek,
Nieuwenhuis, & Ridderinkhof, 2005). In the current study, we examined
the association between error-related brain activity (ERN and Pe) and IC in
preschool-aged children. Thirty-six children (12 females, M=5.4 years; n=23
for EEG data) were assessed using the Woodcock Johnson Pair Cancellation (WJPC; direct child assessment) and the Inhibitory Control subscale of
the Children’s Behavior Questionnaire Short Form (CBQ-IC; parent report).
Children completed a Go/No-Go task during which continuous EEG data
were acquired. A 3 (FCz/Cz/Pz) x 2 (Correct/Error) ANOVA yielded significant interactions for the ERN and Pe. The WJPC was not associated with
error-related brain activity, while the CBQ-IC was negatively correlated
with the Pe. This divergence may reflect measurement differences; the
CBQ-IC, being a broader ecologically-valid assessment, may be more likely
to reflect the day-to-day demands on IC (Duckworth & Seligman, 2006).
The observed IC-Pe association establishes an empirical link between IC
and error-related brain activity, suggesting that children with stronger IC
skills may have a reduced need to engage in conscious error awareness.

E44
HOW REWARD AND PUNISHMENT INFLUENCE PROACTIVE AND
REACTIVE INHIBITION Tara Molesworth1, Timothy Verstynen1; 1Carnegie
Mellon University — When performing an action, like reaching for a cookie,
there are two ways your brain can stop the action. The stopping might be
proactive, such as sticking to a diet, or reactive, like when you see a spider
on the cookie. We wanted to determine whether reward and penalty differentially affected proactive and reactive inhibition. Twelve subjects performed two variants of the Stop-Signal Task (SST) that used different types
of penalty and reward. In the reactive SST, subjects had to stop a moving
bar as close to a target line as they could and inhibit their key press if the
bar stopped before it reached the line. The proactive SST required subjects
to decide whether or not they would stop or go based on the bar’s color,
which represented the probability that the bar would stop 50 ms before hit-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

159

Poster Session E
ting the line. Both SSTs consisted of a Baseline condition (where successful
stop and go trials are rewarded equally), a High Reward condition where
bonus for successful stops increased, and a High Penalty condition where
more money was subtracted from the total for unsuccessful stops. Overall,
subjects were more efficient at stopping in the reactive SST than proactive
SST (F[1,11]=618.47, p<0.001). Within both tasks, the efficiency of stopping
was improved in the High Penalty condition, relative to Baseline. For proactive SST trials, the High Reward condition improved stopping efficiency
more than in the reactive SST. These results demonstrate that proactive and
reactive inhibition are manipulated by contextual factors that influence
motivation.

E45
CHANGES IN COGNITIVE CONTROL REGIONS ASSOCIATED WITH
SUCCESSFULLY ADAPTING TO TASK ENVIRONMENT MODIFICATIONS Jarrod Moss1, Winston Jones1, Hao Bai1, Stephanie Doane1; 1Missis-

sippi State University — Prior research has shown that a set of regions, called
the cognitive control network, decrease in activity with increasing levels of
task experience. These cognitive control regions were examined in a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study of multitasking. In this
study, participants were trained to perform a multitasking task where they
must prioritize the sorting of a set of objects based on the features of those
objects while frequently being interrupted by new objects to sort. After
training, participants performed this task during an fMRI session in which
participants performed the originally trained task followed by a version
of the task in which the function of a key part of the interface was modified. This task modification required a change in a portion of the task set in
order to be able to maintain prior levels of performance. Participants differed on how effectively they adapted to the task modification, and it was
found that the functional connectivity of the anterior insula with the other
regions of the control net significantly decreased in those participants who
were most successful in adapting. The connectivity of the anterior insula
predicted performance change better than other individual difference variables collected (e.g., working memory capacity, ravens). The anterior insula
is thought to be part of a salience network, and the change in connectivity observed in this study indicates that successful adaptation may rely on
this salience network to help inhibit old rules of the task set that must be
replaced by new rules.

E46
DISSOCIATION OF THE PEA AND PEB FOLLOWING ERRORS AND
UNCERTAIN RESPONSES Ana Navarro-Cebrian1,2, Andrew S. Kayser1,2;
1
Ernest Gallo Clinic and Research Center, 2University of California, San Francisco — Error monitoring processes are essential for adaptation and learning; however, the associated neural mechanisms are still unidentified. For
example, the function and underlying neural generators of the ‘error positivity’, PE, remain unknown. Due to its resemblance in timing and scalp
topography to the P300, it has been suggested that the PE could share a
neural substrate with the P300 and reflect a P300-like component associated with the motivational significance of an error. Two P300 components
have been distinguished: a fronto-central P3a that reflects bottom-up attention-orienting mechanisms, and a parietal P3b related to the update of stimulus representations. We hypothesized that there are similarly two distinct
PE components: a PEa, reflecting an error-driven orienting mechanism, and
a PEb, that may be related to the update of the response representation. Our
data show that errors are followed by a PE (PEa) activity with a fronto-central topography that resembles that of a P3a component. Also, a strong negative correlation between the PEa amplitude and the number of errors was
found. This result indicates a habituation of the attention response, which
has also been identified in the P3a. Secondly, uncertain responses (when
people were not confident of their response) were followed by a strong
P3b-like activity (PEb). This finding is in agreement with previous research
that shows that the P3b increases with uncertainty. These results support
the idea that the PE may be a manifestation of more general orienting and
updating processes, rather than being specific for errors.

160

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

E47
IMPACT OF EMOTIONAL IMAGE VIEWING ON NEURAL MECHANISMS OF RESPONSE INHIBITION. Tara K. Patterson1, Agatha Lenartowicz1, Elliot T. Berkman2, Russell A. Poldrack3, Barbara J. Knowlton1; 1UCLA,
University of Oregon, 3University of Texas, Austin — In the stop-signal paradigm, response inhibition is measured by having participants withhold a
practiced key press response when accompanied by a stop-signal. Previous
work in our lab has shown that viewing negative emotional stimuli prior
to performing the stop-signal task compromises stopping performance by
increasing stop-signal reaction time. In the present experiment we investigated how negative emotion impacts the neural mechanisms that facilitate
stopping. We collected fMRI data from 19 participants who performed the
stop-signal task after they viewed negatively emotional images or neutral
images. During stopping following negative image viewing, we observed
reduced BOLD activity in three regions previously implicated in successful
stopping: the right inferior frontal gyrus, middle frontal gyrus, and medial
superior frontal gyrus. We also observed a positive correlation between
amygdala activation following negative versus neutral image viewing and
the corresponding slowing in stop-signal reaction time. The results indicate
that the neural network supporting response inhibition is disrupted by negative image viewing, and that this effect may be mediated by the amygdala.
2

E48
FORETHOUGHT IN ATTENTION-DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER (ADHD) Helene Poissant1, Adrianna Mendrek2, Lucile Rapin1, Noureddine Senhadji3; 1Université du Quebec a Montreal, 2Bishop University, 3Institut
Universitaire de Gériatrie de Montreal — Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is associated with neuroanatomical anomalies. The existence of 1) a prefrontal dysfunction associated with behavioral inhibition
and executive control deficits in ADHD and 2) the link of forethought to
working memory and inhibition, has lead us to hypothesize that children
with ADHD will show atypical patterns of prefrontal activations while
performing a forethought task. Methods: Twenty-one TD and 23 ADHD
adolescents underwent a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
while performing a forethought task: presentation of 56 cartoon stories (23
congruent; 23 incongruent). Participants had to answer if “yes” or “no” the
sequences of actions make sense according to their expectation. Stories were
presented in block of seven stories in a randomized manner. Results: The
fMRI revealed significant activations during performance of the incongruent relative to congruent condition in the left middle orbito-frontal cortex,
the right superior and inferior frontal gyri, right frontal inferior operculum,
as well as the left supplementary motor area in the group of adolescents
with TD. In the ADHD group, results showed significant activations only
in the right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and the right portion of the basal
ganglia (globus pallidus). Conclusion: These findings are consistent with
studies of executive functions and inhibition, which found the involvement
of the frontostriatal network in the pathophysiology of ADHD. They confirm the role of the PFC in cognitive control and in the ability to orchestrate
thought and action and confirm its dysfunction in ADHD.

E49
DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF TWO MEDITATION PRACTICES ON
THE NEURAL RESPONSES TO PAIN IN EXPERT MEDITATORS
Antoine Lutz3,1, David Perlman2,3, Cort Dahl2,3, Richard Davidson2,3; 1Waisman
Laboratory for Brain Imaging and Behavior, University of Wisconsin–Madison,
USA, 2Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin—Madison, USA,
3
Lyon Neuroscience Research Center, INSERM U1028, CNRS UMR5292, Lyon
1 University, Lyon, France — Pain is an unpleasant sensory and emotional
experience that can be regulated by many different cognitive mechanisms.
We compared the regulatory qualities of two different meditation practices during noxious thermal stimuli: Focused Attention (FA), directed
and sustained at a fixation cross away from the stimulation, which could
regulate negative affect through a sensory gating mechanism; and Open
Presence (OP), which could regulate negative affect by cultivating an effortless and open awareness of whatever is occurring in the present moment,
without reacting, rejecting or absorbing the contents of the experience. We
used neuroimaging in 19 expert meditators (>10,000 h of practice) and 19
matched novices to dissociate neural activation patterns associated with
pain, and its recovery during these two practices. Compared to novices,

2013 Annual Meeting
expert meditators reported equal pain intensity, but less unpleasantness
during OP compared to FA. During OP, this difference was associated with
enhanced activity in the so-called ‘salience network’ for experts. The contrast of FA versus OP showed enhanced deactivation in medial prefrontal cortex as well as in occipital regions during pain, suggesting enhanced
recruitment of these regions before pain during FA. This effect was stronger
for experts than novices in occipital regions. Experts showed more activity
compared to novices in the pain-descending pathway after pain than after
warm stimuli during FA but not during OP. This study suggests that OP
practice facilitates the immediate regulation of negative affect by decreasing the ongoing load of medial prefrontal activity, and by increasing the
recruitment of attentional resources during pain.

E50
BEHAVIORAL EXPLORATIONS IN PREPARATORY PROCESSING USING THE AX-CONTINUOUS PERFORMANCE TASK Lisa D.
Ankeny1, Jeremy R. Reynolds1; 1University of Denver — Patterns of behavior in
the AX-continuous performance task (AX-CPT) have proven useful in identifying and characterizing differences in cognitive control across a number
of groups, including older adults, patients with schizophrenia, and young
children (Chatham, Frank & Munakata, 2009; Braver et al., 1999). Further,
neuroimaging studies have manipulated task variables in order to investigate control processes associated with distinct parts of prefrontal cortex,
particularly frontopolar PFC (Braver & Bongiolotti, 2002). However, it is
unclear whether such manipulations result in similar diagnostic behavioral
patterns as seen in earlier, more canonical task versions. The first goal of
the study was to directly compare behavioral performance patterns across
different variants of the AX-CPT, in order to determine whether uncommon variants might demonstrate similar patterns that could be helpful
in characterizing behavioral disorders or developmental trajectories. One
advantage of the AX-CPT task is that it can be decomposed into cue- and
probe-based activity. Results of the first study revealed differential effects
of trial type depending on contextual manipulations of task variables. More
specifically, one variant mimicked the typical, expected patterns of results
seen in the AX-CPT, while another variant showed that a particular cue is
potentially more influential. This suggests that manipulating task variables
may reflect different strategies related to task preparation. To further examine the role of preparatory activity, a second experimental manipulation
involved the inclusion catch (partial) trials to examine behavioral responses
were altered in the context of the AX-CPT. The inclusion of catch trials did
not appear to affect behavioral performance.

E51
FLUID INTELLIGENCE IS DIFFERENTIALLY ASSOCIATED WITH
NEURAL EFFORT IN THE TASK-POSITIVE AND THE TASK-NEGATIVE NETWORK Ulrike Basten1, Christian J. Fiebach1,2,3; 1Goethe University,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 2IDeA Center for Individual Development and
Adaptive Education, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 3Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands —
Previous studies on individual differences in intelligence and brain activation during cognitive processing focused on brain regions where activation increases with task demands (task-positive network, TPN). Our
study additionally considers brain regions where activation decreases
with task demands (task-negative network, TNN) and compares effects
of intelligence on neural effort in the TPN and the TNN. In a sample of
52 healthy subjects, functional magnetic resonance imaging was used to
determine changes in neural effort associated with the processing of a
working memory task. The task comprised three conditions of increasing
difficulty: (a) maintenance, (b) manipulation, and (c) updating of a four-letter memory set. Neural effort was defined as signal increase in the TPN
and signal decrease in the TNN, respectively. In both functional networks,
TPN and TNN, neural effort increased with task difficulty. However, intelligence, as assessed with Raven’s Matrices, was differentially associated
with neural effort in the TPN and TNN. In the TPN, we observed a positive association, while we observed a negative association in the TNN. In
terms of neural efficiency (i.e., task performance in relation to neural effort
expended on task processing), more intelligent subjects (as compared to
less intelligent subjects) displayed lower neural efficiency in the TPN, while
they displayed higher neural efficiency the TNN. The results illustrate the
importance of differentiating between TPN and TNN when interpreting

Poster Session E
correlations between intelligence and fMRI measures of brain activation.
This implies the risk of misinterpreting whole brain correlations when
ignoring the functional differences between TPN and TNN.

E52
CORTICAL ENHANCEMENTS TO REINFORCEMENT LEARNING: A
ROLE FOR PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN STATE ABSTRACTION Christopher Chatham1, David Badre1; 1Brown University — Reinforcement learning
(RL) is a powerful framework for understanding how state-action pairings
acquire value. However, basic RL scales poorly to problems with many
states and actions. One solution in the RL literature, policy abstraction,
reduces this problem’s dimensionality by packaging actions into abstract
classes. The brain is thought to implement a similar process across a hierarchical prefrontal-striatal circuit, whereby more rostral areas of prefrontal
cortex represent more abstract action classes. A second and complementary
solution to this problem involves dimensionality reduction of states. But,
such “state abstraction” could require distinct mechanisms: states cannot
always be hierarchically decomposed, and too much abstraction can lead
to neglect of goal-relevant boundaries between states. We tested whether
prefrontally-mediated top-down biasing might support state abstraction by
training neural networks to categorize a continuous state space. Top-down
biasing was manipulated in a simulated prefrontal layer. Intermediate
values of bias sharpened the boundaries between states and optimized the
placement of those boundaries, but extreme values caused distinct states
to be conflated. These results suggest two testable hypotheses. First, state
abstraction may involve the inverted U-shaped performance curves that
characterize other domains with prefrontal recruitment, though here in a
context where stability and flexibility are not directly pitted against one
another. Alternatively, the conflation of distinct states might be ameliorated
with the recruitment of pattern separation mechanisms, such as those supported by the medial temporal lobe. These novel empirical predictions act
as a theoretical framework for understanding how the brain might “scale
up” basic RL to real-world problems.

E53
WHY DO WE STRUCTURE OUR KNOWLEDGE? TWO LEVELS OF
RULE GENERALIZATION IN REINFORCEMENT LEARNING. Anne Collins1, Michael Frank1; 1Brown University — People do not need supervision or
incentives to learn rules. When learning stimulus-action mappings through
reinforcement, they structure their policy into abstract rules (Collins &
Koechlin 2012, Frank & Badre 2011), even when this does not afford any
immediate advantage (Collins & Frank in press). We further investigate
how and why individuals build such rules, using our structured reinforcement learning model to derive and test behavioral predictions. Subjects
learned to select correct actions in response to stimuli presented in three
different contexts. There were two stimulus-action rules, where one of them
was valid in two contexts and the other only in a third context (but where
each rule was equally frequent across trials). Subsequent phases introduced new stimuli in old contexts and new contexts with old stimuli. Consistent with model predictions, subjects transferred their self-constructed
rule structure to new situations, at different processing levels. First, they
gathered rule-specific, rather than context-specific, knowledge about new
stimuli, thus learning faster by clustering contexts cueing the same rule.
Second, they learned faster in new contexts by generalizing known rules
across stimuli. Finally, when faced with a new context, subjects were more
likely to try rules that were valid across multiple contexts than those that
applied to only one, controlling for rule frequency. These results confirm
our model’s predictions, and show that the seemingly suboptimal strategy of building complex structure affords long term advantages given the
opportunity to generalize across contexts.

E54
TRAINING SEQUENCE LEARNING AS A WAY TO IMPROVE LANGUAGE: AN ERP STUDY Gretchen Smith1, Christopher M. Conway1; 1Geor-

gia State University — Recent research suggests that certain language and
communication disorders may be caused, in part, by disturbances to more
fundamental, domain-general learning abilities such as sequence learning
(Conway et al., 2010; 2011). However it is not yet known whether language impairments can be treated by improving sequence learning skills.
The first step to answering this question requires investigating whether

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

161

Poster Session E
sequence learning can be improved, and if so, whether such gains also
result in improvements to language processing. The goal of the proposed
study then was to test the feasibility of using cognitive training techniques
to improve sequence learning and language abilities in typically-developing adults. Participants first were assessed on several pre-training tasks to
provide baseline measures of sequence learning and language abilities, as
measured by event-related brain potentials (ERPs). Participants were then
quasi-randomly assigned to one of three groups, a treatment group that
involved adaptive sequence training, an active control group, or a passive control group. Following 10 days of training or control, participants
were assessed with the same pre-training ERP measures. The preliminary
findings indicate training-related enhancements – and a functional neural
reorganization -- to sequence learning and language abilities in the training
group only. These results suggest not only that sequence learning can be
improved through cognitive training but that such improvements also generalize to language abilities, which holds the promise for treating certain
language and communication disorders.

E55
EEG CORRELATES OF SPONTANEOUS THOUGHTS TRIGGERED
BY EXTERNAL STIMULI AND STIMULUS-INDEPENDENT COGNITIONS Christine A. Godwin1, Andrew C. Garcia1, Ezequiel Morsella1,2, Mark
W. Geisler1; 1San Francisco State University, 2University of California, San Francisco — Spontaneous thoughts can arise from past memories (AndrewsHanna et al., 2010), future tasks (Morsella et al., 2010), and environmental
cues (Berntsen, 1996). Additionally, people have reported experiencing
spontaneous thoughts triggered by various cues (Berntsen, 1998). Despite
recent advances elucidating the cognitive and neural mechanisms underlying spontaneous thought (e.g., Christoff, 2012), little research has compared
the neural correlates of spontaneous thoughts triggered by external stimuli
or internal, stimulus-independent factors (e.g., memories and wandering
thoughts). In the current study, continuous electroencephalogram (EEG)
was recorded as participants (n = 49) pressed a button upon experiencing
a thought. Participants indicated whether the thought arose from internal
or external factors. Participants also reported the number of thoughts they
believed comprised the sequence of cognitions leading to the spontaneous
thought. To exclude motor activity, a 500-ms epoch preceding each button
press by 400 ms was extracted. EEG within the alpha (8 – 13 Hz), beta (13
– 30 Hz), delta (1 – 5 Hz), and theta (4 – 8 Hz) bands was analyzed for each
epoch. Increased alpha coherence in the right hemisphere was observed for
internal compared to external thoughts (p < .05). Additionally, increased
EEG coherence for reported thoughts compared to a baseline condition
(eyes-opened resting) was observed over parietal and fronto-parietal
regions. These findings are in line with previous research implicating distinct brain networks for internal and external awareness (Vanhaudenhuyse
et al., 2011). Additionally, the current paradigm provides a novel way to
investigate both the neural correlates and subjective aspects of spontaneous
thoughts.

E56
SPONTANEOUS ALPHA OSCILLATIONS PREDICT ENCODING IN
VISUAL SHORT-TERM MEMORY Nicholas Myers1, Mark G. Stokes1, Anna
C. Nobre1; 1Oxford University — Stimulus-guided and top-down attention are
known to improve the encoding of stimuli into visual short-term memory
(VSTM). We explored the role of attention-related neural synchrony for
VSTM encoding by investigating how spontaneous fluctuations in power
lateralization and phase of alpha (8-14 Hz) oscillations over posterior cortex
influence the likelihood of memorizing items. We collected EEG data from
17 healthy participants during a sequential VSTM task (1000 trials each).
Participants saw a stream of 3-4 oriented bars (displayed for 150 ms)
appearing at random locations (6° from fixation), at intervals of 950-1200
ms. After a memory delay, participants rotated a probe to the remembered
orientation. We calculated 8-14 Hz power lateralization and instantaneous
phase around the stimulus presentation to get an index of spontaneous
alpha fluctuations, and regressed these measures onto trial-wise accuracy
to test for a relationship with behavior. Spontaneous alpha desynchronization around 300 to 50 ms before stimulus onset predicted memory accuracy
(corrected p < 0.005). Alpha phase preceding stimulus onset by 250 to 100
ms also correlated significantly with accuracy. These results indicate that
periodic changes in excitability of the visual cortex may, in part, contribute

162

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
to the efficient encoding of visual stimuli into VSTM. We found this effect
even though stimuli were presented in isolation, and well above contrast
threshold, suggesting that alpha biases encoding even when stimuli are
easily detectable. We conclude that spontaneous parieto-occipital oscillations can mimic the effects of top-down attention on VSTM, improving the
quality of encoding.

E57
PREFRONTAL CORTEX ORGANIZATION: DISSOCIATING EFFECTS
OF TEMPORAL ABSTRACTION, RELATIONAL ABSTRACTION, AND
INTEGRATION WITH FMRI Derek Nee1, Andrew Jahn2, Joshua Brown2;
University of California, Berkeley, 2Indiana University — The functions of the
prefrontal cortex (PFC) underlie flexible and intelligent cognition. Varying
proposals suggest that the PFC is organized along a rostral-caudal gradient of abstraction with more abstract representations/processes associated
with more rostral areas. However, different theories disagree regarding
how abstraction is operationally defined. Here, we directly contrasted two
prominent theories of abstraction - temporal and relational – using fMRI.
Critically, we separated manipulations of temporal and relational abstraction from integration demands that also implicate the PFC. While the data
demonstrated robust effects of relational abstraction in the PFC, temporal
abstraction effects were absent. Instead, we found activations specific to the
integration of relational rules in areas previously associated with temporal
abstraction. We suggest that previous effects of temporal abstraction were
due to confounds with integration demands. We propose an integration
framework to understand the functions of the PFC that resolves discrepancies in prior data.
1

E58
FMRI CORRELATES OF TRANSFER IN TRAINING WITH A COMPLEX
TASK. Aki Nikolaidis1, Michelle Voss2, Vo Loan1, Kirk Erickson3, Kramer Art1;
1
University of Illinois Champaign Urbana, 2University of Iowa, 3University of Pittsburg — One of the goals of cognitive training is examining improvements
in untrained tasks; this phenomenon is known as transfer. We describe the
neural correlates of individual differences in transfer using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Forty-five participants trained for 30 hours
with Space Fortress, a multimodal game that challenges working memory,
reasoning, procedural learning, motor control, and both dorsal and ventral
attention streams. Before and after training subjects were scanned in the
MRI while playing the full Space Fortress game, and they were assessed
with a variety of neuropsychological measures focusing on visual attention
and memory. We found that transfer to both the Sternberg Memory task
and Attentional Blink task correlated with activity in the superior parietal
lobe in a gameplay>fixation contrast, and we also replicated previous literature indicating that greater fMRI signal in the caudate correlates with
increased transfer to a working memory task. We replicated our findings in
a separate fMRI scan while the same trainees played the working memory
subtask of Space Fortress. Furthermore, we found that the pre-post changes
in fMRI percent signal change in the superior parietal lobe and caudate
were mediated by transfer. These data demonstrate a relationship between
transfer and changes in functional activation over time, and could be an
indication of a link between training induced plasticity and transfer. We
discuss the theoretical implications of these results for the field of cognitive
training as well.

E59
POSTERIOR PARIETAL CORTEX ACTIVATION PREDICTS WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY FOR FACES Walker S Pedersen1, Alexander J.
Shackman2, Julie A. Blaisdell1, Emily L. Belleau1, Daniel M. Stout1, Christine L.
Larson1; 1University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee, 2University of Wisconsin - Madison — Faces play a key role in the complex socioemotional interactions
characteristic of humans. Although the neural circuitry underlying face
perception is relatively well characterized, much less is known about the
mechanisms supporting the storage of faces in working memory (WM). To
address this challenge, we collected fMRI data during a change-detection
task (1-5 neutral face targets; n=13). A whole-brain ANOVA with load as a
single factor revealed load-sensitive activation in several regions, including
the dorsolateral prefrontal and posterior parietal cortices (p<.05, corrected).
Working memory capacity (Cowan’s k) and activation in most of the frontoparietal clusters monotonically increased from one to three faces, with

2013 Annual Meeting
saturation at higher loads (i.e., a quadratic profile). Individuals with higher
WM capacity (k) showed enhanced activation in the superior parietal lobule
and intraparietal sulcus at the higher load (3-faces vs. 1-face; r>.65, p<.05),
suggesting that activity in these regions is linearly related to the number
of stored faces (i.e., activation saturates with smaller arrays in individuals
with lower capacity). Taken with prior work, these results suggest that similar mechanisms underlie the storage of faces and non-face stimuli in WM.
More broadly, they set the stage for understanding how variation in this
circuitry contributes to normative social processing and psychopathology.

E60
GROUPING VIA THE GESTALT PRINCIPLE OF SIMILARITY ALTERS
CONTRALATERAL DELAY ACTIVITY Dwight Peterson1, Marian E. Berryhill1; 1University of Nevada, Reno — Gestalt principles of grouping facilitate
visual perception, but can they help chunk information in visual working
memory (VWM)? Expanding the VWM capacity limit (~3-4 items) would
facilitate wide-ranging cognitive performance. If a Gestalt grouping principle can enhance VWM then the capacity estimates should increase. One
neurophysiological index of VWM capacity is a posterior event-related
potential (ERP) component called the contralateral delay activity (CDA).
CDA amplitude increases according to the number of items held in VWM
reaching asymptote at capacity (Vogel & Machizawa, 2004). Our goal was
to see whether stimuli grouped by similarity would produce CDA amplitudes associated with smaller set sizes thereby reflecting enhanced VWM
capacity. Participants performed a color change-detection task with 1-6
stimuli per visual field. The grouping manipulation (grouped, ungrouped)
occurred at large set sizes. In grouped trials, some of the stimuli matched
in color. EEG recordings were recorded from left and right posterior parietal cortex. CDA amplitudes were reduced for grouped arrays compared to
ungrouped arrays suggesting that fewer neural resources were needed to
maintain the grouped arrays. VWM capacity was larger when the Gestalt
principle of similarity was available to chunk stimuli together. One promising extension of these findings is that VWM may be expanded by judicious
use of Gestalt principles.

E61
EGOCENTRIC BUT NOT ALLOCENTRIC SPATIAL WORKING
MEMORY IS IMPAIRED IN PRODROMAL HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE Katherine Possin1, Erica Johnson1, Gigi Satris1, Michael Geschwind1,
Sharon Sha1, Bruce Miller1, Joel Kramer1; 1University of California - San Francisco
— Huntington’s disease is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disease with early and prominent caudate nucleus atrophy. Working memory
deficits are often apparent even during the prodromal period (pdHD); i.e.,
prior to the onset of motor or other obvious clinical symptoms. Cognitive
neuroscience investigations have demonstrated a critical role for the caudate nucleus in egocentric (self-based) but not allocentric (landmark-based)
memory (e.g., Postle & D’Esposito, 2003). We administered tests of egocentric and allocentric spatial working memory to 16 pdHD individuals and 17
age matched controls. Each test had 60 trials during which subjects remembered 2 locations over 1-sec delays. Although the tests were nearly identical, they differed in one important way: on the egocentric test, the subject
remembered locations in self-based coordinates, whereas on the allocentric test, the subject remembered locations in landmark-based coordinates.
Accuracy on the two tests was analyzed using a mixed model ANOVA.
The test by group interaction was significant, p = .02. Whereas the pdHD
patients performed normally on the allocentric working memory test, p =
.45, d = -0.3, they exhibited a severe impairment on the egocentric working
memory test, p < .001, d = -1.4. In conclusion, the pdHD patients exhibited
a selective impairment in egocentric working memory, which may be due
to caudate dysfunction. These results have implications for the selection of
cognitive biomarkers for pdHD and also support the application of insights
and methods from cognitive neuroscience to patient research.

E62
ERP EFFECTS OF LEXICAL PRE-EXPOSURE DURING L2 VOCABULARY ACQUISITION He Pu1, Katherine J. Midgley1, Matthias Scheutz1,
Jonathan Grainger2, Phillip J. Holcomb1; 1Tufts University, 2CNRS and Aix-Marseille University — It has been hypothesized that difficulties encountered
during the acquisition of a vocabulary in a second language (L2) is due to
the formation of asymmetrical links between stored concepts and L1 and L2

Poster Session E
lexical representations during learning. For example, in Kroll and Stewart’s
Revised Hierarchical Model, the mapping of L2 lexical units to concepts is
mediated by the L1 lexicon, which has stronger connections to concepts.
Given this reliance on the existing L1 lexicon during L2 vocabulary acquisition, pre-exposure of the lexical forms of L2 words prior to establishing
any form-meaning associations should minimize the strong L2 to L1 lexical
link and strengthen the direct links between the L2 lexicon and concepts.
We tested the pre-exposure hypothesis on Spanish vocabulary learning by
utilizing a series of ERP lexical decision tasks. 14 L1 English speakers who
were enrolled in an introductory Spanish class were pre-exposed to a set of
the course vocabulary items without their L1 translations throughout the
semester. ERPs were then recorded to Spanish words and pseudowords
(PWs), half of which had been pre-exposed. Results showed larger N400
amplitudes in response to pre-exposed Spanish words compared to nonpre-exposed Spanish words. Critically, this effect was not due to repetition, as the N400 amplitude for pre-exposed Spanish PWs was smaller than
that for non-pre-exposed Spanish PWs. This contrast suggests that lexical
pre-exposure leads to larger N400s and perhaps more lexical activation for
learned L2 vocabulary.

E63
ASYMMETRY IN SEMANTIC ACTIVATION BY MISPRONOUNCED
WORDS: EVIDENCE FROM ERP AND REACTION TIME STUDIES Adam Roberts1, Allison Wetterlin1, Aditi Lahiri1; 1University of Oxford —
Although mispronunciations and misperceptions of speech can both hinder
word recognition, native listeners tend to discern some meaning out of any
item they perceive, be it accurate or not. Because of this, a conflict arises:
although mispronounced words may activate some meaning, they can also
be recognised as nonwords. Here we investigate to what extent certain mispronunciations are accepted while others are rejected. We present three sets
of crossmodal semantic priming experiments using real words and mispronunciations as primes, recording both reaction times and evoked potentials.
Mispronunciations were created by replacing the place of articulation of the
medial consonant in English disyllabic words (e.g. image becoming *inage),
this alteration being chosen as alternation of medial consonants does not
occur under normal coarticulatory conditions. Both differences in N400
amplitudes and priming in reaction times show that words with mispronounced medial coronal consonants (e.g., *temor) are accepted as their real
word counterparts (e.g., tenor) and activate corresponding semantically
related words (e.g., SINGER). In contrast, non-coronal mispronunciations
(e.g., *inage) fail to access the real words (e.g., image) and do not activate
their semantically related words (e.g., PICTURE). These results indicate
there is an asymmetry in acceptance, where certain mispronunciations
activate a phonologically related word along with its meaning, reflecting
lexical access, whereas others do not. Neither storage of detailed acoustic information, nor contextual information can account for the asymmetry
seen here, only an asymmetric lexical representation predicts asymmetry
in perception.

E64
LATERALITY, HEMISPHERIC INTERACTION, AND TASK DIFFICULTY: SHIFTS TO HIGH FAMILIARITY WORDS FROM LOW
FAMILIARITY WORDS Barbara Rutherford1; 1UBC Okanagan — Two lex-

ical decision experiments extend tests of laterality and the role of hemispheric interaction in two novel ways. First, the potential for dynamic
influence of context to orthographic and phonological strategies for high
familiarity words is assessed. Second, letter strings are presented at fixation
to more closely approximate normal viewing behaviour. A lateralized distractor or no distractor at all loads processing of the letter string to one or
both hemispheres, respectively. High familiarity words, pseudowords, and
orthographically incorrect letter sequences are presented in Experiment 1.
The same strings and low familiarity words are presented in Experiment
2. Experiment 1 found that letter strings were more accurately processed
by the right hemisphere than both hemispheres, supporting the ideas of a
right hemisphere advantage for orthographic processing and a cost from
hemispheric interaction when a task is simple. Experiment 2 found that
high familiarity words were more accurately processed by both hemispheres than the right hemisphere alone, revealing a benefit rather than a
cost from hemispheric interaction as the task context became more difficult.
In addition, high familiarity words were more quickly processed by the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

163

Poster Session E
left hemisphere than right hemisphere, just as low familiarity words were
more accurately processed by the left hemisphere. These findings fit the
assumption that the left hemisphere shifts to phonological processing as
words become more challenging, and provide new evidence that laterality
and the effect of hemispheric interaction are subject to context effects.

E65
PHONEME RELATED SOMATOTPY AND LEXICO-SEMANTIC
KNOWLEDGE BECOME ACTIVATED IN PARALLEL WITHIN 200 MS
DURING OBJECT NAMING. Kristof Strijkers1, Friedemann Pulvermuller2,
Albert Costa3; 1Laboratoire de Psychologie Cognitive, CNRS and Université
d’Aix-Marseille, Marseille, France, 2Brain-Language Laboratory, Free University
of Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Center for Brain and Cognition, UPF, ICREA, Barcelona, Spain. — In this study we explored the time course of processes related
to lexical and phonological access during speech production. Fifteen native
English speakers named objects aloud while their MEG was recorded. We
orthogonally manipulated the lexical frequency of the object names, as an
index for lexico-semantic retrieval, and the articulator movement of the first
phoneme of a picture’s name (i.e., labial: Monkey vs. dental: Donkey), as an
index of when the brain starts retrieving phonological-phonemic knowledge. Consistent with previous data we found early MEG activation for
the lexical frequency effect (160 – 240 ms), with a stronger brain response
for low frequency compared to high frequency items in the mid temporal
gyrus and the left inferior frontal gyrus. Crucially, differences associated
to the articulator movement of the first phoneme were also present at this
time-window. In the pre- and post-central gyri we observed a single dissociation in that there was more cortical activity in that region responsible
for tongue-movements when a picture’s name started with a dental sound
compared to a labial sound. Furthermore, we also encountered a double
dissociation in the superior temporal gyrus (STG), a region typically associated with acoustic-to-phoneme mappings. Anterior portions of the STG
responded more strongly for labial than for dental sounds, and the opposite
was observed in posteriors sections of the STG. In contrast to the traditional
hierarchical view underlying word production, these data offer compelling
evidence for very rapid and parallel retrieval of lexico-semantic and phonological-phonetic knowledge associated with perceived objects.

E66
CHARACTERIZING OBJECT NAMING ERRORS IN PREOPERATIVE
SPEECH MAPPING VIA NAVIGATED TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC
STIMULATION Noriko Tanigawa1,2, Phiroz Tarapore1, John Houde1, Srikantan Nagarajan1; 1University of California, San Francisco, 2University of Oxford
— Navigated transcranial magnetic stimulation (nTMS) during the object
naming task has been used to map cortical areas causally related to speech
functions in the preoperative context. To improve the mapping efficiency,
the present study investigates phonological and semantic properties that
may affect rates and spatial distributions of object naming errors in preoperative nTMS speech mapping using the NexSpeech® module with
the NBS system 4 (Nexstim Ltd., Helsinki, Finland). Only the correctly
responded pictures without TMS were presented in the nTMS condition.
A 5-Hz 2-second pulse train started at each picture onset. Data from seven
English-speaking left-hemisphere tumor patients were analyzed for phonological and semantic properties preselected from interdisciplinary findings. All error types (Corina, 2010) were collapsed. Overall, error rates
were higher for targets starting with a [-CONTINUANT] feature (e.g.,
/b/, /m/, /d/) than those with a [+CONTINUANT] feature (e.g., /v/,
/l/, /o/). Typical of one-word production, error-prone targets included
disyllabic words with three different consonants (e.g., bucket), multisyllabic words with stress on a non-standard syllable position (e.g., banana).
Semantic specificity differed by tumor locations. Whereas insula and temporal tumor patients were more susceptible to phonological constraints,
handknob and inferior parietal lobe tumor patients were more susceptible
to region-specific semantic constraints, ‘hand-related objects’ (e.g., glove)
and ‘tools’ (e.g., globe) respectively. The semantically selective error distributions accord with the conceptual category-specificity literature (e.g.,
Mahon_et_al_2009). The present study adds to the models of object naming
(e.g., Indefrey_2011), the global phonological, and location-specific semantic constraints, tailoring word lists for efficient preoperative nTMS speech
mapping.

164

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

E67
CHOOSING FIRST OR SECOND LANGUAGE PHONOLOGY IN 125
MS Kalinka Timmer1,2, Lesya A. Ganushchak1,3, Yulia Mitlina2, Niels O. Schiller1,2; 1Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition (LIBC), Leiden, The Netherlands,
2
Leiden University Centre for Linguistics (LUCL), Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Max
Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands — We are
often in a bilingual situation (e.g., overhearing a conversation in the train).
We investigated whether first (L1) and second language (L2) phonologies
are automatically activated. A masked priming paradigm was used, with
Russian words as targets and either Russian or English words as primes.
Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded while Russian (L1) – English
(L2) bilinguals read aloud L1 target words (e.g. РЕЙС /reis/ ‘flight’)
primed with either L1 (e.g. РАНА /rana/ ‘wound’) or L2 words (e.g.
PACK). Target words were read faster when they were preceded by phonologically related L1 primes but not by orthographically related L2 primes.
ERPs showed orthographic priming in the 125-200 ms time window. Thus,
both L1 and L2 phonologies are simultaneously activated during L1 reading. The results provide support for non-selective models of bilingual reading, which assume automatic activation of the non-target language phonology even when it is not required by the task.

E68
TRACKING LEXICALITY EFFECTS IN SECOND LANGUAGE VOCABULARY LEARNING Yen Na Yum1, Katherine J. Midgley1, Jonathan Grainger2,
Phillip J. Holcomb1; 1Tufts University, 2CNRS and Aixs-Marseille University —
Second language (L2) learning in adulthood often begins with acquiring
new visual word forms and mapping meanings onto them. One measure of
L2 word knowledge is sensitivity to lexicality, which is indexed by larger
N400 amplitudes to L2 pseudowords (PWs) and non-words (NWs) than
L2 words. Previous research has shown that learning-related changes in
ERPs, including the emergence of lexicality effects, could occur rapidly following L2 word learning. While effects of visual familiarity and lexicality
were demonstrated for learners whose L1 and L2 were both alphabetic, the
emergence of these effects has not been shown for learners with visually
distinct L1 and L2. To address this, we followed native English speakers
during their first 5 weeks of Chinese word learning. In 3 ERP recording
sessions, participants made lexicality judgments to learned Chinese words,
Chinese PWs (unfamiliar words that obey Chinese orthographic structure),
and Chinese NWs (unfamiliar words that violate orthographic structure).
At the beginning of learning, N400 amplitudes to Chinese words, PWs
and NWs were indistinguishable. Across the sessions, an increase in N400
amplitude was observed to Chinese PWs relative to Chinese words. In
addition, a larger N400 was seen to Chinese NWs compared to Chinese
PWs. Results suggested that beginning learners readily acquired both the
orthographic structure and meaning of Chinese words. Although learning
a visually distinct L2 could feel more challenging than learning a visually
familiar L2, lexical knowledge could be acquired at a comparable rate.

E69
PRE-ATTENTIVE PITCH PROCESSING IS LEFT HEMISPHERE LATERALIZED IN CANTONESE SPEAKERS Caicai Zhang1,2, Feng Gu3;
1

Haskins Laboratories, Yale University, USA, 2Language Engineering Laboratory, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 3CAS Key Laboratory
of Brain Function and Diseases, University of Science and Technology of China,
China — There is a continuous debate between two views regarding the
brain asymmetry for speech and music. Function-dependent lateralization
suggests that left hemisphere (LH) lateralization for speech and right hemisphere (RH) lateralization for music is determined by the functional properties of speech and music. Acoustic-dependent lateralization suggests that
the hemispheric asymmetry is determined by temporal and spectral cues of
acoustic signals irrespective of speech and music. Tone languages in which
spectral cues are lexically contrastive can provide insights into these two
views. In this study we examine the hemispheric lateralization of lexical
and acoustic pitch processing in Cantonese speakers. We found LH lateralization for mismatch negativity (MMN) response elicited by lexical pitch
contrast in speech stimuli, supporting the function-dependent lateralization. Importantly, the MMN elicited by pitch contrast in nonspeech stimuli
is also LH lateralized. The lateralization pattern in Cantonese is different
from previous studies of non-tone languages which found a RH lateral-

2013 Annual Meeting
ization for spectral (pitch) processing. To provide an integral explanation,
we propose a “lateralization-carryover hypothesis” which suggests that the
acoustic-dependent brain asymmetry is a consequence of carryover effect
from function-dependent brain asymmetry. That is, speech related acoustic
processing (i.e. temporal processing in non-tone languages; temporal and
spectral processing in tone languages) is modulated by language experience to be lateralized to the speech dominant hemisphere. This hypothesis
is consistent with many studies that reported a carryover effect from tone
language experience to general acoustic pitch processing, including the
finding of more prevailing absolute pitch ability in tone language speakers.

E70
SEMANTIC AND WORLD-KNOWLEDGE INTEGRATION DURING
SECOND LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION Clara Martin1,2,3, Xavier
Garcia3, Audrey Breton4, Guillaume Thierry5,6, Albert Costa3,7; 1Basque Center
on Cognition, Brain and Language, San Sebastian, Spain, 2IKERBASQUE, Bilbao,
Spain, 3University Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 4Institut des Sciences
Cognitives, University of Lyon – CNRS, Lyon, France, 5Bangor University, UK,
6
Economic and Social Research Council Centre for Research on Bilingualism
in theory and Practice, Bangor University, UK, 7Institució Catalana de Recerca
i Estudis Avançats, Barcelona, Spain — Speakers of a foreign language (L2)
often experience difficulties when understanding the message conveyed
in this language. To advance in our knowledge about the origin of these
difficulties in L2 sentence comprehension, we assessed whether L2 comprehenders are able to integrate semantic and world-knowledge information
in an on-line fashion as native language users do (L1 comprehenders). We
investigated event-related brain potentials elicited by the critical word of
English sentences in three conditions: (1) correct; (2) semantic violations; (3)
world-knowledge violations (semantically correct but false). The processing of semantic violations differed from that of correct and false sentences
as early as the P2 component time-window (150-200 ms after the critical
word onset) in L1 but not in L2 comprehenders. In the N400 time-window
(350-550 ms), the processing of both semantic and world knowledge violations differed significantly from that of correct sentences and from each
other. The effect was similar in the two groups, with an overall latency
delay in L2 compared to L1 comprehenders. We conclude that when reading in L1, the brain needs on average 200 ms more to show sensitivity to
a world-knowledge violation than for semantic violation detection. When
reading in L2, the brain integrates semantic and world-knowledge information simultaneously with no earlier processing for semantics. L2 sentence
comprehension difficulties can be partly explained (1) by a lack of early
literal semantic processing of the sentence and (2) by the fact that semantic
and world-knowledge integration processes are overall delayed in L2 compared to L1 sentence processing.

E71
TAKING A LOOK AT METAPHORS

Marguerite McQuire1, Geena Ianni1,
Anjan Chatterjee1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Comprehending literal
sentences (“The device was a pendulum”) and novel metaphors (“His
thoughts were a pendulum”) presumably engage different cognitive and
neural processes. One hypothesis is that metaphor comprehension entails
an initial rejection of a literal interpretation (Grice, 1975). Another is that
metaphors are understood effortlessly (Lakoff, 1980). The predictions made
by these hypotheses regarding eye movement patterns are not clear. The
structure-mapping hypothesis proposes that metaphors involve a comparison between the target (“thoughts”) and the base (“pendulum”) to identify
shared properties relevant to the metaphorical meaning (Gentner, 1988).
This more granular account would predict that eye-movement patterns
around the target and base terms should differ when participants read literal and metaphoric sentences because the latter entails comparison in a
way that the former does not. Participants (n=24) read 40 novel metaphors
and 40 literal sentences matched for valence, interpretability, familiarity,
naturalness, imageability, figurativeness, length, frequency and concreteness. Dependent measures included fixation time on the base and the probability of recursive eye movements from the base to the target in the metaphor and literal conditions. Greater fixation time on the base would suggest
increased processing demands. Recursive eye-movements between the
base and the target would suggest mapping between the terms. We found
that fixation times on the base word and likelihood of recursive eye-movements between the base and the target were greater in the metaphor than

Poster Session E
the literal condition. These data demonstrating readers’ recursive engagement with the base and target terms is consistent with the structure-mapping hypothesis.

E72
WHO IS DOING WHAT? LEFT TEMPORAL INVOLVEMENT FOR
SENTENCE READING Nicola Molinaro1, Simona Mancini1, Ileana Quiñones1,
Manuel Carreiras1,2; 1BCBL, Basque center on Cognition, Brain and Language,
2
Ikerbasque, Basque foundation for science — Comprehending subject-verb
agreement involves decomposing nominal and verbal forms to extract
grammatical information; this information subsequently maps onto different semantic-pragmatic representations concerning the type of speech
participants (1st=Speaker, 2nd=Addressee, 3rd=non-participant) and their
numerosity (a single entity vs. a multitude). In this event-related fMRI
study we employed a grammatical violation paradigm to determine the
brain regions – within the sentence processing network – that are involved
in mapping morphosyntactic features onto semantic-pragmatic representations. Subject-verb agreement was manipulated in Spanish to create
mismatches in person (Person Mismatch, PM) and number (Number Mismatch, NM) to be contrasted with correct sentences. The processing of both
PM and NM determined increased activation - compared to correct sentences - in a large network of parietal and frontal brain regions such as left
medial frontal areas (BA45/46), precuneus and the cingulate cortex. Crucially, a dissociation emerged between left anterior and posterior middle
temporal regions: The anterior temporal was specifically activated by PM,
while the posterior patch activity was enhanced by both PM and NM, being
larger for PM. The experimental design here employed revealed the differential role of anterior vs. posterior middle temporal regions in semantic
processing at the sentence level. The common posterior temporal activation
would mainly reflect basic semantic-syntactic integration. Critically, person
features directly map onto the participants of the speech act: The anterior
temporal effect can thus reflects the difficulty in integrating subject and
verb information to determine “who” is the actor in the utterance.

E73
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN ASPECTUAL COERCION

Martin
Paczynski1,2, Ray Jackendoff1, Phillip Holcomb1, Gina Kuperberg1,3; 1Tufts
University, 2University of Miami, 3Massachusetts General Hospital — Understanding that the sentence “For several minutes the girl jumped” means the
girl jumped multiple times requires aspectual coercion, a form of enriched
semantic composition. Using Event Related Potentials (ERPs), we have
previously shown that aspectual coercion is associated with a sustained
broadly distributed negativity at the critical verb, the point at which aspectual coercion is first licensed. In the current study, we built upon these findings to examine how individual differences affect online aspectual coercion computation in 32 undergraduate participants. We used the “Sentence
Combining” and “Word Similarities” subtests of the Test of Adolescent and
Adult Language, 4th ed. (TOAL-4) to access participants’ language proficiency. We found that neural activity in response to aspectual coercion was
significantly correlated with participants scores on the Sentence Combining subtest (p < 0.005); as proficiency increased, so did the amplitude of
the anterior negativity . On the other hand, Word Similarities scores were
not found to predict modulation of ERPs evoked by aspectual coercion (p
> 0.1). Taken together, these findings suggest that online computation of
aspectual representations, at least those requiring coercion, may rely on
combinatorial linguistic processes. Additionally, our findings of individual
differences in online aspectual coercion costs may help explain apparent
discrepancies in earlier studies of aspectual coercion.

E74
A COMMON NEURAL ENCODING OF SPATIAL AND SEMANTIC
DISTANCE Carolyn Parkinson1, Shari Liu1, Thalia Wheatley1; 1Dartmouth Col-

lege — One window into the cognitive operations that support abstract
thought is the language we use to describe them. The spatialization of form
hypothesis (Lakoff, 1987) highlights the widespread use of spatial words
(e.g., “outside”, “far”) to describe conceptual relations, suggesting that spatial schemata structure mental representations as “cognitive maps.” The
prevalence of spatial figurative language may reflect “recycling” (Dehaene
& Cohen, 2007) of circuitry originally devoted to spatial processing to
“plot” increasingly abstract contents over the course of evolution. How-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

165

Poster Session E
ever, exactly how neural representations of abstract information relate to
those of physical information is poorly understood. In the current study,
participants were asked to participate in 2 consecutive functional magnetic
resonance imaging experiments. One involved passively viewing shapes
at varying distances from one another, and the other involved passively
viewing word pairs. Each word (e.g., “blizzard”) was conceptually close
to one word (e.g., “hurricane”) but far from another (e.g., “parrot”). A
linear support vector machine learning algorithm was trained on each participant’s patterns of brain activity while viewing “near” and “far” shape
pairs, and tested on patterns of brain activity in response to “near” and
“far” word pairs. Results from both region of interest and multivariate
searchlight analyses indicate that semantic distances can be decoded from
physical distances in areas traditionally implicated in physical distance
processing, such as the hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus and inferior
parietal lobule. These results suggest that neural representations of physical distances may serve as a “scaffolding” for representations of conceptual
similarity.

E75
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF CROSS-LINGUISTIC SOUND SYMBOLISM: EVIDENCE FROM FMRI AND DTI Kathleen Pirog Revill1,
Lynne C. Nygaard2, Laura L. Namy2, Lauren Clepper2; 1Georgia Institute of
Technology, 2Emory University — Non-arbitrary correspondences between
spoken words and categories of meanings exist in natural language, with
mounting evidence that listeners are sensitive to this sound symbolic information. Sound symbolism may be a product of crossmodal integration
whereby aspects of speech production or perception lead to activation of
multimodal properties of the word’s referent. Previously, we developed
a multi-language stimulus set of antonym pairs to investigate the extent
to which native English speakers display sensitivity to sound-to-meaning
correspondences for foreign words. We identified a subset of sound symbolic foreign words for which listeners match words to meanings at above
chance rates. For each of four antonym meaning pairs (round-pointy, bigsmall, moving-still, fast-slow) from this set, we selected ten sound-symbolic and ten non-symbolic items. Fifteen participants without previous
experience with the languages in the stimulus set completed the experiment. During fMRI data collection, participants indicated which antonym
corresponded with the meaning of a spoken word via button press. Trials
were blocked by antonym pair and sound symbolism status. The contrast
between sound-symbolic and non-symbolic words revealed an area of significant activation in left superior parietal lobe (33, 65, 45). Using TBSS, we
also found a significant correlation between an individual’s accuracy on
sound symbolic words and fractional anisotropy in left superior longitudinal fasciculus, near the locus of the functional difference. These findings
are consistent with previous research demonstrating correlations between
parietal lobe structure and function and multisensory integration. These
findings support the idea that synesthetic or crossmodal correspondences
underlie sound symbolism in spoken language.

E76
CONFLICT AND INTEGRATION IN SENTENCE PROCESSING: FMRI
EVIDENCE Ileana Quiñones1, Nicola Molinaro1, Simona Mancini1, Juan Andrés
Hernández2, Manuel Carreiras1,3,4; 1Basque Center on Cognition Brain and Language, BCBL, Donostia-San Sebastián, Euskal Herria, Spain, 2University of La
Laguna, Tenerife, Spain, 3Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao,
Spain, 4Departamento de Filología Vasca, EHU/UPV, Bilbao, Spain — Language comprehension is incremental, involving the integration of information from different words together with the need of resolving conflicting
cues when unexpected information occurs. The present event-related fMRI
design seeks to segregate the neuro-anatomical substrates of these two
processes by comparing well-formed and ill-formed (person agreement
violation between subject and verb, PAV) sentences during a grammaticality judgment task. Well-formed sentences included standard agreement
constructions and a particular Spanish phenomenon, Unagreement, i.e. a
subject-verb agreement mismatch that results in a grammatical sentence
(“Los pintores trajimos...” [The painters3.pl (we)brought1.pl...]). Comprehension of this construction implies a shift in the semantic interpretation
of the subject from 3rd-person to 1st-person, enabling the phrase “The
painters” to be re-interpreted as “We painters”. The results included firstly
a functional dissociation between well-formed and ill-formed sentences:

166

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
While PAV recruited a fronto-parietal network associated to monitoring
operations, grammatical sentences (both Unagreement and standard agreement) recruited a fronto-temporal network related to syntactic-semantic
integration. Second, activation in the left dorso-lateral medial frontal cortex
by both PAV and Unagreement was found, reflecting processing of the initial morphosyntactic mismatch detection. Third, we demonstrate that successful Unagreement identification as a well-formed construction depends
on the recruitment of the left angular gyrus. Incremental sentence processes in subject-verb dependencies depend on agreement patterns: Only
after the evaluation of the available morphosyntactic cues (in left dorso-lateral medial frontal regions) subject-verb integration can start. Critically,
when unexpected information occurs, angular gyrus activity can supply
the reading network for the comprehension of semantically complex but
non-anomalous constructions.

E77
SIMULATING THE N400 COMPONENT AS SEMANTIC NETWORK
ERROR: INSIGHTS FROM A FEATURE-BASED CONNECTIONIST
ATTRACTOR MODEL OF WORD MEANING Milena Rabovsky1, Ken
McRae2; 1Humboldt University, Berlin, 2University of Western Ontario, London,
Canada — The N400 component of the event-related brain potential is
widely used in research on language and semantic memory. Although the
component’s relation to semantic processing is well-established, the specific mechanisms underlying N400 generation are currently unclear. We
explored the mechanisms underlying the N400 by examining how a connectionist model’s performance measures covary with N400 amplitudes.
We simulated six N400 effects obtained in human empirical research. Network error was consistently in the same direction as N400 amplitudes,
namely larger for low frequency words, larger for words with many features, and smaller for semantically related target words as well as repeated
words. Furthermore, the repetition-induced decrease was stronger for low
frequency words, and for words with many semantic features. In contrast,
semantic activation corresponded less well with the N400, and instead
seems related to lexical and semantic decision performance. Our results
suggest an interesting relation between N400 amplitudes and semantic network error. In psychological terms, error values in connectionist models
have been conceptualized as implicit prediction error, and we interpret our
results as support for the idea that N400 amplitudes reflect implicit prediction error in semantic memory.

E78
THE SELF-REFERENCE EFFECT ENHANCES MEMORY FOR NARRATIVE INFORMATION IN HEALTHY AGING Nicole Carson1, Kelly J.
Murphy2,3, Morris Moscovitch2,3,4, R. Shayna Rosenbaum1,4; 1York University,
Toronto, Canada, 2Baycrest Centre, Toronto, Canada, 3University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada, 4Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Centre, Toronto, Canada
— The Self-Reference Effect (SRE), enhanced memory for information
encoded through self-attribution, has been exhibited in young and older
adults. Past studies, however, primarily used trait adjectives as stimuli.
The present study sought to examine whether the SRE can be extended to
memory for narratives, which has been shown to decline even with healthy
aging. Twenty younger (age 18-26) and 20 older (age 65-79) adults encoded
short narratives by deciding: 1) whether they could easily imagine themselves as the protagonist (self-reference condition); 2) whether the event
described was positive (semantic condition); or 3) whether the word “the”
appeared more than four times (structural condition). Results indicated
that although self-referential and semantic encoding benefitted memory to
a similar extent when measured by a recognition task, an accompanying
remember/know decision indicated that self-referential processing promoted recollection of narrative material more than the other encoding conditions. Further, in a recall test, the SRE was clearly evident for narratives:
memory was greatest in the self-reference condition compared to the other
two conditions. Performance in the structural condition was worse than
in the others. Although younger adults outperformed their older counterparts on both overall recognition and recall of narratives, the SRE promoted
recall and recollective retrieval experience, capacities shown to decline with
aging. The SRE may therefore provide an effective intervention strategy for
enhancing recall and episodic re-experiencing of narrative information in
healthy aging.

2013 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E

E79
IMPAIRED SEMANTIC AND LOGICAL MEMORY IN EARLY ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE AND MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT--A MULTIMODAL IMAGING ANALYSIS Ming-Jang Chiu1,2,3,4, Fan-Pei Yang5, Ya-Fang
6

1

1

1,3

5,7

Chen , Ta-Fu Chen , Tien-Wen Tseng , Jia-Chun Chen , Shih-Ching Lee , WeiKai Liao5,8, Kai-Yuan Tzen9,10, Mau-Sun Hua1,3; 1Department of Neurology andCollege of Medicine, National Taiwan University, 2Institute of Brain and Mind
Sciences, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, 3Department of
Psychology, National Taiwan University, 4Graduate Institute of Biomedical Engineering and Bio-informatics, National Taiwan University, 5Department of Foreign
Languages and Literature, National Tsing Hua University, 6Department of Medical Imaging, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, 7Graduate Institute of Linguistics,National Tsing Hua University, 8Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, 9Department of Nuclear Medicine, National
Taiwan University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
10
Molecular Imaging Center, National Taiwan University — Alzheimer’s disease
(AD) causes tissue loss and neuronal death, which drastically affect cognitive functions. The most remarkable signs of brain damage in AD include
shrinkage of the brain volume and white matter disruption. Patients with
mild cognitive impairments (MCI) also display similar but less prominent change in the brain. Although previous research has reported poor
neurocognitive performance of these patients, the relationship between
brain damage and cognitive impairments remains unclear. Little research
has investigated both grey and white matters in these 3 populations. The
present study employed volumetric measurement, voxel-based morphometry (VBM) and tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) to compare the group
differences. The correlations of performance in the attention, memory and
language domains and indices of grey and white matter integrity were also
examined. We observed significant difference in the total hippocampus
volume among the three groups. The VBM analysis showed significant difference in the hippocampus, thalamus, the PFC, visual and motor cortices
between the AD and control groups, but only the hippocampus, thalamus,
and the visual cortex between the control and MCI groups (p<0.001). The
TBSS analysis only revealed significant difference in FA and MD between
controls and ADs. The regions displaying significant difference included
inter-commissural and association tracts. Pearson correlation analysis
showed significant correlations in multiple grey and white matter ROIs
with Delayed recall of Logical Memory and Semantic Verbal Fluency. This
study demonstrates the relationship of brain damage and cognitive deficits
and is consistent with clinical observation of memory and verbal deficits
typically present in patients.

E80
LEARNING FROM DELAYED FEEDBACK IN ADOLESCENCE

Juliet
Y. Davidow1, Karin Foerde1, Adriana Galván2, Daphna Shohamy1; 1Psychology
Department, Columbia University, 2Psychology Department, UCLA — Learning from outcomes is critical at all stages of human development. However, the timing of these outcomes varies. Converging evidence shows that
even small changes in the timing of feedback can impact neural systems
underlying learning. Learning from immediate response-contingent feedback depends on the striatum. In adults, delaying feedback even a few seconds leads to a shift from the striatum to the hippocampus and enhances
episodic memory for feedback events. Over the course of adolescence, the
striatum undergoes developmental change in functional connectivity to
cortical regions, whereas the hippocampus undergoes less developmental
change. Thus we predict that the dynamic interactions between multiple
learning systems change over adolescence, with consequences for what is
learned, and how. Here, we test this prediction by determining how feedback timing modulates neural and cognitive systems for learning in adolescents (13-17 years old). We employed a feedback-learning paradigm where
outcomes were either presented immediately or after a 7 second delay.
Behaviorally, we found that adolescents learned equally well from feedback that was immediate and feedback that was delayed, similar to healthy
young adults (25-30 years old). This positions us to determine whether
feedback timing modulates the neural systems underlying learning. Here,
we use event-related and resting-state fMRI to characterize the neural systems in adolescents that support learning under different feedback timing

conditions. We will discuss the implications of the behavioral and fMRI
findings for the engagement of multiple learning systems in the adolescent
brain, and how they interact to support feedback-driven learning.

E81
STABILITY ACROSS AGE AND ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY PERFORMANCE IN THE ENGAGEMENT OF A CORE NETWORK SUPPORTING RECOLLECTION Marianne de Chastelaine1, Julia Mattson1, Tracy
Wang1, Michael Rugg1; 1Center for Vital Longevity and the School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences, The University of Texas at Dallas — Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies of episodic retrieval have identified a network of cortical regions – each interconnected with the medial
temporal lobe (MTL) – that are consistently engaged during successful
recollection. Here, we used an associative recognition task to investigate
the effects of age and associative memory performance on the engagement
of this ‘core’ recollection network. Young, middle-aged and older adults
were scanned during an associative recognition test. At study, participants
made relational semantic decisions on a series of visually presented word
pairs. At test, they made associative recognition judgments on studied,
rearranged and new pairs. fMRI recollection effects were operationalized
as greater activity for studied pairs endorsed as ‘intact’ than for studied
pairs endorsed as rearranged. In all three age groups, robust effects were
identified across the putative core recollection network – the MTL, posterior cingulate/retrosplenial cortex, ventral posterior parietal cortex and
medial prefrontal cortex, as well as in the ventral striatum. Engagement of
this network did not significantly differ across age groups. Furthermore,
engagement of the network was stable in the face of different levels of associative memory both across and within groups. The findings suggest that
associative recognition may be a useful means of assessing the functional
integrity of the recollection network.

E82
EFFECTS OF FLUENCY ON RECOGNITION MEMORY DECISIONS
IN YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS: AN FMRI STUDY Ilana Dew1, Roberto
Cabeza1; 1Duke University — A vast body of evidence indicates that people
use fluency – the ease with which information is processed – as a heuristic
when making inferential decisions, including judgments of truth, aesthetics,
and frequency. Older adults are typically as likely as young adults to use
fluency as a cue for recognition memory, the decision of whether a stimulus
is old or new. Very little is known about the interaction between age and
fluency on the neural basis of recognition memory decisions. The current
fMRI study used a masked priming technique to investigate fluency-based
memory decisions. Following incidental encoding, participants completed
a recognition test in which they made old/new decisions followed by confidence judgments on studied and unstudied items. Each recognition item
was preceded by a subliminal prime that was either semantically related
or unrelated to the item. Older adults showed reduced overall memory
accuracy relative to young adults. Consistent with previous studies, however, older adults showed an equivalent influence of fluency on recognition
decisions, whereby old and new items preceded by a related prime were
more likely to be judged “old.” In both young and older adults, fluency
reduced neural activations in perirhinal cortex (PRC), and PRC reductions
predicted behavioral misattributions of oldness in both young and older
adults. These results are consistent with age-related preservations in PRC
function. However, the fluency manipulation interacted with age in several
cortical regions outside PRC, suggesting ways in which fluency may affect
the retrieval network differently for the old relative to the young.

E83
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EMOTIONAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL
ACROSS THE ADULT LIFESPAN Jaclyn Ford1, John Morris1, Halle Zucker1,
Elizabeth Kensinger1; 1Boston College — Recent research has identified significant age-related changes in neural recruitment during the encoding of
emotional information. It is unclear, however, whether these neural differences associated with healthy aging extend to retrieval of emotional stimuli. The current study addressed this question by examining the effect of
aging on neural activity (using fMRI) during retrieval of positive, negative,
and neutral information. The effect of age was examined using a lifespan
perspective in which age was treated as a continuous variable (ages 18-80)

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

167

Poster Session E
as opposed to having dichotomous groups of young and older adults. This
allowed us to identify changes across the entire course of healthy aging.
Prior to scanning, participants encoded positive, negative, and neutral
images paired with neutral titles. After a thirty minute delay, participants
engaged in a scanned recognition task in which they viewed the neutral
titles and indicated whether the title had been presented with an image
during the study phase. Neural activity during retrieval of positive, negative, and neutral memories was compared with age as the regressor of interest. Results suggest that age was associated with decreased activity in frontal and temporal regions during retrieval of all valences, but only during
the retrieval of negative memories was age associated with increased activity in regions within the emotional memory network, including the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. These findings suggest that there are both shared
and unique effects of age on retrieval of emotional and neutral information.

E84
FAMILIAR FACES DON’T JUST LOOK FAMILIAR: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE THAT ‘SEMANTIC’ PERSON IDENTIFICATION IS SUPPORTED BY ‘EPISODIC’ RECOLLECTION Graham MacKenzie1, David Donaldson1; 1University of Stirling — Two quite distinct models
of ‘face recognition’ exist. Semantic face processing models incorporate discrete computations of familiarity and person knowledge, whereas episodic
models of recognition memory describe separable retrieval processes of
familiarity and recollection. Here we used Event-Related Potentials (ERPs)
to investigate potential overlap between these models in the context of
familiar face recognition. Brain activity was recorded whilst participants
viewed a series of famous face images. Participants were required to indicate the quality of their memory experience, noting whether each face was
recognised, and if so whether it simply felt familiar, or whether person-specific information was retrieved (akin to the remember/know procedure).
With respect to faces that were not recognised, familiarity decisions were
associated with a left frontal ERP old/new effect (200–400msec), while
retrieval of associated person-specific information elicited a temporally and
topographically dissociable left parietal effect (500–800msec). This finding
is important because previous ERP studies of recognition memory have
shown that recollection of words elicits the left parietal old/new effect,
but recollection of unfamiliar faces elicits frontal old/new effects. The
presence of a left parietal effect for recognition of familiar faces suggests
therefore that the processes supporting recollection of faces differ depending on whether to-be-retrieved faces are represented in semantic memory,
and that pre-existing semantic representations are required in order for the
left parietal old/new effect to be observed. More broadly, these data imply
that face familiarity is associated with different cognitive operations from
retrieval of person knowledge, and that episodic memory subserves person
identification.

E85
ALZHEIMER’S GENE APOE MODULATES NEURAL ACTIVITY
ASSOCIATED WITH RECOGNITION MEMORY RETRIEVAL OF PICTURES IN HEALTHY YOUNG PARTICIPANTS. Catherine A. MacLeod1,
David I. Donaldson2; 1Bangor University, 2University of Stirling — Apolipoprotein E (APOE) supports brain repair mechanisms (e.g., neuronal repair
and beta-amyloid metabolism) that are implicated in Alzheimer’s. The
effectiveness of the repair mechanisms are thought to vary as a function
of APOE genotype, for example E4 allele possession causes impairment
that increases the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. Currently, however, the
full functional consequences of these genotypic differences are unknown,
particularly in relation to young participants. Here we employ Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) to look at changes in brain function and cognition
associated with APOE polymorphisms in healthy adults. ERPs provide
a powerful method for investigating gene-dependent cognitive changes
because they allow neural correlates to be identified for distinct stages of
cognitive processing. In the current study we examined ERP correlates of
episodic memory retrieval as a function of APOE genotype, in the context
of an old/new recognition memory test for pictures. Analysis focused on
ERP effects present during a 500-800ms post-stimulus time-window, previously identified as best capturing neural activity associated with recollection (i.e., conscious retrieval of contextual information about prior study
episodes). Results revealed significant differences in the distribution of
recollection-related ERP effects as a function of APOE genotype. Carriers

168

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
of the E4 allele were found to exhibit greater activity over frontal electrodes
compared to E2 allele carriers, who conversely showed greater activity over
parietal electrodes. These results reveal engagement of different neural processes during episodic memory retrieval as a function of genotype, suggesting APOE-dependent physiological changes in the brain occurring prior to
the onset of cognitive ageing and disease.

E86
DO SUBJECTIVE RATINGS CORRESPOND TO THE CONTENT OF
IMAGINED FUTURE EVENTS? Victoria Martin1, Donna Rose Addis1; 1The
University of Auckland, New Zealand — Many studies of episodic future
thinking incorporate subjective participant ratings intended to capture
information about the imagined events. However, the construct validity of
participant ratings for imagined future events has not yet been systematically investigated. Validity assessment is important if such ratings are to be
accurately interpreted. The present study explores the validity of ratings
made about imagined future events using an adapted version of the Autobiographical Interview (AI). Twenty-one young adult participants imagined
future events out loud in response to cue words, and provided a number of
subjective ratings for each event. Their event descriptions were transcribed
and coded by trained raters to assess the different kinds of details comprising the event. Results of hierarchical linear modelling analyses indicated
that participant ratings of vivid detail and temporal clarity significantly
predicted the number of AI internal (episodic) details comprising future
events, but not the number of external (non-episodic) details. Moreover,
events rated highly in vivid detail were significantly more likely to contain
AI details classified as containing visual information, and events rated as
having a clear temporal context were more likely to contain temporal information. Participant ratings of location clarity did not significantly predict
the number of spatial details in the AI; however, participant ratings of vivid
detail did predict the amount of spatial information. These results suggest
that participants’ understanding of what constitutes a vivid and temporally-specific event corresponds to the content of their verbal descriptions as
coded using the AI scoring scheme.

E87
DISTINCT PATTERNS OF FAMILIARITY RESPONSES FOR FACES
AND BUILDINGS REVEALED WITH MULTI-VOXEL PATTERN ANALYSIS IN PERIRHINAL AND PARAHIPPOCAMPAL CORTEX Chris
Martin1, D. Adam McLean1, Edward O’Neil1, Stefan Köhler1,2; 1University of
Western Ontario, 2Rotman Research Institute — The functional organization of the medial temporal lobes (MTL) remains a topic of intense debate.
One influential view is that the hippocampus and parahippocampal
cortex (PhC) play specific roles in the encoding and recovery of contextual information about a stimulus encounter, whereas perirhinal cortex
(PrC) supports recognition based on the familiarity of the stimulus itself.
Other evidence, however, points to a stimulus-specific organization of MTL
responses. The mapping of both principles of organization remains poorly
understood. Scene specific responses in the PhC provide a critical source of
support for the proposal that this region represents episodic context. Yet,
PhC is also known to respond differentially to buildings - which can be
recognized without any reference to episodic context in memory decisions.
Here, we employed high-resolution fMRI in combination with multi-voxel
pattern analyses to compare distributed patterns of activity associated with
perceived feelings of familiarity for faces, buildings, and chairs in PrC
and PhC. In right PrC, we found familiarity responses for faces but not
buildings. In right PhC, by contrast, we observed familiarity responses for
buildings but not faces. Familiarity signals for chairs were present in both
structures, but showed little overlap with the pattern of familiarity signals
we observed for the other two stimulus classes. Together, these findings
suggest that PrC does not invariably represent item-familiarity, and that
PhC does not invariably represent episodic context. A full understanding
of MTL organization requires consideration of the nature of the stimulus as
well as the distinction between item and context.

2013 Annual Meeting

E88
DMN DURING SUCCESSFUL AND UNSUCCESSFUL EPISODIC
MEMORY ENCODING: AN FMRI STUDY. Penelope Martinelli1, Marcela
Perrone-Bertolotti1,2, Cedric Pichat1, Jean-François Lebas3, Monica Baciu1;
Laboratoire de Psychologie et NeuroCognition, UMR CNRS, Grenoble, France,
2
Lyon Neuroscience Research Center, INSERM U1028 - CNRS UMR, 3Unité
Mixte de Service “Image”, CNRS/CHU/UJF Grenoble, France — Introduction.
Our memory is built up from a variety of events encountered and stored.
A handful of studies have investigated the neural substrates of intentional
encoding success but encoding failure is scarcely studied. Neuroimaging
methods may allow to predict if an event will subsequently be remembered or forgotten. In respect of failing encoding, several authors proposed to draw a parallel between regions activated by encoding failure and
Default Mode Network (DMN) regions. Actually, both types might include
posterior and anterior midline cortices such as temporo-parietal junction
and superior frontal gyrus. The aim of our experiment was to evaluate (1)
neural correlates of encoding success and failure in incidental condition
and, (2) the link between specific activation and DMN regions. Method.
Twenty-two right-handed healthy volunteers were scanned (3T Brucker
MR Scanner) during an incidental encoding of verbal and non-verbal items.
Afterward, participants were asked to take part to a “yes-no” recognition
paradigm. Encoding success vs. failure was evaluated and measured by the
performances on the subsequent memory paradigm (hit vs. miss). Results
and Discussion. In line with previous studies encoding success was associated with greater activity in bilateral hippocampus, fusiform and left superior prefrontal cortices. Interestingly, encoding failure was sub-served by
a widespread posterior activation of midline cortices including posterior
cingulate and bilateral precuneus. These results stress the implication of
posterior DMN during exogenous-items encoding of attentional demanding task; and suggest that attention is orienting toward more internally and
self-referential processes during unsuccessful encoding.
1

E89
NEURAL SUBSTRATES UNDERLYING EFFECTS OF POST-ENCODING STRESS AND EMOTIONAL AROUSAL ON RECOLLECTION
AND FAMILIARITY Andrew McCullough1, Maureen Ritchey1, Andrew P. Yonelinas1, Charan Ranganath1; 1University of California Davis — Stress and emotional arousal are both known to affect learning and memory. For example,
memory for emotional images tends to be stronger than memory for neutral images, an effect that appears to be related to enhanced amygdala and
medial temporal lobe (MTL) activity during encoding. Previous work from
our lab has demonstrated that stress also appears to modulate memory, in
that post-encoding stress manipulations increase the relative contribution
of familiarity to recognition memory performance. Previous work has also
demonstrated a relationship between neural activity during encoding and
subsequent memory performance. Here we tested the novel hypothesis
that this relationship between neural activity during encoding and subsequent memory is modulated by post-encoding stress. Functional magnetic
resonance imaging data were collected while subjects incidentally encoded
negative and neutral pictures; then half of the subjects were stressed using
an ice-water cold-pressor procedure. Recognition memory confidence was
tested after a 24-hour delay to examine recollection and familiarity. We
found that post-encoding stress increased familiarity-based recognition,
but did not affect subsequent recollection-based recognition. Preliminary
neuroimaging results suggest that activation of MTL regions was related to
subsequent memory, and that amygdala activity was more strongly related
to subsequent memory for emotional images than to memory for neutral
images, whereas parahippocampal activity was more strongly related to
memory for neutral images.

E90
BIGGER IS BETTER! HIPPOCAMPAL VOLUME AND EPISODIC
MEMORY PERFORMANCE IN HEALTHY YOUNG MEN Patric Meyer1,
Sebastian T. Pohlack1, Raffaele Cacciaglia1, Traute Demirakca2, Herta Flor1;
1
Department of Cognitive and Clinical Neuroscience, Central Institute of Mental
Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim / Heidelberg University, 2Department of
Neuroimaging, Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim /
Heidelberg University — Functional imaging studies support the notion of a
specific role of the hippocampus for episodic memory processes. Important

Poster Session E
convergent evidence about the functional relevance of a brain region can be
provided by studies on individual differences in brain structure. Whereas
functional studies usually reveal the most reliable activation of brain areas
across individuals, structural analyses focus on the variability that gives
rise to inter-individual differences in behaviour. These inter-individual differences, normally discarded by averaging data across participants, can be
a valuable source of information and can be exploited to reveal the neural
basis of distinct cognitive operations. For this purpose 50 healthy young
male participants performed the California Verbal Learning Test whose
various components permit a fine-grained separation of critical memory
subprocesses. Hippocampal volume was assessed by manual segmentation
of high-resolution 3D magnetic resonance images. We found a significant
positive correlation between short-delay retention, long-delay retention,
discriminability and percent hippocampal volume. No significant correlation was found with measures rather related to working memory processes.
The volume of the amygdala was used as a control region and was not
related to any of these measures. The contribution of extra-hippocampal
medial temporal lobe structures was tested by means of voxel-based morphometry as an exact manual segmentation of these structures is difficult
due to considerable variability in shape and size across individuals. Our
data advance previous findings reported in studies of brain-damaged individuals in a large and homogeneous young healthy sample and are important for theories on the neural basis of episodic memory.

E91
RE-THINKING THE ROLE OF THE HUMAN HIPPOCAMPUS IN RETROGRADE EPISODIC MEMORY Thomas D. Miller1, Clive R. Rosenthal1,
Anne Aimola Davies1, Michael R. Johnson2, Sarosh R. Irani1, Christopher R.
Butler1, Angela Vincent1, Christopher Kennard1, Penny A. Gowland3; 1University
of Oxford, 2Imperial College, 3University of Nottingham — Retrograde amnesia
in individuals with medial temporal lobe damage is associated with relative sparing of remote episodic memories. This is argued to reflect hippocampal involvement in establishing new memories but not long-term storage. We re-examined this time-limited role in twelve amnestic individuals
to determine whether this pattern would be replicated when damage was
confined to the hippocampus proper. Standardised neuropsychological
tests, the Autobiographical Memory Interview and the Autobiographical
Interview were administered. Detailed volumetric measurement of the
hippocampal subfields, related subregions and whole-brain segmentation
were conducted at 7-Tesla, and these data were related to functional circuits involving the hippocampus using resting-state functional MRI. The
neuropsychological tests indicated that performance was within the average range for visuo-perceptual processing, executive function and working
memory. Memory impairment was found on Doors and People and the
Logical Memory and Word Lists subtests of the WMS-III. Episodic memory
impairment did not exhibit a time-dependent gradient and co-occurred with
intact personal semantic memory. Results from manual volumetry revealed
reduced hippocampal subfield volumes relative to age-matched controls.
Changes in functional connectivity within a resting-state matrix centred on
the default mode network were associated with the memory impairment.
The absence of a time-dependent gradient of retrograde episodic memory
loss in the amnestic individuals is at variance with a time-limited role of the
human hippocampus in memory consolidation. These results are striking
because the amnestic individuals performed within the average range on
neuropsychological tests other than memory. We discuss the implications
of these results for neurobiological models of episodic memory.

E92
OSCILLATORY DESYNCHRONIZATION DURING SOURCE MEMORY
RETRIEVAL Matthew Mollison1, Tim Curran1; 1University of Colorado Boulder
— Time-frequency measures of the electroencephalogram (EEG) reveal
effects of neural synchronization, a mechanism involved in the storage and
retrieval of memories. Desynchronization in the alpha (8-12 Hz) and beta
(12-28 Hz) bands is correlated with memory retrieval, but previous results
have not differentiated recognition processes. Previous analyses using
behavioral measures and event-related potentials demonstrated that familiarity contributes more to remembering spatial compared to color information, implying the material-specific involvement of recognition processes
(Mollison & Curran, 2012). In the present experiment extrinsic source monitoring was examined using memory judgments for pictures of common
objects. Source information was either spatial or a color association. Scalp
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

169

Poster Session E
EEG was recorded during retrieval, and widespread alpha and beta desynchronization were seen for retrieval of item and source information. Importantly, the patterns of desynchronization were modulated by the type and
amount of information retrieved from memory. Both source conditions
showed greater late (600-1000 ms) posterior alpha desynchronization for
source recognition (correct greater than incorrect source and new items).
Only the spatial condition showed this pattern over frontal electrodes.
Late widespread beta desynchronization during the spatial condition also
varied with source recognition accuracy, while the color condition only distinguished old from new items, demonstrating item recognition. Assuming
that source recognition is indicative of recollection and item recognition
is indicative of familiarity, these results suggest that alpha desynchronization is associated with recollection of both color and location; whereas beta
desynchronization is associated with location recollection, but only item
familiarity when source information is defined by color.

E93
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE THAT UNITIZATION IS AN
EFFECTIVE STRATEGY FOR INCREASING EPISODIC FAMILIARITY.
Jamie G. Murray1, David I. Donaldson1; 1University of Stirling — How can the
loss of recollection in aging and disease best be alleviated? One avenue
of research is to examine the benefits of encoding strategies on memory,
including the use of ‘unitization’, whereby multi-component stimuli are
encoded as a single item rather than as a set of associated parts. Recent
studies of associative recognition suggest that unitization can improve episodic memory by increasing the availability of familiarity during retrieval,
helping to alleviate deficits in recollection. Here we provide neuroimaging evidence for the benefits of unitization in health adults, in the context
of learning novel associations between words. We compared memory for
word pairs learnt using compound definitions (i.e. VEGETABLE-BIBLE: reference book on gardening) to memory for word pairs learnt using sentence
frames (i.e. TOKEN-POUND: The___for the ride cost a ___). We employed
a standard associative recognition paradigm and measured neural activity
during retrieval using Event-Related Potentials (ERPs). Behavioural results
indicated that compound definitions (compared to sentence frames) produced a selective memory benefit in terms of both discrimination accuracy
and response time. Analysis of ERP data was focused on retrieval-related
old/new effects thought to reflect recollection and familiarity. Clear left
parietal old/new effects (recollection) were observed regardless of encoding condition. By contrast, mid frontal old/new effects were only observed
when stimuli were encoded using the compound definition strategy. The
results provide electrophysiological evidence for unitization using compound definitions, demonstrating improved associative recognition via a
selective increase in familiarity during retrieval, and validating this method
for use in investigations of memory decline.

E94
UPDATING MEMORY WITH TO-BE-REMEMBERED AND
TO-BE-FORGOTTEN INFORMATION Katharine Newman-Smith1, Rebecca
L. Gomez1, Lynn Nadel1; 1University of Arizona, Tucson — Reactivating a
previously consolidated episodic memory returns it to a susceptible state,
during which it can be modified with newly presented information (Hupbach et al., 2007). Here we manipulate the strength of the potential modifying information by using a “directed forgetting” paradigm. During Session
1, participants learned 20 objects (Set 1) paired with associated sounds (e.g.
participants saw the image of a whistle and heard its sound). 48 hours later
participants returned to the same room as Session 1 (same spatial context)
or a different room. Set 1 memory was reactivated by playing half of the
sounds heard during Session 1. Participants were then presented with 28
new objects (Set 2), half of which were surrounded by a blue border, with
instructions to remember only the bordered objects. 48 hours later participants performed a recognition memory test for Set 1 and Set 2 items. Participants correctly recognized more of the Remember than Forget items from
Set 2, underscoring the effectiveness of the Directed-Forgetting manipulation. This manipulation also influenced memory updating – remember
items from Set 2 were more likely to update memory for Set 1 when reactivation occurred in the same spatial context as original learning. However,
an equally high percentage of forget items were incorporated into Set 1
memory regardless of the Set 2 learning context. This suggests that weak
memory facilitates reconsolidation and, hence, memory updating.

170

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

E95
BRAIN NETWORKS RELATED TO THETA OSCILLATORY ACTIVITY
DURING EPISODIC MEMORY RETRIEVAL Erika Nyhus1, David Badre1;
Brown University — Evidence from fMRI has consistently located a widespread network of frontal, parietal, and temporal lobe regions during episodic retrieval. However, the temporal limitations of the fMRI methodology have made it difficult to assess the transient network dynamics by
which these distributed regions coordinate activity. We recently proposed
that theta oscillations represent interactions between brain systems for the
cognitive control of episodic retrieval (Nyhus & Curran, 2010). However,
the spatial limitations of the EEG methodology make it difficult to assess
the relationship between these oscillatory signals and the distributed networks identified with fMRI. The present study used simultaneous EEG/
fMRI to identify networks related to theta oscillations during episodic
retrieval. Subjects studied adjectives and either imagined a scene (Place
Task) or imagined how pleasant the object the word represented was
(Pleasant Task). During the recognition test subjects judged which task
was performed with each word (“Old Place Task” or “Old Pleasant Task”)
or “New”. EEG was recorded with a 64-channel MRI compatible system.
EEG analysis was performed on channel and ICA component data after MR
gradient and cardioballistic artifacts were removed. Frontal theta power
increased from 1000-1500 ms. Theta component power was correlated with
the fMRI BOLD activity by entering single-trial theta power as a regressor
in the fMRI analysis. Combined EEG/fMRI results showed that theta power
was correlated with the fMRI BOLD response in anterior PFC, VLPFC, and
parietal cortex. These results suggest that a fronto-parietal network interacts at theta frequency during episodic retrieval.
1

E96
RECOLLECTING THE UNFAMILIAR: ERP EVIDENCE FOR RECOLLECTION IN THE ABSENCE OF FAMILIARITY Jason Ozubko1, Fahad
Ahmad2, Colin MacLeod3, Jonathan Fugelsang3; 1Rotman Research Institute,
Baycrest Centre, 2Wilfrid Laurier University, 3University of Waterloo — Although
considerable research has demonstrated that recollection and familiarity
can be behaviourally dissociated, they rely in part on common neural substrates. To date, however, there has been very little research examining the
overlap of the subjective experiences of recollection and familiarity. In fact,
one of the most basic questions regarding recollection and familiarity is still
unanswered: Are recollections also familiar? Ozubko and Seli (submitted)
have recently demonstrated that recollections not only can be familiar, but
in common circumstances can even be more familiar than non-recollected
but highly familiar items. In the present project, we investigated the related
issue of whether recollections must always be familiar. To accomplish this,
we examined event-related potentials (ERP) in the recognition failure of
recallable words paradigm, which involves participants producing studied and new words in response to semantic associate cues, and then recognizing those produced words as either “old” or “new.” Compared to
new (unstudied) words, words that could be both recalled and recognized
showed both early mid-frontal and late parietal ERP effects, indicators of
familiarity and recollection, respectively. Words that could be recalled but
not recognized, however, showed only a late parietal ERP component, consistent with recollection in the absence of familiarity. Our results highlight
an important gap in traditional methodologies, which do not measure recollection or familiarity of unrecognized items. Yet when explicit recognition fails, it may be especially important to gauge both recollection and
familiarity.

E97
INVESTIGATING THE IMPACT OF IMPLICIT PRIMING DURING AN
EXPLICIT RECOGNITION TEST USING EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Joanne L Park1, David I Donaldson1; 1University of Stirling — Does priming from the encoding phase carry over in recognition tests? In recent years
talk of implicit contamination has been widespread, whereas attempts to
identify how and when priming impacts recognition testing have been limited. To address this question we employed a deep encoding task combined
with masked priming during the test phase to allow assessment of priming
carried over from encoding. Half of the studied and unstudied test trials
began with a brief (48ms) masked repetition of the to-be-recognized word
prior to the onset of test items (shown for 300ms); the remaining unprimed

2013 Annual Meeting
trials were preceded by the word ‘blank’. The data demonstrated facilitation of response times for all primed vs. unprimed words, which was
greater for studied (~100ms) than for unstudied words (~70ms). The ERP
data revealed two priming-related modulations, an early (0-150ms) central negativity and a later (250-500ms) posterior positivity for primed vs.
unprimed words. Mapping onto the RT data, this posterior difference was
also larger for studied than for unstudied words. Memory ERPs revealed
old/new differences with a Left-Parietal distribution in both conditions,
but the conditions differed in the onset time of these effects. Unprimed
ERPs were consistent with previous identifications of recollection (500800ms), but in primed ERPs the old/new effect was only evident between
300-500ms. These data demonstrate that under deep encoding conditions;
priming can carry over in recognition tests and although masked primes
also contributed to changes in the old/new effect, it is clear that repetition
priming can also impact ERP correlates of recognition.

E98
THE EYES KNOW TIME: EXAMINING TEMPORAL MEMORY WITH
A NOVEL EYE-MOVEMENT PARADIGM Thanujeni Pathman1, Simona
Ghetti1; 1University of California, Davis — Relatively little is known about
the processes underlying temporal memory, a critical feature of episodic
memory. Eye-movements have been found to track associations between
episodes and other types of context and rely on the hippocampus. We asked
whether eye-movements during retrieval of temporal information could
reflect an implicit signal of veridical memory for temporal information. In
Experiment 1 (N=30), after the encoding of sequences of 4 objects, participants were shown one studied item (cue) and asked to select which of three
objects came immediately after it in the encoded quadruplet (target). In the
temporal order condition, the distracters were from the same sequence as
the cue/target; thus recollection of the order with which quadruplet items
were presented was necessary. In the temporal context condition, distracters were from other sequences; recollection of which item was presented
around the same time as the cue was sufficient. Overt judgments were less
accurate for the temporal context condition. Eye-movements reflected an
implicit signal of veridical memory for temporal order across conditions.
Experiment 2 (N=30) was identical to Experiment 1 except that in the
temporal context condition each item in the retrieval array had a unique
ordinal position in their respective encoding sequence. This change eliminated the accuracy difference across conditions, suggesting that event
absolute ordinal position is a fundamental organizing principle of temporal
memory. Eye-movement effects remained. Across experiments, eye-movement effects occurred seconds before participants responded, and were
correlated to behavioral accuracy, suggesting that early eye-movements
influence later overt judgments of temporal order.

E99
VISUAL EXPLORATION MODULATES EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS IN RESPONSE TO NOVEL TOOLS Naima Ruether1, Marco Tettamanti2, Stefano Cappa3, Christian Bellebaum1; 1Ruhr University Bochum,
Bochum, Germany, 2San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy, 3Vita-Salute
San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy — Categorization of objects requires
automatic access to stored semantic concepts. Modality-specific accounts
propose a distributed cortical network storing concepts in the brain,
determined by the modalities of object experience involved in knowledge
acquisition for that concept. Functional neuroimaging studies support this
assumption by showing that the sight of tools leads to activation of motor
associated brain regions. The aim of the present study was to investigate
the influence of modality-specific object experience on processing pictures
of novel manipulable objects by means of event-related potentials. In three
training sessions, participants visually explored one set of objects (visually
trained objects - VTO) and manipulated another set of objects (manipulation trained objects - MTO) whereas a third, untrained object set served as a
control condition (not trained objects – NTO). Pre and post training, participants completed a visual matching task with pictures of the objects while
brain activity was recorded by means of electroencephalography. Training-related changes were found in the time window between 420 and 520
ms after stimulus presentation in an N400-like component which was significantly reduced after training for VTO, but not for MTO and NTO, over
frontal and central electrode sides. The post-training effect was driven by a
training-induced amplitude reduction for VTO. The pattern of findings is
interpreted as a down-regulation of affordance-driven object associations

Poster Session E
for VTO due to the visual modality being dominant during object training in combination with a lack of manipulation experience. Accordingly,
modality of object experience modulates the processing of manipulable
objects.

E100
SEVERE RETROGRADE AMNESIA IN AMNESTIC MILD COGNITIVE
IMPAIRMENT IS RELATED TO DAMAGE IN LATERAL TEMPORAL
CORTEX Christine N Smith1,2, Larry R Squire2,1; 1University of California,
San Diego, 2Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System — Findings from
patients with limited, bilateral damage to hippocampus (H patients) or
more extensive damage to the medial temporal lobe (MTL patients) indicate that the severity of retrograde amnesia (RA) is related to the severity
of anterograde amnesia (AA). Thus, H patients have moderately severe AA
and moderately severe RA covering a few years before the onset of amnesia, whereas MTL patients have very severe AA and extensive RA covering
decades before the onset of amnesia. The amnestic subtype of Mild Cognitive Impairment (aMCI) is considered to be a boundary or transitional
condition between normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease. We tested 15
patients with aMCI and 21 controls with four anterograde memory tests
and one retrograde memory test (314 questions covering news events from
1931-2005). Paradoxically, aMCI patients exhibited mild AA (even less than
H patients) together with very severe RA covering nearly four decades
before their diagnosis (like MTL patients). Their mild AA corresponded
to modest (but significant) damage to hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus (19% and 16% volume reductions, respectively). Next, the aMCI
patients were classified according to whether or not their RA was disproportionately more severe than their AA. aMCI patients whose RA was disproportionately more severe than their AA had additional damage in lateral temporal cortex, especially in inferior temporal gyrus. No other regions
outside of lateral temporal cortex differentiated these two subgroups.
Accordingly, the extensive RA in aMCI patients is likely due to damage
outside the medial temporal lobe, specifically in lateral temporal cortex.

E101
WHEN CONCEPTS LOSE THEIR COLOR: A CASE OF SELECTIVE
LOSS OF KNOWLEDGE OF OBJECT-COLOR Alena Stasenko1, Frank
E. Garcea1, Mary Dombovy2, Bradford Z. Mahon1; 1University of Rochester,
2
Unity Hospital — Color plays an important role in both low- and highlevel visual processing. Previous neuropsychological studies have shown
that color perception and object-color knowledge can doubly dissociate
(achromatopsia versus color agnosia), and that both can dissociate from
processing of object form (visual form agnosia). We present a case study
of an individual (AC) who suffered a stroke affecting the left lingual gyrus
(among other structures). AC was tested with a wide range of neuropsychological tests to assess visual and cognitive functioning, and displayed
a selective impairment for knowledge of the typical colors of objects, with
preserved color perception and color naming. He was normal for a range
of tasks assessing mid- and high-level visual processing, including motion
and form perception, size judgments and orientation discrimination. While
AC’s semantic memory was largely preserved, he had selective difficulty
for naming living items (greater for animals than fruit/vegetables). These
data show that knowledge of object color is stored separately from other
types of visual semantic knowledge, and suggest a model of object semantic memory in which modality and semantic domain jointly constrain the
organization of conceptual information.

E102
WHITE MATTER CHANGES AND CONFRONTATION NAMING IN
RETIRED AGING NFL ATHLETES Jeremy Strain1, Nyaz Didebhani1,
Heather Conover1, Sethesh Mansinghani1, Michael Kraut2, Munro Cullum3, John
Hart Jr.1,3, Kyle Womack3; 1University of Texas at Dallas, 2The Johns Hopkins
School of Medicine, 3University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center — We
studied confrontation naming and cerebral white matter in a group of
retired professional football players along with a group of cognitively
normal controls. Given the known exposure of football players to concussive and subconcussive injuries, and the vulnerability of white matter to
head trauma, we evaluated correlations between white matter fractional
anisotropy (FA) and performance on the Boston naming test. We performed
an unbiased voxel-wise analysis using the tract-based spatial statistics
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

171

Poster Session E
(TBSS) method as implemented in the FSL software package to determine
if an association between FA and BNT T-scores existed in this population.
The voxel-wise analysis was run on the entire group (athletes and controls)
and on each group separately. We also analyzed the DTI data by grouping voxels together as white matter pathways and testing the strength of
each tract’s association with BNT T-scores. In the athlete group, the significantly correlated voxels were located throughout the left hemisphere and
in posterior regions on the right. The voxel-wise analysis on the normal
controls alone failed to produce any significant voxels. Within athletes
alone, grouping voxels together as white matter pathways identified four
tracts with significant correlations; the left inferior longitudinal fasciculus
(ILF), forceps minor, left cingulum and forceps major. White matter integrity, as measured by DTI, is important for distributed cognitive processes
and correlates with confrontation naming performance in athletes exposed
to concussive and subconcussive head injuries, but not in normal controls
without such exposure.

E103
DAMAGE TO THE VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX
REDUCES A “FALSE MEMORY” EFFECT David Warren1, Melissa Duff1,
Daniel Tranel1; 1University of Iowa — Recent neuroimaging evidence has suggested that ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) contributes to memory
for contextual, organizing information, often decribed as “schematic
memory” (cf. Van Kesteren et al., 2012). We investigated this putative relationship with a neuropsychological approach, testing the neuroimaging-derived hypothesis that vmPFC damage would impair schematic memory;
specifically, by reducing “false memory” effects. Patients with focal lesions
to the vmPFC (N=8) were recruited from the Iowa Patient Registry, and
compared to demographically-matched healthy participants (N=8) using
a well-established word-list learning paradigm known to provoke “false
memories” of semantically associated, non-presented items (Deese-Roediger-McDermott [DRM] paradigm; Roediger & McDermott, 1995). Word
lists (18 lists, 15 words each) were presented to each participant aurally,
with free recall immediately following each list, followed by a final omnibus visual recognition test. We found that vmPFC patients generated fewer
non-presented items than comparison participants (t(14)=2.600, p = 0.021)
despite similar recall performance overall (t(14)=0.097, p > 0.9) and across
serial list positions (F(14,196)=1.29, p > 0.25). Intriguingly, during the recognition test both groups endorsed non-presented semantic associates above
chance (each t(7) > 10, p < 0.001), but despite robust differences in recall
of non-presented items, recognition endorsement did not differ between
groups for either presented (t(14)=1.519, p > 0.15) or non-presented items
(t(14)=0.265, p > 0.7). In sum, lesions of the vmPFC reduced false recall
of non-presented semantic associates, but did not alter recognition of such
associates. The results suggest that the vmPFC contributes to schematic
memory, specifically in generative memory tasks requiring novel reconstruction.

E104
SEMANTIC CATEGORIZATION OF EVENTS DISRUPTS SUBORDINATE EPISODIC DETAILS Sehjung Yi1, Sanghoon Han1; 1Yonsei University,

Seoul, Korea — Grouping episodes into a semantically related category is
necessary for constructing better mnemonic structure. However, its effect
on memories of subordinate details was not clearly understood. In our
fMRI study, we tested whether attending superordinates during semantic association disrupts or enhances subordinate episodic details. Cycles of
five cue words which of each holding two detail words were presented,
and participants were asked whether they could imagine a category that
includes previously seen cue words in each cycle while rating their confidence. Participants were given cued recall tests on presented detail
words after the session. Behavioral data indicates that categorization task
RTs were decreased and confidence levels were increased significantly
in the third trial of each cycle, rendering the third trial as “aha moment”,
where a semantic category was successfully established. Critically, accuracy of recalling detail words presented immediately prior to third trials
was significantly lower than followed trials, indicating that subordinate
details were disrupted during categorization. GLM analysis of third trials
revealed significant activations of temporal gyrus(TG) and inferior frontal gyrus(IFG), areas of semantic memory network. In support of memory
disruption on detail words, second trials showed significantly lower activation compared to other trials on hippocampus. Representative Similarity

172

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
Analysis(RSA) also revealed activation patterns of third trials being significantly more consistent than second trials in TG, IFG, and hippocampus, as similarity peaked in third trials. Our research demonstrated that
semantic grouping can disrupt memories of subordinate details, suggesting
that semantic retrieval during categorization affects the quality of related
episodic memory evidence.

E105
OERP SCALP TOPOGRAPHY AS A FUNCTION OF AGE AND APOLIPOPROTEIN E Ε4 DURING ENCODING OF OLFACTORY INFORMATION. Lisa Graves1, Melissa Cervantez1, Amanda Green2, Charlie Morgan1,
Claire Murphy1,2; 1San Diego State University, 2University of California at San
Diego — Alzheimer’s is a neurodegenerative disease associated with severe
memory loss and cognitive decline. The disease affects 5.4 million Americans and costs $200 billion per year. Age and the Apolipoprotein E ε4 allele
are major risk factors for AD. AD pathology first affects brain areas involved
in memory and olfaction. Event-related potential recording offers high temporal resolution, making it a valuable noninvasive method for investigating olfactory function. Individuals at risk for AD display increased OERP
latency and decreased amplitude in odor recognition memory tasks. These
differences are evident before onset of dementia, indicating the potential
contribution of OERPs in AD diagnosis. Furthermore, Alzheimer’s disease,
in relation to other dementias, is associated with specific deficits in encoding new information. Prior OERP studies focus on differences in OERP
activity during retrieval. In the present study, sixty adults were equally
divided into three age groups (young, middle, old) matched on ε4 status.
OERPs were recorded as participants encoded odors that were presented
with a computer-controlled olfactometer. In addition to univariate analyses
of the effects of age and ε4 status on OERP latency and amplitude during
encoding, differences in scalp topography were statistically analyzed using
CARTOOL. Results indicated topographical differences as a function of age
and ε4 status during encoding of odors. The findings reveal the effects of
age and the ε4 allele on the neural correlates of odor recognition memory
and improve our understanding of olfaction and its relation to neurodegenerative disease. This study is supported by NIH grant DC002064-15 and
AG04085-25 to CM.

E106
IMPROVING FEAR EXTINCTION BY HIGH-FREQUENT RTMS TO
THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX Anne Guhn1, Thomas Dresler2, Marta Andreatta1, Thomas Polak1, Jürgen Deckert1, Martin J. Herrmann1; 1University of
Wuerzburg, Germany, 2University of Tuebingen, Germany — In rodents, it has
been repeatedly demonstrated that electrical stimulation of the infralimbic
region of the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) reduces the expression of a
conditioned fear response (CR). However, in humans this effect still remains
to be tested. Therefore we investigated the effects of high frequent repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) to the mPFC on extinction
acquisition and extinction recall in a two day discriminative pavlovian fear
conditioning protocol. Healthy volunteers were conditioned using neutral
faces (CS+, CS-) and a loud aversive scream that followed CS+ trials during
the fear acquisition phase. Subjects were randomly assigned to receive 20
Hz offline rTMS to the mPFC in a placebo controlled manner. Subsequently,
they underwent two extinction trainings: the first one directly followed the
rTMS session, and the second one was applied 24 hours later to test for
extinction recall. Repetitive TMS effects on conditioned fear responses were
assessed by comparing fear-potentiated startle responses (FPS), skin conductance and CS arousal ratings in active and placebo stimulated volunteers. Consistent with our hypothesis of enhanced consolidation of extinction memory after active rTMS, subjects in the active group showed smaller
conditioned responses across all dependent variables. They did not differentiate between CS+ and CS- and exhibited proportionately decreasing
FPS responses to CS+ trials across both extinction sessions while placebo
showed the characteristic fear return during extinction recall. These results
indicate enhanced consolidation of extinction memory that might open up
new treatment perspectives by adding rTMS to exposure based psychotherapy in anxiety patients.

2013 Annual Meeting

E107
FRONTAL MIDLINE THETA AND N200 AMPLITUDE REFLECT
COMPLEMENTARY INFORMATION ABOUT EXPECTANCY AND
OUTCOME EVALUATION Azadeh HajiHosseini1, Clay B. Holroyd1; 1Univer-

sity of Victoria — Frontal midline theta and feedback error-related negativity (fERN) have both been proposed to index a dopamine-like reinforcement learning signal in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). An essential
property of a reinforcement learning signal is that other things being equal,
it must be consistently larger (or smaller) for rewards relative to errors.
We investigated whether both measures satisfy this property by comparing
them with respect to their sensitivities to outcome valence and outcome
probability in a previously collected EEG dataset. Data were recorded from
twelve participants while they were engaged in a time-estimation and
an oddball task. FERN amplitude (measured as N200 base-to-peak) was
found to be highly correlated with evoked theta power, the portion of theta
power related to theta oscillations that are phase-consistent across trials.
Despite this correlation, Bayesian analysis on N200 amplitude and theta
power revealed a dissociation so that N200 amplitude was mainly sensitive
to outcome valence whereas theta power was mainly sensitive to outcome
probability. Further, Bayesian analysis revealed that when the effect of
theta power on N200 amplitude was statistically controlled, the sensitivity
of N200 to probability decreased while its sensitivity to valence remained
strong. Conversely, when the effect of N200 amplitude on theta power was
statistically controlled, sensitivity of theta power to probability remained
strong. These results suggest that although both measures provide valuable
information about cognitive function of frontal midline cortex, fERN amplitude is specifically sensitive to dopamine reinforcement learning signals
whereas theta power reflects the ACC response to unexpected events.

E108
MEASURING HIGH-LEVEL VISUAL DISCRIMINATION WITH A
FAST PERIODIC ODDBALL PARADIGM Joan Liu-Shuang1, Anthony M.
Norcia2, Bruno Rossion1; 1University of Louvain, Belgium, 2Stanford University,
USA — The mechanisms underlying the discrimination of visual objects
remain poorly understood, especially in the case of human faces, which
are efficiently individualised despite their high visual similarity. Here we
present a novel paradigm that uses fast periodic oddball stimulation to
objectively and rapidly quantify face discrimination. This measure is distinct from the general response to faces and does not require contrasting
different conditions. We recorded 128-channel EEG in 20 observers presented with 60-second sequences of face stimuli shown at a constant frequency of 5.88Hz. One face (A) was repeated throughout each sequence.
Different faces (B, C,…) were introduced at fixed intervals (every 4 stimuli: 5.88Hz/5=1.18Hz), resulting in the following sequence structure:
AAAABAAAAC... The response at 1.18Hz is an index of face discrimination that is independent of the response at 5.88Hz. To ensure that our probe
recruited high-level face processing, we manipulated size (face size randomly varied every cycle), orientation (upright vs. inverted, Experiment 1)
and contrast (normal contrast vs. contrast-reversed, Experiment 2). In both
experiments, normal faces showed highly significant responses at 1.18Hz
and its harmonics (2F=2.35Hz, 3F=3.53Hz…), particularly on right occipito-temporal channels. Inversion and contrast reversal reduced the 1.18Hz
responses, while the 5.88Hz response did not differ between conditions.
Thus, the signal at the 1.18Hz oddball frequency and its harmonics represents an objective measure of face individualisation. Similar to recent
studies (Rossion & Boremanse, 2011; Ales et al., 2012, JOV) the current
study underlines the utility of the fast periodic paradigms for exploring
fine-grained visual discrimination of complex patterns.

E109
USE OF FMRI FOR CROSS-VALIDATION OF EEG NEURAL SOURCE
MODELING Jessica R. Wise1, Gwen A. Frishkoff1, Kathleen P. Revill2, Maruf
Hoque1; 1Georgia State University, 2Georgia Institute of Technology — We
conducted a study of sentence comprehension, using ERP (brainwave)
and fMRI (brain imaging) methods to examine the brain’s response to
anomalous vs. unexpected words, two types of semantic violation that are
often confounded. Consider the following sentence: “The barber trimmed
the man’s….” People are faster to make semantic judgments judgment if
“beard” appears as the final word, versus “cuticles” (an unexpected ending)

Poster Session E
or “clock” (an anomalous ending). To dissociate neural responses to these
two kinds of linguistic stimuli, we recorded ERP and fMRI data as participants viewed sentences that ended with a word from one of three categories: Expected (meaningful completions that were highly expected based on
the context), Unexpected (meaningful completions that were unexpected),
or Anomalous (words that did not fit the context). Analysis of fMRI data
revealed greater activity in the left angular gyrus, left middle temporal
gyrus, and left inferior prefrontal cortex for Unexpected versus Anomalous endings. ERP results showed a classical “N400 semantic effect,” as well
as a late, right frontal pattern that was unique to the anomalous endings
and peaked at around 700ms. Neural source modeling suggested that this
later effect was explained by sources in right inferior temporal and right
inferior parietal cortex. We discuss implications for cross-modal studies of
language, and the role of right temporal cortex in meaning integration (the
N700).

E110
TRANSFER OF COGNITIVE TRAINING ACROSS MAGNITUDE
DIMENSIONS ACHIEVED WITH CONCURRENT BRAIN STIMULATION OF THE PARIETAL LOBE Marinella Cappelletti1, Erica Gessaroli2,
Rosalyn Hithersay1, Micaela Mitolo3, Daniele Didino4, Ryota Kanai1, Roi Cohen
Kadosh5, Vincent Walsh1; 1UCL Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, London,
UK, 2Department of Psychology, University of Bologna, Italy, 3Department of
Psychology, University of Padova, Italy, 4Department of Cognitive Sciences and
Education, University of Trento, Italy, 5Department of Experimental Psychology,
University of Oxford, UK — Cognitive training has attracted interest by its
potential to enhance cognitive abilities. However, improvements are often
limited to the training task and do not culminate in generalized improvements across related tasks. Here we show that transfer of training across
tasks can be achieved by concurrent non-invasive brain stimulation. Specifically, we show that successful training in numerical estimation transfers
to other types of magnitude estimation such as spatial and temporal extent
when brain stimulation was delivered to parietal lobes. The transfer was
specific to the magnitude tasks that are thought to share common neural
and cognitive substrates and no transfer was observed for other tasks such
as face perception and arithmetic. These results indicate that with a suitably
chosen task and stimulation, cognitive training can cause large long-lasting
enhancement of cognitive functions that are shared across associated tasks.

E111
WALNUT- A PYTHON BIOPSYCHOPHYSICS TOOLBOX

Sven Hoffmann1, Bernhard Siebelmann1, Edmund Wascher1, Gerhard Rinkenauer1; 1Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors (IfADo) —
The methodological demands with respect to biosignal-processing increase
permanently. For example, multivariate statistics are increasingly applied
in the decomposition of electroencephalographic (EEG) data. Even more
importantly, the amount of acquired variables increases in the applied
context, where researchers become interested in the joint analysis of psychological and physiological data. For this purpose efficient and economic
analysis tools are essential. Most existing software packages are dealing
with either psychophysics, statistics or EEG analysis, and thus are solely
suitable to one kind of analysis. Furthermore, they are often commercial
and thus contradict the idea of research being independent of commercial
interests. In recent years the Python programming language increasingly
caught attention because of its highly object oriented structure, easy to
learn syntax, and numerical capabilities. Furthermore, it is Open Source,
and thus can be used by everyone. The license even allows the usage in
commercial contexts, as long as Python itself is not commercially distributed. Our aim is to provide a free Open Source Software (WALNUT) based
on Python, which is able to read and analyze not only time series data such
as EEG data, but also is able to analyze behavioral data such as response
times or analogue movement data on the basis of chronometric or kinematic models. Since the software is Open Source the source code is open to
everyone. Every programmer who is willing and interested might contribute to its improvement and active development. Additionally, it might be
adapted by the user to its own analysis strategy easily.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

173

Poster Session E

E112
IS EFFICACY OF ACUPUNCTURE TREATMENT A WISHFUL THINKING? FUNCTIONAL TEST OF ACUPUNCTURE FOR LOWER BACK
PAIN, A CLINICAL STUDY Xiao Hong Liu1, Ping Xiao2, Scott N. Dr. MacKinnon3; 1Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John’s Newfoundland, Canada,
2
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 3Memorial University of Newfoundland
— Abstract: The purpose of this study is to assess the effectiveness of acupuncture treatment protocol on lower back pain and lower back range of
motion. Three acupuncture treatments were provided for 21 subjects with
lower back pain. A lumber motion monitor was used to record trunk kinematics in 3-dimensions: the sagittal, lateral and twist planes for free movement and lifting tasks. There were 21 subjects (8 males and 13 females)
who completed the study. The average age of the subjects was 44-yearsold. Family physicians referred 9.52% of the subjects, while 90.48 % were
referred by others. Measurements before the first acupuncture treatment
were compared to measurements taken following the third acupuncture
treatment. It was found that 80.95 % of the subjects exhibited an increased
sagittal range of motion in either free sagittal movements or lifting task or
in both movements; in sagittal movement the p-value = 0.02; during lifting
tasks, the p-value=0.25 was in the sagittal movement along with associated lateral and twist. This study demonstrates the measureable effects of
acupuncture treatment for lower back pain, in which the subject had measurable changes in trunk kinematics. This study suggests that acupuncture
treatments can change a subject’s angular range of motion in the sagittal
plane. Efficacy of acupuncture treatment might not just a wishful thinking.
Because the kinematics changes were greater in the third treatment, this
may suggest that the acupuncture treatments have positive accumulative
effects. With further treatments, additional improvements may be anticipated.

E113
CATHODAL TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION:
FACILITATORY, INHIBITORY, OR BOTH? Nazbanou Nozari1, Kristina
Woodard1, Sharon Thompson-Schill1; 1University of Pennsylvania — While
anodal Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) often facilitates
behavior, controversial cathodal effects have been reported. Depending on
the task, montage, and temporal variables, facilitation, inhibition and null
effects of cathodal stimulation have been observed. We explored the effects
of cathodal stimulation of the left prefrontal cortex on behavior by holding
the task constant, and varying the task-stimulation overlap and the position
of the reference electrode. In a between-subject design, Flanker task with
letters was administered either during cathodal stimulation, post-stimulation or under sham. Subjects who completed Flanker post-stimulation
participated in a task with low demands for cognitive control during stimulation. To control for the effects of the site of the reference electrode, two
montages were tried in the post-stimulation group: cathode was always
placed over the left prefrontal area, but one montage placed the reference
electrode over the right mastoid, and the other, over the right supraorbital
area. The results showed a general inhibitory effect of cathodal stimulation
when applied during the task (slower and less accurate responses). Interestingly, post-tDCS effects were reversed, showing pure facilitation compared to sham (faster and more accurate responses), regardless of the position of the reference electrode. These results suggest that, even within the
same task, cathodal stimulation may induce different effects when task/
stimulation temporal overlap is manipulated. This difference may be due
to release from inhibition in the post-tDCS phase. Alternatively, the effect
of cathodal stimulation may be modulated by the mental operations while
under stimulation.

E114
HORMONAL CONTRACEPTIVES AND MARKERS OF PHYSIOLOGICAL STRESS: DIFFERENCES IN DIURNAL CYCLE ACTIVITY OF
SALIVARY ALPHA AMYLASE AND CORTISOL Roxanna Salim1, Karen
Redwine2, Ponchita Chaiyakam2, Maria Pizana2; 1Claremont Graduate University, 2Whittier College — Activation of two key physiological systems, the
Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal axis and the Autonomic Nervous System,
are indicative of stress reactivity. Classically, and in recent literature, these
systems are measured using cortisol and salivary alpha amylase, respectively. Evidence also indicates that both HPA axis and ANS activity follow

174

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
distinct diurnal patterns. Moreover, evidence indicates that individual differences including sex, menstrual cycle activity, and use of hormonal contraceptives elicit differences in diurnal cortisol activity. While the influence
of hormonal contraceptive use on diurnal cortisol is well-established, the
influence of hormonal contraceptive use on sAA has not yet been investigated. The current study investigated the diurnal cycle activity of cortisol
and salivary alpha amylase in 37 college-aged females who were on and off
hormonal contraceptives. Consistent with previous literature, women on
hormonal contraceptives showed blunted free cortisol responses. Women
on hormonal contraceptives also showed significantly greater salivary
alpha amylase responses, although only at evening and morning collection
times. These results suggest a preliminary model for the influence of hormonal contraceptive use on diurnal ANS activity.

E115
BABIES IN TRAFFIC: INFANT VOCALIZATIONS MODULATE
RESPONSES TO LOOMING SOUNDS John G. Neuhoff1, Grace Hamilton1, Amanda Gittleson1, Adolfo Mejia1; 1The College of Wooster — Infant
vocalizations and “looming sounds” (sounds that move toward a listener)
are two classes of environmental stimuli that are critically important to survival and reproductive fitness. Infant vocalizations capture parental attention and encourage proximity and care thereby increasing the likelihood of
infant survival. Looming sounds elicit anticipatory judgments of auditory
arrival time that can provide a margin of safety and a selective advantage
in dealing with the looming object (Neuhoff, 1998, Nature; Neuhoff, Planisek, & Seifritz, 2009, JEP:HPP). Both classes of sounds have been shown
to activate middle temporal gyri and amygdala. In this experiment we presented listeners with 3-D virtual looming tones and asked them to make
time-to-arrival judgments by pressing a key when they perceived that
the sound source had reached them. Listeners exhibited the characteristic
anticipatory bias which would provide a margin of safety in perceiving
the source’s approach. However, an infant’s laugh presented binaurally
midway through the looming source’s approach significantly reduced the
anticipatory bias and resulted in less cautious judgments of arrival time.
Conversely, when an intensity-matched infant’s cry was presented midway
through the source’s approach, the anticipatory bias was significantly
increased, resulting in more cautious judgments of arrival time. Consistent
with previous work, we found that females exhibited a greater anticipatory
bias than males. However there was no interaction of sex and the type of
infant vocalization. Our results support that the valence of infant vocalizations can influence perception of auditory motion and can modulate motor
responses to other behaviorally relevant environmental sounds.

E116
THE NEURAL BASIS OF SPEECH PERCEPTION IS TASK-DEPENDENT AND DOES NOT RELY ON THE MOTOR SYSTEM: A LESION
STUDY Corianne Rogalsky1, Kristin Raphel2, Tasha Poppa1, Steve Anderson3,
Hanna Damasio2, Tracy Love4, Gregory Hickok1; 1University of California, Irvine,
2
University of Southern California, 3University of Iowa, 4San Diego State University & University of California, San Diego — The neural basis of speech perception is hotly debated, particularly regarding the role of the motor system,
with several conflicting findings attested. Some of the confusion may result
from task effects. For example, much of the evidence for motor involvement
comes from syllable discrimination type tasks, which have been found to
doubly dissociate from auditory comprehension tasks. The present study
used two tasks to assess speech perception in patients with left hemisphere
focal chronic lesions (n= 55) and age-matched controls. Subjects completed
a psycholinguistic battery to assess their phonological, lexical, and sentence-level speech comprehension and production abilities. This battery
included a syllable discrimination task in which pairs of non-words were
presented. The words were either identical, or had different onset syllables. An auditory word-to-picture matching task was also administered
in which an auditory single word was presented in white noise. The task
was to select which picture in a 4-item array corresponds to the word presented. The picture array contained the target, as well as a phonological,
semantic, and unrelated foil picture. For the syllable discrimination task,
voxel-based lesion symptom mapping (VLSM) identified a temporal-parietal voxel cluster, including area Spt and extending into auditory and
somatosensory cortex. Conversely, the word-to-picture matching task was
not associated with damage to this same network, but rather implicated

2013 Annual Meeting
mid-temporal regions (albeit at a more liberal threshold). These results suggest that speech discrimination tasks engage dorsal stream temporal-parietal regions, whereas auditory comprehension tasks engage temporal
regions. Supported by NIH-DC03681.

E117
AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF DURATION ESTIMATIONS OF FLAT
AND PERCUSSIVE TONES Rajwant Sandhu1, Michael Schutz2, Benjamin
Dyson1; 1Ryerson University, 2McMaster University — Pace-maker accumulator models of temporal processing suggest that duration estimates are
made via the accumulation of pulses over an interval, with greater pulse
accumulation implying longer durations. The contingent negative variation
(CNV), an event related potential component, has been proposed as the
neural marker of pulse accumulation due to greater amplitudes of this component being associated with subjectively longer compared to subjectively
shorter durations. To date studies that have examined CNV modulation
on auditory temporal estimation tasks have used either flat tones (those
that end abruptly) or silent intervals. In the current study we examined
the influence of tones which do not imitate those that occur in the natural
environment (e.g., flat tones) against those that do (e.g., percussive tones)
on duration estimates and resultant CNV effects. As expected we find different behavioural and neural patterns associated with these two types of
tones. Behaviourally, percussive tones tended to be underestimated, while
flat tones tended to be overestimated. Neurally and in line with previous
work, we found greater CNV amplitude for subjectively longer tones. Furthermore, we found earlier and more fronto-central CNV effects for percussive tones, and later and more posterior CNV effects for flat tones. The data
suggest that estimation strategies differ as a function of the properties of the
to-be-judged tone. As such, the model of stimulus processing derived from
flat envelope stimuli may not accurately describe the processing of sounds
that are typically heard in the natural world.

E118
THE DISTRIBUTION OF CORTICAL SURFACE AREA DEDICATED
TO AUDITORY TEMPORAL RECEPTIVE FIELDS IS SYMMETRIC
BETWEEN HEMISPHERES IN HUMAN AUDITORY CORE AND
BELT Jonathan Venezia1, Brian Barton1, Kourosh Saberi1, Alyssa Brewer1,
Greg Hickok1; 1University of California, Irvine — The Asymmetric Sampling
in Time (AST) theory proposes that auditory-cortical representations are
elaborated on different timescales in left and right hemispheres. Specifically, AST posits that, (1) there are distinct neuronal ensembles that sample
from time windows spanning roughly 25-50ms (40-20Hz) and 150-300ms
(6.67-3.33Hz), and (2) these neuronal ensembles are distributed differentially across hemispheres. Thus, one measure that should dissociate by
hemisphere is auditory-cortical magnification of Temporal Receptive Fields
(TRFs). In the present fMRI study, we investigate magnification differences
by mapping auditory cortex along two dimensions, frequency (tonotopy)
and time (periodotopy). A modified version of the standard procedure in
visual field mapping, the Traveling Wave method, was applied. Amplitude-modulated Gaussian noise of two types, narrowband and broadband,
was varied across a range of center frequencies (400-6400Hz) and modulation rates (2-256Hz), respectively. Corresponding tonotopic and periodotopic gradients were measured. The orthogonal representation of these
gradients in cortex allowed precise delineation of 11 auditory field maps
(AFMs) in auditory core and belt. Within each AFM we measured cortical
surface area dedicated to different bands within the range of TRFs represented in our broadband stimuli. Equally spaced bins were constructed
around broadband stimulus values (i.e., TRF) and cortical surface area
(mm2) within each bin was tabulated. Two results were of note: (1) significant cortical magnification was observed for certain TRFs, typically following a unimodal distribution centered near 8Hz, and (2) significant differences in magnification between hemispheres were not observed. Together,
these results do not support AST at the level of auditory core and belt.

E119
NEWBORN INFANTS CAN NEURALLY DISCRIMINATE WESTERN
MUSIC CHORDS Paula Virtala1,2, Minna Huotilainen1,2,3, Eino Partanen1,2,
Mari Tervaniemi1,2,4; 1Cognitive Brain Research Unit, Cognitive Science, Institute of Behavioural Sciences, University of Helsinki, Finland, 2Finnish Centre
of Excellence in Interdisciplinary Music Research, University of Jyväskylä, Fin-

Poster Session E

land, 3Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of
Psychology, University of Jyväskylä, Finland — Abstract skills in the auditory
processing of newborn infants have been recently demonstrated in several
studies using event-related potentials (ERPs). Here, the neural processing
of chords was investigated in newborn infants. We studied whether the
categorizations between the major and minor modalities and consonance
versus dissonance already take place at the level of the change-related mismatch negativity (MMN). We found that newborn infants neurally discriminated both dissonant and minor chords in the context of major chords:
while the dissonant chords elicited a large positive mismatch response,
the minor chords elicited an MMN-like negativity. This indicates that they
were processed differently by the infants’ brain. The results show that the
newborn infant is capable of abstract categorizations in auditory stimuli
and that Western music categorizations play a role in infants’ auditory
organization.

E120
NEURAL SOURCES OF MISMATCH NEGATIVITY VARY WITH PARADIGM Lawrence Ward1, Shannon MacLean1, Elizabeth Blundon1; 1University

of British Columbia — The neural mechanisms generating the Mismatch
Negativity (MMN), the scalp potential indexing auditory change detection,
remain largely mysterious. Most previous research localizes the generators
of the MMN to regions in the superior temporal gyrus (STG), although there
is some evidence that the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is involved. Importantly,
the neural generators identified vary substantially from study to study. In
order to elucidate the functional roles the implicated brain regions have in
monitoring auditory environmental regularities and detecting changes in
them, we used independent component analysis (ICA) of high-density EEG
recordings to identify active brain regions during two different versions of
a passive oddball paradigm. One was a simple, monotic, frequency deviant
paradigm and the other was a complex, dichotic, frequency deviant paradigm in which deviants occurred in both ears and deviants and standards
traded places across blocks. In both paradigms we found neural generators
in the bilateral temporal cortices and in the PFC, consistent with some previous studies. In the more complex of our two experiments, however, a
generator in the orbital frontal gyrus accounted for most of the variance of
the scalp potential during the MMN period, which was later (120-200 ms).
In the simpler paradigm, in contrast, the MMN was earlier (50-150 ms), and
scalp potential variance during this period was mostly accounted for by a
wider array of temporal, frontal, and parietal sources. We also identified
several generators that have been strongly linked to attention networks,
indicating that passive oddball tasks may transiently activate these networks.

E121
MUSICAL TRAINING EARLY IN LIFE PROTECTS AGAINST AGE-RELATED DECLINES IN COGNITION AND NEURAL SPEECH PROCESSING Travis White-Schwoch1, Kali Woodruff Carr1, Samira Anderson1,2,
Nina Kraus1; 1Northwestern University, 2University of Maryland — Musical
experience fundamentally alters the nervous system, instilling auditory cognitive and perceptual benefits. The auditory brainstem response
to complex sounds (cABR) reflects plasticity from short- and long-term
experience, including musical training. The brainstem transcribes sounds
with millisecond-precise timing; this transcription is degraded with aging.
Older adults with a lifetime of musical training exhibit subcortical timing
similar to young adults with no musical training, suggesting extensive
musical training offsets age-related neural declines. Moreover, older adult
musicians demonstrate superior auditory cognitive abilities. It remains
unknown, however, whether limited musical training early in life imbues
any benefit years after training has stopped. We collected cABRs to the
speech sound /da/ in older adults with no, some (1-3 years), or a moderate amount (4-15 years) of musical training during childhood and young
adulthood, and measured auditory working memory and speed of processing. Brainstem timing in response to the speech syllable was earliest in the
group with a moderate amount of training, followed by the group with
some training, and slowest in the group with no musical training. Cognitive
performance was similar, with the most-trained group having the highest
auditory working memory and fastest speed of processing. These findings
strongly suggest that a few years of auditory cognitive training early in
life can shape the nervous system into older adulthood. Specifically, even a

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

175

Poster Session E
small amount of musical training may protect against age-related declines
in the neural and cognitive processes important for everyday communication. Supported by the NIH (R01 DC010016) and the Knowles Hearing
Center.

E122
CONGRUENCY MATTERS: CORTICAL PROCESSING OF VISUAL-OLFACTORY INTEGRATION Kathrin Ohla1,2, Johan N. Lundström2,3,4;
1
German Institute of Human Nutrition Potsdam-Rebrücke, Arthur-Scheunter-Allee
114-116, 14558 Nuthetal, Germany, 2Monell Chemical Senses Center, Philadelphia, PA, 3Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 4University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA — Before ingestion, the visual appearance and odor of a food
constitute the primary sensory inputs and shape food choice. Experiences
influence whether distinct sensory events are perceived as concordant and
are integrated to one unitary percept. The brain mechanisms underlying
these processes are poorly understood and were aim of the present study.
We used electrical neuroimaging analyses of the electroencephalographic
(EEG) responses following olfactory-visual stimulation in humans. Stimuli
were odor-image pairs presented at three levels of concordance: congruent (e.g. peanut image with peanut odor), incongruent (e.g. peanut image
with orange odor) and mixed (e.g. peanut image with orange-peanut odor
mixture). Participants rated the stimuli for congruence, pleasantness and
intensity. As expected, participants perceived concordant stimulus pairs as
more congruent than mixed and incongruent pairs. Similarly, congruent
pairs were rated as more pleasant that mixed and incongruent pairs. Waveform analysis yielded significant amplitude augmentation for congruent
as compared to incongruent odor-image pairs between 120-200ms post
stimulus onset. Source analysis revealed the source of the activation differences in visual cortex and left inferior temporal gyrus. Later differences
were observed between 400-700ms in the parietal lobe, lateral frontal cortex
and the bilateral insula. Concordance between olfactory-visual stimuli was
associated with increased pleasantness and activation in unimodal visual
and olfactory areas as well as in multimodal areas. The results suggest that
cross-modal integration is a dynamic process regulated by both unisensory
as well as higher order integration areas and that this process is modulated
by learned associations and perceived congruence between the sensory
inputs.

E123
RECENTLY LEARNED MULTIMODAL ASSOCIATIONS INFLUENCE
VISUAL PERCEPTUAL SELECTION Elise Piazza1, Rachel Denison1, Maxwell Schram1, Michael Silver1; 1University of California, Berkeley — We report
that rapid learning of arbitrary crossmodal associations impacts visual perceptual selection. We measured perceptual selection with binocular rivalry,
a phenomenon in which incompatible images presented separately to the
two eyes result in a perceptual alternation between the two images. Previous work has shown that sounds that are temporally, directionally, or
semantically congruent with one of a pair of rivalrous visual percepts can
promote dominance of the congruent percept. Here we asked whether very
recently learned, arbitrary audiovisual associations could impact rivalry.
Subjects were presented with rapid streams of images and sounds during
a brief (10-minute) passive exposure phase. For half of the stimuli, a given
sound always preceded a specific image, creating an association between
the two. The remaining sounds and images were randomly paired throughout the exposure phase. Pairings were randomly assigned and counterbalanced across subjects. Immediately after the exposure phase, subjects completed a rivalry test. On each rivalry trial, subjects were presented with a
combination of a sound and a pair of rivalrous images, all of which had
been presented during the exposure phase. We found that an image was
more likely to be perceived when it was presented with its auditory match
than when it was presented with a non-matching sound. These effects of
learning on rivalry did not correlate with subjects’ conscious knowledge of
the specific audio-visual pairings, as assessed in a separate recognition test.
Our results indicate that prior knowledge—even that which is rapidly and
recently acquired—helps resolve ambiguity in the visual world.

2013 Annual Meeting

E124
EXCITABILITY OF THE MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM IN SINGING
PERCEPTION: A TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION
STUDY Isabelle Royal1, Pascale Lidji1, Frank Russo2, Isabelle Peretz1; 1University of Montreal, 2Ryerson University — The perception of movements is
associated with increased activity in the human motor cortex. This system
may underlie our ability to understand actions, as it is implicated in the
recognition, understanding and imitation of actions. Here, we investigated
the involvement and lateralization of this “mirror neuron” system (MNS)
in the perception of singing. Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) was
applied over the mouth representation of the motor cortex in non-musicians while they watched 4-second videos of singers producing a 2-note
ascending interval. The task was to decide whether a sung interval matched
a given interval. A control task consisted of judging whether abstract visual
figures were open or closed. During both tasks, motor evoked potentials
(MEPs) were recorded from the mouth muscle and normalized by considering a ratio of the amplitudes obtained in the singing interval task relative to the control task in each cerebral hemisphere. To investigate the time
course of the motor activation, TMS pulses were randomly emitted in 7
time windows (ranging from 500 to 3500 milliseconds after stimulus onset).
Results show that the MEP amplitudes are higher after stimulation of the
right hemisphere in the singing condition. More specifically, TMS applied
between 1000 and 1500 milliseconds, before the production of the second
note of the interval, over the right hemisphere yielded higher MEPs as compared to the left hemisphere. These results suggest that the right MNS is
involved in the anticipation of a singing judgment.

E125
SUPERADDITIVE EFFECTS DURING FLAVOR PERCEPTION ARE
MODULATED BY ANTERIOR TEMPORAL CORTEX CONNECTIVITY.
Janina Seubert1, Kathrin Ohla2, Yoshiko Yokomukai3, Johan Lundström1,4,5;
1
Monell Chemical Senses Center, Philadelphia, USA, 2German Institute of
Human Nutrition Potsdam-Rehbrücke, USA, 3Kirin Institute of Food and Lifestyle,
Kirin Holdings Co. Ltd., 4Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA, 5Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden — The combination of taste and odor found in
a flavorful dish creates a more powerful sensation than its odor or taste
in isolation. Whereas the neural processing of the individual chemosensory components is well known, the functional connectivity underlying the
combined flavor percept is poorly understood. In the present functional
magnetic resonance imaging study, subjects were presented with taste only
(gustatory presentation of juice, closed soft palate), smell only (orthonasal presentation of juice odor), or a combined flavor (retronasal-gustatory
presentation, swallowing juice). As expected, olfactory stimulation alone
stimulated olfactory areas while gustatory stimulation alone elicited activation within the gustatory cortex. Overlapping activation within both networks could be observed during flavor presentation, and a convergence
zone between all three conditions was observed in the anterior ventral
insula and cingulate cortex. Superadditive activity for the flavor condition
relative to odor and taste alone was observed in the dorsal insular gyrus,
extending into parietal operculum and postcentral gyrus. Finally, to delineate the cerebral networks contributing to the flavor percept, we assessed
the functional connectivity between these important nodes responsive to
chemosensory overlap during combined odor-taste stimulation. Increases
in functional connectivity with both convergence and superadditive areas
were observed in an overlapping area in the temporal pole. Taken together,
these findings are suggestive of an important relay function of semantic
memory circuits in the formation of the flavor experience from crossmodal
chemosensory information.

E126
USING CITALOPRAM AND BUSPIRONE TO INVESTIGATE THE
EFFECT OF SEROTONIN ON THE DYNAMICS OF PERCEPTUAL
RIVALRY Jody Stanley1, Suresh Sundram2, Olivia Carter1; 1The University of
Melbourne, Australia, 2The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health,
Melbourne, Australia — When sensory input is truly ambiguous, conscious
perception tends to switch between two mutually exclusive interpretations
in a phenomenon known as perceptual rivalry. Previous research has suggested that the timing of these switches can be altered by a range of sero-

176

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
tonergic drugs that selectively or non-selectively activate the serotonin-1A
(5-HT1A) receptor. We aimed to investigate whether this change in perceptual rivalry switch rate was due to global levels of serotonin in the brain,
or to specific activation of the 5-HT1A receptor. We used two serotonergic
drugs in twelve healthy participants: citalopram to increase global levels of
serotonin, and buspirone to activate 5-HT1A receptors. Perceptual testing
included binocular rivalry and auditory stream segregation. Participants
were asked to indicate when their conscious awareness of the stimulus
changed between the two possible perceptual states. While several individual participants showed changes in switch rate across conditions, the
direction of change was not consistent across participants. Therefore, there
were no significant differences in switch rate between citalopram, buspirone, and placebo conditions in visual and auditory paradigms. Unlike previous studies, we did not find evidence that changes in serotonin affect the
rate of switch in perceptual rivalry. It is possible that participants’ general
arousal levels may have been affected by other methodological factors—
such as refraining from caffeine and the extended waiting time required
for drugs to reach peak plasma levels—and that these factors interacted
with the affects of the drugs on rivalry switch rate. Individual differences
in reactions to the drugs may also play a role.

E127
GRASPING WITHOUT VISION: HAND PREFERENCE IN SIGHTED
AND CONGENITALLY BLIND INDIVIDUALS Kayla Stone1, Claudia Gonzalez1; 1University of Lethbridge — Studies have shown that hand preference
for grasping is modulated by different factors such as object size and location. For example, people prefer to use their right hands when grasping
small as opposed to large objects. A factor that has not been investigated
with respect to hand preference for grasping is vision. To what extent does
vision modulate this preference? We explored this question in two experiments. In experiment One, sighted individuals were tested in a reachingto-grasp task with and without vision (i.e. blindfolded). In experiment Two
we tested congenitally blind subjects. In both experiments participants
were asked to put together 3D models using building blocks. The models
were simple, composed of 7-10 blocks of 3 different shapes. A total of 60
blocks were scattered on a tabletop at the beginning of the sighted trials
and 30 blocks at the beginning of the blindfolded trials. Starting condition (blindfolded or sighted) was counterbalanced between participants.
Results from experiment One showed that right hand preference for grasping decreases when vision is removed but only if participants had started
the task using vision. If participants first performed the portion of the task
blindfolded and then completed the task with vision, no change in hand
use between the two conditions (i.e. sighted and blindfolded) was found.
This suggests that a brief haptic experience can modulate hand preference.
This suggestion is further supported by the results from experiment Two.
Hand preference of the congenitally blind resembled that of the group with
the brief haptic experience.

E128
CREATING A SYNAESTHETIC BRAIN? LEARNING SPATIAL ASSOCIATIONS FOR NOVEL SYMBOLS USING BRAIN STIMULATION
Jacqueline Thompson1, Arwel Pritchard1, Roi Cohen Kadosh1; 1University of
Oxford, UK — Number-space synaesthesia (NSS) is a cognitive phenomenon
in which individuals conceive of numbers as occupying specific locations
in an explicit mental visuospatial layout. Little, however, is known about
how these “number forms” arise and develop, although trends observed
across synaesthetes suggest strong influences of cultural learning (e.g. reading direction). To investigate how spatial information during learning may
influence spatial-numerical associations, we emulated early number learning by teaching adults sets of novel symbols representing relative magnitudes. We used transcranial random noise stimulation (TRNS), a non-invasive electrical stimulation that has been shown to enhance perceptual
learning. NSS synaesthetes and controls received either sham TRNS, parietal TRNS or occipital TRNS, while they undertook a symbol-learning paradigm with stimuli arranged to reflect a number-space association bias. Parietal controls — but not synaesthetes — showed a strong left-to-right spatial
orientation bias for symbol pairs in the learning task, as well as marked
improvement across 5 days in a spatial “number-line” symbol-mapping
task, which reflects an association between numbers and space. Meanwhile,
across both synaesthetes and controls, parietal TRNS completely attenuated the typical spatial-numerical association of response codes (SNARC)

Poster Session E
effect seen in the sham — and to a lesser degree, the occipital — TRNS
groups. We conclude that bilateral parietal TRNS improves spatial-numerical learning in both synaesthetes and controls, but for synaesthetes this is
only evident in tasks that evoke spatial associations implicitly, rather than
explicitly. We suggest this is due to competition from explicit spatial representations created by NSS synaesthetes but not controls.

E129
EATING TOOLS IN HAND ACTIVATE THE BRAIN SYSTEMS FOR
EATING ACTION: A TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION
STUDY Kaori Yamaguchi1, Kimihiro Nakamura2, Tatsuhide Oga3, Yasoichi
Nakajima1; 1Research Institute of National Rehabilitation Center for Persons
with Disabilities, 2Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine Human Brain
Research Center, 3Toranomon Hospital Kajigaya — There is increasing neuroimaging evidence suggesting that visually presented objects and tools
(e.g. letters, pen, scissors) can automatically drive the human visuomotor
system encoding the learned motor actions relevant to the visual stimuli.
According to this framework, while little is known about the neural mechanism involved in eating action in humans, we predicted that somatosensory signals produced by eating tools in hand can covertly activate the
neuromuscular systems involved in eating action. In Experiment 1, using
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) with an oddball paradigm, we
measured motor evoked response (MEP) of the masseter muscle in normal
humans to examine the possible impact of tools in hand (chopsticks and
scissors) on the neuromuscular systems during the observation of food and
non-food stimuli. We found that food stimuli overall increased MEPs more
greatly than non-food stimuli, whereas this category-specific modulation of
MEP was greater when participants held chopsticks than when they held
scissors in their dominant hand. In Experiments 2&3, we further observed
that eating tools (chopsticks) enhanced the masseter MEPs more greatly
than other tools (scissors) during the visual recognition of food, whereas
this covert change in the neuro-masticatory system was not detectable at
the behavioral level. A joint analysis of the three experiments further confirmed a robust impact of eating tools on the masseter MEPs during food
recognition. Taken together, we conclude that eating tools in hand exert a
category-specific impact on the neuromuscular system for eating.

E130
ENHANCED WHITE MATTER CONNECTIVITY IN COLORED-MUSIC
SYNESTHESIA Anna Zamm1, Gottfried Schlaug1, Psyche Loui1; 1Department
of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School
— Synesthesia, a condition in which stimuli in one sensory modality consistently and automatically trigger concurrent percepts in another modality,
provides a window into the neural correlates of crossmodal associations.
While research on grapheme-color synesthesia has provided evidence for
both hyperconnectivity and disinhibited feedback as possible underlying
mechanisms, less research has explored the neuroanatomical basis of other
forms of synesthesia. Here we investigated the neuroanatomical substrates
of colored-music synesthesia, with the goal of identifying white matter
connectivity differences associated with enhanced audiovisual association.
We hypothesized that colored-music synesthetes might show unique patterns of white matter connectivity in pathways connecting areas involved
in auditory and visual association. The Inferior Fronto-Occipital Fasciculus
(IFOF) connects auditory and visual association areas to frontal regions,
and thus serves as a good candidate for exploring possible differences in
white matter connectivity between sensory areas in coloured-music synesthetes. We used diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to trace the IFOF in synesthetes (n=10) and matched controls (n=10). Behavioral results with the synaesthesia battery (Eagleman et al, 2007) confirmed behavioural consistency
of sound-color associations among the synesthetes. DTI results showed
enhanced white matter integrity in the right IFOF in synesthetes relative
to controls. Furthermore, white matter integrity in the right IFOF was
significantly correlated with scores on audiovisual subtests of the synaesthesia battery, notably within white matter underlying the fusiform gyrus
(p < 0.05 FWE). Our findings provide the first evidence of a white matter
substrate of colored-music synesthesia, and suggest that enhanced white
matter connectivity subserves enhanced cross-modal associations.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

177

Poster Session E

E131
HOW WE OPTIMIZE EFFORT ALLOCATION: BEHAVIORAL EVIDENCE FOR AN ACCUMULATION MODEL WITH DISSOCIABLE
IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT COSTS Florent Meyniel1,2,3,4,5, Lou Safra1,2,3,4,5,
Mathias Pessiglione1,2,3,4,5; 1Motivation Brain & Behavior team, 2Brain & Spine
Institute, 3University Paris 6, 4Inserm UMR_S975, 5CNRS UMR 7225 — A pervasive problem for living creatures is effort allocation, i.e. finding a tradeoff
that maximizes benefits while preserving exhaustion. Because task-related
costs are difficult to predict, this tradeoff has to be dynamically adjusted
online. We suggested an accumulation model where decisions to start and
stop effort exertion are triggered by a cost evidence signal reaching lower
and upper bounds. In a first set of three experiments (n=45), we tested the
main predictions of our model. Participants produced an imposed force on
a handgrip, for a payoff proportional to their effort duration. The period
preceding behavioral observation was systematically manipulated by
imposing various efforts and rests. We observed that effort exertion linearly
shortened with preceding effort duration, and prolonged with preceding
rest duration, up to a maximum corresponding to full recovery. When
subjects were allowed to rest before effort exertion, they waited for a time
that was linearly dependent on the preceding effort duration. In a second
set of three experiments (n=67), we addressed the question of whether the
tradeoff would be different when cost is explicit (visually cued), as opposed
to when it remains implicit (only experienced through force production).
During each trial, participants freely alternated effort and rest, with the aim
of maximizing payoff. We found the following dissociation: implicit cost
specifically affects effort duration, whereas explicit cost specifically affects
rest duration. These effects could be captured by our cost evidence model,
with accumulation slope increasing with implicit cost and dissipation slope
decreasing with explicit cost.

E132
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THE FEEDBACK-RELATED NEGATIVITY ARE ASSOCIATED WITH ALTRUISTIC BEHAVIOR Pablo
Morales1, Ulrich Mayr1; 1University of Oregon — Economists have favored
models of rational choice and utility maximization to help explain human
choice behavior. Several challenges include reconciling rational choice
models with altruistic behaviors, as well as obtaining non-choice measures
of utility. Previous neuroimaging research has demonstrated a relationship
between activity in areas associated with reward processing and subsequent altruistic behavior (Harbaugh, Mayr, & Burghart, 2007). The goal of
the current work was to determine to what degree an event-related potential measure related to the processing of negative feedback, the feedback-related negativity (FRN), can be elicited in an altruistic context, and can be
used to predict actual altruistic behavior. Subjects performed a version of
a gambling task (Gehring & Willoughby, 2002) where they experienced
monetary gains and losses for both themselves, and also for a charity. This
was then followed by an independent assessment of real-stakes charitable
donations. A significant FRN was found in response to self-losses, as well
as charity-losses. Overall, FRN amplitudes were significantly larger for selflosses than charity-losses. Furthermore, individuals with larger amplitudes
in response to charity-losses than to losses to themselves were more likely
to subsequently engage in altruistic behavior. These results suggest that
with the FRN we can measure a decision-relevant parameter that either
directly or indirectly affects altruistic choices.

E133
CHOOSING UNKNOWN GOODS: FMRI STUDY OF PRODUCT CHOICE Ikuya Nomura1, Kazuyuki Samejima2, Kazuhiro Ueda1,4,
Yuichi Washida3, Hiroyuki Okada2, Takashi Omori2; 1The University of Tokyo,
Tamagawa University, 3Hitotubashi University, 4CREST — Choice between
known goods and unknown goods is repeated in everyday life as new
products go on the market one after another. Although such choice is one
of the key factors of consumer behavior, very few experimental studies
that reveal the underlying mechanism of the choice have been carried out
thereon. In the present study, repetitive choices among known goods and
unknown goods are performed by utilizing 48 bottles of mineral water as
stimuli and cognitive mechanisms related to the choice are examined. Further, brain activity during product choice was measured with fMRI. As a
result, participants who tend to seek for information have a stronger ten2

178

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
dency to choose unknown goods and their right frontal pole was activated
when unknown goods were chosen. Here, the right frontal pole is known
to be activated during exploratory decisions and such activation is further
confirmed in the present study with another task. Additionally, functional
connectivity between the right frontal pole and inferior frontal gyrus was
observed. These results indicate that choosing unknown goods is primary
for the purpose of gaining information but also includes a cognitive process
of a risk taking decision.

E134
BOOSTING YOUR ‘NO’S’: THE NEURAL ORIGIN OF SELF-REGULATION IMPROVEMENT Karolien Notebaert1,2, Sabrina Bruyneel1, Kinnunen
Suna2, Hahn Tim2, Anderl Christine2, Windmann Sabine2, Dewitte Siegfried1; 1KU
Leuven, Belgium, 2Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany — Effective self-regulation is crucial to avoid the detrimental effects
that can be associated with impulsive choice behavior. Although recent
studies have revealed the neural processes underlying a single self-regulation decision, it remains unclear which neural mechanisms are driving the
improvement of self-regulation. Here, we shed light on this issue by using
functional brain imaging to examine the neural activity in restrained eaters
making real decisions regarding snacks to eat. We found that a behavioral
improvement of self-regulatory food choices was associated with (i) an
increase of activation in the prefrontal cortex, a region previously associated with top-down control processes (ii) a decrease of activation in regions
associated with bottom-up impulses, including the ventral striatum and
amygdala. In line with this, these neural processes were associated with
a simultaneous decrease of experienced response-conflict, as reflected
by a decrease of activation in the anterior cingulate cortex throughout
the improvement of food choices. These findings provide insight into
the neural mechanisms that enable an improvement of self-regulation in
repeated decisions, and therefore contribute to our understanding of effective strategies to down-regulate cravings associated with pathologies, such
as substance abuse and impulse control disorders.

E135
THE VALUE OF UNCERTAINTY: A REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
MODEL OF INCREASED RISK SEEKING DURING GAMBLING WITH
NEAR-MISS OUTCOMES Scott Oberg1, Aaron Gruber1, Matthew Tata1;
1
University of Lethbridge — Electronic gambling machines (EGMs) such as
video slot-machines present players with complex contingencies and feedback about their success that may affect decisions. For example, these games
often present artificially high rates of “near miss” outcomes. Such manipulations may distort a player’s ability to judge risks and rewards. We tested
whether near misses affect decision making in a simple two-armed bandit
contingent-learning problem. Two bet choices were offered to players on
each trial. Players learned to choose the bet with positive rather than negative long-run expected values. Feedback after each bet consisted of three
colored squares, which appeared in sequence and indicated either a win (all
squares the same), a near miss (first two squares the same), or a full loss (all
squares different). We manipulated the rate at which players encountered
near misses after advantageous or disadvantageous bets. Players learned
more slowly when near-misses were artificially high, regardless of which
bet type was manipulated. Several standard reinforcement-learning models
failed to predict this distortion in learning rate. We describe a model that
better predicts this effect by incorporating uncertainty bonuses. Theoretical
considerations indicate that gaining knowledge (reducing uncertainty) has
value. If uncertainty is high, outcomes have greater salience for predicting
future outcomes then when uncertainty is low. EGMs that incorporate a
high occurrence of near misses may be manipulating the normal role of
uncertainty by increasing the perception that inherently uninformative
feedback is predictive of future reward.

E136
ACUTE STRESS EFFECTS ON MODEL-BASED VERSUS MODEL-FREE REINFORCEMENT LEARNING Ross Otto1, Candace Raio1,
Elizabeth Phelps1, Nathaniel Daw1; 1New York University — Contemporary
accounts of decision-making posit the operation of separate, competing valuation systems in the control of choice behavior. In particular, model-free
reinforcement learning (RL), which learns action preferences in a manner
in accord with the “law of effect”, is contrasted with the more flexible mod-

2013 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E

el-based RL, which explicitly represents the structure of the environment
in order to prospectively evaluate actions. Popular neurocomputational
accounts of reward processing emphasize the involvement of the dopaminergic system in model-free choice and putatively prefrontal, executive
control systems in model-based choice. Here we hypothesized that the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis stress response—believed to
have detrimental effects on prefrontal function—should modulate model-based contributions to choice behavior. Based on previous work detailing how acute stress promotes habitual choice behavior at the expense of
goal-directed performance and moreover, impairs working memory capacity, we examined if an acute stressor modulates the usage of model-based
RL strategies in a sequential decision-making task that affords disentanglement of the two choice strategies. The cold pressor task was used in half of
the subjects to induce a neurophysiological stress response, and following
a short delay, participants completed 200 trials of the sequential choice task.
Further, baseline Operation Span as well as pre-and post-stressor salivary
cortisol levels were taken as measures of working memory capacity and
HPA axis reactivity to stress, respectively. We find suggestive evidence that
acute stress attenuates the contribution of model-based strategy to behavior, enriching existing accounts of the interplay between acute stress and
prefrontal function.

E137
CORRELATION AND CAUSATION: A SYSTEMS APPROACH TO
UNDERSTANDING DECISION-MAKING AT THE SINGLE-NEURONAL LEVEL IN THE HUMAN BRAIN Shaun Patel1,2, Sameer Sheth1, Matt
Mian1, Sarah Bourne3, Alice Flaherty1, Emad Eskandar1; 1Massachusetts General Hospital, 2Boston University School of Medicine, 3Vanderbilt School of Medicine — Single neuronal computations underlying financial decision-making remain unclear. We explored single neuronal activity from the nucleus
accumbens (NAc) and subthalamic nucleus (STN) in patients undergoing
deep brain stimulation while actively engaged in a financial decision-making task. In a subgroup of the subjects, we explored the effects of intermittent electrical stimulation of the STN on financial decision-making. Subjects
are presented with a computerized gambling task modeled as a simplified
version of the card game “war”. We recorded 25 NAc and 20 STN from
13 patients undergoing deep brain stimulation for neuropsychiatric or
movement disorders. We found single neuronal evidence of a behavioral
and prediction error signal in the NAc and STN. The behavioral signal predicted–during a discrete 500 ms interval–their upcoming financial decision
well before they physically manifested their choice. The prediction error
signal–the difference between expectation and outcome– occurred during
a discrete 500 ms interval immediately after receiving feedback on the outcome of the current trial. Furthermore, in a subgroup of subjects, we were
able to shift their behavior towards risk-seeking by applying 1 s of electrical
stimulation in the STN before the trial began; we found no changes when
stimulation was delivered at any other task epoch. In conclusion, these
findings demonstrate the ubiquitous nature of two reinforcement learning
signals during financial-decision making. In addition, we demonstrate a
causal relationship by applying intermittent electrical stimulation to bias
the decision signal and ultimately alter financial behavior.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

179

Poster Session F
F1
ORIENTING ATTENTION IN PREPARATION TO ENCODING IN
VISUAL SHORT-TERM MEMORY AND DURING VISUAL SHORTTERM MEMORY MAINTENANCE IS ACHIEVED THROUGH DIFFERENT TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OVER DEVELOPMENT Andria Shimi1,2,
Duncan Astle1, Anna C Nobre2, Gaia Scerif2; 1MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences
Unit, Cambridge, 2University of Oxford — In this study, we used event-related
potentials to examine developmental changes in the neural mechanisms
through which participants orient attention towards perceptually present
items or items maintained in visual short-term memory (VSTM). Adults
and 10-year-olds saw an array of four differently-colored items followed
by a probe item and indicated whether the probe matched one of the four
items in color. In pre-cue trials, a cue was presented before the array and
guided participants’ attention to one of the upcoming items. In retro-cue
trials, an informative spatial cue followed the array and guided participants’ attention to one of the already encoded items in memory. In neutral
trials, uninformative cues were shown before and after the array. Analyses
compared accuracy and latency for responding as well as brain activation
in pre-cue, retro-cue and neutral trials to determine commonalities and
differences in the deployment of attentional processes across the different
orienting conditions. Results showed that adults elicited a set of conventional lateralized neural markers (EDAN and ADAN), previously studied
in service of perception, which were largely common to prospective and
retrospective orienting. Children deployed orienting less efficiently than
adults and more so prospectively than retrospectively, thereby revealing a
neural dissociation between attentional shifts prior to encoding and during
maintenance. Results demonstrate that understanding the neural changes
of these mechanisms over development can inform the adult end-state.

F2
VISUAL MISMATCH NEGATIVITY AND EARLY EVOKED POTENTIALS IN MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT AND ALZHEIMER’S
DISEASE George Stothart1, Andrea Tales1, Nina Kazanina1; 1University of

Bristol — Visual mismatch negativity (vMMN), a neurophysiological tool
allowing the examination of early visual and attentional processing, has
been shown to be maintained in healthy ageing (Stothart et al., 2012, Neurobiology of Aging), providing a baseline against which to compare the
equivalent processes in pathologically ageing populations. Using 64 channel EEG, we examined the early visual processing of healthy older adults
(n=26, mean age=77 yrs), patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI)
(n=26, mean age=77 yrs, mean Mini-Mental State Exam=26) and patients
with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (n=18, mean age=80 yrs, mean Mini-Mental State Exam=23) in a vMMN paradigm. All groups displayed a double
peaked visual P1 response prior to the vMMN epoch. vMMN was observed
in AD patients and was of an equivalent duration (c95ms) and amplitude
(0.9μV) to the healthy older adults, suggesting that early sensory processing and visual change detection are maintained in AD. However it was
noticeably absent in MCI patients at a group level. Further investigation of
the vMMN and preceding visual evoked potentials showed a high degree
of absolute variability and group heterogeneity in the evoked potentials
of the MCI group compared to both healthy ageing and AD. Using visual
evoked potentials to measure early sensory and attentional processing may
provide the tools needed to investigate the clinical heterogeneity of MCI
patients and their subsequent prognoses.

F3
DISTRACTION IMPAIRS VISUAL ORIENTATION DISCRIMINATION
AND CATEGORIZATION ABILITIES IN OLDER ADULTS Peter Wais1,
Joyce Clanon1, Daniel Steiner1, Adam Gazzaley1; 1University of California, San
Francisco — The influence of distraction on visual attention negatively
impacts memory. It is not known if the influence of irrelevant information impacts visual perception involved in orientation discrimination and
categorization abilities. Our study examined the effects of distraction on
tests of orientation discrimination and categorization abilities between

180

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

groups of younger and older adults. Because older adults are more susceptible to visual distraction than younger adults (Gazzaley et al., 2005), we
hypothesized that age-related distractibility might have a negative effect
on different types of visual perceptual abilities. We used an adaptive staircase method to threshold participants’ perceptual abilities in two experiments that differed in demands for top-down control of visual attention
to goal-relevant stimuli. Both of the experiments included conditions with
and without visual distractors. Results from Experiment 1, an orientation
discrimination task with conditions using exogenous or endogenous cues
to attend to rotated probes, showed an interaction of cue-type, age and distraction. For endogenous cues, discrimination in the plain condition did
not differ between groups, but was impaired in the distractor condition
for older adults. Results from Experiment 2, a categorization task that used
morphed prototype stimuli, showed an interaction of age and distraction.
Older adults, but not younger adults, showed a negative impact of visual
distraction on categorization. These results suggest a direct relationship
between increased susceptibility to visual distraction in normal aging and
impairment in perceptual abilities involved in both orientation discrimination and categorization.

F4
TO BECOME OLDER IS FATIGUING: ON THE INTERACTION
BETWEEN HEALTHY AGEING AND MENTAL FATIGUE Edmund
Wascher1; 1IfADo - Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human
Factors — With increasing age, functions of the frontal lobe, so-called executive functions decline as a consequence of structural changes. Prolonged
cognitive effort is assumed to exhaust the very same structures temporarily. The present study investigates the interaction of ageing and mental
fatigue. We measured inhibition of Return (IOR) in 12 young (18-27) and
12 older (55-65) adults. EEG was recorded from 64 electrodes. Each subject
performed 4 blocks of 25 minutes each. Across all blocks, IOR raised later in
older adults. In younger adults no effects of mental fatigue were observed.
In older adults, however, the initial deficit increased further and led to a
substantial reduction and delay of IOR at the end of the experiment. The
difference in information processing started already with the handling of
the cue. A missing frontal N2 and an increased P3 in older adults can be
assigned to reduced control over irrelevant information. Consequently,
older adults show prolonged durations of the N1, a delayed slow positive
component ispilateral to the cue, and a missing Pd, all indices of impaired
inhibition of this irrelevant stimulus. Adjustment of attentional effort with
increasing time on task was missing in older adults. The pattern of data
indicate that older adults may not only fail control irrelevant information
but also fail to evolve automatisms in signal processing when performing
for extended time periods. More effort that has to be paid to perform adequately may lead to accelerated exhaustion.

F5
EFFECTS OF AGE AND EXTERNAL NOISE ON SELF-REGULATION
OF INTERNAL DISTRACTIONS David A. Ziegler1, Adam Gazzaley1; 1UCSF
— Interference in goal-directed behavior can arise from distractions in the
external environment, as well as from the internal milieu (e.g., intrusive
thoughts). The objectives of this study were to test whether internal distractibility is affected the presence of external distractions and by aging.
Healthy younger (YA) and older adults (OA) performed an externally-oriented visual target detection task and an internally-oriented mental rotation task. Each task was performed both with and without auditory noise
delivered through headphones. After each trial, participants reported if
they were distracted by internal thoughts or by some external factor. Total
distraction was similar between YA and OA in no-noise conditions, but
OA reported more total distractions in the presence of auditory noise (p =
.058). Both groups showed a significant interaction (p < .05) between auditory noise and the type of distraction reported (internal or external), but
the pattern of the effect differed between groups. For both groups, internal
distractions were more frequent than external distractions in the no-noise
conditions. In YA, auditory noise led to an increase in external distractions
and a decrease in internal distractions (paired t-tests, p < .05), whereas OA

2013 Annual Meeting
showed an increase in external distractions under the noise conditions (p <
.05), but without an accompanying decrease in internal distractions. These
results suggest that internal and external distractions interact dynamically,
with YA exhibiting a trade-off between internal and external distraction. In
contrast, OA appear less able to regulate their levels of internal distraction,
leading to higher overall distractibility under noisy conditions.

F6
ATTENTIONAL STATE TRAINING IMPROVES EXECUTIVE FUNCTION IN HEALTHY AGING SENIORS Ativ Zomet1,4, Thomas Van Vleet1,2,
Christina Marini1, Alana Vernon1,2, Sawsan Dabit1, Jose Gallegos1, Michael
Merzenich1,3; 1Brain Plasticity Institute, 2VA Medical Center, Martinez, 3University of California, San Francisco, 4Tel-Aviv University, Israel — A number of
recent studies suggest that cognitive training focused on the promotion of
a more optimal state of attention can improve higher-order functions such
as working memory and executive control. One method (Tonic and Phasic
Alertness Training, TAPAT) that targets executive control functions, such
as inhibition and sustained attention, has been shown to produce benefits in attention, working memory and executive function in patients with
acquired brain injury. Given the decline in these cognitive operations in
healthy aging, in the current study we examined whether TAPAT training
could also benefit this population. Twenty one healthy aging participants
were assessed on standardized and experimental neuropsychological measures of attention, working memory and executive function before completing either 5 hours of TAPAT training or a closely matched active control
training condition (9 sessions, ~ 33 min/session). Post-training, changes in
performance on the outcome measures revealed significant improvement
in attention, working memory and executive function in the TAPAT group
vs. the active control training group. The results suggest that training to
achieve a more optimal state of attention may benefit higher-order cognitive operations in healthy aging.

F7
EFFECTS OF ALERTNESS AND TEMPORAL PREPARATION ON
INHIBITION OF RETURN Dana Hayward1, Jelena Ristic1; 1McGill University
— Recent studies suggest that Inhibition of Return (IOR), a hallmark index
of reflexive orienting, might be modulated by top-down changes in voluntary temporal preparation to respond to the target. However, these findings remain difficult to interpret because voluntary temporal preparation
was manipulated differently across studies. Specifically, some researchers
manipulated voluntary temporal preparation by decreasing the percentage
of no target trials, thus also affecting overall tonic alertness (e.g., Tipper
& Kingstone, 2005). Others manipulated voluntary temporal preparation
by changing the frequency of target occurrence at each cue-target interval
(e.g., Gabay & Henik, 2008). We measured the individual and combined
effects of alertness and voluntary temporal preparation on the magnitude
of IOR elicited by a spatially nonpredictive peripheral cue using a typical
cuing task. High tonic alertness was achieved by presenting the target on
94% of trials and low tonic alertness was achieved by presenting the target
on 75% of trials. High temporal preparation was achieved by increasing the
frequency of target occurrence with the lengthening of cue-target intervals
and low temporal preparation was achieved by keeping the frequency of
target occurrence constant across all cue-target intervals. Our data indicated that the manipulations of alertness and voluntary temporal preparation produced the expected effects on reaction times. However, the magnitude of IOR remained unchanged across all conditions, suggesting that IOR
is a fundamentally reflexive effect.

F8
REWARD GUIDES ATTENTION TO OBJECT CATEGORIES IN REALWORLD SCENES Clayton Hickey1, Marius Peelen2; 1VU University Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2University of Trento, Italy — Reward is thought to
motivate approach behaviour in part by automatically facilitating the
processing of reward-associated visual stimuli. Existing studies of human
vision have demonstrated this effect at the level of visual features, showing
that objects characterized by reward-associated features become salient and
attention-drawing. However, exemplars taken from real-world categories,
like ‘cars’, rarely share more than a few basic features, and the features that
characterize individual members are often shared with non-target items.
Search for this type of target will benefit little from feature-priming. Here

Poster Session F
we test the idea that reward primes this kind of visually-heterogeneous,
real-world category of natural stimuli. Participants detected the presence of
object categories - cars, trees, or people - in briefly presented photographs
of natural scenes. Each trial began with a cue indicating target category and
each correct response randomly resulted in reward or no-reward. We examined search efficiency as a function of a.) whether a distractor in the display
was a member of the target category from the immediately preceding trial,
and b.) whether that preceding trial had garnered reward. Behavioural
results show that search was disrupted by a reward-associated distractor
and that the magnitude of this effect could be predicted from a questionnaire index of trait reward sensitivity. Preliminary fMRI results suggest an
increased response in object-selective cortex to previously rewarded distractors. Reward thus appears to potentiate processing of reward-associated categories during visual search through cluttered natural scenes.

F9
EFFCTS OF ACUTE PSYCHOSOCIAL STRESS ON MUTIPLE OBJECT
TRACKING Atsuko Iwasaki1, Cary Feria1, Cheryl Chancellor-Freeland1; 1San

José State University — Multiple object tracking (MOT) is an experimental
technique to assess aspects of attention, and requires attentional control,
which involves acts of the prefrontal cortex. Cognitive functions related
to this brain area are considered to be vulnerable to the stress hormone,
cortisol, and these effects may be either beneficial or detrimental depending on the level of cortisol reactivity, task difficulty, and type of a stressor.
We assume that when individuals undergo relatively difficult MOT tasks
before and following socially-induced stress, an improvement in performance due to the practice effect should vary across cortisol reactivity.
Thus, we hypothesized that among three types of cortisol reactivity (low,
middle, high), the high-cortisol responders would show the least improvement in MOT performance within the stressed group. Participants in this
study were 76 undergraduate students from a culturally diverse university,
49 of whom underwent the two blocks of MOT trials before and following exposure to a psychosocial stressor, whereas 27 control participants
viewed a neutral stimulus between the two MOT blocks. Cortisol reactivity
was determined by four saliva samples. The results revealed that under
stress, low- and high-cortisol responder groups showed a significantly
smaller improvement relative to the control and middle-cortisol responder
groups that showed an expected change with practice. This suggests that
acute psychosocial stress modified cortisol levels, and may have impacted
attentional control on MOT. An implication of this work is that high levels
of social stress (e.g., a job interview) may affect everyday multiple object
tracking tasks, such as that seen while driving.

F10
UNFILLED LINE OBJECTS ARE UNIQUE REGARDING THE
MANNER OF SPATIAL SELECTION Tetsuko Kasai1, Ryuji Takeya1, Sho
Tanaka3; 1Hokkaido Universty — In previous studies, we have found that
spatial attention reflected by the visual N1 component of event-related
potential (ERP) spreads over perceptually grouped elements or an “object”.
Furthermore, some later ERP attention effects can also vary with perceptual grouping, while functional significance of them is unclear. The present study examined whether the N1 and later spatial attention effects are
modulated by unfilled line objects, which have boundary and shape information but lack surface information. ERPs were recorded from 14 participants during a focal attention task with bilateral line squares that had a gap
at the upper or lower part and were connected or unconnected by a line.
The task was to detect squares without the gap (easy condition) or with a
narrower gap (hard condition) in an attended visual field. ERP attention
effects were observed as amplitude enhancement at occipital temporal electrodes contralateral rather than ipsilateral to attended fields. P1 attention
effect (100-140 ms post-stimulus) increased in the hard condition, as previously reported. In contrast, N1 attention effect was absent and P2 attention effect (200-250 ms) was clearly observed but decreased for connected
objects regardless of task difficulty. These results are in accordance with
the view that the object-based N1 attention effect previously found reflects
selection of filled highlighted objects, or a sensory enhancement mechanism of object-based attention. The present object-based P2 attention effect
may specifically reflect selection of boundary information or higher object
representations that are constructed from lines.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

181

Poster Session F

F11
NEURAL CORRELATES OF LOCAL VS. GLOBAL ATTENTIONAL
SCOPE REVEALED VIA EEG PATTERN CLASSIFICATION Alexandra
List1, Monica Rosenberg2, Aleksandra Sherman1, Marcia Grabowecky1, Satoru
Suzuki1, Michael Esterman3; 1Northwestern University, 2Yale University, 3VA
Boston Healthcare System — Pattern classification techniques have been
widely used to differentiate neural activity of perceptual categories, especially using fMRI. Here, we instead endeavored to predict the scope of
attention, local or global, from EEG data. A group of 15 participants were
presented with hierarchical stimuli and were asked to indicate which of
two target letters (H and S) were presented, irrespective of whether the
target appeared at the local or global level. On each trial, the target letter
appeared equiprobably at each level, paired with an irrelevant distracter
(E or A) at the other level. EEG data were recorded from 64 channels at
a sampling rate of 1024 Hz, and were subsequently high-pass filtered at
0.1 Hz. We applied linear support vector machine (SVM) classifiers with a
cross-validation procedure at each timepoint (~1 ms). EEG data were reliably differentiated for local vs. global attention, emerging over posterior
electrode sites during the 300-700 ms interval after stimulus onset. Whereas
the classifiers reliably differentiated the scope of attention, a more traditional event-related potential (ERP) analysis of the same data did not. In
sum, multivariate pattern analysis of EEG, which reveals unique spatiotemporal patterns of activity distinguishing between behavioral states on
a trial-by-trial basis, is a highly sensitive tool for characterizing the neural
correlates of attention.

F12
ERP EVIDENCE OF A GLOBAL INTERFERENCE EFFECT AT EARLY
STAGES OF GLOBAL/LOCAL VISUAL PROCESSING Nicolas Poirel1,
Grégory Simon2, Mathieu Cassotti2, Arlette Pineau2, Olivier Houdé1, Virginie
Beaucousin3; 1LaPsyDÉ, Unité CNRS 3521, Université Paris Descartes, Université de Caen, PRES Sorbonne Paris Cité ; Institut universitaire de France (IUF),
2
LaPsyDÉ, Unité CNRS 3521, Université Paris Descartes, Université de Caen,
PRES Sorbonne Paris Cité, 3EA 2027, Laboratoire de Psychopathologie et
Neuropsychologie, Université Paris 8 — Our visual environment consists of
global structures (e.g., a forest) that are composed of local parts (e.g., trees).
Behavioral studies evidenced that (1) the detection of global information is
faster than the detection of local elements, a phenomenon called the global
advantage, and that (2) global information interfere with the processing of
local elements. These two effects constitute the so-called ‘global precedence
effect’. Although the global advantage appears to impact neural processing as early as the first 100 ms post-stimulus, previous studies failed to
evidence a global interference effect before 200 ms. Using a rapid display
of letter compound stimuli in a global/local task with no-conflict and conflict conditions, the present event-related potential study shows a global
interference occurring as early as the time range of the N1 component.
This finding completes and reinforces the recent neural models of human
visual perception, which suggest that the global information conveyed by
rapid magnocellular visual channels allows an initial perceptual analysis of
visual inputs and then guides the subsequent analysis of local information
conveyed by slow parvocellular visual channels through feedback signals
into early visual areas. This fast global processing could be conveyed within
the brain ventral pathway and would be able to guide – or interfere with
– the subsequent more detailed and slower local processing of the visual
scene. In regards to this model, the present study demonstrates for the first
time that global information interfere at a very early stage (approximately
150 ms after stimulus presentation) with local information.

F13
NEGLECT DYSLEXIA: A MATTER OF “GOOD LOOKING” Silvia Primativo1,2, Lisa Saskia Arduino3,4, Maria De Luca2, Roberta Daini5, Marialuisa Martelli1,2; 1University of Rome, La Sapienza, Rome, Italy, 2Neuropsychology Unit,
IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy, 3LUMSA University, Rome, Italy,
4
ISTC-CNR, Rome, Italy, 5Milano-Bicocca University, Milan, Italy — Neglect Dyslexia (ND) is an acquired reading disorder often associated with right-sided
brain lesions and Unilateral Spatial Neglect (USN). In reading aloud single
words patients with ND produce left-sided errors. The reported dissociations between USN and ND suggest that the latter can be interpreted as a
selective reading deficit distinct from USN. We analyzed eye movements in

182

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
USN patients with and without ND (respectively ND+ and ND-) and in a
group of controls (right brain-damaged patients without USN), comparing
a reading aloud task and a saccadic task (left-right saccade test). Only ND+
patients did left-sided errors, with a prevalence of omissions, and showed
an impaired eye movement behavior both in the reading and in the saccadic
tasks. While reading ND+ patients made more fixations than the other two
groups, with only few falling accurately on the target. This result parallels the inaccurate fixations during the saccadic task shown by the same
group of patients. A third experiment addressed whether left neglect and
low fixation accuracy account for reading errors in ND. Using a speeded
reading-at-threshold experiment, that didn’t allow for eye movements,
ND- patients, but not controls, did left-sided errors. We concluded that ND
rather being a dissociated disorder is the result of the USN syndrome when
the fine eye movements, as those required in reading, are compromised.

F14
THE FIRST BRANCH OF THE SUPERIOR LONGITUDINAL FASCICULUS MEDIATES VISUAL IMPROVEMENTS INDUCED BY
RHYTHMIC TMS ON RIGHT PREFRONTAL AREAS Romain Quentin1,2,
Lorena Chanes1,2, Antoni Valero-Cabre1,2,3; 1Centre de Recherche de l’institut
du Cerveau et de la moelle épinière, CR-ICM, CNRS UMR 7225, INSERM UMRS
975, 2Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France, 3Laboratory for cerebral
Dynamics Plasticity & Rehabilitation, Boston University, School of Medicine,
USA — Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) has demonstrated the
ability to induce local as well as connectivity-mediated effects on distant
brain areas. Moreover, when used at specific frequencies in short bursts,
this non-invasive technique can entrain local and distant oscillatory activity
and modulate behavior. We hereby used low beta TMS bursts at 30 Hz on
a key frontal site of the human visuo-attentional network, the right Frontal Eye Field (FEF) resulting in visual perception ameliorations. Subjects
were asked to perform a visual discrimination and a conscious visual detection task involving near threshold Gabors. We specifically addressed the
question on to what extent the TMS-modulated perceptual effects derived
from such FEF intervention might be influenced by specific white matter
pathway connecting the stimulated area with the rest of the attentional network. We used a recent method using spherical deconvolution to model
the diffusion signal in each voxel and tracked the whole brain fibers with
deterministic tractography. We report a statistically significant inverse correlation between the number of streamlines and the volume of the right and
left Superior Longitudinal Fasciculus I (SLF I) and bilateral visual detection
sensitivity improvements (d’) induced by such frontal stimulation. Our
data indicate that a lower SLF I number of streamlines or volume would
make individual participants more prone to experience higher visual modulatory effects under frontal rhythmic TMS. It strongly suggests that the
architecture of specific white matter pathway has the ability to influence the
distributed effect of focally applied rythmic neurostimulation, resulting in
different behavioral modulations.

F15
YOUR ATTENTION PLEASE: EFFECTS OF VALENCE ON EMOTION REGULATION WITH FULL- AND DIVIDED-ATTENTION John
A. Morris1, Christina M. Leclerc2, Elizabeth A. Kensinger1; 1Boston College,
2
State University of New York at Oswego — Numerous studies have investigated the neural substrates supporting cognitive reappraisal, identifying
the importance of interactions between prefrontal and medial temporal
lobe regions. It is unclear, however, how valence and attention interact
to affect the processes used for cognitive reappraisal. The current study
investigated this issue by asking participants to regulate their reactions to
positive or negative images while undergoing fMRI. Participants viewed
images from the International Affective Picture System database and were
instructed to use cognitive reappraisal to increase or decrease their emotional response to the images or to view the images without attempts to
regulate. For some participants, full attention was devoted to the regulation task. For other participants, an auditory discrimination task was performed concurrently with regulation. When asked to view negative and
positive images, results revealed few effects of valence. However, when
reappraisal was required, the results revealed a robust effect of valence that
interacted with the attention condition. The reappraisal of negative images
was associated with more widespread activation than the reappraisal of
positive images (including cingulate, hippocampus, insula, and lateral and

2013 Annual Meeting
medial prefrontal cortex), particularly in the divided attention condition.
Contrast analyses revealed that divided attention did not disrupt the processes used to reappraise negative images, whereas the divided attention
manipulation reduced activity in regions associated with the reappraisal
of positive images. Critically, participants continued to report reappraisal
success even during the divided attention condition. These results suggest
multiple routes to cognitive reappraisal, depending upon image valence
and the availability of attentional resources.

F16
MENTAL INTEGRATION OF EMOTIONAL AND NON-EMOTIONAL
VERBAL PAIRS IS SUPPORTED BY DISSOCIABLE NEURAL
REGIONS AT ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL Brendan Murray1,2, Elizabeth
Kensinger1,2; 1Boston College, 2Center for Brain Science, Harvard University
— Integration describes one way to encode discrete pieces of information
as a single mental representation (e.g., imagining the verbal pair “surf +
degree” as a degree conferred upon completion of a surfing course; Graf &
Schacter, 1989; Murray & Kensinger, 2012). Recent neuroimaging investigation has shown that visual processing regions can support the encoding
of non-emotional items as a single, integrated representation (Staresina &
Davachi, 2010), suggesting that integration may occur before information
reaches the medial temporal lobes. In the present study, participants underwent functional MRI while encoding verbal paired associates as single,
integrated mental representations (e.g., the surfing degree) and also while
performing an associative recognition test. For pairs that participants subsequently identified as “intact” on the recognition task, encoding activity in
the cuneus and lingual gyrus increased parametrically with self-reported
encoding vividness for emotional pairs while activity in right hippocampus and bilateral dorsolateral and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex increased
parametrically with self-reported encoding vividness for non-emotional
pairs. During recognition, correct identification of both intact and recombined non-emotional pairs was supported by activity in right parahippocampal gyrus, while correct identification of emotional pairs was supported by activity in right cuneus/precunes, bilateral auditory cortex,
and left orbitofrontal cortex. These results suggest that dissociable regions
support successful integration of emotional and non-emotional pairs and
successful retrieval of those integrated representations. Integration and
retrieval of non-emotional pairs is supported disproportionately by medial
temporal lobe (i.e., hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus), while integration and retrieval of emotional pairs is supported disproportionately by
visual processing regions.

F17
THE ACTIVE AVOIDANCE OF THREAT ENHANCES NEURAL SENSITIVITY TO EXPECTANCY VIOLATION. Vishnu Murty1, Kevin LaBar2,
R. Alison Adcock2; 1New York University, 2Duke University — Threat avoidance can alter the way individuals interact with their environment. However, relatively little research has investigated how this motivational state
changes neural sensitivity to salient events encountered in these environments. To investigate these processes, participants performed a motivated
reaction-time task in which they tried to avoid shock punishments, or not,
during the simultaneous collection of fMRI and skin conductance levels
(SCL). On half of the trials, participants were presented with task-irrelevant, trial-unique expectancy violations: a neutral novel object in a stream
of expected objects. Results indicated that the active avoidance of threats
increased activations in the amygdala as well as the mesolimbic dopamine
system including the nucleus accumbens, and VTA. Further, the active
avoidance of threats enhanced neural sensitivity to expectancy violations in
regions previously implicated in encoding environmental salience, such as
the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), dorsal striatum, and parahippocampal cortex. The active avoidance of threat also increased individuals’ SCLs.
Trial-by-trial variation in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activation and orbitofrontal cortex deactivation predicted variations in SCLs. Critically, this
variation in SCL responses predicted neural sensitivity to expectancy violations on a trial-by-trial basis, such that greater SCLs were associated with
greater expectancy violation processing in the mPFC, ventral visual stream,
and parietal cortex; thus, SCL is a potentially useful biomarker for neural
sensitivity to salient features of the environment. Together these findings

Poster Session F
demonstrate that the active avoidance of threats recruits neural resources
to enhance processing of salient, unexpected features of the environment,
even when those features are not inherently threatening.

F18
DON’T SAY IT: SELF-GENERATED EMOTION NAMING IMPEDES
EMOTION REGULATION IN SHORT TIMEFRAMES Erik Nook1, Ajay
Satpute2, Kevin Ochsner3; 1Stanford University, 2Northeastern University,
Columbia University — Extant psychological research has not investigated
the effect of categorizing an emotion by giving it a name on the subsequent
regulation of that emotion. The present set of studies used behavioral
and psychophysiological techniques to ascertain if emotion naming using
self-generated labels is helpful or detrimental to emotion regulation. Participants viewed negative images and reported on their affective responses
while heart rate and skin conductance were recorded. While viewing the
images a second time, participants either “named” the emotion they felt
by generating and verbally reporting an emotion label, regulated their
response using a cognitive regulation strategy, both named and regulated their emotions or neither named nor regulated their emotions (passive viewing). In study 1, both self-report and psychophysiological results
showed that participants who both named and regulated their emotions
felt more negative and less positive than those who just regulated their
emotions. This suggests that naming interfered with the regulation of their
emotions. Additionally, participants who named their emotions did not
report feeling less negative than those who merely saw the images a second
time, suggesting that self-generated emotion naming provided no regulatory benefit. Study 2 replicated these results and extended them by finding that emotion naming reduced the effectiveness of both reinterpretation
and acceptance regulation strategies. These findings suggest that emotion
naming interferes with some emotion regulation strategies, implying that
either emotion naming crystalizes emotional experiences (rendering them
less amenable to modification) or that emotion naming drains cognitive
resources that are otherwise used to carry out regulation.

3

F19
DID YOU HEAR THAT TOO? EMOTIONS MAKE BRAINS TICK
TOGETHER DURING SPOKEN DISCOURSE PROCESSING Lauri
Nummenmaa1,2,3,4, Heini Heikkilä1, Athanasios Gotsopoulos1, Enrico Glerean1,
Iiro P. Jääskeläinen1, Riitta Hari2, Mikko Sams1; 1Department of Biomedical
Engineering and Computational Science, School of Science, Aalto University,
Finland, 2Brain Research Unit, O.V. Lounasmaa Laboratory, School of Science, Aalto University, Finland, 3Turku PET Centre, University of Turku, Finland,
4
Advanced Magnetic Imaging Centre, School of Science, Aalto University, Finland — Auditory communication and storytelling provide humans a powerful way for sharing their emotional experiences. Here we show that networks of brain areas “tick together” in participants who are listening to
similar emotional events in spoken narratives. Participants’ brain activity
was measured with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while
they listened to 45-s spoken narratives describing, unpleasant, neutral,
and pleasant events spoken in neutral voice. After scanning, participants
listened to the narratives again and rated continuously their experience
of pleasantness¬–unpleasantness (i.e. valence) and of arousal–calmness.
Instantaneous inter-subject phase synchronization (ISPS) measures were
computed to derive both multi-subject voxel-wise similarity measures of
hemodynamic activity and inter-area functional connectivity (seed-based
phase synchrony, SBPS). Valence and arousal time series were subsequently
used to predict the moment-to-moment ISPS and SBPS. While listening to
the discourses, participants’ brain activity was synchronized mainly in the
auditory cortices. However, high emotional arousal increased ISPS in the
auditory cortices and in Broca’s area, while low valence was associated
with enhanced ISPS in thalamus, anterior cingulate and lateral prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortices. SBPS analysis also revealed that emotional
valence and arousal modulated connectivity of large-scale brain networks
during narrative processing. We propose that high arousal synchronizes
different individuals’ brain networks involved in auditory information
processing and speech comprehension, whereas low valence synchronizes
mechanisms supporting self-referential processing as well as regulatory
responses. By enhancing the synchrony of brain activity across individuals,
emotions may thus promote social interaction and facilitate interpersonal
understanding.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

183

Poster Session F

F20
NEURAL CORRELATES OF ANXIOUS APPREHENSION AND INTERFERENCE DURING EMOTIONAL AND NON-EMOTIONAL STROOP
TASKS Aminda O’Hare1, Laura Crocker2, Wendy Heller2, Stacie Warren3, Jeffrey Spielberg4, Gregory Miller2,5; 1University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, 2University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 3St. Louis VA Medical Center, 4University
of California Berkley, 5University of Delaware — Identifying patterns of brain
activity accompanying individual differences in affective traits such as
stable anxiety can aid in understanding their cognitive implications. Anxious apprehension is a type of anxiety characterized by worry and verbal
rumination. It has been associated with increased activity in left inferior
frontal gyrus (LIFG), an area involved in the production and rehearsal of
language, both during rest (Nitschke, et al, 1999) and when examining
negative vs. neutral words in an emotion-word Stroop task (Engels, et
al., 2007). Theoretically, non-emotional tasks that require cognitive effort
should also be associated with increased worry and verbal rumination
when anxious apprehension is high. The present study examined the relationship between anxious apprehension and both emotional and cognitive
interference via functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during an
emotion-word and a color-word Stroop task in a community sample characterized by substantial psychopathology (n = 99). Consistent with theory
and previous findings, activity in LIFG increased for both emotional (negative vs. neutral) and cognitive (incongruent vs. congruent) interference as a
function of anxious apprehension. In addition, increases in LIFG activation
were associated with increases in behavioral interference, as measured by
reaction time, in both tasks. These findings are consistent with the prediction that anxious apprehension is associated with increased risk for verbal
rehearsal and disrupted performance during tasks that require effortful
control, regardless of the nature of the distractors.

F21
IMAGING TRAUMATIC MEMORY: AN FMRI STUDY OF SURVIVORS
OF THE AIR TRANSAT DISASTER Daniela J. Palombo1,2, Margaret C.
McKinnon3,4, Anthony R. McIntosh1,2, Adam Anderson2, Brian Levine1,2; 1The
Rotman Research Institute, 2University of Toronto, 3McMaster University, 4St.
Joseph’s Healthcare Hamilton — While laboratory-based studies demonstrate enhancement of memory by negative emotion, relatively few studies
have mapped the behavioral and neural changes associated with real-life
trauma. Studies of exceptionally emotional or life-threatening events are
particularly challenged by the inherent variability of such events across
individuals. We investigated the neural correlates of traumatic memory in
passengers from an August, 2001 airline flight that nearly ditched into the
Atlantic Ocean, but was then safely landed on an island military base with
no serious injury. Survivors were scanned, using fMRI, during recollection
of three different events: the airline disaster (AT), the September 11th terrorist attacks (9/11), and a comparatively non-emotional event from the
same time period. Passengers showed a robust flashbulb memory for the
AT incident. Relative to non-emotional recollection, functional connectivity analyses of fMRI data indicated increased amygdala coupling with
the insula, medial prefrontal cortex, lateral and medial temporal cortices,
and posterior higher-order visual regions during 9/11 and AT recollection
in passengers. This amygdala coupling was highest in individuals whose
recollection of 9/11 and AT was most pronounced. Moreover, the PTSD
symptom severity was positively correlated with the degree of this neural
coupling in all three mnemonic conditions. These findings, which extend
laboratory-based studies of emotional memory, suggest that functional
alterations in cortical and subcortical areas, via amygdalar influences,
underlie the expression of negatively valenced memory traces.

F22
VIOLENT TRAUMA HISTORY DETERMINES THE REACTION TO
HUMAN ATTACK PICTURES Mirtes Pereira1, Orlando Fernandes Jr1, Rita
de Cassia S Alves1, Liana C L Portugal1, Isabel P A David1, Izabela Mocaiber1,
Eliane Volchan2, Leticia Oliveira1; 1Federal Fluminense University, 2Federal University of Rio de Janeiro — Exposure to unpleasant pictures has consistently
evoked interference on behavioral tasks. Here we tested if trauma history
might influence emotional modulation evoked by violence scenes. We
employed a set of pictures of human attack and matched neutral pictures.
Each trial (n=30) begun with a fixation cross for 1500 ms followed by a cen-

184

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
tral picture and two peripheral bars (presented for 200 ms). Subjects were
instructed to ignore the central images and to respond as fast as possible
whether or not the orientation of the bars was the same while his reaction
time (RT) was recorded. A questionnaire of life-threating events selected
59 students who experienced at least a traumatic event of violence. The
number of types of “violent crime” was added up. We used mean-split to
separate respondents in two groups: low trauma and high trauma. We calculated each subject´s median RT for correct threat and neutral trials. Then
we created an emotional modulation score by subtracting the RT at neutral
trials from those at threat trials. T tests revealed that emotional modulation
score was significantly different between groups (p=0.03). One sample t test
revealed that only the emotional modulation score of high violent trauma
subjects (-32 ms) was significantly different from zero (p<0.01). Negative
values observed in the high trauma group represent that subjects were
faster for threat stimuli than for neutral. These results suggest that increasingly number of violent trauma might prompt overt motor preparation,
compatible with more active defensive responses, thus reducing reaction
time to threat pictures.

F23
PREFFERED INTERPERSONAL DISTANCE: A BEHAVIORAL AND
EEG STUDY Anat Perry1, Orly Rubinstein1, Leehe Peled1, Simone Shamay-Tsoory1; 1University of Haifa — Despite the vast knowledge, both behavioral and neural, of the mechanisms defining space around a singular body,
little is known about the neural mechanisms that encode space between
bodies. Yet, the space between people creates and defines the social dynamics of our interactions with others. Although different between cultures,
within each culture interpersonal distance is implicit but clearly felt, especially if one stands nearer or further than expected. To assess the neural
dynamic of interpersonal distance preferences we used a revised version
of the Comfortable Interpersonal Distance paradigm, in which participants
imagine either a friend or stranger approaching (visualized on a computer screen) and are asked to stop the figure when feeling uncomfortable.
Behavioral findings in 100 students indicated that preferred interpersonal
distance is correlated with both measures of empathy and of social anxiety. We then used the same paradigm to explore how interpersonal distance modulates EEG suppression in the mu/alpha range, and analyzing
the ERPs elicited by the same stimuli, we investigated how early in the
perception time-course these factors affect perception. Alpha / Mu suppression (8-12 Hz) was modulated by the type of figure approaching (friend
or stranger). ERP differences between conditions were evident as early as
200 ms, as well as differences between socially-anxious verses non-anxious
individuals. Individual differences affect how comfortable we feel when
being approached by a friend or stranger. These differences are determined
early in perception, and modulate early attentional processes.

F24
CUTTING LIKING AT ITS JOINTS: IN SEARCH OF DISSOCIATION
BETWEEN SEVERAL TYPES OF OLFACTORY EXPERIENCES IN THE
BRAIN Aline Pichon1,2, Géraldine Coppin2,3, Sylvain Delplanque2,3, Corrado
Corradi-Dell’Acqua1,2, Christian Margot4, David Sander2,3, Patrik Vuilleumier1;
Laboratory for Behavioral Neurology and Imaging of Cognition, University Medical Center, University of Geneva, 2Swiss Center for Affective Sciences, University of Geneva, 3Laboratory for the Study of Emotion Elicitation and Expression,
Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, University of Geneva, 4Firmenich S.A. — Odor perception is a complex process merging sensory input
with strong emotional components. In addition, odorant quality and structure coding are dissociated in the brain. Here we used fMRI to study how
the emotional component of odors is represented neurally. Participants (n
= 9, aged 19-37) were presented with 12 prototypical odors divided in 4
different profiles, covering major emotional dimensions as defined by the
6-level Geneva Odor Emotion Scale (GEOS). Odors were delivered with an
MRI compatible olfactometer, and participants performed a simple detection task after each trial. They were asked at the end of each session to
rate the pleasantness, familiarity, intensity of the odors, as well as the subjective feelings elicited by the olfactory stimulus along GEOS dimensions.
Skin conductance, heart and respiratory rate were simultaneously recorded
during each session. Our first fMRI results showed activations in major
olfactory brain structures, including piriform and orbito frontal (OFC)
cortices, amygdala, hippocampus, and parahippocampal cortex. Pleasant
1

2013 Annual Meeting
smells elicited activations in the medial OFC, while unpleasant odors activated the OFC more laterally, together with insula, in keeping with past
work. Finite Impulse Response analysis was also carried out, revealing how
amygdalar activity occurred about about 3 sec after the odor delivery by
valve aperture, whereas OFC activity was more delayed. Grouping odors
by GEOS emotional profiles already enables some dissociation between
several pleasant olfactory experiences. Further analyses based on correlations with self-reported measures on GEOS scale will be necessary for finer
distinctions between emotional profiles elicited by odors.

F25
MODULATION OF COGNITIVE CONTROL BY TRANSCRANIAL
DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION (TDCS) Christian Plewnia1, Monika
Zeiller1, Bastian Zwissler1, Larissa Wolkenstein2; 1Department of Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy, Neurophysiology and Interventional Neuropsychiatry, University
of Tübingen, Germany, 2Department of Clinical Psychology, University of Tübingen, Germany — Cognitive control (CC) is of decisive relevance for adaptive
human behavior. Deficient CC is a central characteristic of major depressive
disorder (MDD). Insufficient activation of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(dlPFC) has been linked with this deficit. The activity of distinctive brain
areas can be transiently modulated by transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS). To further explore the role of the dlPFC in physiological and
disturbed CC we modulated dlPFC activity in healthy subjects and MDD
patients by tDCS and tested its effects on CC as quantified by emotional
distractibility in a delayed working memory task (DWM) and an attentional bias task (ABT). We found that activity enhancing anodal tDCS to
the left dlPFC (1mA, 20 min, cathode at right upper arm) during DWM performance enhanced working memory in healthy subjects (n=22) and MDD
patients (n=22). Most importantly, it ameliorated emotional distraction
prevalent in patients with MDD. Reciprocally, inhibiting, cathodal tDCS
to the left dlPFC (1mA, 20 min, anode at right upper arm) impairs CC on
the influence of negative stimuli in healthy subjects (n=28) reflected by a
decrease of correct responses in the DWM and an increase in reaction time
in the following ABT. These findings demonstrate a tDCS-polarity specific
plasticity of CC and thus verify the important role of left dlPFC activity for
this key feature of human cognition and its disturbance in MDD. Therefore
our data point towards new opportunities for the treatment of MDD by a
specific combination of brain stimulation techniques and cognitive-behavioral treatment strategies.

F26
BEHAVIORAL ACTIVATION, INHIBITION, AND HYPOMANIC
PERSONALITY MODERATE NEUROCOGNITIVE COMPONENTS
DURING AN EMOTIONAL GO/NOGO TASK Narun Pornpattananangkul1,
Xiaoqing Hu1, Ellen Reynolds2, Robin Nusslock1; 1Northwestern University,
2
Columbia University — The present study examined the effect of stimuli
valence on N2 and P3 event-related potentials (ERP) during an emotional
Go/Nogo task. Furthermore, we examined the extent to which individual
differences in Behavioral Inhibition, Behavioral Activation (BIS/BAS), and
hypomanic personality moderated ERP components to emotional salient
stimuli. Nogo stimuli were emotional (i.e., happy and fearful) faces, and
Go stimuli were non-emotional faces. Fearful Nogo stimuli elicited higher
P3 than happy Nogo stimuli (F(1,34.07) = 5.67, p = .027, partial η2 = .21,
G-G corrected); however, we did not find an effect of emotional valence on
NoGo N2. Moreover, individual differences in BAS, BIS, and hypomanic
personality moderated the Nogo N2 for each emotional valence. Participants who had a more negative Nogo N2 for fearful faces over happy faces
had higher BAS (r(20) = -.47, p = .028) and Hypomania Personality Scale
(HPS; r(20) = -.51, p = .003) scores, but lower BIS scores ( r(20) = .48, p =
.024). Taken together, these results indicate elevated BAS and hypomanic
personality are associated with reduced response conflict to happy stimuli,
whereas elevated BIS is associated with reduced response conflict to fearful
stimuli. These results have implications for understanding emotional sensitivity and inhibitory deficits in mood and anxiety-related psychopathology.

F27
THE EFFECT OF FMRI-GUIDED CONTINUOUS THETA BURST STIMULATION (CTBS) ON THE SPONTANEOUS REGULATION OF EMOTION Ignazio Puzzo1, Birthe Henne1, Yanbo Hu1, Tom Johnstone1; 1School of
Psychology and Clinical Language Sciences University of Reading Earley Gate

Poster Session F
Whiteknights Road Reading RG6 6AL — The present study used fMRI-guided
continuous theta burst stimulation (cTBS) to examine the causal role of the
right and/or left lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) in the down-regulation of
emotional distraction during cognitive tasks. 16 healthy adult participants
first completed an fMRI session with an instructed emotion regulation task.
Lateral PFC cTBS targets were identified on the basis of each individual’s
activation. In two following sessions, each participant received 40s of cTBS
to the left and right lateral PFC respectively (counterbalanced). Participants performed a blocked visuo-spatial working memory task containing
a threat of shock in 50% of blocks. Participants were significantly slower
during “risky” than “safe” blocks following cTBS to the right lateral PFC
but there was no significant difference in reaction times between “risky”
and “safe” blocks following cTBS to the left lateral PFC. Individuals’ reaction time difference between “risky” and “safe” blocks under cTBS were
then entered as covariates in a group level analysis of the same contrast
(Risky>Safe) in the same WM task performed during fMRI. This accounted
for between-subjects variance thus revealing a number of clusters including
insula, left ventrolateral PFC, anterior cingulate and precuneus which were
more activated during the risky than the safe trials. In summary, participants are slower at performing the visuo-spatial WM task during “risky”
compared to “safe” blocks when they received cTBS over the right lateral
PFC, and individual differences in RT during right PFC cTBS explain individual differences in fMRI activation during the same task.

F28
VENTRAL ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX FACILITATES AFFECTIVE MNEMONIC INTERFERENCE RESOLUTION Crystal Reeck1, Kevin
LaBar1; 1Duke University — When memories compete for retrieval, executive
control resolves interference by enhancing relevant and dampening irrelevant representations. These control processes impose lasting consequences,
such that selected representations are more mnemonically accessible and
competing representations are more readily forgotten. Theories of selective retrieval draw parallels to selective attention, positing that prefrontal
mechanisms that detect and resolve interference from external stimuli are
similarly recruited by mnemonic interference. The present investigation
tested this proposition by examining whether neural mechanisms putatively related to affective control also underlie affective mnemonic interference resolution. Twenty-four participants completed a retrieval-induced
forgetting paradigm while undergoing fMRI. Participants selectively
retrieved items from memory while experiencing mnemonic interference
from either neutral or negative associates. A final recall test revealed that
both neutral and negative associates experienced similar levels of retrieval-induced forgetting, indicating that control enacted similar consequences
regardless of the affective status of mnemonic competitors. Activation in
left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) and dorsal anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC) decreased over multiple successful retrieval attempts, reflecting diminished mnemonic interference. Importantly, connectivity analyses
indicated that VLPFC showed greater positive correlations with subgenual ACC when mnemonic interference was generated by affective representations. Rostral ACC also exhibited increased activation in individuals
that demonstrated greater subsequent forgetting of affective competitors,
further implicating this region in affective mnemonic interference resolution. These findings parallel previous research examining control processes
driven by external affective distracters, demonstrating that executive control processes in memory, like those mobilized in response to external distracters, recruit distinct prefrontal regions when interference arises from
affective sources.

F29
OXYTOCIN INCREASES ANXIETY TO UNPREDICTABLE THREAT
Marissa Krimsky1, Danielle Charney1, Katherine Vytal1, Monique Ernst1, Brian
Cornwell1, Christian Grillon1; 1National Institute of Mental Health — The nonapeptide oxytocin, dubbed by the media as the ‘moral’ or ‘love’ molecule,
has a variety of pro-social effects across species. A relatively simple explanation for these complex effects is that oxytocin alleviates anxiety, thereby
indirectly promoting trust, cooperation and other affiliative behaviors.
Indeed, oxytocin can reduce anxiety-like behavior in animals, via its neuromodulatory influence on the amygdala, a core hub mediating fear and
anxiety. Surprisingly, oxytocin also promotes territoriality, aggression, and
other defensive behaviors toward out-group members, complicating any
straightforward interpretation of oxytocin’s socio-emotional effects. We
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

185

Poster Session F
investigated the effect of oxytocin and vaso pressin during anticipation
of predictable and unpredictable shocks in 24 males and 19 females. Each
subject was tested under placebo, oxytocin, and vaso pressin. Startle was
used as a measure of fear and anxiety. Results showed that oxytocin did not
reduce but rather increased startle potentiation during unpredictable threat
in humans, suggesting that oxytocin enhances anxiety.

F30
STIMULUS-UNAWARE EMOTIONAL ACTIVATION COLORS FIRST
IMPRESSIONS: A REGULATORY ROLE FOR CONSCIOUS ACCESS
Regina C Lapate1, Bas Rokers1, Tianyi Li2, Richard J Davidson1; 1University of
Wisconsin-Madison, 2University of Chicago — Affective stimuli can modulate
central and peripheral-physiological systems independent of awareness. It
has been proposed however that conscious access benefits emotion regulation by rendering affect less diffuse (e.g., less likely to color preferences
for unrelated stimuli). Here, we used an individual-differences approach to
examine this proposal by independently indexing the intensity and diffuseness of affective provocation. Sixty-seven individuals were presented with
blocks of emotional (fearful faces & spiders) and neutral (flowers) stimuli
shown for 1000ms. An interocular suppression technique, continuous flash
suppression (CFS), prevented stimulus visibility in half the trials. To quantify the intensity and diffuseness of the affective elicitation, we recorded
skin conductance responses (SCRs) to the stimuli and likeability ratings of
novel neutral faces presented subsequently. The data from forty-six individuals who were SC responders and whose performance in a 2-alternative-forced-choice stimulus detection paradigm did not significantly differ
from chance (P>.1) were used in the analysis. Emotional stimuli elicited
larger SCRs than neutral ones, F(2,44)=6.46, P=.003; an effect that was not
modulated by stimulus-awareness, P>.56. Specifically, regardless of stimulus-awareness, fearful faces elicited significantly larger SCRs than flowers, Ps<.03. Critically, only during stimulus-unawareness did larger SCRs
to fearful faces (relative to flowers) predict decreased likeability of novel
neutral faces, rho=-.31, P=.03. No such association was found during stimulus awareness, rho=.12, P>.4, and awareness did significantly modulate
the strength of the intensity-diffuseness relationship, 95% CI correlation-coefficient difference: .01, .8, P<.05. This study confirms the privileged processing of fearful expressions and underscores a putative role for conscious
access on behavioral regulation.

F31
FETAL PROGRAMMING EFFECTS OF TESTOSTERONE ON THE
REWARD SYSTEM AND BEHAVIORAL APPROACH TENDENCIES IN HUMANS Michael Lombardo1, Emma Ashwin2, Bonnie Auyeung1,
Bhismadev Chakrabarti3, Meng-Chuan Lai1, Kevin Taylor4, Gerald Hackett5,
Ed Bullmore1, Simon Baron-Cohen1; 1University of Cambridge, 2University of
Bath, 3University of Reading, 4Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, UK, 5Rosie
Maternity Hospital, Cambridge, UK — Sex differences are present in many
neuropsychiatric conditions that affect emotion and approach-avoidance
behavior. One potential mechanism underlying such observations is testosterone in early development. Although much is known about the effects of
testosterone in adolescence and adulthood, little is known in humans about
how testosterone in fetal development influences later neural sensitivity
to valenced facial cues and approach-avoidance behavioral tendencies.
With functional magnetic resonance imaging we scanned 25 8–11-year-old
children while viewing happy, fear, neutral, or scrambled faces. Fetal testosterone (FT) was measured via amniotic fluid sampled between 13 and
20 weeks gestation. Behavioral approach-avoidance tendencies were measured via parental report on the Sensitivity to Punishment and Sensitivity
to Rewards questionnaire. Increasing FT predicted enhanced selectivity
for positive compared with negatively valenced facial cues in reward-related regions such as caudate, putamen, and nucleus accumbens but not
the amygdala. Statistical mediation analyses showed that increasing FT
predicts increased behavioral approach tendencies by biasing caudate,
putamen, and nucleus accumbens but not amygdala to be more responsive
to positive compared with negatively valenced cues. In contrast, FT was not
predictive of behavioral avoidance tendencies, either through direct or neurally mediated paths. This work suggests that testosterone in humans acts
as a fetal programming mechanism on the reward system and influences
behavioral approach tendencies later in life. As a mechanism influencing

186

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
atypical development, FT might be important across a range of neuropsychiatric conditions that asymmetrically affect the sexes, the reward system,
emotion processing, and approach behavior.

F32
BRAIN ACTIVATION DIFFERENCES BETWEEN INFORMATION
AND REWARD PROCESSING Josep Marco-Pallares1,2, Azadeh Hajihosseini3, Antoni Rodríguez-Fornells1,2,4; 1University of Barcelona, 2Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute, IDIBELL, 3University of Victoria, 4Catalan Institution
for Research and Advanced Studies, ICREA — Living in changing environments requires constant adaptation of behavior. Having information about
upcoming events is not only an advantage, but is often crucial for survival.
In a recent study, Bromberg-Martin and Hikosaka found that midbrain and
lateral habenula dopaminergic neurons that fired to rewarding outcomes,
were also phasically excited to a cue informing that the next signal would
indicate the magnitude of the reward (Bromberg-Martin and Hikosaka,
2009, 2011), suggesting that information and reward might activate the
same cerebral network. In the present study, 21 healthy subjects participated in a new experimental paradigm in which either an informative or
a non-informative pre-cue preceded information about the probability of
gaining or losing money (probability cue) or no information (non-probability cue). Functional magnetic resonance imaging revealed that positive
monetary feedbacks activated reward-related areas including Ventral Striatum, Posterior Cingulate Cortex and VentroMedial Prefrontal Cortex. In
contrast, among all these areas, informative pre-cues only activated the
Ventromedial Prefrontal Cortex, as well as the right Hippocampus. Therefore, while there was a certain degree of overlap at the prefrontal cortex
between the two contrasts, other key structures in reward processing such
as Ventral Striatum were not activated by information processing. In conclusion, present results seem to suggest that from brain’s perspective, information and reward are not exchangeable.

F33
PAIN PREDICTABILITY REVERSES VALENCE OF A RELIEF-ASSOCIATED STIMULUS Andreatta Marta1, Mühlberger Andreas1, Glotzbach-Schoon Evelyn1, Pauli Paul1; 1University of Würzburg — Relief from pain
entails reward-like properties and stimuli presented upon pain termination acquire implicit appetitive properties, but explicit aversive properties
(Andreatta et al., 2012). Relief pleasantness depends on pain averseness,
and pain averseness may be increased by unpredictability. Here, we investigated whether the un-predictability of pain modulates the pleasantness of
a relief-associated stimulus. Thirty (Study1) and twenty-eight (Study2) participants underwent a conditioning phase followed by a test phase. During
conditioning, a visual stimulus (FORWARDCS+) was presented before
a painful electric shock (unconditioned stimulus, US), another stimulus
(BACKWARDCS+) was presented after US, and a third stimulus (CS-) was
never associated with US. In Study1, FORWARDCS+ predicted half of the
USs, the other half was delivered unwarned before the BACKWARDCS+.
In Study2, all USs were fully predicted by FORWARDCS+ and always
followed by BACKWARDCS+. During test, no US was delivered and an
additional stimulus (NEW) was presented as control. Startle reflex, ratings
of valence and of arousal were collected as learning indices. No discriminative startle responses were found to the CSs in Study1, but startle potentiation to FORWARDCS+, and startle attenuation to BACKWARDCS+ were
found in Study 2. Participants of Study1 reported both FORWARDCS+
and BACKWARDCS+ as associated with US, whereas in Study2 only FORWARDCS+ was indicated. Possibly, such awareness influenced the ratings.
Thus, both FORWARDCS+ and BACKWARDCS+ were reported as aversive in Study1, while BACKWARDCS+ was rated with positive valence
and low arousal as opposed to FORWARDCS+ in Study2. In summary,
predictability of US reverses valence ratings of a relief-associated stimulus.

F34
NEGATIVE MUSIC MODULATES AMYGDALA RESPONSIVITY TO
SURPRISED FACES Alison M. Mattek1, Amy L. Palmer1, Paul J. Whalen;
Dartmouth College — Functional MRI studies have demonstrated a
robust activation of the amygdala to facial expressions of emotion. If the
expression is ambiguous (e.g., surprise), amygdala responses are modulated by the perceiver’s interpretation of the expression. Previous studies
have also shown that music can bias interpretations of ambiguous facial

1

2013 Annual Meeting
expressions. This study investigated how differentially valenced musical
contexts would bias amygdala responses to surpised facial expressions.
During fMRI scans, subjects listened to 16 minutes of valenced (i.e., either
positive or negative) music followed by alternating blocks of surprised
faces and fixation. Because amygdala signal changes tend to habituate
with repeated presentations, blocks of surprised faces were divided into
early and late trials within each run. A significant music by time interaction
was observed in the right amygdala. Subjects primed with negative music
showed a heightened right amygdala signal to surprised faces during early
trials that quickly habituated. Conversely, subjects primed with positive
music showed moderate right amygdala signal that was sustained through
both the early and late trials. This amygdala response pattern to surprised
faces preceded by negative music strongly resembles amygdala responses
to fearful faces devoid of any musical context (see Whalen et al., 2009). This
suggests that negative music biased perceivers to interpret surprised faces
as more negative. However, amygdala responses to surprised faces preceded by positive music were typical of those seen to surprise faces devoid
of a musical context, suggesting that the positive music did not necessarily
bias the interpretation of surprise.

F35
NEUROIMAGING STUDIES OF HUNGER AND IMPULSIVITY

Vlad
B. Papa1, Erica M. Orenstein1, Kevin E. Ruprecht1, Tyler E. Owens2, Laura E.
Martin1; 1University of Kansas Medical Center, 2University of Kansas — Impulsive decision-making is associated with enhanced sensitivity to immediate
over delayed rewards. The medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), the anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC), and the insula are involved in evaluating rewards
and making decisions. The current study used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine impulsive decision-making when participants reported increasing levels of hunger and no change in hunger over
the 2 hours prior to the scan. Scans were performed using a 3 Tesla Siemens
Skyra scanner. A mixed group of healthy weight to obese subjects was separated into an increasing hunger group, and a no change in hunger group.
Participants performed a delay discounting task during which they chose
between a smaller immediately available reward and a larger delayed
reward. fMRI data were analyzed using AFNI and focused on brain
responses when participants selected the immediately available reward,
delayed reward and the difference in brain responses between choosing
the immediately available vs. the delayed reward. Preliminary results show
differences in brain activations between subjects who reported increases in
hunger compared to those who did not report changes in hunger levels, in
the insula and MPFC when choosing the delayed reward, but no differential brain activations were found when choosing the immediately available
reward. Overall, the MPFC and insula may be activating more to suppress
the urge to select an immediate choice when participants are hungry. These
results indicate that changes in hunger impact impulsive decision-making
and have implications for the development of health interventions.

F36
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES AND NEURAL CORRELATES OF
LEARNING FACES WITH CARICATURED INNER OR OUTER FEATURES Stefan R. Schweinberger1, Jan Plötner1, Claudia Schulz1,2, Franz J.
Neyer1, Jürgen M. Kaufmann1; 1Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany,
University Hospital, Münster, Germany — Previous findings demonstrated
that increasing distinctiveness via spatial caricaturing improves face learning, and causes modulations of event-related-potential (ERP) components
associated with processing of typical shape information (P200) and with
face learning and recognition (N250). We investigated the extent to which
this caricature learning advantage is driven by exaggerated shape of inner
or outer facial features. In addition, we tested whether individual differences in face recognition skills are associated with differences in the role
of caricatured inner and outer features. In a face learning paradigm, previously unfamiliar faces were presented either 1) as veridical portraits, 2)
with only inner features caricatured, 3) with only outer features caricatured, or 4) with both inner and outer features caricatured in shape. In a
subsequent recognition test, participants performed a face familiarity task
on learned and novel faces. Different image exemplars were used at learning at test. Both accuracy and ERPs suggested that the caricature learning
advantage was mainly driven by exaggerated shape of inner features, with
little contribution of external features. We also found that while individual

2

Poster Session F
differences in face recognition skills were not associated with differential
efficiency of inner and outer feature caricatures, individuals with poorer
face recognition profited more from caricatured shape information overall. The results suggest that shape caricaturing facilitates the acquisition of
new face representations by exaggerating critical idiosyncratic information
of inner facial features. Moreover, at least within the normal range of face
recognition skills, individual differences in face learning appear unrelated
to differences between inner and outer facial features.

F37
EVIDENCE THAT THE EVOKED RESPONSE OF DORSOMEDIAL
PREFRONTAL CORTEX TO FIXATION BASELINE PERIODS FACILITATES FUTURE SOCIAL (BUT NOT NONSOCIAL) INFERENTIAL
(BUT NOT NON-INFERENTIAL) JUDGMENTS Robert Spunt1,2, Meghan
Meyer2, Matthew Lieberman2; 1California Institute of Technology, 2University
of California, Los Angeles — People draw inferences about each other with
great efficiency. Such inferences are typically executed in order to refer
transient observed behaviors ( e.g.,“smiling”) to relatively more permanent unobservable states (e.g.,“friendly”). A large body of evidence has
delineated a set of brain regions that are reliably correlated with the performance of such mental state inferences: the mentalizing system. Intriguingly, this system shows considerable anatomical overlap with the default
mode network, so-called because it is exhibits strong, integrated activity
when people are at rest, for instance, duration fixation baseline periods.
Here, we used fMRI to test the hypothesis that activity of the mentalizing
system during these fixation periods prior to social inferential judgments
would increase the efficiency of such judgments. 21 healthy adults underwent event-related fMRI while executing three types of judgments: social
inferential (evaluating a mental description of a photographed behavior);
social non-inferential (evaluating a motor description of a photographed
behavior); or non-social (evaluating an arithmetical expression). Social
inferential judgments robustly activated the mentalizing system, and many
of the same areas were robustly de-activated by the non-social task when
compared to the fixation baseline periods in between each trial. A parametric analysis of response time revealed that increased activity during these
pre-trial periods in one of these regions, dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, was
associated with faster response times to accurate social (but not non-social)
inferential (but not non-inferential) judgments. This provides the best support yet for a functional link between default activity of the mentalizing
system and the execution of social inferences.

F38
SOMETHING ALWAYS STICKS? - EMOTIONAL MODULATION OF
NEUTRAL FACE PERCEPTION IN AN IMPLICIT MEMORY DESIGN
Janine Strehlow1, Johanna M. Kissler2; 1University of Konstanz, Germany, 2University of Bielefeld, Germany — Emotional stimuli modulate EEG event-related potentials (ERPs) at distinct processing stages. In a previous study
we demonstrated that neutral faces associated with negative context elicit
larger LPPs during recognition testing than neutral faces associated with
neutral context in an explicit memory design. The present study investigates the effect of emotional context on perception and processing of neutral
faces in an implicit design. We collected event-related potentials from 24
healthy students (12 male / 12 female). At first participants viewed briefly
presented neutral faces. During a second run each face was preceded by a
descriptive phrase about the person’s occupation or criminal activities that
participants were instructed to read attentively. Faces finally were re-presented randomly mixed with new ones. In addition to a surprise old-new
recognition test participants performed a nine-step sympathy rating. Recognition performance was similar for faces presented in negative and neutral context. However, sympathy ratings differed significantly: Faces that
had been presented in negative context were evaluated more negatively
than faces presented in neutral context. Still, follow-up analyses revealed
that evaluative changes were driven by the explicitly recognized faces. On
a neural level old faces associated with negative information elicited larger
left-parietal negativity around 300 ms after stimulus presentation than old
faces with neutral context or new stimuli. No context-related modulations
were found for N1, EPN and LPP components. Results indicate that evaluative changes due to an affective context rely on explicit mnemonic processes even in implicit designs and specify a neural correlate for this effect.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

187

Poster Session F

F39
ACCURATE INTEROCEPTIVE AWARENESS ENHANCES EMOTIONAL SENSIBILITY Yuri Terasawa1,2, Yoshiya Moriguchi2,3, Saiko Tochizawa4, Riko Sato4, Satoshi Umeda4; 1Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), 2Department of Psychophysiology, National Center of Neurology
and Psychiatry, 3Integrative Brain Imaging Center (IBIC), National Center of
Neurology and Psychiatry, 4Department of Psychology, Keio University — The
peripheral theory of emotion suggests that subjective experience of emotion
and interoception are essentially related. Some researches showed that the
interoceptive sensibility predicts emotional sensibility and anxiety traits. In
this study, we examined whether the interoceptive sensibility modulates
emotional experience in social context, using with facial expressions. Thirty
graduate and undergraduate students participated our study. The interoceptive sensibility was measured by the heartbeat detection task. In this
task, participants were required to report number of heartbeats that they
could feel over a period of time. Interoceptive sensibility was evaluated by
the levels of dissociation between reported and actual heartbeats (interoception error rate). We selected 5 types of facial expression photos, those
were happy, sadness, disgust, anger and neutral. We made morphed continua photos between neutral and each facial expression. We prepared eight
steps between neutral-100% and each emotion 100%. Each stimulus was
presented in random order and participants judged whether they can feel
any emotion from the stimulus or not, and chose the most appropriate emotion when they judged the stimulus have emotional valence. Individual’s
threshold to feel the emotion were obtained from their responses against
the facial expression photos. Interoception error rate was significantly correlated with sensibility to happiness and sadness. The results imply that
individuals who are sensitive to their own interoceptive information are
also sensitive to emotions presented in facial expressions. The results suggest that interoceptive awareness modulates intensity of subjective experience of emotion and affects personality traits concerned with emotion
processing.

F40
FMRI EVIDENCE FOR WHETHER MORALS ARE PROCESSED
LIKE FACTS OR PREFERENCES Jordan Theriault1, Adam Waytz2, Larisa
Heiphetz3, Liane Young1; 1Boston College, 2Northwestern University, 3Harvard
University — Are statements of moral value more like statements of objective
fact or statements of subjective preference? Prior work in philosophy and
psychology has examined issues of moral “objectivism” versus “subjectivism”. Using fMRI, we measured neural responses to statements of morals,
preferences, and facts to determine whether morals are processed more like
preferences or more like facts. Statements were designed such that participants would agree with half and disagree with half, within each domain
(morals, preferences, facts). Participants reported agreement/disagreement
in the scanner. We focused on regions of interest (ROIs) for theory of mind
(ToM) using a standard localizer task: right/left temporo-parietal junction
(RTPJ/LTPJ), dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC). First, we found
that the average magnitude of response in ToM ROIs was equally robust
for morals and preferences, whereas the response was reduced for facts.
Second, we found that within the RTPJ, LTPJ, and DMPFC the increase in
activation for morals and preferences relative to facts was driven by disagreeable statements. These findings reveal broad similarities in the neural
processing of morals and preferences versus facts. Moreover, people may
be especially inclined to consider the “minds” behind morals (or preferences) versus facts in the case of disagreement.

F41
BRAIN REGIONS FOR THEORY OF MIND DISTINGUISH BETWEEN
COOPERATIVE AND COMPETITIVE INTERACTIONS IN A “ROCK,
PAPER, SCISSORS” GAME Lily Tsoi1, James Dungan1, Liane Young1;
Boston College — Prior work suggests we dehumanize our opponents
during intergroup conflict but attribute mental states to close others. Other
work suggests that theory of mind (ToM) is essential for strategic, competitive interactions. We investigated whether brain regions for ToM are
differentially recruited for competitive versus cooperative interactions and
whether this dimension is encoded in these regions. Participants played a
variant of “Rock, Paper, Scissors” with one other player (actually the computer), in which they had to pick a shape (circle, square) and also try to

1

188

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
guess what shape the other player would pick. In “cooperate” trials, players worked together toward the same goal to both win $1 (“if you both
guess the same shape, you’ll both win $1”). In “compete” trials, players
had opposite goals, and only one person could win $1. In the control trials,
the computer generated a shape, and either both players would win or
only one would win, mimicking “cooperate” and “compete” trials, respectively. First, region of interest (ROI) analyses revealed greater activation
for compete and cooperate over control trials in ToM regions: precuneus,
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC), and right temporo-parietal junction (RTPJ). Second, distinct patterns emerged across ROIs when comparing competitive and cooperative interactions: greater precuneus activity for
competitive, greater DMPFC activity for cooperative, and equally robust
activity in RTPJ. Third, multi-voxel pattern analyses (MVPA) revealed all
three regions, including RTPJ, encode whether an interaction is cooperative
or competitive. These results suggest that competitive versus cooperative
interactions engage different components of ToM with distinct neural substrates.

F42
A TRAIT CODE IS REPRESENTED IN THE MEDIAL PREFRONTAL
CORTEX Frank Van Overwalle1, Ning Ma1, Kris Baetens1, Marie Vandekerckhove1, Jenny Kestemont1, Wim Fias2; 1Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium,
Ghent University, Belgium — The medial Prefrontal Cortex (mPFC) is critically involved in inference about the traits of the self and others. We investigated whether the mPFC also represents the neural code for traits, or trait
code. To localize the trait code, we used fMRI-adaptation, which is a rapid
suppression of neuronal responses upon repeated presentation of the same
underlying stimulus, in this case, the implied trait. Participants had to infer
an agent’s (social) trait from brief trait-implying behavioral descriptions. In
each trial, the critical (target) sentence was preceded by a sentence (prime)
that implied the same trait, the opposite trait, or no trait at all. The results
revealed robust suppression of activation in the ventral mPFC only. Crucially, this adaptation effect was graded: strongest after being primed with
a similar trait, moderate after an opposite trait and negligible after a trait-irrelevant prime. These findings indicate that a trait code is represented in
the ventral mPFC.

2

F43
ANTERIOR TEMPORAL FACE PATCHES: A META-ANALYSIS AND
EMPIRICAL STUDY Rebecca J. Von Der Heide1, Laura M. Skipper1, Ingrid
R. Olson1; 1Temple University — High-resolution fMRI studies of nonhuman primates have reported the existence of face-sensitive patches in the
ventral anterior temporal lobes (ATL). Studies in humans have suggested
the function of these patches is related to the mnemonic aspects of person
processing. First, neurons in these regions have response profiles indicative of mnemonic activity. Second, a face sensitive P350 ERP component
has been localized to the ventral ATL in patients undergoing resection
surgery. Third, ATL resection or damage causes an associative prosopagnosia in which face perception is intact but face memory is compromised.
Although fMRI studies of humans have extended these findings, it remains
unclear if activations to novel and familiar faces in humans are similar to
those reported in studies of non-human primates. It is also unclear whether
regions of the ATL are preferentially sensitive to famous and personally
familiar faces and if activations to these stimuli are similar. We present the
results of two studies of person memory: a meta-analysis of existing fMRI
studies and an empirical fMRI study using optimized imaging parameters.
The findings from the empirical study and meta-analysis were remarkably
similar showing left-lateralized ATL activations to familiar individuals
whereas novel faces activated the right ATL. The only consistent overlap
in activations in both studies to faces associated with knowledge was in the
polar tip of the ATL. Activations to famous faces were quite ventral, similar
to those reported in nonhuman primates. These findings suggest that face
memory-sensitive patches in the human ATL are in the ventral/polar ATL.

F44
WALKING IN AND OUT OF VIEW: DIRECTION OF ANIMATE
MOTION REVEALS SOCIAL ORIENTING OF ATTENTION Nicole
White1, Adam Anderson1, Jay Pratt1; 1University of Toronto — Research in
humans and non-human animals suggests that attention capture by animate motion is both reflexive and innate. Some authors suggest further that

2013 Annual Meeting
visual processing of animacy may contribute critically to social cognition,
as complex inferences about intentional agents can be drawn from sparse
motion cues. The present study explicitly tests the hypothesis that visual
processing of animate motion is linked to more complex social cognitive
tasks by examining competitive bias of attention in a two-stimulus display.
We demonstrate that, when participants are presented with two instances
of identical human motion in the left and right visual periphery, attention
is biased towards human figures appearing to approach the observer’s
central field of vision (i.e., figures facing towards the observer’s fixation).
The time-course of attentional bias was also significantly related to scores
on a Theory of Mind task; participants with higher scores showed attentional bias faster, indicating a link between animate motion processing and
higher-level social cognitive abilities. Subjective ratings of animacy experience (“aliveness”) and agent recognition (“humanness”) collected after the
experiment also reliably predicted reaction times in the visual task. Participants who rated stimuli as both “highly alive” and “highly human” exhibited the fastest responses, while the slowest responses were observed for
participants who rated stimuli as “highly alive” but low in “humanness”.
These results suggest that visual processing speed is associated with subjective recognition of animacy and agency. Further work using event-related potentials will investigate whether these findings reflect modulation
of early visual processes (e.g., the P1 component).

F45
FACES IN CONTEXT: – THE MUTUAL INFLUENCE OF FACIAL
EXPRESSIONS, GAZE DIRECTION, AND VISUAL CONTEXT
SCENES ON VISUO-CORTICAL PROCESSING Matthias Wieser1, Paul
Pauli1, Andreas Keil2; 1University of Würzburg, 2University of Florida — Perception of facial expressions is typically investigated by presenting isolated face stimuli. In everyday life, however, faces are rarely seen without a surrounding visual context. Conversely, fearful faces may act as a
cue, heightening the sensitivity of the visual system to effectively detect
potential threat in the environment. In addition, gaze direction may interact
with facial expressions leading to differential processing of the face itself
but also the surrounding contexts. In the present studies, we used steadystate visual evoked potentials (ssVEP) to examine the mutual effects of
facial expressions, gaze direction, and affective visual context. By assigning
two different flicker frequencies (12 vs. 15 Hz) to the face and the context
scene, cortical activity to the concurrent stimuli was separated, allowing
to track the cortical processing of the face and the context independently.
Participants viewed flickering faces (angry, fearful, neutral) with averted or
direct gaze overlaid on flickering visual scenes, while performing a simple
change-detection task at fixation, and high-density EEG was recorded.
Analysis of mean ssVEP amplitudes revealed that cortical processing of
fearful faces with averted compared to direct gaze was enhanced only
when unpleasant context scenes were presented. These findings point at a
complex interplay between facial expressions, gaze direction, and context
on visual perception, which further challenge the assumption of hardwired
categorical emotion extraction mechanisms.

F46
TRAINING EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS INDUCED NEURAL CHANGES
IN READING Pedro M. Paz-Alonso1, Maria R. Rueda2, Sonia Guerra2, Myriam
Oliver1, Manuel Carreiras1; 1Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language
(BCBL), Spain, 2University of Granada, Spain — Cognitive psychologists have
begun to devise effective methods for training cognitive abilities. Recent
evidence suggests that some of the core ingredients of cognition are susceptible to substantial practice-related improvements. Nevertheless, little is
yet known about the neural changes supporting these improvements and
to what extent the strengthening of executive functions transfers to other
domains, such as reading. The present fMRI study was aimed at investigating the neural changes in cognitive control and reading abilities induced
by training executive functions. A total of 56 participants aged 8-9 years
took part in the study. Before undergoing training, participants’ higher
cognitive functions and reading abilities were assessed behaviorally and
with functional MRI. Then, participants either received 8 sessions of computer-based games of increasing difficulty intended to train attention and
executive control abilities (Experimental Group) or received an equally
long control intervention playing the lower levels of difficulty of the same
games (Control Group). After training, participants’ cognitive functions

Poster Session F
were again assessed behaviorally and in the scanner. Similar to prior evidence, our results revealed that the experimental intervention improved
participants’ fluid reasoning and working memory, but it did not influence
participants’ crystallized intelligence. Training modulated the involvement
of fronto-parietal networks in cognitive control, as well as critical regions
within the reading network including the left inferior frontal gyrus and the
ventral occipitotemporal cortex. Interventions intended to train executive
functions might not only produce benefits in the specific functions being
trained, but also yield transfer effects in untrained functions, such as fluid
reasoning and reading.

F47
NEURAL REACTIONS TO POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE FEEDBACK
CHANGE ACROSS CHILD AND ADOLSCENT DEVELOPMENT Sabine
Peters1,2, Eveline A. Crone1,2,3; 1Brain and Development Lab, Leiden University, The Netherlands, 2Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, The Netherlands, 3Developmental Psychology, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
— Learning from feedback is a crucial component of adaptive behavior,
which continues to develop across childhood and adolescence. Recently,
developmental neuroscientists have started to investigate if feedback learning in adults and children relies on similar neural mechanisms. In one
study (Van Duijvenvoorde et al. ,2008), the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC) and parietal cortex were more active in adults after negative
feedback, but in children after positive feedback. In this study, we further
investigated these neurodevelopmental patterns in a larger sample of participants (n=271, 8-25 years old) in a more complex multiple-trial learning
setting. Participants completed a task that was designed to compare feedback learning networks in children and adults, as well as possible valence
differences across development, while ensuring that positive and negative
feedback were similarly informative for learning. Behaviorally, adolescents
and adults demonstrated faster learning than children. The neuroimaging
data indicated that adolescents and adults recruited the fronto-parietal network and medial prefrontal cortex to a greater extent. Performance was
correlated with neural activity during learning in areas within the feedback
learning network, even after age-correction. Crucially, children showed
more activation in the DLPFC and superior parietal cortex after positive
feedback, whereas adults showed more activation in these areas after negative feedback. The results provide more specific evidence for the hypothesis
that during child development, the role of the DLPFC and parietal cortex
changes from a focus on positive feedback towards a focus on negative
feedback.

F48
EFFECTS OF AGE AND VASCULAR RISK FACTORS ON PERFORMANCE DURING THREE INHIBITORY CONTROL PARADIGMS IN
COGNITIVELY NORMAL OLDER ADULTS Alexandra Roach1, Samuel
Lockhart1, Charles DeCarli1; 1University of California Davis — In normal,
healthy aging, older adults experience cognitive decline across multiple
domains. Previous work has shown that aging affects the inhibitory control
network, however, no study has simultaneously investigated the affects of
age and vascular risk factors on three forms of inhibitory control. Using
the Go-NoGo task, we tested basic response inhibition; with the Eriksen
Flanker task, we evaluated inhibition of response competition driven by
the interference of incompatible arrow directionality; and with the Stroop
task, we assessed response competition driven by the interference of
incompatible word stimuli. We tested cognitively normal young adults
(18-30 years) and cognitively normal older adults (65-90 years) on each of
the three inhibitory control paradigms. Our research questions focused on
1) whether there were appreciable differences in interference across these
tasks that differed between younger and older adults, and 2) whether these
specific performance deficits within the older adults were correlated with
neuroimaging biomarkers including severity of white matter injury (as
measured by white matter hyperintensities), and white matter integrity (as
measured by fractional anisotropy). Results showed a consistent interference effect that was greater in the Stroop than the Flanker for both younger
and older adults, however, response inhibition during the Go-NoGo task
remained intact. Additionally, performance differences between compatible and incompatible trials were mediated by the presence of white matter

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

189

Poster Session F
hyperintensities indicating that white matter injury exacerbates age-related
cognitive decline in normal aging. Our results demonstrate differences in
the affects of aging across the different inhibitory control paradigms.

F49
INCREASED P2 EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL RESPONSE IN
OLDER INDIVIDUALS WITH EXCEPTIONAL MEMORY FUNCTION
Rebecca Shukhman1, Krishna L. Bharani1, Katherine D’Aunno1, Kristen Rose
Whitney2, Robert S. Hurley2, Sandra Weintraub2, Emily Rogalski2, M-Marsel
Mesulam2, Robert G. Morrison1; 1Loyola University Chicago, 2Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine — The Northwestern SuperAging Project
recruits individuals over the age of 80 with exceptional memory function
to explore potential causes for their cognitive resilience. An initial cohort
of SuperAgers, have significantly thicker cortices than their healthy agematched peers and thicker left anterior cingulate cortices (ACC) than much
younger individuals with age-typical memory function (Harrison et al.,
2012). While ACC thickness did not correlate with memory function, it is
possible that SuperAgers’s different ACC morphology contributes to their
memory resilience. In the present study 10 SuperAgers (M = 85.1 years-old,
M=14.8 years-education) and 10 older adult controls (OAs, M = 76.1 yearsold, M=17.1 years-education) performed 300 trials of a visual Go-NoGo
task while we recorded scalp electroencephalography (EEG). While there
were no reliable differences in accuracy or RT between groups, SuperAgers showed dramatically different event-related potentials (ERPs) in both
Go and NoGo conditions. For example, SuperAgers showed greater fronto-central P2 (200-300ms) ERPs (p=.01) than controls, as well as a greater
difference between the NoGo and Go centro-parietal P3 ERP (450-650ms; p
=.04). The P2 topography was consistent with a dorsal ACC source. Mean
P2 amplitude was highly correlated with individual RAVLT memory
performance (r=.70) suggesting early engagement of cognitive control
resources may enhance subsequent memory processes. Understanding
how unusually successful older adults’ enhanced cognitive control contributes to better memory performance may provide insight into how to
improve cognitive aging trajectories for both those showing normal decline
as well as those exhibiting the severe decline typical in Alzheimer’s disease.

F50
EFFECTS OF REAL-TIME STRATEGY VIDEO GAME TRAINING ON
WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY IN INTERHEMISPHERIC POSTERIOR
CALLOSAL CONNECTIONS OF THE PRECUNEUS IN HEALTHY
AGING Maren Strenziok1, Ellen Clarke1, Sophia A. Santa Cruz1, James C.
Thompson1, Raja Parasuraman1, Pamela M. Greenwood; 1George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA — Although good cognitive functioning in old age
appears to depend on white matter integrity, the ability of cognitive training to heighten white matter integrity has been largely unexplored. Previous studies reported that memory training increased integrity of prefrontal
white matter and anterior corpus callosum (CC) compared to no-contact
control groups. Such effects may reflect different performance expectations
of trained and non-trained groups, so that it remains unknown whether
white matter changes can be detected between cognitive training tasks that
may vary in effectiveness. Adults over age 60 were randomly assigned to
real-time strategy (Rise of Nations, RON) or auditory perception (Brain Fitness, BF) training. RON was previously shown to improve cognitive control, and BF was shown to improve memory in older people. Fractional
anisotropy (FA) from diffusion-weighted images (12 gradient directions;
b=1000s/mm2; TE=75ms; TR=1000ms; 50 slices, 3mm thick, 4 repetitions),
processed with longitudinal tract-based spatial statistics (FSL), were measured before and after training. Group (RON, BF) by time (pre-training,
post-training) whole brain ANOVA interaction effects analyses revealed
lower FA in the CC splenium after RON training (p<0.05, tfce-corrected).
No change was found after BF training. Probabilistic tractography seeded
from the peak intensity area in the splenium revealed interhemispheric
pathways connecting the bilateral precuneus. We conclude that in aging,
strategy training specifically decreases reliance on interhemispheric parietal connections involved in spatially-guided behavior and attention. Even
though decreased FA is thought to reflect lower white matter integrity,
trajectories are likely a more complex result of regional changes with age,
disease, and interventions.

190

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

F51
DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF GAIN VS. LOSS ANTICIPATION ON
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF ERROR AND FEEDBACK PROCESSING IN CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS Kerstin
Unger1, Kray Jutta1; 1Saarland University, Saarbruecken, Germany — Previous
research suggests that adolescents are characterized by stronger reward
sensitivity compared to children and younger adults. However, less is
known so far about the extent to which developmental differences in incentive processing affect behavioral adaptation during feedback-based learning. In this study, we examined the influence of appetitive and aversive
cues on error and feedback processing – as reflected in the error-negativity (Ne/ERN) and feedback-related negativity (FRN) in 10- to 11-year-old
children and 13- to 14-year-old adolescents. We applied a specific variant
of a reinforcement task in which errors resulted in losing money (loss condition), failure to gain money (gain condition), or neither of both (neutral
condition). Incentive value was varied trial-by-trial and was indicated by
’loss’, ‘gain’, and ‘neutral’ cues prior to each imperative stimulus. Although
learning performance did not differ significantly between loss, gain, and
neutral conditions in children and adolescents, gain anticipation differentially affected error and feedback processing. Children showed a larger Ne/
ERN on gain trials relative to loss and neutral trials, suggesting that gain
expectation was associated with an increased reactivity of a rapid internal
error detection mechanism. While incentive value did not modulate the
Ne/ERN in adolescents, gain anticipation resulted in more differentiated
processing of positive and negative feedback, mainly due to reduced (i.e.
more positive) FRN amplitudes on correct trials. Our data suggest that the
transition from childhood to adolescence is accompanied by a shift in a
relatively greater sensitivity to the motivational value of feedback stimuli,
particularly if prior cues signal higher rewards.

F52
MODULATING YOUNGER AND OLDER ADULTS’ PERFORMANCE
IN IGNORING PICTORIAL INFORMATION DURING A WORD
MATCHING TASK Andrea J. Wilkinson1, Lixia Yang1, Ben Dyson1; 1Ryerson
University — The current study sought to examine the extent to which distracting pictorial information affects semantic word matching performance
in younger and older adults. This was tested in the context of semantic
relations between task-relevant word pairs, a task-irrelevant picture and
resultant N400 differences. During EEG monitoring, younger and older
adults were shown a prime word superimposed on a to-be-ignored picture,
followed by a test word. Their task was to determine whether the prime
and test word were semantically related. The to-be-ignored pictures were
interfering (for ‘No’ trials), facilitating (for ‘Yes’ trials), or neutral (for both
‘Yes’ and ‘No’ trials) to the expected responses. The relationship between
inhibitory and facilitatory effects of a to-be-ignored picture was assessed
during a more automatic and a more controlled condition by manipulating
the context-test ISI as 50 ms and 1000 ms, respectively. Test display analysis
of the N400 at centro-parietal sites revealed similar N400 amplitudes for the
‘No’ response trials at either ISI, revealing that younger and older adults
showed an equivalent effect from interfering pictures. In contrast, younger
adults showed greater reductions in the N400, as compared to older adults,
for ‘Yes’ facilitation trials - but only in the long ISI condition. These results
suggest that younger adults utilize irrelevant but facilitating pictorial information in a semantic word matching task, specifically during controlled
retrieval.

F53
ALTERED N400 CONGRUITY EFFECTS IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE WITHOUT DEMENTIA Marta Kutas1,2, Vicente Iragui1, Yu-Qiong
Niu3,4, Tanya D’Avanzo5, Jin-Chen Yang3,4, David Salmon1, Lin Zhang3, John
Olichney3,4; 1Department of Cognitive Science, University of California San
Diego, 2Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego,
3
Department of Neurology, University of California Davis, 4Center for Mind and
Brain, University of California Davis, 5Department of Psychology, Rehabilitation
Hospital of the Paciﬁc, Honolulu, Hawaii — The N400 congruity effect (ERP
300-500 ms post stimulus onset to contextually incongruent minus congruent words) generally shows a linear amplitude decrease with normal aging,
and an even greater decrease in Alzheimer’s dementia. As little is known
about N400 effects in Parkinson’s disease (PD), we recorded ERPs in 11

2013 Annual Meeting
elderly medicated patients with PD (without dementia, mean age = 66.4
yrs, mean duration of illness = 10.8 yrs) during antonymic and category
verification. Eleven (11) healthy elderly controls (mean age = 65.7 yrs) also
participated in the study. Non-demented PD patients exhibited substantially larger N400 congruity effects (~2 μV) than the age-matched controls
for both the opposites (F(1, 10) = 21.8, p < .001) and categories (F(1, 10) =
5.5, p < .05) conditions, consistent with reports of behavioral hyper-priming and possibly insufficient inhibition of irrelevant semantic information
and/or greater target activation. It is also consistent with abnormally heavy
reliance in PD on external cues. These findings implicate abnormal dopaminergic signaling (e.g., frontostriatal and/or mesocortical circuits) in PD,
despite L-dopa therapy.

F54
NEURAL CORRELATES OF COGNITIVE INHIBITION FOR EMOTIONAL CONTENT IN ADOLESCENTS Laura Quiñones-Camacho1, Coral
Rosado-Santiago1, Cybelle M. López-Valentín1, Lydia C. Rodríguez-Corcelles1,
Ángel A. Nuñez-Méndez1, Nicole M. Ryan-Nolla1, Antonio Algaze-Beato2,3,
Giovanni Tirado-Santiago1; 1University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras Campus,
2
University of Puerto Rico, Medical Sciences Campus, 3University of Puerto
Rico, Bayamón Campus — Cognitive inhibition (CI), the ability to ignore
non-relevant information, has been studied extensively in adults. However,
there are few studies of CI in adolescents. The aim of this study was to
assess in adolescents the neural correlates of CI for emotional information
using BOLD fMRI at 3T during a Prose Distraction Task (PDT). The task
consisted of four 85 word-long stories that remained on-screen for 66s,
followed by a 15s fixation point. Interspersed within each story, arbitrary
words printed in italics served as distractors of either neutral or negative
emotional valence (a total of two stories of each type were shown). Recent
studies have shown increased activation of the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG)
when the demand of attention grows and inhibition of emotional stimuli is
necessary. We hypothesized that CI for emotional stimuli in this task would
require areas related to inhibition and emotional processing such as the
IFG and the amygdala. We also hypothesized that participants would take
longer to read stories with negative emotional distractors than with neutral
distractors. Seven participants (3 females; mean age 14.28 years, SD=1.17)
were assessed to rule out any serious behavioral or psychological disorder.
Afterwards, participants completed the PDT during an fMRI session. A
fixed-effects analysis in FSL demonstrated that, in our sample, the left IFG
demonstrated a significantly higher BOLD response when reading stories
with negative vs. neutral distractors. These data show a trend similar to
previous studies where IFG showed higher activation in tasks with emotional stimuli and larger attentional demands.

F55
MUSIC TRAINING IS LINKED TO ENHANCED EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS IN CHILDREN: EVIDENCE FROM ERPS AND NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL TESTS Katri Saarikivi1,2, Vesa Putkinen1,2, Mari Tervaniemi1,2,
Minna Huotilainen1,2,3; 1University of Helsinki, 2University of Jyväskylä, 3Institute
of Occupational Health — The transfer effects of music training are broad,
ranging from enhancement of verbal auditory memory and attention to
better intellectual ability as measured with cognitive ability tests. Improved
executive functions are one candidate mechanism for explaining the extent
of this cognitive enhancement. In this study, we combined the search for
an underlying mechanism to a developmental perspective. We investigated the differences in executive functions between children aged 9-15
engaged in music training since the age of 7 and their not musically trained
but active peers. The investigations took place two years apart (Time 1 and
Time 2), enabling a follow-up of the development of brain responses and
their connection to neurocognitive test performance. We found that the P3a
response measured at Time1 predicts test performance at Time 2, irrespective of musical training or age-related maturation. In addition, musically
trained children showed greater P3a responses at both measurement times
and better overall test performance at Time 2. These results point towards
the role of the P3a as an index of executive functions and provide support
for the role of music training in developing these neurocognitive skills.

Poster Session F

F56
INTRA-INDIVIDUAL RESPONSE TIME VARIABILITY IN CHRONIC
METHAMPHETAMINE ABUSERS WITH AND WITHOUT METH-INDUCED PSYCHOSIS Catherine Fassbender1, Stefan Ursu1, Ruth Salo1; 1UC

Davis Imaging Research Center — Intra-individual variability (IIV) in an
individual’s response times (RT) has been used successfully as an index
of inattention in disorders such as ADHD and schizophrenia. IIV has also
been linked to functional brain activity. To our knowledge an examination
of RT IIV and its relation to brain activity on a cognitive paradigm has
never been carried out in methamphetamine (MA) abuse. We examined RT
IIV using a Stroop paradigm and how this IIV related to brain activity in 30
currently drug abstinent (3 mos to 2 yrs) MA abusers compared to 27 non
substance-abusing controls. We calculated IIV for congruent and incongruent stimuli separately. Repeated Measures ANOVA with group (MA, control) as a between-subjects factor and stimulus (congruent, incongruent) as
a within-subjects factor revealed a main effect of stimulus with higher IIV
in incongruent compared to congruent stimuli (p=0.001). Although the MA
group was more variable than the controls, this difference did not reach significance (p=0.14). However, when the MA group was divided into those
subjects who had experienced MA-induced psychosis (MAP+; n=20) and
those who had not (MAP-; n=10), group differences emerged (p=0.01). The
MAP+ group had higher IIV compared to the other groups (post-hoc test
p<0.02). Elevated IIV was associated with an inability to effectively activate
right prefrontal cortex (BA10) during incongruent stimuli in all subjects.
Greater IIV did not correlate with severity of use or months MA abstinent.
Results suggest impaired attention control in MA-dependent subjects who
had experienced MA-induced paranoia in the Stroop paradigm. DA021847;
NARSAD

F57
TEST-RETEST RELIABILITY AND CONVERGENT VALIDITY OF
MEASURES OF EXECUTIVE PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FROM THE
SIMON, FLANKER, SWITCHING, AND ANTISACCADE TASKS Oliver
Sawi1, Kenneth Paap1; 1San Francisco State University — Executive processing is often studied with the Simon, flanker, antisaccade, and switching
tasks. The Simon, flanker, and antisaccade effect have all been assumed
to measure the inhibitory control component of executive processing. The
switching task has been assumed to provide measures of the monitoring
(mixing costs) and switching (switch costs) components of executive processing. The test-retest reliability of these various measures was analyzed.
Participants completed all four tasks in two sessions and Pearson r’s were
computed. The flanker effect shows moderate reliability as a measure of
inhibitory control. However, both the Simon effect and the antisaccade
effect show low reliability. Switching costs show good reliability while
mixing costs show moderate reliability. A related question is whether the
magnitude of flanker and Simon interference decreases with practice. A
2x2 ANOVA on the Simon data shows main effects of condition and session, but no ConditionxSession interaction. Similarly, the flanker data also
show main effects of condition and session, but also shows a ConditionxSession interaction reflecting a slightly reduced flanker effect in Session 2.
Both mixing costs and switching costs decreased with practice. In addition,
when the participants were partitioned into groups of bilinguals and monolinguals, ANOVAs were conducted on all of the measures described above.
There were no main effects of group nor were there any GroupxCondition
or GroupxConditionxSession interactions. Lastly, in order to examine the
convergent validity of these tasks, Pearson r’s were computed between
tasks confirming previous reports that measures of inhibitory control are
not correlated

F58
NEURAL CORRELATES OF INTENTIONAL AND STIMULUS-DRIVEN
INHIBITION: A COMPARISON Margot Schel1,2, Eveline Crone1,2,3; 1Leiden
University, the Netherlands, 2Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition (LIBC), the
Netherlands, 3Amsterdam University, the Netherlands — People can inhibit an
action because of an instruction by an external stimulus, or because of their
own internal decision. The similarities and differences between these two
forms of inhibition are not well understood. Therefore, the present study
directly compared the neural correlates of intentional and stimulus-driven
inhibition. Participants (18-26 year-olds, M = 21.49, N =24) performed two

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

191

Poster Session F
inhibition tasks while lying in the scanner: the marble task in which they
had to choose for themselves between intentionally acting on, or inhibiting
a prepotent response to measure intentional inhibition, and the classical
stop signal task in which an external signal triggered the inhibition process.
Results showed that both intentional and stimulus-driven inhibition decision processes rely on a neural network including bilateral parietal and lateral prefrontal cortex and presupplementary motor area (preSMA). We also
found additional activation in dorsal fronto median cortex (dFMC) and left
inferior frontal gyrus (left IFG) during intentional inhibition that depended
on the history of previous choices. Together, these results indicate that
intentional inhibition and stimulus-driven inhibition have commonalities at the neural level, but intentional inhibition is also characterized by
additional context-dependent neural activation in medial prefrontal cortex.
Currently, we are analyzing data from children aged 10 to 12 (M = 11.05, N
=19) to examine the development of the neural correlates underlying intentional and stimulus-driven inhibition.

F59
THE NEURAL MECHANISMS OF CONTEXT-SPECIFIC CONTROL
Nathalie Schouppe1, Jelle Demanet1, C. Nico Boehler1, Wim Notebaert1;
1
Ghent University — Goal-directed behavior requires constant adjustments
to changing environmental demands. This context-sensitive recruitment
of cognitive control is evidenced by behavioral studies reporting reduced
interference effects in contexts with a high proportion of incongruent trials,
compared to contexts with a low proportion of incongruent trials (i.e., context-specific proportion congruency effect, CSPC effect). Recently, King et
al. (2012) demonstrated the involvement of the medial superior parietal
lobule in bringing about this effect. Our study extends these findings by
investigating the neural mechanisms involved in contextual control, not
only when the context is imposed, but also when the context is freely
selected. If the CSPC effect is an instance of proactive control, we would
predict larger behavioral and neural effects for freely chosen contexts than
for imposed contexts. In contrast to this prediction, behavioral results
showed a similar CSPC effect in the voluntary and the imposed condition.
Imaging data showed typical conflict-related activation (incongruent >
congruent) in the anterior cingulate cortex, the presupplementary motor
area, and the inferior parietal lobule. Additional analyses in these regions
of interest revealed a significant context x congruency interaction in the left
inferior parietal lobule and also this neural CSPC effect was not modulated
by how the context was selected. These results indicate that different areas
in the parietal lobe play a role in contextual control and that the mechanisms underlying this adaptation do not depend on whether the context is
chosen freely or not.

F60
ACTION VIDEO GAME EXPERIENCE HURTS COGNITIVE CONTROL: A LONGITUDINAL EXPERIMENT Daiqing Shi1, Zude Zhu1, Weiyan
Huang1, Shuangju Zhen1, Wei Zhang1; 1South China Normal University — To
investigate the causal role of the video game experience in cognitive control change, we performed a longitudinal experiment by recruiting 24
subjects who had very little video game experience to complete 30 hours
non-action video game training (control group, CG) or first-character action
video game (experimental group, EG) training within 5 weeks. The participants’ cognitive control ability was measured with Stroop task in three
time slots: before training (Time 1, T1), immediately after training (Time
2, T2) and three weeks after training (Time 3, T3). In T1 and T2, EEG was
recorded when the participants performing the Stroop task. Following the
dual mechanism of cognitive control theory, the Stroop task was presented
with a mixed design to distinguish reactive and proactive control as well
as varied response-to-stimulus interval (RSI, 750 ms or 3000 ms) to distinguish recruitment and maintenance of proactive control. Behaviorally,
the maintenance of proactive control of the EG was significantly declined
in T2 than T1 in EG, while rebounding in T3. Additionally, the proactive
control related frontal slow wave showed lower magnitude in the EG than
the CG in T2, suggesting declined proactive control in the EG after video
game training. Furthermore, we also found the reactive control related
slow potentials difference between congruent and incongruent trials disappeared in the EG in T2, suggesting declined reactive control in the EG participants. Taken together, the present study taken a longitudinal approach
found that action video game experience hurts both proactive and reactive
cognitive control.

192

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

F61
DOPAMINERGIC MODULATION OF WORKING MEMORY IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE PATIENTS Kathleen Poston1, Fadi Tayim1, Sophie
YorkWilliams1, Jennie Lambert1, Vinod Menon1; 1Stanford University — Parkinson’s disease patients can exhibit working memory deficits early in
the disease. Because dopamine is well-known to play an important role
in working memory, dopamine deficiency in the mesocortical circuits has
been hypothesized as one etiology for this deficit. However, the relationship between dopamine and cognitive performance in Parkinson’s disease
is complex, and both impairments and improvements have been observed
after dopamine replacement, depending on the task performed. The present study directly compares working memory performance and concurrent
cortical activity associated with dopamine replacement during a modified
Sternberg task. We recorded behavioral and Blood-oxygen level dependent
(BOLD) functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data from non-demented Parkinson’s disease patients (n=13) and Control subjects (n=15).
In this task, participants encoded either 5 unique or identical numbers
(High or Low load, respectively), maintained them during a delay, and
then responded whether a single probe matched an item from the memory
set. The Parkinson’s disease patients were assessed both OFF and ON Parkinson’s dopaminergic medications, counterbalanced at least two weeks
apart. Behavioral results revealed no difference in accuracy or reaction time
between the Control and Parkinson’s disease OFF participants. By contrast,
Parkinson’s disease ON were less accurate and slower than both Parkinson’s disease OFF and Control participants. fMRI results revealed Parkinson’s disease OFF showed more prefrontal cortex activity than Parkinson’s
disease ON. Taken together, these data indicate a link between working
memory deficits and dopaminergic medications in Parkinson’s disease
patients, which may be associated with reduced prefrontal cortex activity.

F62
THE BENEFITS OF STIMULUS-DRIVEN ATTENTION FOR WORKING MEMORY ENCODING: REDUCTION OF THE PHONOLOGICAL SIMILARITY EFFECT Susan Ravizza1, Eliot Hazeline2; 1Michigan State
University, 2University of Iowa — Lesions of the temporal-parietal junction
(TPJ) are associated with low verbal working memory span (Koenigs et
al., 2011; Shallice & Vallar, 1990). In a previous study, we demonstrated
that activity of this region was inconsistent with the TPJ acting as a verbal
store and, instead, we suggested that this region may be involved in stimulus-driven attention that could be important for encoding information
into working memory (Ravizza et al., 2011). The present study investigates
whether stimulus-driven attention to relevant information affects working
memory performance. In two experiments, we examine whether stimulus-driven attention to similar items can improve retention of these items
in working memory. Lists of phonologically-similar and dissimilar items
were presented at expected or unexpected locations in Experiment 1. Stimulus-driven attention to similar items presented at unexpected locations
reduced the phonological similarity effect so that these items were better
remembered than similar items that appeared at expected locations. These
results were replicated in Experiment 2 using contingent capture to boost
stimulus-driven attention to similar items. Together, these experiments
demonstrate that stimulus-driven attention to relevant information is one
mechanism by which encoding can be facilitated and suggests that patients
with lesions to the TPJ may have lower verbal spans because of a loss of
attention to incoming information.

F63
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EXECUTIVE FUNCTION AND
FRONTAL CORTEX CONNECTIVITY AT REST Andrew Reineberg1, Jessica Andrews-Hanna1, Harry Smolker1, Amy Turner1, Marie Banich1; 1University
of Colorado Boulder — Studies of group differences in resting state functional connectivity (rs-fcMRI) are pervasive throughout the fields of cognitive neuroscience and clinical neuropsychology. However, the relationship
between the resting brain and individual differences in executive control
in a normal population remains unexplored. Ninety-one college-aged participants completed a six minute resting state fMRI scan and a battery of
tasks measuring important constructs of executive function (see Miyake
& Friedman, 2012): inhibition of a prepotent response (antisaccade task),
task set shifting (category switching task), and working memory updat-

2013 Annual Meeting
ing (keep track task). Using Independent Components Analysis (ICA), we
found distinct brain networks associated with improved goal maintenance
(z-score average of the three tasks), shifting-specific performance, and
updating-specific performance. The networks identified consisted of typical sources of executive control (right inferior frontal gyrus, frontal pole,
anterior medial prefrontal cortex) and typical targets of executive control
(parietal lobe, superior temporal lobe, and hippocampus). Using the frontal regions from these ICA-identified networks as regions of interest in a
functional connectivity analysis, we found that increased connectivity of
right inferior frontal gyrus (particularly connectivity to the hippocampus
and other subcortical regions) was predictive of individual differences in
updating-specific performance but not shifting-specific performance or
goal maintenance. Whole brain connectivity of other frontal regions of
interest was not predictive of individual differences in executive function.
The results of the current study have important implications for our understanding of individual differences in the brain at rest, particularly the relationship between sources vs. targets of control and executive function.

F64
ENHANCING TRAINING AND TRANSFER EFFECTS BY APPLYING NON-INVASIVE BRAIN STIMULATION DURING WORKING
MEMORY TRAINING Lauren Richmond1, David Wolk2, Ingrid Olson1; 1Temple
University, 2University of Pennsylvania — An emerging body of research
shows that working memory (WM) can be enhanced via focused practice.
However, whether these effects transfer to other tasks is more controversial. Moreover, research on this topic has accrued slowly because running
these tasks is costly, subjects find training tedious, and the effects are not as
robust and long-lived as hoped. We hypothesized that transcranial direct
current stimulation (tDCS) could serve as an adjuvant for some types of
cognitive training including WM training. Previously tDCS was shown to
influence performance on two different WM tasks: n-back (e.g. Fregni, et
al., 2005) and a variant of the Sternberg task (Marshall, et al., 2005). However, the degree to which tDCS might influence WM training and transfer
has yet to be explored. To this end, young adult participants completed
a battery of tests tapping WM, sustained attention, and inhibition. Next,
active or sham tDCS was applied to dorsolateral prefrontal cortex while
participants performed an adaptive complex WM task (see Chein & Morrison, 2010; Richmond et al., 2011) over 10 daily testing sessions. A post-test
battery was administered at completion. Preliminary results indicate that
participants receiving active tDCS show large improvements on the training task compared to sham. In addition, the active participants exhibited
improved transfer to other WM tasks compared to sham. These data represent the first demonstration that tDCS can enhance training effects in the
domain of working memory.

F65
HOW DISTRIBUTED ARE SHORT-TERM MEMORY REPRESENTATIONS OF VISUAL MOTION? Adam Riggall1, Bradley Postle1; 1University of

Wisconsin-Madison — We recently demonstrated the successful time-pointby-time-point decoding, with multivoxel pattern classification (MVPC), of
remembered directions of motion during a short-term delayed-recognition
task (Riggall & Postle, 2012). Critically, this item-level decoding was only
possible within medial and lateral occipital cortex despite the presence of
robust, elevated delay-period signal in frontal and parietal cortex. Here,
we address the seemingly paradoxical fact that, in the same data, ‘importance maps’ from whole brain decoding--the specific voxel weights used
by the trained classifier--revealed a number of important voxels located in
frontal and parietal regions. A comparison of ROI importance maps (frontal, parietal, lateral occipital (including MT+)), medial occipital) with the
whole brain importance maps reveals a marked difference between occipital vs. frontoparietal regions: Whereas in posterior regions the same voxels
tended to be assigned large importance values by both analyses (mean 62%
overlap of top 25% important voxels across subjects), in frontal and parietal
cortex, the overlap was much lower (mean overlap of 7%). This suggests
that, whereas frontal and parietal regions may participate in broadly distributed representations of trial-specific information, these regions cannot
be construed as storing “independent” mnemonic representations. In a
second analysis we assessed the neural stability of delay-period representations by comparing the 25% most important voxels across time points. Here
we found that only a small percentage of these (mean of 5% across subjects)

Poster Session F
were important throughout the delay. This suggests, in line with recent
multiunit electrophysiological studies, that seemingly stable mental representations may be underlain by highly dynamic neural representations.

F66
SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES IN THE COGNITIVE PROCESSES AND NEURAL SUBSTRATES THAT SUPPORT WORKING
MEMORY AND LONG-TERM MEMORY Nathan Rose1, Fergus Craik1,
Bradley Buchsbaum1; 1Rotman Research Institute, University of Toronto — The
extent to which recall on working memory (WM) tasks involves retrieving
items from long-term memory (LTM) largely depends on the amount of
disruption to active maintenance processes (Rose & Craik, 2012). In this
study, participants were to make a deep or shallow judgment on a word
and recall the word after a 10 s delay on each trial. During the delay, participants either rehearsed the word or performed an easy or hard math task.
Immediate recall was best following rehearsal-filled delays and for deeply
processed items, but only when followed by difficult, math-filled delays. In
contrast, LTM for items initially recalled following rehearsal-filled delays
was worst, and better for deeply processed items regardless of the delay.
We repeated the experiment in an fMRI study. Activation was greater for
deep than shallow processing in left inferior frontal and anterior temporal
cortex and the hippocampus during both encoding and immediate recall,
particularly when retrieval occurred following a math- vs. rehearsal-filled
delay. Whereas shallow processing and rehearsal-related areas can support
active maintenance in WM, deeper processing benefits recall on WM tasks
when the conditions invoke the neural substrates that support LTM.

F67
STILL SEARCHING FOR THE PHONOLOGICAL STORE: EEG CORRELATES IMPLICATING MOTOR AND PERCEPTUAL REGIONS
Jason Samaha1, Margaret T. Lynn3, Tiffany K. Jantz1, Ezequiel Morsella1,2,
Mark W. Geisler1; 1San Francisco State University, 2University of California,
San Francisco, 3Ghent University — Isolating the neural correlates of the
phonological store (i.e., the imagery-related component of verbal working
memory [WM]) has proven to be more challenging than originally anticipated (Buchsbaum & D’Esposito, 2008). Contrary to classic models of WM
(e.g., Baddeley, 1986), in which the phonological store is well circumscribed
and modularized, studies examining the neural underpinnings of this component have implicated both perceptual and what have historically been
classified as motor regions, along with frontal regions employed in cognitive control (Koenigs et al., 2011; McNorgan, 2012). Building on these
findings, we examined the degree of involvement of motor and perceptual
processing in verbal WM. In Study 1, subvocalizing a word (traditionally
associated with articulatory rehearsal) or holding verbal auditory imagery
in mind (traditionally associated with perceptual processing) led to comparable behavioral effects (e.g., priming), t(45) < 1, p > .30. This equivalence
is, consistent with the hypothesis that auditory imagery and subvocalization may recruit the same neural network, and echoes ‘common-code’ proposals (e.g., Hommel, 2009) in which motor-related and perceptual-related
processes are inextricably linked. Study 2 provides additional evidence for
this hypothesis using electroencephalography coherence (sites F3, F7, and
TP3). While participants (n = 20) experienced auditory imagery of words,
we measured co-activation of motor-speech areas (F7, TP3) and prefrontal
areas (F3) involved in foregrounding representations in WM (Johnson &
Johnson, 2009). Taken together, these data provide evidence that the phonological store may rely on both perceptual and motor processes.

F68
RECITATION-RELATED STRUCTURAL CHANGES IN THE BRAINS
OF VEDIC SANSKRIT PANDITS James Hartzell1, Ben Davis1, David
Melcher1, Gabriele Miceli1, Tanmay Nath2, Jorge Jovicich1, Nandini Chatterjee
Singh2, Uri Hasson1; 1Center for Mind/Brain Sciences (CIMeC), University of
Trento, Italy, 2National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, India — Intensive
training of specialized expertise can lead to structural brain changes in the
human brain (Maguire et al., 2000). India’s Vedic pandits maintain a 3500+
year-old tradition of memorizing and reciting several large Sanskrit texts
(Vedas) that can exceed 20,000 lines. Training is based on oral recitation
extending from early adolescence to adulthood. To examine the neural
systems allowing this memorization we used MRI to compare the brain

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

193

Poster Session F
structure of Indian Vedic pandits (N=18) to that of matched Indian control
participants (N=18) using voxel based morphometry. The two groups were
matched for gender, age, multilingualism, education, and hand-eye dominance. Two structural MRI scans (3T system) were obtained per participant
within session and averaged to increase signal-to-noise (MPRAGE, 1mm3
isotropic voxels). Brain masks were manually edited to ensure accuracy of
grey-matter inclusion. We constructed a group template from all participants, segmented the grey matter, and conducted a voxel-wise analysis to
compare grey matter density of the two groups. Higher grey matter density
was found for the pandit group in several areas (a reverse contrast revealed
no effects). These included a very large cluster covering bilateral anterior
cingulate cortex extending from its most rostral extent to the central part
of the cingulate gyrus, and several left hemisphere regions: the insula,
posterior middle temporal gyrus, paraphippocampal gyrus, and fusiform
gyrus. The findings support recent theoretical models in which the anterior
cingulate cortex plays an important role in enabling long-term storage of
memories and their retrieval (e.g., Weible et al., 2012).

F69
DOES THE CORPUS CALLOSUM CONTRIBUTE TO LEFT HEMISPHERE LANGUAGE DOMINANCE? Leighton Hinkley1, Elysa Marco2,3,
Ethan Brown2, Anne Findlay1, Polina Bukshpun2, Rita Jeremy3, Mari Wakahiro2,
A. James Barkovich1,2,3, Pratik Mukherjee1, Elliott Sherr2,3, Srikantan Nagarajan1; 1Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, UCSF, 2Department of
Neurology, UCSF, 3Department of Pediatrics, UCSF — Speech production is
a dynamic process, involving the recruitment of multiple brain structures
in a temporal pattern that typically relies on left-lateralized hemispheric
dominance. Individuals with agenesis of the corpus callosum (AgCC)
offer a unique opportunity to examine the role of corpus callosum development on language processing dynamics. We use time-frequency MEG
imaging to quantify changes in neural oscillations during language tasks in
AgCC patients with partial (pAgCC) and complete (cAgCC) agenesis and
matched healthy controls (HC). MEG data were collected using a 275-channel whole-head biomagnetometer (MISL). Subjects participated in an
auditory verb (AV) generation task and Boston picture naming (BPN) test
during MEG recording. Data were analyzed in the time-frequency domain
using an adaptive spatial filtering technique (NUTMEG). Changes in beta
oscillatory power (12-30Hz) were used to compute a language laterality
index (LI, a ratio of power change between the left and right hemispheres).
While we found the expected HC leftward language lateralization only
20% of cAgCC individuals showed left hemisphere language dominance.
The pAgCC group demonstrated an intermediate left lateralization at 47%.
In the group comparison, an increase in beta power suppression (p<0.01
FWE) was identified in the AgCC group over the right medial frontal and
pre-central gyrus ~450ms prior to the vocal response. In the left hemisphere,
significantly reduced beta suppression in the AgCC group was identified
over the angular and the superior occipital gyrus (p<0.01 FWE). This report
demonstrates a direct relationship between abnormal callosal development
and impairments in cortical recruitment during language production.

F70
TOPOLOGICAL EFFICIENCY OF RESTING-STATE NETWORKS AND
PRAGMATIC PROCESSING IN SENTENCE COMPREHENSION Jie
Hu1, Xiaoming Jiang1, Yong He2, Xiaolin Zhou1,3; 1Center for Brain and Cognitive Sciences and Department of Psychology, Peking University, Beijing, China,
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal
University, Beijing, China, 3Key Laboratory of Machine Perception and Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics (Ministry of Education), Peking University,
Beijing, China — Recent studies have shown that functional brain networks
derived from resting-state fMRI exhibit robust small-world properties. The
topological efficiency of such brain network organization is proved to be
useful in identifying atypical neural functions in autistic patients, who
show severe deficits in their pragmatic ability. Here, we investigated the
relationship between the topological architecture of the resting-state brain
networks in healthy participants and the individual ability to derive pragmatic implicature during sentence comprehension. The participants rated
the comprehensibility of Chinese sentences with a lian … dou… construction (similar to the English construction of even + a low likelihood event).
By embedding an event with low likelihood, high likelihood or an event
with unspecified likelihood in the lian…dou… construction, we created

194

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
pragmatically congruent, incongruent, and underspecified conditions respectively. Graph-theoretical analysis evidenced a strong positive correlation between the comprehensibility rating of the underspecified sentences
and the global efficiency of the resting-state brain network, suggesting that
the global efficiency of the whole brain network affects the individual’s
ability to derive pragmatic implicature for ambiguous sentences. Moreover, individual’s comprehensibility rating of incongruent sentences negatively correlated with the regional nodal efficiency in subcortical regions
responsible for detection of linguistic violations, including left thalamus
and putamen, but positively correlated with the efficiency in cortical areas
responsible for resolution of linguistic conflict, including the right middle
frontal and medial superior frontal gyrus, indicating that the resting state
efficiency of regions related with executive control can affect individuals’
ability to deal with pragmatic failure during sentence comprehension.

F71
ASYMMETRIC PHYSIOLOGY OF THE PERISYLVIAN LANGUAGE
NETWORK: EVIDENCE FROM RESTING STATE FMRI Robert Hurley1,
Xue Wang1, Marsel Mesulam1; 1Northwestern University — It is widely accepted
that the language network is asymmetrically distributed in the brain, with
left perisylvian regions being more critical for language function. Subtle
structural differences between the hemispheres have been documented,
but the physiological mechanisms of asymmetry remain unknown. In
order to address this issue, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
was acquired from 29 healthy adults at rest, and functional connectivity between perisylvian regions was examined in each hemisphere. Seed
regions of interest were placed in each subdivision of Broca’s area: pars
orbitalis (pOr), pars triangularis (pTr), and pars opercularis (pOp). pTr
showed a reciprocal pattern of functional connectivity with the middle temporal gyrus (MTG) in the left hemisphere, but there was no appreciable connectivity between their right hemispheric counterparts. Both pTr and MTG
have been strongly linked to lexical processing in prior fMRI and lesion
mapping studies, and each may function as important epicenters within
the perisylvian language network. In contrast, neither pOr or pOp showed
appreciable patterns of temporal connectivity in either hemisphere. These
findings suggest left hemispheric dominance for language is facilitated by
greater intrinsic connectivity between left perisylvian epicenters.

F72
PREDICTIVE PROCESSING IS INFLUENCED BY THE SPECIFICITY OF SPEECH SOUND REPRESENTATIONS William Idsardi1,
Mathias Scharinger1,2, Philip Monahan3; 1University of Maryland, College Park,
USA, 2Max-Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig,
Germany, 3Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, Donostia-San
Sebastián, Spain — Recent research provides converging evidence for predictive processing in audition. Perceived regularities allow auditory cortex
to generate predictions about when the next stimulus will occur and what
the stimulus will be. As such, what predictions should be modulated by
prior expectations, particularly for familiar auditory categories, e.g., speech.
Here, we tested whether the predictability of speech sounds is modulated
by prior knowledge regarding the precise nature of long-term memory representations. To that end, we considered American English low-, mid-, and
high- front vowels ([æ], [ε], [І], respectively). Mid-vowels have less specific phonological representations than either low or high vowels (termed
underspecification). We presented all vowels in a passive oddball paradigm, contrasting high- and low-, as well as high- and mid-vowels in standard and deviant position. The prediction error generated by a high-vowel
deviant (reflected by the Mismatch Negativity, MMN) should be greater
after more specific low-vowel standard than after a less specific mid-vowel
standard. MEG responses (n=12) were recorded by a 157 channel wholehead axial gradiometer MEG system (KIT, Japan). High-vowel deviants
elicited larger MMNs after more specific (low) than after less specific (mid)
vowels. We conclude that vowels with more specific representations generated stronger predictions regarding future occurrences than vowels with
less specific representations.

2013 Annual Meeting

F73
THE PRESENCE OF “METAPHOR BLINDNESS” IN THE GENERAL
POPULATION Baland Jalal1, VS Ramachandran1; 1Center for Brain and Cognition, University of California at San Diego — Previous research from our
group suggests that patients with lesions in the left inferior parietal lobule
(IPL)—which is concerned with abstract numerical cognition and crossmodal association (which is consistent with its strategic location at the
crossroads between the temporal, parietal and occipital lobes) have difficulty with metaphors. In the current study we report “metaphor blindness”
among normal adults in the general population; that is, either the complete
inability or difficulty for otherwise intellectually non-challenged individuals to comprehend metaphors compared to the rest of the population. Participants (N = 205) read 12 metaphorical (The detective jumped at the clue)
and 12 literal (The accident was a fall) sentences and had to decide whether
the sentences had a metaphorical or literal meaning. The mean accuracy
for these metaphorical sentences was 10.98 (SD = 2.41); the mean accuracy
for literal sentences was 7.30 (SD = 1.84). We found that 5% of participants
(11/205) were unable or had difficulty understanding metaphors (were statistical outliers; i.e., scored three or more standard deviations below the
mean), while their score for literal sentences felt within a normal statistical
range (i.e., less than two standard deviations below the mean). In a follow-up study, a verbal IQ test (WASI; verbal subscale) was administered to
9 out of these 11 participants with low metaphor scores; results suggested
that the inability of these individuals to accurately detect metaphors is not
due to low verbal IQ.

F74
WHEN SPOKEN AND WRITTEN WORDS MEET IN THE BRAIN: A
DEVELOPMENTAL ERP STUDY Lea B. Jost1,2, Aleksandra K. Moscicka1,2,
Christine Frisch1, Volker Dellwo3, Urs Maurer1,2; 1Department of Psychology,
University of Zurich, Switzerland, 2Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of
Zurich and ETH Zurich, Switzerland, 3Phonetics Laboratory, English Department, University of Zurich, Switzerland — Integrating visual and auditory
language information is critical for reading. Suppression and congruency
effects in audiovisual paradigms with letters and speech sounds provided
information about low-level mechanisms of grapheme-phoneme integration during reading. However, the central question about how such processes relate to reading entire words remains unexplored. Using ERPs, we
investigate (1) when audiovisual integration occurs for entire words and
pseudowords, (2) whether this integration is reflected by differences in
map strength or differences in map topography, and (3) whether this integration is influenced by reading fluency. A 128-channel EEG was recorded
while 69 monolingual (Swiss)-German speaking first-graders performed an
oddball detection task. Word and pseudoword stimuli were presented in
blocks either auditorily (A), visually (V) or audiovisually (matching: AVM;
nonmatching: AVN). Corresponding ERPs were computed, and unimodal
ERPs were summated (sumAV). We applied TANOVAs to identify time
windows with significant integration effects: suppression (sumAV-AVM)
and congruency (AVN-AVM). These integration effects were further characterized using GFP and 3D-centroid analyses. If significant, these analyses
were recomputed adding reading fluency as covariate. Significant audiovisual suppression effects were observed for words and pseudowords in
similar time windows, in agreement with previous studies on letters and
speech sounds. Significant congruency effects were found only for words,
but not for pseudowords, suggesting early integration processes specific
for words. Suppression effects tended to be characterized by differences in
map strength, whereas congruency effects tended to be characterized by
differences in map topography. Among all audiovisual integration effects,
reading fluency modulated the word suppression effect around 300ms.

F75
INVESTIGATING THE...ER... COMMUNICATIVE ROLE OF DISFLUENCY Jennifer Lines1, Martin Corley2, David I. Donaldson1; 1University of Stirling, 2University of Edinburgh — Disfluency in speech (“um”, “uh”) has been
shown to affect listeners’ expectations about upcoming words and the likelihood of their later recognising those words. A linguistic account of these
disfluency effects states that disfluency marks speaker difficulty, and listeners adjust their linguistic expectations accordingly (e.g., Arnold et al., 2004).
Alternatively, disfluency effects may not be caused by changes in linguistic

Poster Session F
processing, but may reflect the introduction of a delay in the speech stream,
with attendant changes in attention (e.g., Corley & Hartsuiker, 2011). To
investigate whether disfluency effects depend on perceived speaker difficulty, we contrasted listeners’ expectations about words following disfluencies with those following artificial interruptions. We used Event-Related
Potentials (ERPs), focussing on the N400 effect as an index of semantic
integration difficulty, comparing ERPs to predictable and unpredictable
words within fluent, disfluent, and interrupted sentences. We found that
the difference in expectation between predictable and unpredictable words
was reduced in disfluent compared to fluent sentences (as indexed by the
size of the N400 effect). Expectations about words in artificially interrupted
sentences lay between those for fluent and disfluent sentences, suggesting
that expectations are modulated by a combination of delay and information
about speaker state. Participants later remembered unpredictable words
more accurately than predictable words, and were more likely to remember
words occurring in disfluent or interrupted than fluent sentences. Importantly, however, memory performance did not differ between words from
disfluent and interrupted sentences, indicating that improved subsequent
memory does not depend on listeners responding sympathetically to perceived speaker difficulty.

F76
PREDICTING THE FORESEEABLE FUTURE: MEG EVIDENCE FOR
PREACTIVATION OF PREDICTED WORDS Tal Linzen1, Joseph Fruchter1,
Masha Westerlund1, Alec Marantz1; 1New York University — There is mounting evidence that the brain processes information by generating predictions
and testing them against incoming stimuli. However, little is known about
how these predictions are encoded. The focus of the present study was to
determine whether a specific representation of the predicted item is pre-activated prior to presentation of that item. Prediction is often argued to be
informed by the statistics of the environment. Language processing offers
a particularly appealing testing ground for this claim, since these statistics
can be easily estimated from texts. We selected adjective-noun pairs that
varied in transition probability, ranging from cases in which the adjective
is highly predictive of a specific noun (“stainless steel”) to cases in which
the adjective is not predictive of any particular noun (“important clue”).
The adjective was presented for 600 ms, and was then replaced with the
noun. Participants performed a lexical decision on the noun. We obtained
cortically-constrained minimum norm source estimates for MEG data from
16 subjects. Using the lexical frequency of the predicted noun as an index of
pre-activation, we found that activity in the left temporal lobe was modulated by the noun most likely to follow the adjective, starting at around 100
ms before the noun was even presented. This effect held only for predictive
adjectives, and could not be attributed to other variables such as adjective
frequency or transition probability. This result presents direct neural evidence for the pre-activation of word-specific predictions driven by the distribution of words in the language.

F77
EASY AS PIE: COGNITIVE EFFORT DURING READING IN LATE
BILINGUALS. Evguenia Malaia1, Sharlene Newman2; 1University of Texas at
Arlington, 2Indiana University Bloomington — This EEG study investigated
the effect of the late acquisition of Spanish (L2) on reading native English
words. Two groups of native English participants – one with very limited
Spanish experience and one with extensive experience performed two lexical decision tasks: an English lexical decision task (ELD), where participants
indicated whether a letter string was an English word; and a General lexical
decision task (GLD), where participants indicated whether a letter string
was a word in either English or Spanish. We conducted a frequency domain
analysis of the EEG collected during the task in the higher α band (9.712.8 Hz) across electrode clusters of interest. The left posterior and anterior,
right posterior and anterior regions of interest, comprised of 16 channels
each demonstrated significantly higher α power in the monolingual group.
However, while the bilingual group exhibited higher α power amplitude
for Spanish stimuli, bilingual group demonstrated higher α power for
English stimuli. The high α power in EEG of monolinguals exposed to
Spanish stimuli likely indicates the lack of binding across ROIs, as they
cannot use visual information for linguistic processing in an unfamiliar
language. Higher coefficient of variation (ratio of standard deviation to the
mean) in the α band power amplitude across electrode clusters of interest
corresponded to faster response times in both groups, except for GLD task
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

195

Poster Session F
responses on English stimuli. The overall results confirm that orthographic
representations of visually presented words are activated simultaneously
for both known languages even in late bilinguals.

F78
RAPID AND AUTOMATIC PROCESSES OF MOTOR SYSTEM ACTIVATION AND INHIBITION IN SPOKEN WORD COMPREHENSION
Yury Shtyrov1, Anna Butorina2, Anastasia Nikolaeva2, Tatyana Stroganova2;
1
MRC Cognition & Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK, 2Moscow State University of Psychology & Education, Moscow, Russia — Perception and action are
functionally linked in the brain, but a hotly debated question is whether
and to what extent cortical motor circuits are immediately involved in the
perception and comprehension of external information, or whether their
activation in perceptual tasks is a secondary post-comprehension phenomenon. To address this, we used MEG in combination with individual MR
images to investigate the time course and neuroanatomical substrates of
activations elicited in the human brain by action-related verbs and nouns,
which were presented auditorily outside the focus of attention under a
non-linguistic visual distractor task. We found that very early on in the
course of perception – starting from about 80 ms after the information was
available in the auditory input – both verbs and nouns produced characteristic somatotopic activations in cortical motor areas, with words related
to different body parts activating the corresponding body representations
(confirmed through a motor localiser task), which was most pronounced in
the left pre-motor cortex. Moreover, near-simultaneously with this category-specific activation we observed suppression of motor-cortex activation
by competitor words with incompatible action semantics, for the first time
documenting operation of the neurophysiological lateral inhibition principle in neural word processing. The extremely rapid speed of these activations and deactivations, their emergence in the absence of attention and
their similar presence for words of different lexical classes testify, in our
view, to automatic involvement of motor-specific circuits in the perception
of action-related language.

F79
CONNECTIVITY OF CORTICAL NETWORKS SUPPORTING SOCIAL
AND NONSOCIAL, ABSTRACT AND CONCRETE CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE Laura Skipper1, Ingrid Olson1; 1Temple University — Concreteness is a critical organizing factor in semantic memory. While many
neuroimaging studies have been carried out that contrast activations for
abstract versus concrete concepts, there is little consistency in findings.
Neuroimaging has relied on subtraction analyses to search for individual
sites of activation responding to abstract/concrete concepts. In this study,
we instead chose to explore the functional networks supporting abstract
and concrete concepts via Psychophysical Interaction (PPI) analysis. Subjects engaged in a semantic task while undergoing functional MRI. Word
stimuli varied on two factors: concreteness (abstract, concrete) and social
content (social, nonsocial). Nonword trials made up the baseline trials. In
each block, subjects viewed three words consecutively, all belonging to the
same concreteness and social content condition. The task was to answer
a meaningful question about the words. The left inferior frontal gyrus as
the seed region. Results show a left-lateralized network for abstract and
concrete concepts that were differentiated along an axis oriented on the
superior temporal sulcus. Abstract concepts were part of a superior network including the angular gyrus, while concrete concepts were part of
an inferior lobe network including the temporal pole and middle temporal gyrus (MTG). Further analyses revealed that some regions within these
networks preferred social stimuli, such as the temporal pole, while other
regions showed no preference, such as the posterior MTG. These results
suggest that abstract and concrete concepts may be differentiated in the
brain through the connectivity of distinct networks, and specific regions in
these networks support knowledge of social content.

F80
AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY OF AUTOMATIC SEMANTIC ACTIVATION OF EMBEDDED BILINGUAL WRITTEN WORDS
Jenna Todd Jones1, Jeffrey Bowers1, Nina Kazanina1; 1University of Bristol
— A recent study of semantic categorisation in monolinguals (Bowers,
Davis & Hanley, 2004) demonstrated semantic interference to meaning
related words embedded within larger non-related written words (e.g.

196

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
“hat” within “that”). The present study examines whether the same effect
of semantic interference could be elicited in a bilingual population using
mixed linguistic stimuli, while maintaining a single language context. For
example, would a cross-language embedded word in an equivalent task,
such as the French “sel” meaning “salt” in the English “tinsel”, instigate
semantic interference in bilinguals similarly to monolinguals. Examination
of the event-related potential (ERP) N400 index of semantic congruity was
used as an indicator of automatic retrieval of native language word-forms,
despite having participants operate solely in their second-language. We
examined RTs and the N400 ERP in 24 French-English late bilinguals and a
preliminary dataset of 15 English monolinguals. Participants rated semantic relationships between a common target (bird) and four primes: related
(wings), English-embedded (reggae, including ‘egg’), French-embedded
(snide, including ‘nid’ meaning ‘nest’), and unrelated (tourist). Bilinguals
revealed a typical N400 disassociation for the related and unrelated conditions, and similarly for both the French-embedded and English-embedded
conditions relative to the unrelated condition. Data from the monolingual
sample again revealed an N400 disassociation for related and unrelated
conditions, and similarly for English-embedded words but not French-embedded words. Results confirm that the interference elicited by embedded
words in monolinguals occurs at the semantic level, and that this extends to
a subtle bilingual inter-word context (despite previous evidence of context
constraint on semantics).

F81
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF COMPREHENDING AMERICAN
SIGN LANGUAGE-ENGLISH CODE-BLENDS jill weisberg1, Stephen
McCullough1, Jennifer Petrich1, Karen Emmorey2; 1San Diego State University Research Foundation, 2San Diego State University — Bimodal bilinguals
fluent in English and American Sign Language (ASL) often “code-blend”,
producing signs and words simultaneously. We have recently shown that
code-blending facilitates comprehension in both languages (Emmorey et
al., 2012). We investigated the neural basis of this facilitation using fMRI
to examine cortical recruitment during bimodal bilingual perception of
code-blends. Fourteen hearing native ASL-English bilingual adults made
semantic decisions (‘Is it edible?’) to audiovisual clips of a native hearing
signer producing a) an ASL sign; b) a spoken English word; or c) a sign
and spoken word simultaneously. Three imaging runs (3T, TR = 2s, 30
sagittal slices with voxel size = 3.75 x 3.75 x 4.5) each presented two 30s
blocks per condition (10 trials/block) and control blocks displaying the
model at rest. Individuals’ fMRI responses were estimated using multiple
regression, and parameter estimates for each condition were entered into a
group-level mixed effects ANOVA. Code-blending recruited a combination
of brain regions active for each language alone, with increased activation
for simultaneous perception of sign and speech in relevant modality-specific regions. Moreover, we found reduced activation during code-blend
comprehension, compared to ASL alone, in bilateral occipitotemporal
cortex (area MT/V5), left precentral gyrus, and right anterior insula. These
decreases may be a neural reflection of the behavioral facilitation previously observed for code-blend comprehension. Increased activity during
ASL comprehension may also reflect greater effort during ASL processing
in the absence of redundant cues from spoken English.

F82
THE ROLE OF THE LEFT ANTERIOR TEMPORAL LOBE IN SEMANTIC MEMORY VS. SENTENCE PROCESSING Masha Westerlund1, Doug
Bemis2, Liina Pylkkänen1; 1New York University, 2CEA-INSERM Neurospin —
The left anterior temporal lobe (LATL) is robustly implicated in semantic
processing by a growing body of literature. However, these results have
emerged from two distinct bodies of work. On the one hand, the LATL
has been characterized as a ‘semantic hub’ that binds features of distributed concepts, based on results from semantic dementia. On the other,
the LATL has been implicated in combinatorial operations in language, as
shown by increased activity in this region associated with the processing of
sentences and of basic phrases. The present work aimed to reconcile these
two literatures by independently manipulating combination and concept
specificity within a minimal MEG paradigm. We used a task from the literature on specificity (Rogers et al., 2006) in which subjects had to match
images to either less specific (‘boat) or more specific nouns (‘canoe’), during
MEG recordings. Crucially, the nouns were either presented alone (preceded by a consonant string, e.g. ‘xhsl boat’/‘canoe’), or in a combinatory

2013 Annual Meeting
context (preceded by an adjective, e.g. ‘blue boat’/‘canoe’). Neural activity was measured from the onset of the target noun in all conditions, such
that the activity elicited by combinatory and non-combinatory operations
was measured at the same lexical items. We identified significantly greater
composition-related activity in the LATL for the less specific nouns (‘blue
boat’ v. ‘xhls boat’) as compared to the more specific nouns (‘blue canoe’ v.
‘xhls canoe’) between 222-254 ms. These results suggest that we can modulate combinatorial activity simply by modifying the properties of the noun
being composed.

F83
INFLUENCE OF SELECTIVE ATTENTION ON STORY COMPREHENSION Steven Small1, Jie Yang1, Uri Hasson2, Emily Cooper3; 1Brain Circuits
Laboratory, Department of Neurology, University of California Irvine, USA,
Center for Mind/Brain Sciences, The University of Trento, Italy, 3Helen Wills
Neuroscience Institute, University of California Berkeley, USA — When people
comprehend a story, their prior knowledge and intrinsic motivation influence how they make inferences and develop interpretations about the story
content. The current fMRI study applies a new method to data acquired
in previous investigation (Cooper et al, Neuroimage, 2011) of the role of
selective attention in modulating the functional neuroanatomy of story
comprehension. Twelve participants were asked to focus on action- (e.g.,
run, eat), space- (e.g., in the zoo), or time-related information (e.g., yesterday) when they listened to identical stories. In each condition, group independent component analysis (ICA) and simple correlation analysis were
conducted to identify components correlated with story listening. Subsequently, Granger Causality (GC) analysis was used to test causal influences among the components. All three conditions produced strong ICs in
both superior temporal gyri (STG) and anterior temporal lobes, reflecting
speech processing and semantic integration during story comprehension.
The space condition selectively produced an IC in both insulae, presumably related to spatial processing. The time condition strongly engaged ICs
in both insulae, left posterior MTG, and left middle frontal gyrus (MFG),
suggesting that comprehending temporal features requires extra resources
for lexical semantic processing and working memory. The action condition strongly engaged one IC in the left middle MTG, presumably reflecting action feature processing. GC analysis indicated different patterns of
causal influences among the ICs in each condition. These results indicate a
previously unrecognized role in how selective attention can modulate the
biological processes for story comprehension, with integration of linguistic
and semantic feature information.
2

F84
NPI LICENSING IN TURKISH: AN ERP STUDY

Aydogan Yanilmaz1,
John Drury ; Stony Brook University — Negative polarity items (NPIs)
include words like “any/ever” which must co-occur with a licensor (e.g.,
negation) in order to be well-formed (e.g., “…has *ever left” versus “…
has NOT ever left”). Further, licensor/NPI-dependencies must realize a
particular syntactic/hierarchical relationship (e.g., in “[A man with NO
beard] has *ever left” negation is a structurally ineligible licensor since it
is nested inside a preceding relative clause). NPIs represent a type of logical-semantic/pragmatic deviance which has attracted increasing attention
in the ERP literature. A common finding is that unlicensed NPIs elicit P600type effects (Steinhauer et al. 2010). However, NPI-licensing has typically
been investigated in languages where licensor/NPI-dependencies are retrospective (i.e., negation does not predict the occurrence of NPIs). In these
languages (e.g., English/German) “intrusion-effects” have been found
where NPIs seem to be “attracted” by preceding but structurally ineligible licensors (despite their ungrammaticality), resulting in attenuation of
on-line violation ERP effects. However, it is unknown whether such intrusion-effects are conditioned by the nature of the memory/retrieval mechanisms supporting these retrospective dependencies. We conducted an ERP
reading study (N=10) in Turkish, where NPIs typically precede licensors
(prospective/predictive dependency), testing sentences with embedded
clauses and NPI-subjects (e.g., [NPI[…embedded-Verb]main-Verb]) and
manipulating the presence/absence of negation on the embedded/mainverbs. Only main-verb negation licenses Turkish main clause subject-NPIs;
embedded-verb negation could result in an intrusion-effect. Among other
findings, our results showed that, like other languages, unlicensed NPIs
1

1

Poster Session F
in Turkish yield P600-like responses. Further, similar to findings from
English/German, violation effects were attenuated by the presence of
“intrusive” (embedded-negation) licensors.

F85
CONTEXT INFLUENCES THE ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF SEMANTICALLY ENRICHED COMPOSITION Megan
Zirnstein1, Matthew J. Traxler2, Tamara Y. Swaab2; 1Pennsylvania State University, 2University of California, Davis — The current study utilized ERP methods to test the degree to which enriched composition is affected by prior
context. Complement coercion, a form of enriched composition, occurs
when two syntactically compatible, but semantically mismatching elements are combined in an expression (e.g., started the book). The semantic
mismatch triggers the coercion of one element from an entity into an event
sense (e.g., read the book), resulting in processing costs when compared
to control expressions. Whether enriched composition is primarily driven
by semantic or syntactic operations is currently under debate. Previous
ERP work has shown that coerced nouns elicit an N400 response similar
to that of semantically anomalous nouns (e.g., astonished the book; Baggio
et al., 2009; Kuperberg et al., 2010). Coercion costs, then, should be sensitive to semantic manipulations inter- and intra-sententially. However,
some behavioral research has shown that this may not be the case (Frisson & McElree, 2008; Traxler et al., 2005). In the current study, participants
read sentence pairs while having their EEG recorded. The sentence pairs
included context sentences that either fully specified or underspecified the
activity implied by the coercing expression in the paired target sentence
(e.g., “reading” for “started the book”). Contrary to previous findings, context modulated the ERP response to the word following the coerced noun,
with the fully specified and underspecified contexts eliciting N400 and
P600 effects, respectively. These results demonstrate that event information
in prior context can change the nature of the cost associated with coercion,
but does not attenuate said cost.

F86
PREFRONTAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO RELATIONAL ENCODING
IN HEALTHY AGING AND MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT Chris
Foster1, Donna Addis2, Jaclyn Ford1, Daniel Kaufer1, Jeffrey Browndyke3, Kathleen Welsh-Bohmer3, Kelly Giovanello1; 1University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, 2The University of Auckland, New Zealand, 3Duke University — Relational
encoding relies on two distinct mnemonic mechanisms, binding and generation. Patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), a transitional period
between normal aging and very early Alzheimer’s disease, show deficits
in hippocampal-mediated binding mechanisms, but the status of frontal-based generation processes remains unclear. The current study utilized
functional magnetic resonance imaging during encoding to investigate
the parametric responses of frontal and hippocampal regions to varying
amounts of generative processing in MCI and healthy older adults. Participants made judgments about the relatedness, or number of links, between
three word triads and were given an incidental memory test at retrieval.
Triads consisted of a category name and two exemplars and semantic relatedness was manipulated across three levels. At encoding, control participants and MCI patients showed equivalent accuracy for relatedness judgments when triads consisted of two related exemplars, but MCI patients
were impaired as the number of related links decreased. During the two
alternative forced-choice test, patients showed an overall decrement in recognition performance compared to the control group. At the neural level,
both groups recruited lateral temporal and parietal cortices as semantic
relatedness decreased; however, middle frontal and inferior frontal gyri
were recruited significantly more by MCI patients relative to controls as
relatedness decreased. In the early stages of cognitive decline, an over
recruitment of frontal neural regions appears to aid in the performance of
generative processing involved in relational memory. Such findings extend
past research and show that over recruitment occurs for both binding and
generation in MCI.

F87
PREFRONTAL GRAY MATTER VOLUME MEDIATES AGE EFFECTS
ON STRATEGIC PROCESSING Brenda A. Kirchhoff1, Brian A. Gordon2,
Denise Head2; 1University of Missouri - St. Louis, 2Washington University in St.
Louis — Episodic memory is one of the domains of cognition most susCognitive Neuroscience Society

197

Poster Session F
ceptible to decline with age. Prior research suggests that age differences
in the strategies that individuals spontaneously use to learn new information contribute to age differences in episodic memory. Currently, relatively
little is known regarding what factors drive age differences in self-initiated
memory strategies. This study investigated the role of prefrontal structure in age differences in self-initiated memory strategies. Specifically, we
explored whether the brain regions that support self-initiated memory
strategies change with age, and whether regional prefrontal gray matter
volumes mediate age effects on self-initiated memory strategies. The relationships among age, regional prefrontal gray matter volume, and semantic
and serial clustering on the California Verbal Learning Test were examined
across the adult lifespan (ages 18 – 91). Age was negatively correlated with
both serial and semantic clustering. Serial clustering was not significantly
correlated with gray matter volumes. Semantic clustering was positively
correlated with grey matter volume in left caudal middle, left inferior, and
right rostral middle regions of prefrontal cortex. Age did not moderate the
relationships between serial and semantic clustering and gray matter volumes. Importantly, grey matter volume in left caudal middle, left inferior,
and right rostral middle regions of prefrontal cortex mediated age effects
on semantic clustering. These results suggest that the same regions of prefrontal cortex support self-initiated semantic memory strategies across the
lifespan. They also suggest that prefrontal gray matter volume mediates the
effects of age on self-initiated memory strategies.

F88
RECOLLECTION AND FAMILIARITY DECLINES IN HEALTHY AGING,
AMCI, AND AD Joshua Koen1, Andrew Yonelinas1; 1University of California,
Davis — Many cognitive abilities show marked deficits in the elderly,
including the ability to recognize specific details about previous events.
Recognition memory is supported by recollection of specific details associated with a prior episode or by assessments of an event’s familiarity. There
is strong evidence that recollection declines with healthy aging, but the fate
or familiarity is less clear. A quantitative review of 54 published studies
examining age-related declines in recollection and familiarity showed large
age-related declines in recollection and small, yet detectable declines in
familiarity. One factor that appeared to mediate familiarity declines was
the use of different estimation methods across studies. To further probe this
possibility, we examined recognition memory in 40 adults between the age
of 40 and 81using the process-dissociation, remember/know, and receiver-operating characteristic procedures. Age-related declines were evident
recollection, but not familiarity, and the pattern did not differ across the
estimation methods. A second factor that may underlie age-related familiarity declines is the inclusion of individuals with preclinical dementia. In
line with this possibility, a review of 10 additional studies revealed that
patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) and Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) have large declines in both recollection and familiarity. In conclusion, both healthy and pathological aging leads to large declines in recollection. However, familiarity deficits are large in individuals with aMCI
and AD but are much smaller (and sometimes nonexistent) in healthy aging
individuals. These data suggest that measures of familiarity may be useful
in the identification of individuals who will develop memory impairments.

F89
HOW FLUENCY SUPPORTS SOURCE MEMORY FOR FAMILIAR
NAMES IN YOUNGER AND OLDER ADULTS: EVIDENCE FROM
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Jessica Komes1, Stefan R. Schweinberger1, Holger Wiese1; 1DFG Research Unit Person Perception & Department
of General Psychology and Cognitive Neuroscience, Friedrich Schiller University
of Jena — It is a matter of current debate whether and how the access to
source information may rely not only on recollection, but on fluency-based
processes as well. By means of behavioral measures and event-related
potentials (ERPs), the present experiments examined potential influences of
fluency on source memory for famous names. In Experiment 1, with visual
presentation at test, source judgments were more accurate for repeated
visually learned versus non-repeated visually learned names, whereas no
such beneficial effect was apparent for repeated auditorily learned versus
non-repeated auditorily learned names. Additionally, visually presented
items at test elicited an N400-like ERP effect (300-600 ms), differentiating
between visually and auditorily learned names, for correct source memory
decisions only. We interpret this effect as indexing a decision-relevant fluency mechanism arising from within-modality priming of visually learned

198

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
names. This idea was further supported in Experiment 2, in which the pattern of behavioral and ERP effects for older adults was found to be analogous to the one in younger adults, in line with the assumption of spared
fluency processes in older adults. In sum, the experiments suggest that fluency assists person-related source memory via within-modality priming in
both younger and older adults.

F90
WHITE-MATTER INTEGRITY IN UNCINATE FASCICULUS AND
FORNIX IS ASSOCIATED WITH AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN
HIPPOCAMPAL BOLD ACTIVITY DURING EPISODIC RETRIEVAL
Joshua Lee1,2, Carter Wendelken3, Julia Ross2, Jacqueline Pospisil2, Marcos
Sastre2, Silvia Bunge3,4, Simona Ghetti1,2; 1University of California, Davis,
Department of Psychology, 2University of California, Davis, Center for Mind
and Brain, 3University of California, Berkely, Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute,
4
University of California, Berkely, Department of Psychology — Recent evidence indicates that the contribution of hippocampus to episodic memory
changes during childhood, but mechanisms underlying this change are
largely unknown. In the present study, we tested the hypothesis that the
integrity of white-matter tracts projecting from the hippocampus to prefrontal cortex (uncinate fasciculus) and/or to subcortical structures (fornix)
influences functional activity in the hippocampus during childhood. We
have collected fMRI and DTI data for 49 children ages 8-11 as part of a
larger study. Fractional anisotropy (FA) values were obtained for regions
of interest in the uncinate and fornix. The fMRI task involved memory for
the association between images of objects and the specific scene with which
they had appeared. Hippocampal BOLD activation was measured from the
contrast of accurately remembered vs. inaccurately remembered objectscene associations. In the younger but not older children (from a median
split), there was a positive correlation between uncinate FA and the contrast in hippocampal activation, r(25) = .43, p < .05. By contrast, in the older
but not younger children, there was a negative correlation between fornix
FA and the contrast in hippocampal activation, r(24) = -.55 , p < .01. These
preliminary results suggest that age-related differences in hippocampal
function are influenced by the relative strength of anatomical connections
with prefrontal and subcortical projections.

F91
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN CRITERION SHIFTING DURING
RECOGNITION MEMORY ACROSS THE LIFESPAN Brian Lopez1, Tyler
Santander1, Misty Schubert1, Justin Kantner1, Craig Bennett1, Michael Miller1;
1
University of California, Santa Barbara — A critical aspect of recognition
memory is the integration of available memory evidence and a decision
criterion. Previous work has shown that several cognitive and personality
factors can affect the placement of a decision criterion. Furthermore, episodic retrieval and criterion shifting involve distinct brain regions that are
engaged differentially across individuals depending on unique characteristics and strategies. In this study we attempted to quantify how development and aging interact with such factors in their influence on criterion
placement during recognition memory. Recognition behavior and regional
brain activity were examined in late adolescents, young adults, and elderly
adults during an fMRI task involving criterion shifting. The degree of
shifting between a liberal and conservative criterion in high- and low-target-probability conditions was quite variable across participants. However,
on average there were not significant differences in discriminability or criterion placement between groups. Analysis of task-related brain activity
revealed that groups similarly recruited frontoparietal regions typically
associated with memory retrieval. Despite overall similarities, significant
differences in inter-subject variability between groups was observed with
elderly adults being the most variable, followed by late adolescents, then
young adults. We examined how personality and cognitive characteristics,
brain connectivity, task performance, strategy, and other factors explained
this variability, with different factors emerging as significant predictors
for each group. These results provide a comprehensive examination of
the underlying factors that account for individual variability in criterion
shifting during recognition memory across the lifespan. Supported by the
Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies through grant W911NF-09-0001
from the U.S. Army Research Office.

2013 Annual Meeting

F92
EMOTIONAL MEMORY AND PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL REACTIVITY FOLLOWING A NIGHT OF SLEEP Jessica Payne1; 1University of Notre
Dame, Department of Psychology — Negative objects are typically better
remembered than the neutral backgrounds on which they are placed, while
neutral objects and backgrounds tend to be remembered equivalently. This
preferential reinforcement of negative arousing stimuli within scenes is
known as the emotional memory trade-off effect, and it has been shown to
increase following periods of sleep. Here we examined 1) the sleep stage
correlates of this selective benefit to emotional objects within scenes, 2)
whether the degree of physiological reactivity (as measured by heart-rate
deceleration) to images at encoding would predict subsequent memory for
these objects, and 3) whether physiological reactivity in response to scenes
at encoding would be depotentiated following sleep compared to wakefulness. Results suggest that preferential memory for emotional objects
was associated with rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, that the degree of
heart rate deceleration to negative scenes at encoding predicted selective
memory for negative objects, but only in the sleep group, and that sleep
globally depotentiated physiological reactivity to both negative and neutral
scene components. These results suggest that selective emotional memory
consolidation during sleep is largely associated with time spent in REM
sleep, that larger visceral reactions to negative pictures at encoding set the
stage for this preferential memory for negative objects following a night of
sleep, and that sleep has a net depotentiating effect on physiological reactivity to images, regardless of valence.

F93
A NETWORK FOR NAVIGATION: CROSS-HEMISPHERIC HIPPOCAMPAL CONNECTIVITY PREDICTS WATER MAZE PERFORMANCE Jonas Persson1, Eva Stening1, Johan Wikström1, Hedvig Söderlund1;
Uppsala University, Sweden — Extensive research has shown that the hippocampus is crucial for flexible navigation and spatial memory, but given
the complexity of such cognitive abilities, hippocampal activity alone is
likely insufficient to fully account for successful performance. Earlier findings have identified other brain structures subserving relevant cognitive
processes, though few studies have directly investigated hippocampal connectivity with these areas during navigation and to what extent connectivity is related to performance. To answer this question, we had twenty
participants (25.3±3.2 years of age) perform a virtual Water Maze task.
During performance, the right posterior hippocampus showed increased
activity for hidden versus visible platforms. Using this area as a seed, a
psychophysiological interaction analysis was performed. This revealed
task-modulated functional connectivity with the right precuneus, possibly
reflecting a translation between egocentric and allocentric representations
during encoding of the platform location. When considering performance,
faster platform finding was associated with greater connectivity with the
left anterior hippocampus. Given earlier evidence of hemispheric specialization, this may reflect an integration of verbal and spatial mnemonic processes that is beneficial for performance. When considering activation only,
no correlation was found between performance and hippocampal activation in corresponding areas. This study reveals hippocampal connectivity
during Water Maze performance and shows that it is cross-hemispheric
connectivity within the hippocampus, not hippocampal activation in these
regions per se, that predicts navigation ability.

1

F94
THE EFFECTS OF ITEM FAMILIARITY ON THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF SUCCESSFUL RELATIONAL MEMORY ENCODING
Kristina M. Peterson1, Christina E. Johnson1, Nancy A. Dennis1; 1The Pennsylvania State University — Relational memory is resource demanding in
that participants are required not only to learn individual items, but also
the specific relationships between individual items. Previous research has
shown that prior study of individual items aids in relational memory for
pairs composed of those same items compared to pairs of items that were
not pre-learned (Kilb & Naveh-Benjamin, 2011). The current study sought
to elucidate the neural correlates mediating this memory facilitation. After
being trained on, or familiarized with individual faces and scenes, participants were scanned while encoding face-scene pairs composed of items
from the pre-trained phase (familiarized-item pairs) and pairs whose items

Poster Session F
had not previously been learned (unfamiliarized-item pairs). Overall subsequent recollection showed engagement of bilateral parahippocampal
gyrus (PHG) and hippocampus when compared to subsequent familiarity – a finding consistent with previous literature. However, a comparison between familiarized and unfamiliarized-item pairs showed that
subsequently recollected unfamiliarized-item pairs were associated with
increased activity across the encoding network including bilateral PHG,
hippocampus and right medial prefrontal cortex (PFC); whereas no region
exhibited greater activity for encoding of familiarized-item pairs. Results
suggest simultaneous encoding of both items and the relationship between
items leads to increased recruitment of encoding resources in the PHG and
PFC, whereas familiarized-item pairs may utilize the preexisting trace of
individual items when encoding pairs of items. These results highlight the
demands of relational memory on medial temporal lobe processing and
suggest a means by which such demands can be alleviated with prior exposure to individual items.

F95
DISSOCIATION OF ITEM-SPECIFIC AND RELATIONAL MEMORY
IN SCHIZOPHRENIA USING SIMULTANEOUS EYE-TRACKING
AND FMRI METHODS Joshua Phillips1, Deborah Hannula2, Jeremy Le
Veque2, Cameron Carter1, Charan Ranganath1, J. Daniel Ragland1; 1University
of California, Davis, 2University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee — In a previous study
that combined behavioral and eye tracking measures our group examined
whether or not relational memory was impaired in patients with schizophrenia. We predicted that memory for items would remain intact, while
memory for spatial relationships among items would be disrupted. While
behavioral results showed that patients had an overall performance deficit,
eye movement data pointed to a specific impairment on the test of relational memory. To investigate the neural correlates of this impairment we
adapted the task used in our earlier work for fMRI, which is the focus of
the current presentation. Simultaneous eye-tracking and fMRI data were
obtained from 20 schizophrenia patients and 18 controls and fMRI data
were examined for task and group effects using behavioral and eye-tracking covariates. As reported previously, patients showed a generalized
memory deficit, but eye-movement-based memory effects were more specific, and replicated the results described above. Preliminary fMRI results
are congruent with the eye tracking results and failed to show any group
differences in whole-brain activation in the item memory condition. In contrast, patients showed reduced activation in the left DLPFC, left middle
temporal gyrus, and several subcortical regions (amygdala and caudate)
during the relational memory condition. These results confirm previous
behavioral and fMRI results indicating that item-specific memory is relatively intact, whereas DLPFC control of relational memory processes is specifically impaired. Eye-tracking procedures were well tolerated by patients
and played a key role in dissociating memory processes.

F96
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN BEHAVIORAL AND ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MEASURES OF PROSPECTIVE MEMORY IN HEALTHY
ADULTS AND ADULTS WITH TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Sarah
Raskin1, Navneet Kaur1, Conseulo Pedro1; 1Trinity College — Prospective
memory (PM) is remembering to do something in the future and involves
the ability to form and later realize intentions that are delayed over time
(Einstein & McDaniel, 1990). The purpose of this experiment was to
examine the underlying brain activity related to PM using event-related
potentials (West & Ross-Munroe, 2002) and to determine the relationship
between the electrophysiological measures and behavioral performance,
as measured by the Memory for Intentions Screening Test (MIST) (Raskin,
Buckheit, & Sherrod, 2011) in both healthy individuals (HA) and individuals with traumatic brain injury (TBI). Results showed that individuals with
TBI performed worse than HA on all variables of both the MIST and the
computerized behavioral test. They also showed smaller amplitudes on all
ERPs of interest when compared to HA. Lastly, when comparing the MIST
and the computerized behavioral data, the MIST correlated more strongly
with reaction time of the computerized behavioral test than with any other
variables. Overall, these findings suggest that individuals with TBI have
deficits in PM compared to HA and that the MIST and the computerized-behavioral tests are measuring similar PM-related processes.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

199

Poster Session F

F97
AUTOBIOGRAPHICALLY SIGNIFICANT CONCEPTS: MORE EPISODIC THAN SEMANTIC IN NATURE? AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION OF OVERLAPPING TYPES OF MEMORY
Louis Renoult1,2, Patrick Davidson2, Erika Schmitz2, Lillian Park3, Kenneth
Campbell2, Morris Moscovitch1, Brian Levine1; 1Rotman Research Institute,
Baycrest, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada,
3
SUNY College at Old Westbury, NY, USA — A common conception is that
semantic memory emerges from episodic memory, shedding the distinctive contexts associated with episodes. Some semantic concepts, such as
names of people, however, may retain their episodic origins or acquire
episodic information during life experiences. The current study examined
this hypothesis by investigating the event-related potential (ERP) correlates
of autobiographically significant (AS) concepts, that is, semantic concepts
that are associated with vivid episodic memories. We compared famous
names that easily brought to mind episodic memories (high AS names)
against equally famous names that did not bring such recollections to mind
(low AS names), on a semantic task (fame judgment) and an episodic task
(recognition memory). We inferred the contribution of semantic and episodic memory to AS concepts, using the amplitude of the N400 and LPC
event-related potentials (ERPs), respectively. Compared to low AS names,
high AS names were associated with increased amplitude of the LPC in
both tasks. Moreover, in the recognition task, the LPC effect of AS was
highly correlated with that of recognition confidence. In contrast, the N400
did not differentiate the two kinds of names in any of the tasks, but instead
was related to the amount of general knowledge participants had of each
person. These results thus supported our hypothesis that semantic concepts
high in AS also appear to have an episodic component, and are associated
with the same neural correlates that are engaged by episodic memory.
Studying these AS concepts may provide insights into how episodic and
semantic memory interact.

F98
THE EFFECTS OF IMMEDIATE TESTING ON NEURAL CORRELATES
OF RECOLLECTION Timm Rosburg1, Axel Mecklinger1, Michael Weigl1,
Mikael Johansson2; 1Saarland University, 2Lund University — The testing effect
is conceptualized as the benefit for remembering items that were studied
and tested rather than just studied. Yet, little is known about its neural
correlates. In an event-related potential (ERP) study, we investigated how
testing affects subsequent recollection processes. During an initial study
phase, 32 participants encountered object names together with pictures of
the denoted object (‘perceived items’) or with the instruction to mentally
visualize them (‘imagined items’). In two consecutive source memory tests,
participants had to differentiate between perceived, imagined, and newly
presented items. Half of the studied items were presented in the first run
and all items in the second. Behaviorally, repeated testing led to improved
item and source memory, as well as faster reaction times, as compared
to items that were only tested once. In accordance with these behavioral
changes, the left-parietal old/new effect (500-700 ms) as putative correlate
of recollection was strongly enhanced by previous testing. An enhancement
after testing was also observed for the early portion of the late right frontal
old/new effect (700-900 ms). This old/new effect was, however, also modulated by memory source, with larger effects for imagined items than for
perceived items. Such a modulation by memory source was also revealed
for the late posterior negativity (LPN, 900-1500 ms), that was largely unaffected by repeated testing. Our study shows that immediate repeated testing has an impact on retrieval related old/new effects, while later occurring
old/new effects related to post-retrieval processes are clearly less modulated by repeated testing.

F99
THE ROLE OF CONSCIOUS AWARENESS IN MTL AND CORTICAL PROCESSING OF SCENE CONFIGURAL SIMILARITY Anthony
Ryals1, Joel Voss1; 1Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine —
MTL structures are involved in memory for relationships among items
even when conscious awareness for these relationships is lacking. However, less is known regarding neural processing that supports memory for
and awareness of the stable configurations of features that define complex
scenes. Memory for feature configurations could depend on MTL process-

200

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
ing and be expressed without an individual’s awareness, whereas awareness could depend on co-involvement of MTL and prefrontal cortical
structures. To test these possibilities, we measured awareness and brain
activity during a memory paradigm that involved manipulation of scene
configural similarity (SCS). Participants studied scenes and then were
tested using scenes that were high in SCS to studied scenes, in that objects
and features had the same configuration despite being comprised of different objects, colors, textures, etc. They then rated familiarity for high SCS
scenes and for new non-SCS scenes, and also reported recollection of corresponding studied scenes. Familiarity ratings were significantly associated
with SCS even when subjects did not recollect, indicating that SCS memory
may not require recollection. Furthermore, judgments of learning during
study were unrelated to SCS memory, but strongly predicted high-accuracy recognition of studied scenes, indicating that subjects were relatively
unaware of processing that supported SCS memory. In a pilot version of
this task (N=13), MTL activity distinguished familiarity and recollection for
SCS. MTL and cortical activity in the current paradigm will be discussed
with respect to SCS memory expressed with awareness versus expressed
through eye-movement measures of unaware memory that were obtained
throughout the experiment.

F100
THE ROLE OF PREDICTION ERRORS IN CONTROL OF RECOGNITION MEMORY DECISIONS Jason M. Scimeca1, Perri L. Katzman1,
David Badre1; 1Brown University — An outstanding question regarding cognitive control of memory is how we evaluate and update memory strategies and mnemonic control representations. Previous research in recognition memory has demonstrated that external feedback does not typically
guide participants to establish a more appropriate recognition criterion.
However, recent work has shown that false feedback can induce dramatic
shifts in recognition criteria. We hypothesized that prediction errors (PEs)
are the critical learning signal for updating recognition criteria. In a recognition memory task, we provided false positive feedback to differentially
reinforce “old” or “new” responses and found that participants gradually
become more likely to make the reinforced memory decision. Critically, we
manipulated how much this feedback deviated from participants’ expectations by providing the false positive feedback either on trials when participants gave high or low confidence ratings. If participants’ confidence
ratings reflect their expectation of making a correct response, then false
positive feedback following low confidence ratings should lead to a large
deviation from their expected outcome. We found that participants who
received false positive feedback primarily on low confidence responses
showed greater shifts in their response criterion. This is consistent with
a learning process mediated by PEs, and with recent theories positing an
important role for frontal-striatal circuits in the cognitive control of declarative memory (Scimeca & Badre, 2012). The striatum is known to represent
PEs in the reinforcement learning domain, and the present results provide
a basis for future neuroimaging work to test whether similar striatal PEs
support the updating of recognition memory criteria.

F101
COMMON AND DISTINCT NEURAL STRUCTURES SUPPORT AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY, SEMANTIC AND IMAGERY-BASED
RETRIEVAL. Signy Sheldon1,2, Brian Levine1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute,
Baycrest Centre for Geriatric Care, 2University of Toronto — There is a growing
interest in the neural overlap between autobiographical memory retrieval
and other forms of retrieval. In this study, we explore the commonalities
and distinctions between the neural substrates that support autobiographical memory retrieval, semantic retrieval and imagery. Participants were
cued with pictured objects and asked to recall a past personal event (autobiographical), think of a location for the object and list other objects that may
also be located there (semantic) or imagine object-based sensory details
(imagery) during fMRI scanning. We identified a network common to autobiographical, semantic and imagery retrieval that included inferior frontal,
temporal and parietal activity. A follow-up exploratory analysis identified
patterns of brain activity that distinguished between the autobiographical,
semantic and imagery conditions. This analysis also revealed a separate
pattern that related to commonalities between the autobiographical and
imagery condition, but not the semantic condition, that included regions
such as the inferior frontal gyrus and superior and inferior parietal lobule.

2013 Annual Meeting
Altogether, these findings indicate that while there is a common network
for retrieval regardless of content, distinctions are evident between the
three tasks. The association between the autobiographical and imagery condition suggest that there is a strong link between detail retrieval associated
with imagery and autobiographical memory.

F102
THEORY OF MEMORY: NEURAL CORRELATES OF SUCCESSFUL
DIFFERENTIATION OF SHARED VERSUS NON-SHARED MEMORY
Yeonsoon Shin1, Sehjung Yi1, Sanghoon Han1; 1Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea
— A crux of social relationship lies at both sharing experiences with others
and remembering the experiences appropriately. Especially, it is crucial to
have Theory of Memory and differentiate others’ memory status from our
own. In an fMRI study, we aimed to find brain regions that consistently represent socially shared/non-shared memory, using Representational Similarity Analysis (RSA). Specifically, we focused on the role of temporo-parietal junction (TPJ), which is an important region for Theory of Mind, during
social memory. Participants were scanned while performing memory tasks
in three conditions: other-shared (OS), other-non-shared (ON), and selfalone (SA). During encoding phase, subjects encoded word stimuli presented with video clips where other person either attended the word (OS)
or did not (ON), resulting in shared and non-shared memory respectively.
While watching the clip, they were asked to make a meta-memory judgment of other. In test phase, they retrieved word with old/new recognition
memory paradigm in their own perspective (SA) or in other’s perspective
(OS, ON). GLM analysis revealed that OS/ON encoding elicited greater
TPJ involvement than SA. Moreover, this region was more involved in
OS than ON, differentiating shared memory from non-shared memory.
While GLM analysis did not reveal any difference between OS and ON
at retrieval, RSA more sensitively discerned consistent pattern representations in TPJ for successful memory of shared versus non-shared episodes.
Our data provide evidence that TPJ is mainly involved in encoding other’s
memory status and represents a pattern for shared memory more consistently.

F103
POSTERIOR CINGULATE SHOWS GREATER ACTIVATION DURING
SCENE PROCESSING IN YOUNG ADULT CARRIERS OF THE
APOE-4 ALLELE Jonathan Shine1,2, Carl Hodgetts1, Andrew Lawrence1,
Julie Williams3, Paul Hollingworth3, Rebecca Sims3, Toby Lloyd-Jones4, Richard
Wise2, Kim Graham1; 1Wales Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, School of Psychology, Cardiff University, 2Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre,
School of Psychology, Cardiff University, 3MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric
Genetics and Genomics, Cardiff University, 4Wales Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, School of Psychology, Swansea University — Presence of the APOE-4
allele is associated with an increased risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Recent imaging studies have reported differences in brain
activity between carriers and non-carriers of the APOE-4 allele, but findings have been inconsistent over the direction and location of these effects
(Trachtenberg et al., 2010). In one seminal study, healthy young carriers of
APOE-4, relative to non-carriers, showed increased activity in the “default
mode network” during resting state fMRI, and increased activity in hippocampus (HC) during memory encoding (Filippini et al., 2009). Here, we
asked whether these group differences would be affected by the type of
stimuli to be remembered, based on evidence that patients with AD and
Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) show particular difficulties with scene,
but not face, processing (Lee et al., 2007). Thirty healthy young adults, half
of whom carried the APOE-4 allele, performed a 1-back matching task with
objects, faces, scenes and scrambled objects during fMRI. Group-level differences in BOLD signal were evident in posterior cingulate; these reflected
a between-group difference in scene, but not face or object, processing.
Specifically, APOE-4 carriers showed significantly greater BOLD response
associated with scene processing. These findings support previous studies
highlighting differences in the BOLD response in young participants who
are carriers of the APOE-4 allele, but in addition show that these can be
extended beyond long-term memory to working memory, and may be particularly prominent during spatial processing (consistent with the earliest
cognitive deficits seen in AD and MCI, Pengas et al., 2010).

Poster Session F

F104
ROLE OF HIPPOCAMPAL SUBREGIONS IN DISAMBIGUATING
ELEMENTS OF TEMPORAL VS. SPATIAL CONTEXT IN EPISODIC
MEMORY Dana Smuda1, Colin Kyle1, Jared Stokes1, Arne Ekstrom1; 1Uni-

versity of California, Davis — Despite widespread agreement that the hippocampus is critical for representation of spatial and temporal context of
remembered episodes, the nature and mechanisms of underlying processes
remain debated. One proposal is that spatial and temporal information are
handled differentially by CA3 and CA1, respectively (Rolls and Kesner,
2006). An alternative idea suggests both subregions are involved in processing spatial and temporal context, but differ in terms of processing the
underlying representations. Ten participants played a virtual taxi-driver
game in which they searched for stores in a specific order, learning both
the temporal order of deliveries and the spatial layout of the stores. Participants then judged the relative serial position (temporal context) and the
relative distance (spatial context) of these while undergoing high-resolution fMRI (structural: .4X.4X2mm; functional: 1.5x1.5x2mm) targeting the
hippocampus. Reaction time (RT) data showed that judgments of temporal
order were faster (t-test, p < .001) for nearby stores (M = 3.1221 seconds, SE
= 0.3021) than distant stores (M = 3.6623, SE = 0.0444) while spatial layout
RTs showed no such difference (M = 2.1554, SE = 0.0444, M = 0.3047, SE =
0.0440, respectively. Representational similarity (RS) analyses of fMRI data
showed that temporal context retrieval resulted in significantly lower RS
compared to spatial layout retrieval (t-test, p< .001); RS varied as a function of distance for temporal but not spatial context. Our behavioral and
neuroimaging are consistent with a more coherent representation of spatial layout, compared to a distinct representation of elements in a temporal
order.

F105
EXPLORING THE FOUNDATION OF RESTING STATE CONNECTIVITY IN THE HIPPOCAMPUS USING DIFFUSION WEIGHTED IMAGING (DWI) BASED PARCELLATION Areeba Adnan1, Massieh Moayedi1,2,
Cornelia McCormick1,2, Mary Pat McAndrews1,3; 1Toronto Western Research
Institute, 2Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Toronto, 3Department
of Psychology, University of Toronto — Introduction: The hippocampus is
well known to be a critical structure supporting recollection. Recent evidence based on functional connectivity in fMRI suggests that the anterior
and posterior segments of the hippocampus may play different roles in this
process (Poppenk & Moscovitch, 2011). In the present study, we investigated the possibility that the functional heterogeneity of the hippocampus
arises from the distinct structural sub-regions that can be distinguished
on the basis of their connectivity. Methods: We used DWI tractography
based parcellation to divide the hippocampus into distinct sub-regions on
the basis of differences in estimated structural connections to the rest of
the brain. Then, we used resting-state functional connectivity to determine
the different connectivity profiles of these regions. Results: Our methods
revealed that parcellation based on intrinsic structural connectivity reliably
segmented the hippocampus into distinct anterior and posterior segments
bilaterally. We then used these bilateral DTI parcellated anterior and posterior segments as seeds in a functional connectivity analysis using the Conn
toolbox in SPM8. Using a contrast looking at anterior > posterior, we found
connections to the frontal and temporal regions including the temporal
pole. Using a posterior > anterior contrast, there was evidence of connectivity to more posterior regions including the precuneus (p<0.001, uncorrected). Conclusions: Tractography based parcellation suggests a division
in the hippocampus along the anterior-posterior axis. This structural division also predicts functional connectivity profiles for these regions. This
could have important implications for understanding how different aspects
of memory may be subserved by distinct patterns of hippocampal-neocortical interactions.

F106
TRENDS IN NEUROIMAGING METHODS: LARGE-SCALE AUTOMATED ANALYSIS OF THE FMRI LITERATURE. Joshua Carp1; 1Uni-

versity of Michigan — How do researchers design and analyze neuroimaging experiments? How should they? And how likely are their results to
be reproducible? To investigate these questions, the present study created
a comprehensive database of nearly all published articles that used fMRI

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

201

Poster Session F
to study human cognition (as of October 2012, the corpus contains 14,953
articles). Methodological details (including software packages, imaging
parameters, and analysis procedures) were automatically extracted from
each article and validated against a hand-coded database. Overall, methodological details were extracted accurately, with a mean d’ value of 3.53
(range: 1.12 to 6.18). Results revealed both variability and stability in methodological practices over time, with some tools increasing in prevalence
(e.g. temporal filtering), others decreasing (e.g. global mean scaling), and
others remaining stable (e.g. spatial normalization). Thus, the results of
early fMRI studies may not be directly comparable to the results of more
recent studies. Results also showed that design and analysis pipelines were
highly variable across studies and have grown more variable over time. In
1998, we observed 133 unique pipelines among 172 articles (0.77 pipelines
per article); in 2011, we observed 492 pipelines among 517 articles (0.95
pipelines per article). Because flexible research methods are associated with
elevated rates of false positive results, these results point to a serious risk
of false positives among fMRI studies. Altogether, the present investigation
highlights the utility of large-scale methodological surveys and suggests
that methodological flexibility poses a particular challenge to the integrity
of research findings in the fMRI literature.

F107
EEG FEATURE ANALYSIS IN A WORKING MEMORY TASK:
MAKING SENSE OF MACHINE LEARNING Matthew Caywood1, Daniel
Roberts1,2, Jeffrey Colombe, Hal Greenwald, Monica Weiland; 1The MITRE Corporation, 2George Mason University — As a step towards implementing a
real-time brain-computer interface (BCI) monitoring neural signatures of
continuous human workload, multivariate pattern analysis methods were
used to quantitatively measure the contribution of different EEG features
to task load in a working memory task. Sixteen participants performed
three variants of a working memory task as well as a related visuospatial
memory task. Information present in EEG features about task level, task
modality, and subject-reported workload was analyzed using a continuum
of methods ranging from easily interpretable statistical methods (correlation, ANOVA) to maximally informative for prediction (linear regression,
GPR). A BCI was trained using Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) to
predict task level and subject-reported workload in real time. Predictive
accuracy for both variables was high (task level Pearson’s correlation ρ =
0.90 ± 0.01, mean and SEM across subjects). The EEG features identified by
statistical methods (ANOVA) as significant were only loosely correlated
with the features identified by automated feature selection techniques as
most relevant for prediction of task level. However, this subset of ANOVA
features still captured over 90% of the full model’s predictive ability; there
was considerable predictive redundancy between EEG features, and only
the top 20% of the features were necessary for asymptotic prediction. Thus,
features consistent with cognitive neuroscience models, when sufficient for
prediction, can be preferred on account of their interpretability and generalization potential.

F108
DETECTING FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY CHANGE POINTS IN
FMRI DATA Ivor Cribben1, Lauren Y. Atlas2, Tor D. Wager3, Martin A. Lindquist4; 1University of Alberta School of Business, 2New York University, 3University of Colorado, Boulder, 4Johns Hopkins University — Recently in functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies there has been an increased
interest in understanding the dynamic manner in which brain regions communicate with one another, as subjects perform a set of experimental tasks
or as their psychological state changes. In this work, we extend Dynamic
Connectivity Regression (DCR), a technique used for detecting temporal
change points in functional connectivity between brain regions where the
number and location of the change points are unknown. DCR also estimates a graph or set of relationships between the brain regions for data that
falls between pairs of change points. We firstly introduce a new algorithm
for detecting the changes in functional connectivity for single-subject data
as well as new bootstrap techniques for inference on the change points and
the graphical structures. Secondly, we discuss methods that combine information across subjects for multi-subject fMRI studies as variability between
subjects makes the use of these data sets challenging. The DCR methodology is motivated in part by the fact that often it is hard to specify the nature,
timing and duration of psychological processes being studied a priori. The

202

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
new methods are applied to various simulated data sets as well as to fMRI
data sets including data from a study (n=26) of a state anxiety induction
using a socially evaluative threat challenge. The results illustrate the method’s ability to observe how the networks between different brain regions
changes with subjects’ emotional state.

F109
AMPLITUDE VARIANCE ASYMMETRY: IDENTIFYING NONLINEAR
SIGNATURES IN THE BOLD RESTING STATE SIGNAL Ben Davis1,
Jorge Jovicich1, Vittorio Iacovella1, Uri Hasson1; 1University of Trento — Since
Biswal et al.’s (1995) pioneering work documenting connectivity between
the left and right motor cortex during rest, numerous studies have identified large, functional networks where low frequency BOLD signals similarly correlate in the absence of an explicit task, and connectivity has
become the major descriptive principle for understanding the brain’s resting state. However, recent work has shown that resting state activity (RSA)
also consists of high-frequency and non-random non-oscillatory properties
that are functionally relevant. Extending this work, we propose a novel
method for identifying BOLD time series that show nonlinear, non-oscillatory signatures during rest. This method quantifies the relative variance of
the amplitude of local maxima and local minima in the BOLD time series
(amplitude variance asymmetry; AVA). This simple, easily implemented
method reveals new properties of RSA activity without relying on connectivity as a descriptive tool. After an initial validation of AVA on phantom
data, we performed AVA analysis on data from 2 participant groups (n=25,
n=31) collected in 2 different centers (NYU, UNITN). We find that AVA is
remarkably stable across participants, that the regions showing AVA do
not form a single functional network and that group-level results replicate
across scanning sites (3T,4T). AVA values departed from chance in bilateral lateral temporal cortices, bilateral pre-motor regions extending to the
post-central sulcus, and bilateral occipital regions that largely excluded primary visual cortex and extended dorsally towards the medial intraparietal
sulcus. These findings indicate that AVA is a robust metric that may reflect
important and novel properties of RSA.

F110
MRS CORRELATES OF WORKING MEMORY AND ANXIETY IN ALS
Katherine Denny1, M. Agustina Rossetti1, Heather Katzen2, K. R. Sharma2, Kristopher Arheart2, Andrew Maudsley2, Bonnie Levin2, Varan Govind2; 1University
of Miami, 2University of Miami Miller School of Medicine — Objective: Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is fatal neurodegenerative disease associated with alterations in select cognitive and behavioral domains. Proton
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) offers an opportunity to link brain
metabolites with neurobehavioral change. This study examined the distribution of observed brain metabolites in the frontal lobes and their association with mood and neuropsychological test performance in ALS. Participants and Methods: 44 ALS patients (mean age: 54.8, symptom duration:
7.2 months) and 43 age-matched controls (mean age: 48.1) were evaluated
with a comprehensive neuropsychological battery that included working
memory (e.g., Digit Span-Backwards), and mood (Beck Anxiety Inventory).
All participants underwent MRI and volumetric MR Spectroscopic Imaging (MRSI). Average values of signal normalized metabolites in the frontal
lobes were calculated for N-acetyl-aspartate (NAA), total-choline (Cho),
and total-creatine (Cre) and their ratios. Results: For the ALS group, partial
correlations adjusting for symptom duration and severity revealed bilateral
Cho/NAA in frontal white matter was negatively associated with working
memory (p<.01), and Cho/NAA in left frontal grey matter was positively
associated with anxiety (p<.02). These correlations were not observed in
controls. Conclusion: In ALS patients, increased Cho/NAA in bilateral
frontal lobe white matter is associated with deficits in working memory,
and increased Cho/NAA in left frontal lobe grey matter is associated with
increased anxiety symptoms. This study (1) highlights the role of frontal
systems in the expression of select cognitive and affective changes documented in ALS and (2) demonstrates that MRS has the capacity to capture
neuronal degeneration, a potentially important biomarker of ALS.

2013 Annual Meeting

F111
GRAY MATTER VOLUME DIFFERENCES BETWEEN SPANISH-ENGLISH AND HINDI-ENGLISH BILINGUALS Teresa Gray1, Peter Glynn1,
Gigi Luk2, Swathi Kiran1; 1Boston University, 2Harvard University — Previous
research has documented structural brain differences between monolingual
and bilingual young adults. However, little is known about the structural
brain difference between bilinguals who are biliterate in different scripts.
In this study, we compared gray matter volume in Spanish-English bilingual (n = 9) and Hindi-English bilingual (n = 10) young adults (Mean age
= 25 years). Spanish and English share the same script, both languages are
represented by Roman alphabets. In contrary, Hindi and English are represented by Devanāgarī and Roman alphabets, respectively. The two groups
of young adults were comparable in chronological age, second language
age of acquisition (English for both groups) and English proficiency (using
Boston Naming Test and self-reported). T1-weighted images were collected
from the participants and the data were analyzed using voxel-based morphormetry (VBM) analysis in FSL. A priori Regions-of-interests (ROIs) were
determined: bilateral inferior and middle frontal gyri, middle temporal gyri
(MTG), angular gyri, supramarginal gyri, and anterior cingulate. Previous
research has reported activity in these regions during bilingual processing. We hypothesized the bilingual groups would differ in gray matter
volume in word processing regions because of their biliteracy experience.
Results showed that the Hindi-English bilinguals had higher gray matter
volume in part of the left MTG (BA 21) compared to the Spanish-English
bilinguals (corrected p < .05). The Spanish-English bilinguals did not show
higher gray matter volume in any area within the ROIs. Results suggested
that brain structures responsible for word processing may be influenced by
reading experience using different written representations.

F112
NEURAL CORRELATES OF DIFFERENT HIERARCHIES OF PREDICTIONS Christiane Ahlheim1, Anne-Marike Schiffer2, Ricarda I. Schubotz1;
Westfaelische Wilhelms-University Muenster, 2University of Oxford — Studies
on perception emphasize how much perception is guided by predictions.
Valid predictions can be acquired through statistical learning. Statistical
regularities in our environment span different levels, from simple frequencies to more complex conditional probabilities of first- to nth-order. Using
higher-order probabilities may constrain expectations on lower levels, thus
limiting uncertainty about upcoming perceptions. It has been proposed
that processing more abstract information draws on more anterior brain
regions than processing more concrete information. We therefore tested
the hypothesis that using higher-order probabilities for the formation of
expectations draws on more anterior frontal sites than using lower-order
probabilities. We employed an action-observation paradigm involving statistically structured artificial action sequences, which encompassed firstand second-order conditional probabilities between successive action steps.
The probability of each upcoming action step n was modified by its history
such that n-1, provided that n-2, modified n’s probability differently than
n-1 alone. Two posttests provided behavioral evidence for participants´
implicit learning after three training sessions. We found an effect of transition probability on reaction times in a serial reaction time task. Furthermore, participants showed an effect of the employed transition probabilities when they declared which object they expected next in a sequence. In
the functional data, the extent to which expectations were modulated by
the first-order structure correlated positively with the BOLD response in
the ventromesial prefrontal cortex. We take this to reflect biased expectations. In contrast, modulation by the second-order structure drew on the
ventrolateral prefronal cortex, showing the expected anterior extent.
1

F113
A CRITICAL ROLE FOR THE HIPPOCAMPUS IN ASSESSING THE
STRENGTH OF PERCEPTION Mariam Aly1, Andrew P Yonelinas1, Charan
Ranganath1; 1University of California, Davis — The hippocampus is essential
for episodic memory, but its role in visual perception is controversial. We
hypothesized that inconsistencies in the literature may arise because the
hippocampus is only necessary for some types of perceptual decisions. In
previous work, we found that perception can be based on discrete, high-confidence states associated with conscious access to specific details, or on
continuously-graded, lower-confidence strength signals associated with a
sense of match/mismatch. In the current study, we used receiver-operating

Poster Session F
characteristics to measure perceptual sensitivity as well as the state and
strength components underlying perception in patients with selective hippocampal damage or more widespread medial temporal lobe damage. The
patients exhibited significant reductions in perceptual sensitivity. Importantly, both the hippocampal patients and the more extensive MTL lesion
patients showed a selective impairment in the graded, lower-confidence
strength process, and were completely spared on high-confidence, statebased perception. Similar methods were then used to examine the neural
underpinnings of perceptual decisions in healthy individuals. Activation
in the posterior hippocampus was related to accurate perceptual discriminations, and this activation linearly tracked the strength of graded, lower
confidence responses. As in the patient study, there was no evidence that
the hippocampus was involved in high-confidence, state-like judgments of
conscious change detection. The results demonstrate that the hippocampus
is critical for scene perception based on assessments of the graded strength
of sensory information.

F114
A BIOPHYSICAL PERSPECTIVE ON CORTICAL COMPARATORS IN
MISMATCH NEGATIVITY Stefan Berteau1, Ennio Mingolla2, Daniel Bullock1;
Boston University, 2Northeastern University, Boston, MA — The Mismatch
Negativity (MMN) is an EEG “component” computed by subtracting the
ERP (event-related potential) evoked by a frequent standard stimulus
from the ERP evoked by an infrequent stimulus (Naatanen et al., 1978).
Most models of MMN genesis posit a neural “comparator”. Neural comparators for computing mismatches are common, e.g., those for computing
reward prediction errors (Tan & Bullock, 2008), motor performance errors
(Yamazaki & Tanaka, 2007) and reafference prediction errors (Sawtell et
al., 2005). Four types of comparators have been proposed for MMN, with
formal modeling of three (Wacongne et al., 2012; Banquet & Grossberg,
1987; and May & Tiitinen, 2010). All have shortcomings relative to theoretical criteria or experimental data. We here introduce a biophysical model of
neuronal computations that provides a novel basis for a comparator. Our
model extends Prescott et al. (2006)’s study of membrane dynamical modes
enabled by M-currents (potassium currents affected by muscarinic acetylcholine receptors). We simulate pyramidal neurons with distinct apical and
basal poles, to illustrate neuron-level contributions to comparator operations. When “primed” by modulatory top-down input to the apical pole,
the neuron fires a burst only at the onset of bottom-up input to the basal
pole. Thus, priming enables a regular-spiking neuron to switch from a ratebased code to a binary confirmation at onsets of expected features. This provides robust comparison while reconciling seemingly conflicting neuronal
modes (Poisson randomness versus deterministic timing; Ballard & Jehee,
2011). It also reduces metabolic costs and speeds processing of anticipated
stimuli (cf., Johnston & Hawley, 1994).

1

F115
NEGLECT BEYOND THE BRAIN-DAMAGED: LEFT EXTRA-PERSONAL SPACE NEGLECT IN HEALTHY PARTICIPANTS DURING A
VISUALLY GUIDED GRASPING TASK. Devon. C. Bryant1, Claudia. L. R.
Gonzalez2; 1University of Lethbridge — In the current study we documented
space use during a visually-guided grasping task. Participants reached
out and grasped Lego blocks in ipsilateral, contralateral, peripersonal and
extrapersonal space. Previous results have shown that each hand prefers to
act in its respective ipsilateral space but hand preference in peripersonal/
extrapersonal space has not been documented in a controlled setting. Two
separate sets of four different models each (four built with big- and four
built with small-Lego blocks) were used for the experiment. Each model
contained ten unique pieces but the same ten pieces were used to build the
four different models (of each size). So collectively, there were 40 blocks (4
identical pieces of each block) scattered on a tabletop. One of each repeating
block was placed in one of the four quadrants of the table: right-periperisonal, right-extrapersonal, left-peripersonal and left-extrapersonal space.
Right- and left-handed participants were instructed to build replicas of
each model. Results showed that grasps directed towards the left-extrapersonal space were executed last, when most other blocks had been removed
from the table (i.e. incorporated into the earlier models). Crucially, this
result was also present in left-handers and therefore is not linked to handedness. This study demonstrates that healthy individuals exhibit ‘quadrispatial’ neglect specific to the left extrapersonal space. This suggests that left

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

203

Poster Session F

2013 Annual Meeting

extrapersonal space might be coded by different neural mechanisms than
peripersonal or right extrapersonal space. Ultimately, this finding could
have important implications for understanding visuospatial functions and
deficits such as those seen in patients with hemispatial neglect.

F118
DISTRIBUTED CODING OF SYMBOLIC AND NONSYMBOLIC
NUMBERS IN THE HUMAN BRAIN Lyons Ian1,2, Ansari Daniel2, Beilock

F116
BELIEVING AND PERCEIVING: AUTHORSHIP BELIEF MODULATES SENSORY ATTENUATION Andrea Desantis1,2, Carmen Weiss3,

Sian1; 1University of Chicago, 2Western University — Are symbolic (Indo-Arabic-numerals) and nonsymbolic (dot-arrays) numbers coded differently in
the brain? We present the first direct neural evidence in humans supporting the summation-coding hypothesis for representation of approximate,
nonsymbolic-numbers – but not exact, symbolic-numbers. In the bilateral
intraparietal sulci (IPS), both nonsymbolic-numbers and symbolic-numbers showed a linear increase in activation as the number being processed
increased (from 1-9). Linear model-fit was high (nonsymbolic: R²=.860;
symbolic: R²=.626). However, different neural-coding hypotheses predict
this result. To differentiate coding-hypotheses, we used representational
similarity analysis (RSA) to quantify the distributed, voxelwise correlations
between numbers in IPS activity-patterns. In summation-coding, activity
for a given quantity (e.g., 9) subsumes all lesser numbers’ activity patterns
(1-8). This predicts strong dependence across numbers, which increases
with size and ratio. In place-coding, activity patterns for different numbers
scale independently of one another. Only nonsymbolic-numbers showed
an increase in voxelwise correlations as numerical-size increased [nonsymbolic: r(34)=.772; symbolic: r=–.386; correlation-difference: p<.001], and
as numerical-ratio between numbers approached 1 [nonsymbolic: r=.838;
symbolic: r=–.149; correlation-difference: p<.001]. Our RSA analyses suggest that nonsymbolic-numbers are represented in humans via summation
coding and symbolic-numbers are not. We also addressed whether voxelwise activity-patterns were related across symbolic and nonsymbolic
number-systems. IPS showed significant cross-system correlations only for
numbers in the subitizing-range (1-4): the mapping between number-systems in the IPS is endemic only to numbers within the limits of visual-attention. Only in prefrontal regions did we find significant cross-system
correlations for all numbers (1-9), suggesting that a general mapping-mechanism between number-systems relies on domain-general working-memory mechanisms.

Simone Schütz-Bosbach3, Florian Waszak1; 1Laboratoire Psychologie de la Perception, CNRS UMR 8158, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 2Institut
Jean Nicod CNRS UMR 8129, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France, 3Max
Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany —
Sensory attenuation refers to the observation that self-generated stimuli
are attenuated, both in terms of their phenomenology and their cortical
response compared to the same stimuli when generated externally. Accordingly, it has been assumed that sensory attenuation might help individuals
to determine whether a sensory event was caused by themselves or not.
In the present study, we investigated whether this dependency is reciprocal, namely whether sensory attenuation is modulated by prior beliefs of
causality. Participants had to judge the loudness of auditory effects that
they believed were either self-generated or triggered by another person.
However, in reality, the sounds were always triggered by the participants’
actions. Participants perceived the tones’ loudness attenuated when they
believed that the sounds were self-generated compared to when they
believed that they were generated by another person. Sensory attenuation
is considered to contribute to the emergence of people’s belief of causality.
Our results suggest that sensory attenuation is also a consequence of prior
belief about the causal link between an action and a sensory change in the
environment. Our findings are of importance for several reasons. Firstly,
they shed further light on the understanding of the processes underlying
sensory attenuation. Moreover, they provide useful insights on the understanding of delusion of control in schizophrenia.

F117
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL REGULATION OF ACUTE PAIN: A
META-ANALYSIS OF FUNCTIONAL BRAIN IMAGING STUDIES
Audrey-Anne Dube1,2,3, Simon B. Eickhoff4,5, Stephanie Simard1,3, Duncan
Gary1,3,6, Rainville Pierre1,2,3,6; 1Universite de Montreal, 2Centre de recherche
en neuropsychologie et cognition (CERNEC), 3Centre de recherche de l’Institut
universitaire de geriatrie de Montreal (CRIUGM), 4Institute of Clinical Neuroscience and Medical Psychology, Heinrich-Heine University Düsseldorf, 5Institute
for Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Center Juelich, 6Groupe de
recherche sur le systeme nerveux central (GRSNC) — Cerebral and cerebro-spinal regulatory processes are thought to subserve the now widely
demonstrated analgesic effects of psychological interventions (Price and
Bushnell, 2004). A quantitative meta-analysis, based on foci of brain activity, surveyed nearly 15 years of published papers (1997-2011) reporting an
increase in BOLD signal or rCBF during psychological procedures intended
to produce analgesia. Eighteen papers were categorized according to their
psychological approach: placebo, hypnosis, distraction, emotion, controllability of stimuli, meditation, and the induction of emotion. Only statistically
significant activation foci, reported in a standard stereotaxic space, were
considered. Further, this brain activity had to be associated with a significant reduction of pain subsequent to the experimental procedure. Thus,
data for our analyses included 217 foci, 263 healthy subjects and 34 contrasts. Results revealed that psychologically mediated analgesia involves
several prefrontal regions (including peaks in the medial, dorsolateral and
orbitofrontal sectors) and to a lesser extent some insular, parietal, temporal,
and subcortical structures. This may reflect self-awareness as well as the
affective, motivational, and cognitive processes associated with the different interventions. Detailed analyses further suggest some anatomo-functional specificity associated with the different interventions. For instance,
significant peaks found in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and adjacent
areas of the medial-prefrontal cortex can be further segregated based on
the specific intervention used. This supports the notion of an integrative
role of the ACC as an “adaptive control” center (Shackman et al., 2011), but
further suggests some anatomo-functional specificity dependent upon the
means through which adaptation is achieved. Fundings: CIHR and FRQS.

204

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

F119
CHANGES IN THE CHROMATIC VISUAL EVOKED POTENTIAL (VEP)
INDUCED BY HYPNOTIC SUGGESTION Chad Duncan1, Chris Jones1,
Molly Finnegan1, William Danton1, Michael Crognale1; 1University of Nevada,Reno — Past research has demonstrated that the chromatic visual evoked
potential is robust to the effects of attentional manipulations such as similar and non-similar distraction. This suggests that the chromatic VEP may
be a low level response that is generally unaffected by cortical feedback.
Recently, there have been reports of selective achromatic VEP signal loss in
a case of Associative Identity Disorder. In this report, brain responses were
suppressed for blind personalities but not for sighted personalities within
the same subject (Waldvogel, Ullrich & Strasburger, 2007). This result suggests feedback mechanisms from higher cortical areas can influence neural
responses in primary visual cortex. The current study attempted to elicit
neural inhibition on chromatic responses from putative feedback mechanisms via hypnotic suggestion. Baseline VEPs were recorded before hypnotic induction, after which subjects were read a standardized induction.
Experimental VEPs were recorded following instructions designed to
induce either positive or negative hallucinations. Results indicate selective
signal changes following hypnotic suggestion. We conclude that the chromatic visual evoked potential may be influenced by feedback from higher
cortical areas through hypnosis, and that hypnotic suggestion may be a
useful tool to probe higher cortical influence on human vision.

F120
CAN YOU TELL WHAT IT IS YET? PERCEPTUAL AND SEMANTIC
PROCESSES IN RESOLVING AMBIGUOUS IMAGES Ben Dyson1;
1
Ryerson University, Canada — In contrast to many common cognitive
paradigms, a common feature of real-world perception is the ability to
repeated sample subtly different views of the same object. To study the
consequences of repeated environmental sampling, participants were presented with series of drawings generated by iterative copying. Shown in
reverse order, representations of single objects or animals began as complex abstract images but lead to semantic resolution as the images became
more concrete. During EEG monitoring, participants were presented with
consecutive pairs of images and at each trial were asked to both judge the

2013 Annual Meeting
perceptual similarity of the pair and to indicate whether they had resolved
the identity of the current image set. Behavioral data showed that as participants progressed through individual sets, consecutive comparisons
remained stable in terms of perceptual similarity but increased in terms of
semantic identification. Neural data showed that semantically unresolved
and perceptually dissimilar images produced greater neural activity than
semantically resolved or perceptually similar images. The time course of
the neural effects suggested that markers of semantic distinction were
available earlier than markers of perceptual distinction. Under conditions
of repeated sampling, the outcome of previous semantic analyses may hold
the key to subsequent perceptual investment, thereby underscoring how
modeling based on continuous sensory processing may differ from discrete
sensory processing.

F121
THE EFFECT OF NEUROFEEDBACK-INDUCED CHANGES IN HIGH
ORDER VISUAL AREAS ON BINOCULAR RIVALRY Jinendra Ekanayake1, Ged Ridgway1, Frank Scharnowski1, Yury Koush1, Spas Getov1, Nikolaus
Wesikopf1, Geraint Rees1; 1University College London — The application of
online neurofeedback through the use of real-time fMRI opens the possibility of gaining voluntary control of a target brain region. Through repeated
training of this modulation we hypothesized that a persisting change in
behaviour could be elicited. Subjects first underwent a binocular rivalry
(BR) paradigm with rivalrous face and house stimuli; switch frequency
and duration of stable percepts were measured. Subjects were then split
into two groups and underwent real-time fMRI neurofeedback training
up-regulating regions of interest (ROIs) These were individually defined
fusiform face area or parahippocampal place area, using a localiser session
with stimuli identical to the BR session. Up-regulation of the target ROIs
was achieved using real-time neurofeedback through a visual interface
driven by the level of BOLD activation in the ROI. At the end of training
subjects performed BR again, this time with no up-regulation as before,
or with simultaneous up-regulation of one of the target brain regions. A
significant decrease in duration and switch rate of the untrained percept
was observed. There was no significant change in the perception of the
stimulus linked to training. The BR measures during up-regulation were
in the same direction as following training i.e. a reduction in the duration
of the percept not linked to the up-regulated brain region, regardless of the
previous training the subject underwent. Neurofeedback from predefined
brain regions results in a top-down perturbation of rivalry dynamics, with
training of these regions resulting in a more pronounced effect than up-regulation of a brain region alone.

F122
WHERE YOU READ IS NOT WHERE I READ: HOW INDIVIDUAL
VARIABILITY IN LOCATION IMPACTS ORTHOGRAPHIC SELECTIVITY IN THE “VISUAL WORD FORM AREA” Laurie S. Glezer1, Maximilian Riesenhuber1; 1Georgetown University Medical Center — Strong evidence
exists for a key role of ventral occipitotemporal cortex (vOT) in reading
yet there have been conflicting reports about the specificity of this area in
orthographic vs. nonorthographic processing. We suggest that the inconsistencies in the literature can be explained by the method used to identify
regions that respond to words. Specifically, we provide evidence that the
“visual word form area” (VWFA) shows word selectivity when identified
at the individual subject level, but that inter-subject variability in the location and size of the VWFA causes this selectivity to be washed out when
defining the VWFA at the group level or based on coordinates from the
literature. Using fMRI, we scanned 53 subjects while they viewed blocks
of words, faces, objects, scrambled objects and scrambled words. We then
defined VWFA ROIs (as in Glezer et al., 2009, using response contrasts of
words vs. scrambled words and fixation) at the individual and group levels
and based on coordinates from the literature, as in previous studies. We
found that indeed when defining the VWFA using a group based analysis
or using coordinates from the literature, there were no significant response
differences between words and faces or objects. However, when identifying the VWFA on an individual subject basis we found that words activated
the individually-defined VWFA significantly more than the other stimulus
groups. Our findings confirm the existence of a word-selective region in
vOT while providing an explanation for why other studies have found a
lack of word specificity in vOT.

Poster Session F

F123
THE FUSIFORM GYRUS REPRESENTS THE AGE OF FACES. Golijeh
Golarai1, Alina Liberman1, Kalanit Grill-Spector1; 1Stanford University — Behavioral studies suggest that adults better remember faces of their own-age
cohorts than of children. However, the neural substrates of this own-age
preference are not known. We asked if responses across the Fusiform gyrus
(FG) varied for own- vs. other-age faces, using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in children (ages 7 – 11, n = 14) and adults (ages 18 –
40, n = 12). Subjects underwent fMRI (3T scanner) while viewing images of
faces of boys and men, objects, scenes and scrambled images in four blocks
per category across two runs, and performed a 1-back task. For each subject
we drew the anatomical boundaries of the right FG, partitioning a posterior
and a middle region. Age groups were matched for BOLD related signal-tonoise ratio in each anatomical partition of FG. In an independent analysis
of percent signal change among face-selective voxels (man and boy faces >
objects, p < 10-3) we found significantly higher responses to faces in adults
than children and a significant interaction between age of the face stimuli and age of subject in the mid-FG, where own-age faces elicited higher
responses than other-age faces. Similarly, in a multivoxel pattern analysis
(MVPA) across the mid-FG partition, we found a significant interaction of
age of face and age of subject in the reproducibility of MVPAs across run
1 and 2 and better classification of own-age faces in adults. Our results are
first to show differential responses to own- vs. other-age faces in the FG of
children and adults.

F124
INTERNAL REPRESENTATIONS OF REAL-WORLD SCENE CATEGORIES Michelle Greene1, Abraham Botros1, Diane Beck2, Li Fei-Fei1; 1Stanford University, 2University of Illinois Urbana Champaign — Human observers
rapidly categorize natural images, but the mechanism behind this ability
is unknown. Some models posit that categorization is aided through the
use of internal category representations, deployed in a top-down manner
to constrain visual input. What is the content of these representations?
Although internal representations have been obtained for simple stimuli
using reverse correlation, these techniques are not generally scalable to the
complexity of real-world scenes. Here, we introduce a novel type of visual
noise, that when used with reverse correlation, can reveal internal representations of scene categories. Visual noise was created by sampling from
real-world scene features: an 8800-scene database was represented using
multi-scale Gabor wavelets. Principal components analysis was performed
on this representation, and noise patterns were created by reconstructing
random values for the first 2500 principal components. This low-dimensional noise contains extended structures found in natural images, making
it more amenable to reverse correlation than Gaussian white noise. We presented this visual noise to four observers, and asked them to classify the
noise patterns as members of a particular scene category (e.g. street, mountain, forest). As no scene information was present in these images, observers had to use their internal knowledge of the category, matching it with
the visual features in the noise. The reconstructed images were found to be
more similar to scene images from the target category than images of other
categories, and most similar to the category average, suggesting internal
category representations may reflect a composite of experienced exemplars.

F125
NATURAL STIMULI ACQUIRE BASIC-LEVEL ADVANTAGE IN
OBJECT-SELECTIVE CORTEX Marius Catalin Iordan1, Michelle R. Greene1,
Diane M. Beck2, Li Fei-Fei1; 1Stanford University, 2University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — With the exception of a few important categories (e.g.
faces), it is thought that most object categories elicit a distributed representation throughout visual cortex, yet little is known about the principles
behind this distribution. In her seminal work, Eleanor Rosch argued that
although objects can be categorized at varying levels of specificity ranging
from the very broad (“natural object”) to the very distinct (“Mr. Whiskers,
my orange tabby”), a mid-level of generality (i.e. “cat”) maximizes within-category similarity and minimizes between-category similarity in a cognitively useful way. We used this basic- or entry-level perceptual advantage to guide our search for a fine-grained organizational principle for
object categories in the brain: we asked whether patterns of activity across
visual cortex adhere to this very powerful cognitive principle of maximizing within-group similarity and minimizing between-group similarity, and
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

205

Poster Session F
if so at what level of the object taxonomy is this organization predominant.
We conducted an fMRI experiment in which participants were shown 1,024
images from 32 subordinate categories (i.e. “chihuahua”) grouped into 4
basic categories (i.e. “dog”) and 2 superordinate categories (i.e. “natural
object”). Using several multi-voxel pattern analyses, we provide evidence
that activity patterns in visual cortex simultaneously maximize within-basic-level similarity and between-basic-level dissimilarity, which is most
consistent with behavioral judgments. This effect is strongest in object-selective cortex, but is also shared by scene- and face-selective areas. Furthermore, the basic-level advantage emerges gradually as we move up the
visual cortical hierarchy, suggesting that successive levels in the visual
system may be optimizing basic-level categorizations.

F126
DYNAMIC SCENES AS AN EXPERIMENTAL TOOL TO INVESTIGATE
THE NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF COARSE-TO-FINE PROCESSING
IN SCENE PERCEPTION Louise Kauffmann1, Benoit Musel1, Alan Chauvin1,
Nathalie Guyader2, Cédric Pichat2, Stephen Ramanoël1,3, Jean-François Le Bas3,
Carole Peyrin1; 1LPNC, CNRS UMR5105, 2GIPSA-lab, CNRS UMR5216, 3GIN,
ISERM U836 — Influential theories of visual perception suggest that scene
recognition follows a predominant coarse-to-fine processing sequence:
Low spatial frequencies (LSF) may rapidly reach high-order cortical areas
to allow an initial coarse parsing of the visual scene, which could then be
“retroinjected” through feedback connections into lower level visual areas
to guide the subsequent finer analysis of high spatial frequencies (HSF). In
a previous fMRI study, we investigated the neural substrates of the coarseto-fine categorization using sequences of two spatial-frequency-filtered
scenes (LSF followed by HSF or vice versa) with a long inter-scene interval
(400 msec) and participants performed a scene-matching task (Peyrin et al.,
2010, JOCN, 22). In the present fMRI study, we investigated these neural
substrates using dynamic scene stimuli and participants performed an
explicit categorization task (outdoors vs. indoors). Dynamic stimuli were
composed of six spatial frequency-filtered versions of the same natural
scene, from LSF to HSF or from HSF to LSF, in order to experimentally
impose a coarse-to-fine (CtF) or the reverse fine-to-coarse (FtC) processing. Consistent with previous psychophysical studies, CtF sequences were
categorized faster than FtC sequences. At the neurobiological level, the
contrast between CtF and FtC processing revealed significant activation
within the orbitofrontal cortex (evidenced to be involved in LSF-based categorical inferences) and the primary visual cortex (on which the first LSF
computation could be “retro-injected” back). No significant activation was
obtained by contrasting FtC and CtF. These dynamic scenes seem therefore
well appropriated to investigate the coarse-to-fine categorization within
scene-selective regions.

F127
PHOSPHENE OR SCOTOMA? IT’S A MATTER OF DEFINITION. Ramisha Knight1, Chiara Mazzi1, Silvia Savazzi1; 1University of Verona and National
Institute of Neuroscience — Phosphenes induced by transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) have been described as sensations of light and a missing
region from a visual pattern induced by TMS is referred to as a scotoma. It
is believed that phosphenes are caused by neural excitation while scotomas
are due to neural inhibition. Alternatively, we propose that this interpretation derives from the specific conditions under which the two precepts
have been studied: uniform backgrounds for phosphenes and pattern backgrounds for scotomas. As a consequence, the presence of something over a
uniform background (phosphene) has been interpreted as neural excitation
while the absence of a pattern (scotoma) has been interpreted as neural
inhibition. However, we believe that both kinds of percepts are productive
phenomena: the presence of something brighter for phosphenes and the
presence of something darker for scotomas. Here, we tested the hypothesis that the two phenomena reflect the same mechanism: neural excitation.
TMS was applied over the left occipital cortex under two background conditions: a uniform gray and a pattern background. After detection of a percept, participants reported its luminance, size and location. Reaction times
were also recorded. Of the 13 participants, nine reported percepts brighter
(phosphenes) and darker (scotomas) than the background and phosphenes
were reacted to faster than scotomas. Importantly, the percentage of phosphenes and scotomas did not differ depending on the two backgrounds.

206

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
The present data suggest that both phosphenes and scotomas are productive phenomena, reflecting the presence of something brighter or darker
than the background, that result from neural excitation.

F128
USING TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION TO ELUCIDATE INTERACTIONS BETWEEN TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP
BRAIN NETWORKS IN VISUAL DISCRIMINATION Bruce Luber1, David
Jangraw2, Austin Harrison1, Paul Sajda2, Sarah H Lisanby1; 1Duke University,
Columbia University — Previous work using EEG and fMRI on a visual discrimination task identified three brain networks- one most active 170ms
after stimulus presentation and involved with bottom-up visual processing, a second active around 220ms and associated with top-down attention-related regions, and the third active in decision processing after 300ms.
We used TMS to test the involvement of this latter network, centered upon
the lateral occipital complex (LOC). Fourteen healthy adults participated
in two TMS sessions, one in which left LOC was stimulated, and in the
other, right LOC. Targeting was achieved using frameless stereotaxy and
a robotic coil holder. Subjects performed a two-alternative forced choice
task in which they were to choose whether a car or face was presented. For
each subject, visual coherence of the stimuli had been previously adjusted
to approximate a 75% accuracy level. A pair of TMS pulses, separated by
50ms, was applied at 100% motor threshold in each trial beginning at one
of five stimulus onset asynchronies (SOAs): -200ms, 200ms, 400ms, 450ms,
or 500ms. For %correct, there was a main effect of SOA (p<0.05) and a face/
car x SOA interaction (p<0.02), and for reaction time, a main effect of SOA
(p<0.01). Across SOAs, performance described U-shaped functions, with
subjects were slowest with TMS at 400ms and having lowest %correct at
200 and 400 ms SOA, primarily for cars. TMS was thus able to demonstrate
the involvement of LOC in the task at the expected time, but also earlier,
suggesting an interaction with the top-down attentional network.
2

F129
THE IMPACT OF PRIOR KNOWLEDGE ON OBJECT SEARCH IN
REAL-WORLD SCENES Julia Seyfarth1,2, Joachim E. Weber1, Johannes
Mohr2, Klaus Obermayer2, Felix A. Wichmann3, Andreas Lueschow1; 1Charité –
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany, 2Technische Universität Berlin, Germany,
3
Universität Tübingen, Germany — Humans are excellent at rapidly detecting
objects even in complex environments whereas the most advanced artificial systems are slow and unflexible when they have to perform this task.
Numerous studies using synthetic search arrays showed that simple object
features like contrast or orientation play a critical role in guiding attention
in visual search. On the other hand it seems evident that the real world surrounding us offers further clues that might enhance visual processing. For
example real objects often have semantic or functional relations to objects
in their neighbourhood (“a knife and a plate on the kitchen table”). Here
we investigated whether prior knowledge about object location facilitates
object detection in real scenes. Former studies regarding this matter using
artificially manipulated scenes resulted in conflicting results. We created a
photo database of everyday scenes in which only the location of the object
to be searched was arbitrarily manipulated. The stimulus set was controlled
with respect to various psychophysical parameters like saliency and contrast in order to prevent a confounding with object position at the expected
versus the unexpected location. 30 subjects were instructed to search for
shortly presented objects in a scene presented afterwards. Reaction times
were significantly shorter at the expected location, averaged across 30 subjects as well as across 115 scenes which demonstrates that the effect is not
the trivial consequence of extreme values of single subjects or single scenes.
In summary our results demonstrate that prior relational knowledge is
used to enhance object search in real environments.

F130
RESILIENCE IN DECISION-MAKING: MORE ABOUT COGNITION
AND GENDER THAN AGE Alison Perez1, Winston Chiong2, Jeff Spence3,
Lowell Kiel4, Sandra Chapman5; 1University of Texas at Dallas, Center for BrainHealth, 2University of California San Francisco, 3University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 4University of Texas at Dallas, 5University of Texas at Dallas,
Center for BrainHealth — There is a growing demographic of adults arriving
to their retirement years. With this period of life come countless crucial

2013 Annual Meeting
decisions to be made, fiscally, socially, and personally. This collaborative
study on decision-making aimed to elucidate the validity of the pervasive
negative stereotyping of decline in the cognitive and decision-making abilities of seniors. The goal of this collaborative research study was to highlight
key factors that affect very important components of decision-making: the
ability to apply a logical strategy to similar decisions in a consistent manner
and to recognize biasing information, such as the context in which information is presented, and overcome its influence to make riskier decisions. In
a sample of cognitive healthy older adults (50-80 yrs. old), a battery of cognitive tests, as well as a framing paradigm, were used to examine the influence of age and cognitive control on these decision-making abilities. We
will present evidence that demonstrates age does not significantly predict
the decision-making aptitude of older adults, (p=0.300). Cognitive control,
specifically strategic learning, is a significantly better predictor than age
and strongly forecasted the abilities of older adults to make logically consistent choices and exhibit less vulnerability to contextual biases, (p=0.002).
Results also indicate an interaction between gender and cognitive control
in decision-making. These results demonstrate the ability of older adults to
maintain robust cognitive performance and retain essential decision-making skillsets in later life. This research has broad public health benefits to
mitigate disadvantageous financial decisions and abuse in seniors.

F131
RAPID AFFECTIVE MARKING OF SELF-GENERATED ACTIONS IN
THE ANTERIOR INSULA: EVIDENCE FROM HUMAN IEEG Gilles
Pourtois1, Leonie Koban2, Leen De Taeye3, Dirk Van Roost4, Paul Boon3, Wim
Fias5, Robrecht Raedt3; 1Department of Experimental Clinical & Health Psychology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2Swiss Center for Affective Sciences,
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Laboratory for Clinical and Experimental Neurophysiology, University Hospital, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium,
4
Department of Surgery, University Hospital, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium,
5
Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium —
Human beings automatically categorize external stimuli as good or bad.
However, this evaluation does not only concern external stimuli in the
environment, but also self-generated actions. Recently, we found direct
evidence for this assumption and showed that simple actions generated
during a perceptual decision making task were swiftly evaluated along a
negative–positive dimension. Here we present new EEG results obtained
in a patient implanted with intracranial electrodes in the right anterior
insular cortex prior to surgery for pharmaco-resistant epilepsy. The patient
performed a Go/noGo task, in which trial outcome depended not only on
action accuracy, but also on an adaptively changing reaction time limit.
This enabled us to model outcome prediction and outcome uncertainty
as a function of reaction time in each trial. Results show that responselocked single trial iLFPs in the insula systematically varied in amplitude
early on following response onset depending on computational estimates
of both outcome prediction and outcome uncertainty. Remarkably, these
two effects occurred at different latencies, with reward prediction clearly
preceding uncertainty. Moreover, anterior insula iLFPs time-locked to the
onset of the feedback following action execution revealed that outcome processing was best predicted by uncertainty. Surprisingly, when uncertainty
(at the time of the response) was high, outcome processing (at the time of
the feedback) was substantially reduced. Altogether, these results suggest
that the anterior insula computes predictions regarding action outcome and
uncertainty, which may relate to a role of this region in associating affective
values to actions.

F132
DISSOCIATIONS IN REWARD NETWORK ACTIVATION WHILE
LEARNING FROM COGNITIVE VERSUS HEDONIC FEEDBACK
Jenna Reinen1, Catherine Insel1, Tor D. Wager2, Daphna Shohamy1; 1Columbia
University, 2University of Colorado at Boulder — Converging evidence indicates that the human reward network supports incremental, trial-by-trial
learning from feedback. Specifically, functional imaging has demonstrated
that prediction error and learning signals are represented in the striatum,
prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, and amygdala in response to positive and
negative outcomes, and are thought to drive future choices that maximize
gain and minimize loss. However, the ability to learn to make the best
choices over time would theoretically involve associating cognitive feedback with a stimulus, as well as experiencing an appropriate affective reac-

Poster Session F
tion to a reward or loss. To date, most studies present reward information
and outcome together, which does not allow one to identify separate contributions of each neural system to cognitive versus affective reactions to feedback. To address this, we tested 24 subjects on a two-stage, probabilistic,
feedback-based learning task while undergoing fMRI. Participants made
choices in two phases of non-intermixed conditions (gain, loss). On each
trial, subjects chose between two shapes and received feedback (correct,
incorrect) followed by reward outcome (monetary gain or loss). To assess
learning at each stage, we calculated prediction error independently for
feedback and reward outcome. Results indicated that there was a dissociation in activation in several structures associated with the reward network.
In particular, orbitofrontal cortex showed more activation when subjects
received rewards as opposed to reward-related feedback. These findings
suggest that structures within the reward network contribute differentially
to cognitive and affective aspects of feedback-based reward learning.

F133
PROCESSING OF POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE FEEDBACK IN
PATIENTS WITH CEREBELLAR OR BASAL GANGLIA LESIONS
Martina Rustemeier1, Benno Koch2, Michael Schwarz2, Christian Bellebaum1;
1
Ruhr University Bochum, Germany, 2Dortmund Municipal Hospital, Germany
— Functional neuroimaging studies and deficit patterns in patients with
Parkinson’s Disease consistently suggest that the basal ganglia (BG) are
critically involved in reward processing and reward-based learning. A cerebellar involvement in reward learning has also been suggested but was
studied less intensively. In the present study we investigated learning from
and processing of positive and negative feedback in twelve patients with
selective cerebellar lesions and eight patients with selective BG lesions.
Participants performed a feedback learning task with monetary rewards.
The processing of rewards was assessed by means of event-related potentials (ERPs) during a separate task with equal frequencies of positive and
negative monetary feedback. Both patient groups neither showed a general
learning deficit nor altered transfer performance, i.e. a bias of better learning
from positive or negative feedback compared to controls. Feedback-locked
ERPs were analyzed with a difference wave approach (ERPs following the
presentation of positive feedback subtracted from those for negative feedback). Compared to the respective control group, patients with cerebellar
lesions showed significantly higher difference wave amplitudes in a time
window between 250 and 450 ms after feedback presentation, whereas BG
patients’ difference waves did not differ from those of control subjects. Our
findings show that feedback processing is altered in patients with cerebellar lesions and add to recent findings on altered performance monitoring
despite preserved behaviour associated with cerebellar dysfunction. The
results appear to suggest a role of the cerebellum in predicting outcomes of
actions, which can be compensated in the case of cerebellar damage.

F134
VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX MEDIATES THE EFFECTS
OF SOCIAL INFLUENCE ON THE UTILISATION OF REWARDS AND
PUNISHMENTS: AN EVENT-RELATED FMRI STUDY Anja Varjacic1,
Anastasia Christakou1, Tom Johnstone1, Doug Saddy1; 1University of Reading,
Centre for Integrative Neuroscience and Neurodynamics — There is growing
appreciation of the neural mechanisms that integrate the value of decision outcomes with the context in which decisions are made. However, it
remains unclear how the judgement of our actions by others is represented
in the brain and integrated in the evaluation of our own action outcomes.
In this study, we employed a novel task to induce such a “social congruency context”. Varying levels of rewards and penalties were experienced in
light of different levels of agreement with other people’s choices. Healthy
young males (N=20) underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) scan whilst performing the task. We measured how the probability of staying with the same option varied as a function of the value of
outcomes, the level of social congruency (SC) and their interaction. There
was a significant outcome x SC interaction, with the most prominent “stay
effect” during penalties paired with low SC. An extensive brain network
scaled its responses to outcome magnitudes (reward/punishment), including ventral striatum, insula, medial prefrontal cortex, dorso-lateral PFC and
dorsal and ventral anterior cingulate. Ventromedial PFC tracked the level
of SC, as revealed by the contrast of high versus low SC. Finally, the preceding SC magnitude modulated responses to losses compared to neutral

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

207

Poster Session F
outcomes in lateral PFC (BA9/10). These results further characterise the
role of the ventromedial PFC in context-dependent evaluation of decision
outcomes, with preliminary mediation analyses further indicating that the
ventromedial PFC drives behavioural adaptation by directly modulating
value representation.

F135
NEURAL SIGNATURES OF VALUE-DRIVEN ATTENTIONAL CAPTURE PREDICT INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN ECONOMIC
CHOICE René San Martín1,2, Lawrence G. Appelbaum1, Scott A. Huettel1,
Marty G. Woldorff1; 1Duke University, 2Universidad Diego Portales, Chile — Few
studies have investigated the link between learning-guided decision-making and neural activity elicited by predictive cues. We used event-related
potentials (ERPs) in a probabilistic decision-making task to investigate
whether attentional allocation to outcome-predicting cues was affected by
their learned reward probabilities. Five visual cues were associated with
different probabilities of winning versus losing. Each trial started with a
pair of these cues presented bilaterally, from which participants had to estimate the probability of winning on that trial in order to choose between a
high or low magnitude bet. At the end of each trial, feedback was given
indicating if the wagered amount was won or lost, allowing the participant
to learn the probabilities associated with each cue in order to improve their
choices. We found a posterior negativity (N2pc-like, peaking ~300 ms), similar to that associated with lateralized attentional shifting, which was larger
contralateral to the most rewarding cue, relative to the other four cues. We
also found that the ability of each participant to bet high on trials with the
most rewarding cue scaled with the amplitude of the early portion of this
component (~180 ms). In contrast, participants who were good at avoiding
high bets when presented with the least rewarding cue had an increased
ipsilateral (rather than contralateral) negativity in this latency range, suggesting an attentional aversion to this loss-predicting cue. Our results indicate that attentional allocation to environmental cues can be modulated by
their reward-predicting value, which is in turn associated with different
economic choices.

F136
CROSS-CONTEXT INFLUENCES: GAINS AND LOSSES IN SOCIAL
STATUS AFFECT FINANCIAL RISK TAKING Vincent c Schoots1,2,
Maarten A S Boksem1,2, Alan G Sanfey2, Ale Smidts1; 1Erasmus University
Rotterdam, 2Radboud University Nijmegen — Different rewards (i.e. money,
food, sex, social inclusion) are encoded similarly by the brain, which can
potentially lead to spill-over effects. Here, we find that gains and losses
in a social status context can directly impact subsequent financial risk-taking. In a behavioral experiment, participants competed with two others
on a simple task. On each round of the game they could either win or
lose, thus impacting their competitive rank. This game alternated with a
financial choice, always between a sure gain and a risky gamble. The subjective expected utility of the gamble was matched to the sure option for
each individual, such that we expected participants to gamble on 50% of
the trials; however, participants gambled on only 38%. Players in the top
rank (high social status) gambled more after wins, while players in bottom
rank (low social status) gambled more after losses (interaction [status*win/
loss]). Thus, subjects gambled more (i.e. behaved in the expected direction)
when the status-quo was maintained in the social status game. Subsequently, we tested 29 males in an fMRI experiment, using the same paradigm. We observed activity in midline visual cortex, cingulate cortex, and
bilateral insula when decisions followed the status-quo, suggesting a role
for attention and conflict monitoring. We propose that attention is shifted
from the status game to the gambling task during these status-quo trials.
While people might base their decision on gut-feeling during low attention,
higher attention to the choice options allows for choices more in line with
individuals’ reasoned risk preferences.

208

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

Poster Session G
G1
ATTENTION AMPLIFIES OR SUPPRESSES NEURAL PREDICTION
ERROR RESPONSES IN A REGIONALLY SPECIFIC MANNER Jiefeng
Jiang1, Christopher Summerﬁeld2, Tobias Egner1; 1Duke University, 2University of Oxford — Attention and expectation facilitate behavior via distinct
mechanisms: attention prioritizes processing of motivationally relevant
information, whereas expectation constrains processing using probabilistic inference. Supporting this distinction, attention and expectation have
different neural signatures: neural activity increases for attended stimuli
but decreases for expected stimuli. An important yet largely uninvestigated
question is how attention and expectation interact. One hypothesis is that
attention amplifies the processing of prediction error (i.e., unexpected stimuli), whereas another hypothesis holds that attention suppresses prediction error. To adjudicate between these hypotheses we conducted an fMRI
study (n = 21) that independently manipulated attention and expectation
to face and scene stimuli. Intriguingly, our results showed both types of
interactions between the effects of attention and expectation on neural
responses, varying by brain region. Specifically, we found suppressed
neural prediction error for attended face stimuli in regions belonging to
the face processing network, specifically, the fusiform face area (FFA) and
in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vMPFC). In contrast, we observed
amplified neural prediction error for attended stimuli in bilateral caudate
nuclei. Thus, attention modulates prediction error in a regionally specific
manner: On the one hand, in general learning-related regions (i.e., the caudate), attention boosts prediction error signal, which may in turn improve
the efficiency of learning. On the other hand, in regions specialized for
processing target stimulus information (i.e., FFA and vMPFC), attention
reverses the attenuation of neural responses to expected stimuli, which
may in turn enhance their chances of gaining access to higher-level memory
and decision-making centers.

G2
THE EFFECTS OF REWARD ON THE ATTENTIONAL BLINK IN
HEALTHY HUMANS AND PATIENTS WITH RIGHT HEMISPHERE
STROKE Korina Li1, David Soto1, Charlotte Russell2, Youssuf Saleh1, Paresh
Malhotra1; 1Imperial College London, UK, 2Brunel University, UK — In healthy
individuals, the ability to detect a second target amongst a stream of distractors is typically impaired if it is presented within 200-500ms of a correctly identified first target. This failure of temporal selective attention is
the attentional blink (AB) phenomenon. It has been demonstrated to be
prolonged in some patients who have suffered from hemispheric stroke,
and this extended blink has been related to the spatial neglect syndrome
(Husain et al., 1997). There is increasing evidence that motivation and
reward can influence attentional processes in healthy individuals and it has
recently been shown that reward reduces visuospatial neglect in patients
who have suffered from right hemisphere stroke (Malhotra et al., 2012).
We aimed to determine whether anticipated reward could modulate the
AB in healthy volunteers and right hemisphere stroke patients by adapting a standard rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) task. Subjects were
instructed to identify two targets in a RSVP task, where the temporal location of the second target in relation to the first varied from trial to trial.
The task was performed under conditions of no reward and anticipated
monetary reward. In both healthy volunteers and right hemisphere stroke
patients, reward reduced the AB effect, modulating both its duration and
magnitude. These results suggest that reward can specifically affect the
temporal dynamics of visual selective attention, possibly through dopaminergic modulation of the capacity-limited processes of encoding and consolidating stimuli into visual working memory (Slagter et al., 2012).

G3
CONTOUR INTEGRATION: STIMULUS AND TASK-BASED MODULATIONS OF ERPS AND GAMMA OSCILLATIONS Jennifer Padwal1,
Michael Pitts2, Daniel Fennelly2, Antigona Martinez1, Steven Hillyard1; 1University of California, San Diego, 2Reed College — Contour integration is a
mid-level visual process in which spatially-separate edge information is

grouped together to form object boundaries. Previous ERP experiments
have investigated a purported index of contour integration: a negative
amplitude deflection over the posterior scalp from ~150-300ms elicited by
contour-present versus contour-absent stimuli. More recent experiments,
however, suggest that only the early phase of this ERP difference reflects
contour integration (“contour integration negativity” or “CIN”), while
subsequent phases reflect attentional and task-related processes. In the
present experiment, subjects viewed an array of randomly oriented lines
that shifted orientation once per second to form either rectangle or ellipse
contour patterns, or another random arrangement. Subjects attended to the
contour patterns and reported occurrences of target shapes of a particular
orientation (horizontal or vertical). All shapes, regardless of task-relevance,
elicited CINs of equal magnitude. Amplitudes of subsequent posterior negativities were modulated as a function of task-relevance. In addition, these
effects in the time domain were accompanied by oscillatory bursts in the
gamma band (35-45Hz) over the occipital scalp from 300-400ms that were
of equal magnitude for all shapes. These results along with those from previous experiments suggest that the CIN component indexes an automatic
grouping process, while subsequent posterior gamma oscillations reflect
access of this information for task completion.

G4
TOP-DOWN MODULATION OF PRESTIMULUS ALPHA POWER AND
ITS RELATION TO A STIMULUS DISCRIMINATION PROCESS Daniel
Roberts1, John Fedota1, George Buzzell1, Raja Parasuraman1, Craig McDonald1; 1George Mason University — It has recently been demonstrated that
the occiptal-temporal N1 component of the event-related potential (ERP)
indexes both the difficulty and behavioral outcome of a stimulus discrimination process. The enhanced N1 for difficult, correct responses relative
to both easy, correct responses and difficult, incorrect responses has been
suggested to reflect the successful application of top-down control. However, the mechanism through which top-down control is exerted in this task
has yet to be identified. One candidate mechanism is increased excitability
of neurons contributing to the discrimination process reflected by the N1,
which may be indexed by suppression in power of the alpha rhythm of the
electroencephalogram (EEG) at the site of the N1 effect. The magnitude and
topography of alpha modulations in the period preceding stimulus onset
have been shown to be related to the locus of spatial attention, as well as the
likelihood of detecting a near threshold visual stimulus. Here a contextual
flanker task was utilized to manipulate stimulus discrimination difficulty,
in which vertical Gabor stimuli are flanked in time by distractor stimuli
that vary in their degree of similarity to the vertical targets. In the period
preceding stimulus onset, alpha power for difficult, correct responses was
suppressed relative to both easy, correct responses and difficult, incorrect
responses, mirroring the pattern of the occipital-temporal N1 effect. These
results suggest that the observed pattern of alpha modulation reflects the
successful application of top-down control, which occurs prior to stimulus
onset and contributes to the subsequent N1 effect.

G5
MIND OVER CHATTER: PLASTIC UP-REGULATION OF THE FMRI
SALIENCE NETWORK DIRECTLY AFTER EEG NEUROFEEDBACK
Tomas Ros1,2, Jean Théberge1,3, Paul Frewen1, Rosemarie Kluetsch1,5, Maria
Densmore1,3, Vince Calhoun4, Ruth Lanius1; 1Department of Psychiatry, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada, 2Laboratory for Neurology
and Imaging of Cognition, Department of Neurosciences, University of Geneva,
Switzerland, 3Department of Medical Imaging, Lawson Health Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada, 4The Mind Research Network, Albuquerque, NM,
USA, 5Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim / Heidelberg University, Germany — Neurofeedback (NFB) involves a brain–computer interface that allows users to learn to voluntarily control their cortical
oscillations, reflected in the electroencephalogram (EEG). Although NFB
is being pioneered as a noninvasive tool for treating brain disorders, there
is insufficient evidence on the mechanism of its impact on brain function.
Furthermore, the dominant rhythm of the human brain is the alpha oscil-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

209

Poster Session G
lation (8–12 Hz), yet its behavioral significance remains multifaceted and
largely correlative. In this study with 34 healthy participants, we examined whether during the performance of an attentional task, the functional
connectivity of distinct fMRI networks would be plastically altered after
a 30-min session of voluntary reduction of alpha rhythm (n=17) versus a
sham-feedback condition (n=17). We reveal that compared to sham-feedback, NFB induced an increase of connectivity within regions of the salience
network involved in intrinsic alertness (dorsal anterior cingulate), which
was detectable 30 min after termination of training. The increase in salience
network (default-mode network) connectivity was negatively (positively)
correlated with changes in ‘on task’ mind-wandering as well as resting
state alpha rhythm. Crucially, we observed a causal dependence between
alpha rhythm synchronization during NFB and its subsequent change at
resting state, not exhibited by the SHAM group. Our findings provide neurobehavioral evidence for the brain’s exquisite functional plasticity, and
for a temporally direct impact of NFB on a key cognitive control network,
suggesting a promising basis for its use to treat cognitive disorders under
physiological conditions.

G6
ENHANCED UTILIZATION OF REWARD PROSPECT LEADS TO
IMPROVED PROCESSING OF STIMULUS CONFLICT Berry van den
Berg1,2, Monicque Lorist2, Marty Woldorff1; 1Duke University, 2University of Groningen — Reward prospect can improve task performance in cases in which
the cognitive system is challenged, such as in the presence of conflicting
stimuli. Little is known, however, about the interaction between reward
prospect and attention to achieve such facilitation of conflict processing.
Here we used event-related potentials (ERPs) to study how reward prospect influences the neural dynamics of conflict processing. In a color-word
Stroop paradigm, color-words printed in colored fonts (e.g., “RED” printed
in blue) were presented, with the task to indicate the font color with a
button press. Prior to the target, a cue indicated whether there was potential reward on that trial. Results showed faster response times (RTs) for
potential-reward than no-reward trials and for congruent than incongruent targets, but no significant interaction between reward and congruency.
There were, however, large individual differences in the reward-related
RT effects and their relationship to neural activity. In particular, relative to
no-reward trials, reward-prospect cues elicited larger attention-related preparatory activity (CNVs), which correlated across subjects with the overall
speeding of RTs for rewarded versus non-rewarded targets. Moreover, the
amplitude of reward-related CNV enhancement correlated with greater
reduction in interference effects for the rewarded (versus unrewarded) targets. This relationship, likely reflecting improved filtering of the irrelevant
dimension, was also reflected neurally as greater reduction of the hallmark
negative-polarity ERP incongruency effect from 300-450 ms. These results
show that increased utilization of reward-related information by the attentional system leads to improved processing of stimulus conflict.

G7
GAZE CUING ELICITED BY GAZING EXPRESSIVE FACES AND
ALCOHOLIC/NON-ALCOHOLIC TARGETS IN SOCIAL DRINKERS
Gordon Dodwell1, Mayﬁeld Abigail1, Ceballos Natalie1, Graham Reiko1; 1Department of Psychology, Texas State University — Research suggests that facial
expressions can modulate attentional shifts due to changes in gaze direction,
especially when affective context is added by the use meaningful targets. In
the current study, we investigated the combined effects of facial expression
(happy vs. disgusted faces) and appetitive targets (alcoholic vs. non-alcoholic beverage images) on gaze-triggered orienting in social drinkers. Seventy-two social drinkers (43 light drinkers, 29 heavier drinkers) identified
targets in a Posner-style cuing task: a face gazed non-predictively to the left
or right, and then became disgusted or happy; an image of an alcoholic or
non-alcoholic beverage would then appear on the left or right of the face.
Analyses revealed a main effect of validity that was mitigated by an interaction with target type: participants were fastest to respond to validly-cued
alcohol targets. Furthermore, there was an expression by target type interaction that was moderated by drinking status (heavier vs. lighter drinkers).
Whereas light drinkers did not show differences in response times to identify beverages cued by the two different expressions, heavier drinkers were
faster to identify alcohol targets cued by happy faces, and slower at identifying alcohol targets cued by disgusted faces. These results are consistent

210

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
with the notion that affective context can have a powerful effect on gaze
and expression interactions and subsequent attentional orienting, of which
attitudes toward target objects are an important component.

G8
INCREASED DISTRACTION IN ADULT ATTENTION-DEFICIT
HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER CAN BE AMELIORATED WITH HIGH
PERCEPTUAL LOAD Sophie Forster1, David J. Robertson1, Alistair Jennings1, Jonna Kuntsi2, Philip Asherson2, Nilli Lavie1; 1University College London,
King’s College London — Impoverished ability to focus attention in the face
of distractions is a core, and highly disruptive, symptom of Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Perceptual load has been established
within non-clinical populations as a critical determinant of both the efficiency of distractor rejection, and the stage of processing at which this
occurs: Increasing perceptual load induces early selection and thus reduces
distractor processing at an early perceptual stage. Here we ask whether high
perceptual load can ameliorate distraction in ADHD. The performance of
17 adults with ADHD was compared with that of 17 age- and IQ-matched
controls on a novel measure of irrelevant distraction under load (Forster
& Lavie, 2008), designed to parallel daily-life distraction. Participants performed letter search with either high load (set-size: 6) or low load (set-size:
1). A salient yet entirely task-irrelevant distractor (selected from images of
famous cartoon characters) was presented in the periphery on 10% of trials.
Search reaction times were significantly increased in the presence (versus
absence) of an irrelevant distractor, and this effect was significantly greater
for adults with ADHD. Critically, even the inflated levels of distractor interference exhibited by the ADHD group were significantly reduced by high
load: This beneficial effect of perceptual load was as potent for the ADHD
group as the control group. These findings imply that increased distraction in ADHD reflects disruption to late selection processes, while early
selection remains intact. In demonstrating a tangible method for reducing
distraction experienced in ADHD, our findings also have promising implications for future interventions
2

G9
THE EFFECTS OF MIND WANDERING ON PROSPECTIVE MEMORY
Julia Kam1, Megan MacPherson1, Todd Handy1; 1University of British Columbia
— When mind wandering, or when our attention is away from the task
at hand, the processing of external stimuli at both the sensory and cognitive level attenuates. Recent studies have found a bias towards future
as opposed to past thinking while mind wandering. Given these findings,
we were interested in the extent to which our attention to task affects
one’s prospective memory – memory that involves performing an act in
the future. To address this question, we administered several prospective
memory tasks and had participants complete the Stroop test. First, participants were asked to remember to retrieve an item from the experimenter
after the computer task. Second, they were given instructions to two tasks
that they had to perform upon a cue at the end of the experiment. Participants then completed the Stroop – as a filler task – and were occasionally
asked about their attention state during their performance. For our primary
analysis, we found that the frequency and content of mind wandering predicted performance on the prospective memory tasks. Interestingly, we
also found that behavioral performance on the Stroop task (i.e. reaction
times and accuracy) was modulated by whether they preceded reports of
on-task vs. mind wandering. Together, this suggests that the effects of mind
wandering extend beyond sensory and general cognitive level processing
to prospective memory and response inhibition.

G10
PRACTICE IMPROVES LATE-STAGE DISTRACTOR FILTERING: A
COMBINED EEG-FMRI STUDY. Todd Kelley1, George Mangun2; 1Microsoft Corporation, 2University of California, Davis — Avoiding distraction is a
critical capacity for survival. Research has shown that people improve their
ability to ignore distracting stimuli with practice, but the specific neural
mechanisms of this practice effect are not fully understood. We conducted
an electroencephalography/event-related potential (EEG/ERP) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study to investigate how neural
activity changed as observers became more practiced at ignoring distractors. Two groups of participants performed a color discrimination task on
a target object. While performing this task, they also had to ignore irrele-

2013 Annual Meeting
vant (distractor) objects that could appear next to the target. The presence
of these distractor objects initially resulted in slower responses with lower
accuracy. However, these behavioral deficits were reduced with practice
within sessions. ERPs showed no changes with practice in the lateralized
readiness potential (associated with response planning) or the PD component (associated with suppression of task-irrelevant sensory signals).
However, there was an increase in the coherence of parietal alpha (8-12 Hz)
oscillations evoked by distracting stimuli. The fMRI data showed reduced
response to distractors across parietal and frontal regions with practice,
but no change in the response in early visual cortex. These data suggest
that practice leads to improved suppression of post-sensory distracting
information as indexed by the alpha oscillations. This in turn leads to
decreased need for parietal and prefrontal filtering mechanisms, as indexed
by the decreased BOLD response to distractors. We propose that practice
improves late selection attention mechanisms that prevent irrelevant information from reaching working memory. Supported by MH055714.

G11
VISUAL ATTENTION TO THE PARTS OF ANIMALS AND ARTIFACTS:
EVIDENCE FOR EARLY SELECTION FOR HANDLES Heath Matheson1,
Aaron Newman1, Nicole White2, Patricia McMullen1; 1Department of Psychology,
Dalhousie University, 2Department of Psychology, University of Toronto — In
the object perception literature, previous research has demonstrated that
participants are faster at making a response (e.g. object orientation decision) with the hand that is aligned with the handle of a manipulable object.
According to the embodied cognitive account of object representations,
this finding suggests that the presentation of a manipulable object automatically elicits sensorimotor simulations of the respective hand and these
simulations facilitate the response, decreasing its latency. However, one
would also expect faster responding with a hand that is in the same spatial
location as a handle if handles automatically attract visual attention (i.e.
stimulus-response compatibility). In the present study, we modified the
Posner-style attentional cuing paradigm to test this hypothesis. Participants
were shown target dots in the left or right visual field and had to press a
button to indicate their location (i.e. target detection). Each dot was ‘cued’
by a centrally presented artifact or animal, oriented towards the left or the
right. Each image was oriented such that the functional-end/head or the
handle/tail was in the same spatial location as the target dot. We showed
that a) participants are better at detecting target dots cued by handles, and
b) that the P1, an index of early visual attention, is greater in response to
targets cued by handles than targets cued by functional-ends. This result
suggests that object handles automatically bias attention. This attentional
bias may account for earlier behavioural findings, without any recourse to
embodied theories of cognition.

G12
ALCOHOL-RELATED ATTENTIONAL BIASES IN FEMALE COLLEGE
FRESHMAN: A CROSS-CULTURAL ERP STUDY Abigail Mayﬁeld1,
Natalie Ceballos1, Reiko Graham1; 1Texas State University — Young women
may be at risk for problem drinking during the transition from home to
college, Latinas in particular. We assessed event-related potential (ERP)
correlates of alcohol-related processing, alcohol attitudes, and consumption in freshman females using a 3-stimulus oddball paradigm and a longitudinal design. Participants (24 Non-Hispanic/Caucasian and 17 Hispanic,
mean age = 18.0) completed 2 sessions approximately 6 months apart. In
each session, participants completed self-report questionnaires and two
versions of the task (counterbalanced): one where they responded to alcohol targets (ignore other objects or nonsense shapes) and another where
they responded to object targets. Groups did not differ on age, depression,
acculturation or family history of drinking. Both groups reported very low
drinking levels that remained stable over 6 months. Overall, Non-Hispanic/Caucasian freshmen had more extreme positive and negative attitudes towards alcohol; attitudes remained stable over time. Analyses
focused on the parietal P300, which was maximal approximately 350-450
ms after stimulus onset. Peak amplitudes (350-450 ms) were larger to alcohol images for both groups, suggesting that alcohol images were salient.
This effect was more marked for Non-Hispanic/Caucasians and remained
relatively stable over time. Exploratory correlational analyses revealed that
late P3 amplitudes (450-550ms) at both Time 1 and Time 2 were negatively
correlated with self report and alcohol intake measures at Time 2. Longitu-

Poster Session G
dinal assessments of use are currently underway to determine whether or
not these ERP indices of alcohol salience during the freshman year predict
future drinking patterns in this group of women.

G13
PROLONGED ATTENTIONAL BLINK RELATES TO ERROR PROCESSING IN THE CINGULO-OPERCULAR NETWORK Maital Neta1,
Andrew Padgett1, Steve Petersen1,2,3,4,5,6; 1Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, 2Department of Radiology, Washington University School of Medicine, 3Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology, Washington
University School of Medicine, 4Department of Neurosurgery, Washington University School of Medicine, 5Department of Psychology, Washington University,
6
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University — The attentional blink is a phenomenon found during rapid serial visual presentation
(RSVP) tasks by which the detection of a target (T1) suppresses the ability to
detect a second target (T2) that follows shortly (400-600 ms) thereafter. This
effect is thought to reflect generalized interference related to passing a processed item into a limited capacity processor (focal attention). Activity in
the cingulo-opercular network (comprised of the dorsal anterior cingulate/
medial superior frontal cortex and bilateral anterior insula/frontal operculum) has been characterized, at least in part, as indexing focal attention.
Cingulo-opercular activity also shows greater and more prolonged activity for errors than correct trials. Combining these concepts suggests that
the attentional blink should be prolonged during trials where there is an
error at T1. Participants performed an RSVP task, where 15 words were
presented, one immediately after the other, for 250 ms each. Most of the
words were nouns, but targets (1 or 2 per list) were verbs. Participants were
instructed to report each verb (target) aloud. We replicated the attentional
blink effect for accurately detected T1s; participants were less accurate at
detecting T2 at short SOAs as compared to longer SOAs. Importantly, after
an error at T1, accuracy for T2 detection was significantly attenuated across
a large range of SOAs, consistent with a prolonged attentional blink. This
experiment deepens the tie between activity in the cingulo-opercular network and focal attention, by showing that activity profiles in these regions
can predict the outcome of a commonly used attentional interference task.

G14
DIFFERENCES IN ATTENTIONAL BLINK AFTER OPEN-MONITORING AND FOCUSED-ATTENTION MEDITATION Chivon Powers1, Marcia
Grabowecky1, Mark Beeman1; 1Northwestern University — Open awareness
and focused attention influence thinking in different ways. We induced
open perceptivity and focused attention via a guided session of either
open-monitoring meditation (OM) or focused-attention meditation (FA).
We then examined the effect of these two meditation styles on attentional blink, which is thought to measure allocation of cognitive resources
during selective attention. After 30 minutes of OM, FA, or no meditation,
we gave 57 age and education-matched participants a rapid serial visual
presentation (RSVP) task. Participants identified two target letters (T1 and
T2) presented at short and long lags within a stream of rapidly-presented
numbers. In each group, we compared accuracy for detecting both targets
at short and long lags to measure attentional blink. We found a marginal
effect of group on target accuracy. Participants who practiced OM showed
a greater attentional blink than FA and control participants during short
lags. Yet all groups showed similar T1 detection across both lags and T2
detection at long lags. These results indicate that a single attempt at meditation by inexperienced meditators has immediate influences on cognitive
processes associated with attentional deployment. OM meditation may
induce a receptive state wherein distractors are given more attention than
when attention is more directly focused. Thus, OM may amplify the attentional blink by effectively training the mind to allow distractors to capture more attention than would normally be allocated for non-meaningful
information. We further distinguish effects of OM and FA by examining
target-related electroencephalographic differences among novices as they
perform the RSVP task.

G15
NEURAL PROCESSING OF MALE AND FEMALE FEARFUL FACES
IN A SPATIAL ATTENTION MODULATION TASK Andrew Hathaway1,
Karen Reinke1; 1University of Illinois Springﬁeld — Previous research has
shown that attention can be modulated by the presentation of a fearful
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

211

Poster Session G
face. The purpose of the current research was to examine the differences in
modulation based on whether or not the fearful face was male or female.
A dot-probe paradigm was used to measure reaction times. A 128-channel
electroencephalography (EEG) cap was used to examine the event related
potentials. Participants viewed two face stimuli of the same sex for 166ms
on either side of a fixation point. The stimuli were immediately replaced by
a target dot on one side of the fixation point. There were six different trial
types, three for each sex of faces. Congruent: one neutral and one fearful
face with the target dot presented in the same visual field as the fearful face.
Incongruent: one neutral and one fearful face with the target dot presented
in the opposite visual field as the fearful face. Baseline: both faces were
neutral and the target dot could appear in either visual field. Both male
and female faces produced a congruency effect. There was also a slight,
but non-significant, difference in reaction times to male faces versus female
faces. However, EEG waveforms differed for male versus female faces, suggesting that there was a difference in neural processing based on the sex of
the fearful face.

G16
RELATION OF ANXIETY AND DEPRESSION TO COGNITION IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE Gretchen Reynolds1, Alice Cronin-Golomb1; 1Boston

University — The study of Parkinson’s disease (PD) typically focuses on the
classic motor symptoms of the disease, but many non-motor symptoms
occur in PD and significantly contribute to a poorer quality of life. Specifically, anxiety occurs in up to 40% of PD patients and is often comorbid
with depression and other psychiatric symptoms. In the general population, limbic, prefrontal, and temporal brain regions have been implicated
in the pathogenesis of anxiety and depression. In our sample of 28 non-demented PD patients (16M, 12F; mean age = 63.5), we examined levels of
anxiety and depression with the Beck Anxiety and Depression Inventories
(BAI, BDI-II) and the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS), and assessed their
relation to cognition. Anxiety and depression were correlated with one
another (BAI with BDI: r=0.46, BAI with GDS: r=0.53) and with quality of
life as indexed by the PD Quality of Life questionnaire (PDQ-39) (BAI with
PDQ-39: r=0.72; BDI with PDQ-39: r=0.68). Regarding cognition, anxiety
correlated with executive function, including response inhibition and fluid
thinking (Ruff Figural Fluency Test: r= -0.48) and set-shifting (Trail Making
Test [TMT] B: r=0.47). Similarly, depressive symptoms correlated with Ruff
(r=-0.49) and TMT B (r=0.38) performance. All correlations were at p<.05.
Anxiety and depression did not correlate with cognitive tests of memory or
visuospatial function, indicating a relatively specific relation to executive
function. The results suggest that dysfunction in prefrontal brain regions
affected in PD, as indexed by scores on executive-function tests, may also
contribute to the development or maintenance of anxiety and depression.

G17
THE MANY FACES OF DREAD: DISSOCIABLE EFFECTS OF ANTICIPATORY ANXIETY ON ATTENTION CONTROL AND SENSORY PROCESSING IN V1 Valentina Rossi1, Leonie Martens1, Gilles Pourtois1; 1Ghent
University — The fronto-parietal network (FPN) is involved in directing
attention toward goal-relevant stimuli, and it is recruited when the need
for top-down control is enhanced. As a consequence, adaptive behavior
is maintained through focusing on task-relevant processing, and through
efficient filtering of irrelevant (though salient) information. However, emotional states, such as sustained fear, can transiently compromise the ability
to rely on this dorsal system, potentially resulting in inefficient stimulus
selection. We tested, using high-density EEG, source localization and physiological measures, whether different types of anticipatory anxiety would
differentially alter attention control, impairing goal-related stimulus processing and perturbing efficient filtering of irrelevant stimuli in primary
visual cortex. Participants performed an easy or more difficult task. As predicted, increased load was accompanied by enhanced activation within the
FPN and the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and by efficient early filtering
of irrelevant information in V1. Anticipatory anxiety induced by aversive
stimuli (sounds) also modulated cingulate cortex recruitment, indicating
sustained effort. However, responses in the FPN were not increased in this
condition, eventually resulting in insufficient filtering of irrelevant information rapidly following stimulus onset. On the contrary, anticipatory anxiety related to social threat did not impair attention control, and maximized
filtering in early visual cortex. Our results indicate that transient negative
emotional states can have widespread effects on attention selection and

212

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
early sensory processing. Crucially, the balance between goal-relevance
and saliency governing attention allocation can be swiftly tipped over by
emotion. However, these effects are not generic, but specific to the actual
anxiety state.

G18
WHETHER EMOTION LEADS TO RETROGRADE AMNESIA OR
FACILITATION DEPENDS ON THE FOCUS OF TOP-DOWN ATTENTION Michiko Sakaki1, Kellie Fryer, Mara Mather; 1University of Southern California, 2University of Southern California, 3University of Southern California
— Many studies reveal enhanced memory for emotional stimuli. But there
are contradictory findings about how emotional stimuli seen in a sequence
influence memory for preceding or subsequent neutral stimuli. For example, while many studies reveal impaired memory for neutral stimuli preceding emotional items (e.g., Strange et al., 2003; Knight & Mather, 2009), other
studies show facilitated memory for neutral stimuli preceding emotional
items (e.g., Anderson, Wais & Gabrieli, 2006). The current study tested the
hypothesis that top-down attentional focus determines whether emotional
arousal enhances or impairs memory for other neutral stimuli. Consistent
with our hypothesis, we found that emotion facilitates memory for preceding neutral items when people prioritize those neutral items. In contrast,
emotion impaired memory for preceding neutral items when people do not
prioritize those neutral items, and instead focus on the following emotional
items. These patterns were observed irrespective of emotional valence
(positive or negative). Furthermore, we found similar attention effects on
memories for neutral items that appeared after the emotional items. These
results support the arousal-biased competition theory (Mather & Sutherland, 2011) and indicate that the top-down priority determines whether
emotion facilitates or impairs memory for other neutral information.

G19
INCREASED FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF THE NUCLEUS
ACCUMBENS WITH AUDITORY AND VALUATION REGIONS OF THE
BRAIN PREDICTS REWARD VALUE OF MUSICAL EXCERPTS Valorie
N. Salimpoor1,2, Iris van den Bosch3, Natasa Kovacevic2, Anthony Randal McIntosh2, Alain Dagher1, Robert J. Zatorre1; 1Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill
University, 2Rotman Research Institute, University of Toronto, 3Utrecht University
— Auditory expectations are thought to play a crucial role in shaping emotional responses to music. How can we predict the direction of novel music?
We used functional magnetic resonance imaging to examine how music
gains reward value the first time it is heard. To assess reward value objectively, an auction paradigm was used as 11 participants (6 male) listened
to 70 new music clips, making a bid after hearing each item. To increase
ecological validity, participants kept music won through the auction and
remainder of their budget. The best predictor of reward value during
music listening was activity in the nucleus accumbens (NAcc), known to
be associated with positive prediction error, suggesting that participants
make predictions despite any explicit familiarity with the music. Importantly, reward value was also related to increasing functional connectivity
of the NAcc with superior temporal gyri, associated with storing templates
of music information implicitly accumulated over year of listening, linking
predictions to previous auditory experience. These data can help explain
why different people like different music. We also found a dissociation in
reward-related processes as the auditory cortices, amygdala, and ventromedial prefrontal regions were active to a similar extent during all listening
conditions requiring valuation, but did not predict reward value of items,
which was instead predicted by increasing functional connectivity of these
regions with the NAcc as reward value increased. This finding provides
direct evidence that aesthetic rewards arise from the interaction between
mesolimbic reward circuitry and cortical networks involved in perceptual
analysis and valuation.

G20
EMPATHY AND SOCIAL PROBLEM SOLVING IN ALCOHOL DEPENDENCE Tobias Schmidt1, Patrizia Thoma1, Patrik Roser2, Georg Juckel2,
Boris Suchan1; 1Ruhr University Bochum, Germany, 2LWL University Hospital
Bochum, Germany — Empathy and social problem solving are fundamental
for everyday functioning. Currently, little is known about specific changes
of these aspects of social cognition in alcohol dependence. In the current

2013 Annual Meeting
study, we investigate distinct components of empathy and social problem
solving in patients with alcohol dependence and depression in comparison
to healthy controls. Recently detoxified patients with alcohol dependence
(ALC), patients hospitalized for depression (DEP) and a group of healthy
controls (HC) completed a computerized task assessing different components of empathy (emotion recognition, personal concern and affective perspective taking) and a scenario-based test of the ability to understand and
solve interpersonal problems. Furthermore, standardized executive measures were administered. Current data suggest a tendency for faster reactions of the ALC group relative to the HC group when responding on the
personal concern and the affective perspective taking subtasks, while the
performance of the DEP group was inconspicuous. ALC patients generated
significantly fewer socially acceptable solutions for interpersonal problems
than DEP and HC groups and significantly fewer irrelevant solutions than
DEP patients. Mentalizing about scenario content was significantly better
in DEP relative to ALC patients. DEP patients were impaired in selecting
optimal solutions for interpersonal problems relative to healthy controls.
The ability to select optimal solutions for difficult interpersonal situations
correlated significantly with executive performance in the overall group.
Our data provide evidence of specific patterns of altered empathic responding and social problem solving in alcohol-dependent relative to depressed
patients and healthy controls. This might partly be related to executive dysfunction.

G21
MODULATIONS OF CORTICAL RESPONSES (ERPS) TO PERIPHERALLY PRESENTED EMOTIONAL FACES, WORDS, AND GESTURES
BY ATTENTIONAL LOAD Patrik Schoch1, Johanna Kissler2; 1University of
Konstanz, Germany, 2University of Bielefeld, Germany — It is debated, to what
extent attentional resources are necessary for prioritized processing of emotional stimuli. If attention is required (Pessoa et al., 2005), emotion effects in
vision should be modulated by the task at hand and follow some amount
of perceptual processing, implying relatively late emotion effects. If attention is not directly needed (Dolan and Vuilleumier, 2003; LeDoux, 1996),
reduced attentional resources should not constrain emotional processing
and responses to emotional stimuli should appear rapidly, with little previous perceptual processing. Two event-related potential (ERP) experiments
were conducted to investigate these issues. Emotional and neutral faces,
words, and gestures were presented peripherally in separate blocks while
the participants’ EEG was recorded. In experiment 1, participants had to
maintain fixation on the central fixation cross while stimuli were presented
peripherally (~10°), each for 150ms. In experiment 2, peripheral stimulation remained the same, but participants additionally had to count color-changes of the fixation cross. Two salient results emerged: When attention was centrally engaged by counting the color changes, no significant
emotion effects emerged following stimulus presentation in the left visual
field, as right hemisphere resources were taken up by the task. Without
attentional load, right hemispheric emotion effects were also found for left
visual field presentation. Second, there were significant P1-effects during
passive viewing, but not during the task. These results reconcile both perspectives: Whereas emotional stimuli do not need to be directly attended to
receive privileged processing, insufficient attentional resources or distraction (Lavie, 2005) can diminish emotional cortical processing.

G22
EMOTIONAL MODULATION OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
ATTENTIONAL CONTROL AND BRAIN ACTIVITY IN ADOLESCENTS
WITH MENTAL HEALTH DISORDERS: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION.
Andrea T. Shafer1, K. Jessica Van Vliet1, Sunita Vohra1, Lihong Wang2, Anthony
Singhal1, Florin Dolcos1,3; 1University of Alberta, 2Duke University, 3University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Research in healthy young adults has
shown that increased attentional control (AC) enhances goal-relevant processing and minimizes emotional distraction (ED). Also the degree of brain
activity in attention and emotion processing regions, in response to emotional stimulation has been linked to individual differences in self-reported
measures of AC. However, it is unclear whether similar relationships are
found in earlier stages of development, and how more rigorous standardized measures of attention are linked to brain activity related to goal-relevant processing and ED. These issues were investigated using the Test Of
Variables of Attention and fMRI in conjunction with an emotional oddball

Poster Session G
task, where infrequent emotional images (distracters) and targets were presented amongst a stream of frequent scrambled images, in 40 adolescents
with affective mental health disorders. Results showed overall reduced AC
linked to slower responses to both emotional distracters and targets, but
with a stronger specific impact on targets. Activity in areas associated with
both attention (anterior middle frontal gyrus-aMFG, cingulate, putamen,
caudate) and emotion regulation (bilateral ventrolateral prefrontal cortex-vlPFC) was linked to increased AC and enhanced target performance.
Interestingly, the relationship between aMFG, putamen, and cingulate and
AC was also modulated by the preceding emotional distracter. Moreover, a
hemispheric asymmetry was identified in the vlPFC, with right hemisphere
being linked to general distraction inhibition and left specifically inhibiting ED. These results provide novel findings concerning emotion-attention
interactions in the adolescent brain, linked to individual differences in standardized AC scores, and have relevance for understanding cognitive and
emotional developmental disturbances.

G23
TASK-SPECIFIC FRONTAL-AMYGDALA NETWORK CONCORDANCE PREDICTS INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN AFFECTIVE
EMPATHY Tong Sheng1, Katherine Fu1, Lisa Aziz-Zadeh1; 1University of South-

ern California — Empathy refers to one’s capacity to understand and feel
another person’s emotional experiences and is an important aspect of social
cognition. Empathy encompasses affective and cognitive components, and
correspondingly, a number of affective, sensorimotor, and higher cognitive
brain regions have been implicated in empathic processing. However, individuals display large variances in their empathic abilities and tendencies,
and a network-level understanding of the neural bases of such individual
differences is currently lacking. In the current study, we used fMRI to characterize the extent to which an emotion-processing network comprised of
inferior frontal/orbitofrontal cortices and the amygdalae can account for
individual differences in affective empathy under different task conditions.
Specifically, subjects were scanned during: (1) resting state; (2) passive
auditory emotion perception; (3) an affective auditory emotion perception
task; (4) a cognitive auditory emotion perception task. The overall concordance of the inferior frontal/amygdala emotion-processing network was
calculated for each condition, and a multiple regression model showed that,
collectively, network concordances during the various tasks accounted for
a substantial amount of the variance in individual differences in affective
empathy. Post-hoc analyses revealed that network concordances during
the affective and cognitive emotion perception tasks were the strongest
predictors of individual scores in empathy. These findings demonstrate a
multivariate, functional-network-level account of individual differences,
and highlight the importance of the task-specific nature of the relationship
between brain function and behavior.

G24
CONTRIBUTION OF SAFETY SIGNALS TO ESCAPE/AVOIDANCE
LEARNING IN HEALTHY INDIVIDUALS Jony Sheynin1, Saima Shikari2,
Jackie Ostovich2, Barbara Ekeh2, Kevin D. Beck1,3,4, Kevin C.H. Pang1,3,4, Richard J. Servatius1,3,4, Mark W. Gilbertson5, Scott P. Orr6, Catherine E. Myers1,3,4;
1
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Medicine and Dentistry
of New Jersey, Newark, NJ, 2Honors College, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ,
3
Stress & Motivated Behavior Institute, New Jersey Medical School, Newark,
NJ, 4Department of Veterans Affairs, New Jersey Health Care System, East
Orange, NJ, 5Department of Veterans Affairs, Manchester VA Medical Center,
Manchester, NH, 6Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA — Avoidance behavior is a predominant symptom in all anxiety disorders. The propensity to acquire and express such behavior may be
an important vulnerability factor contributing to the etiology and pathogenesis of the disorders. To date, a more complete understanding of how
avoidance behavior is exhibited by humans is limited by the absence of
relevant tasks. Specifically, it is of interest to test the contribution of “safety
signals”, stimuli that indicate periods of non-threat and were shown to
facilitate avoidance learning in animals. Here, we modified our computerized avoidance learning task for human subjects (Sheynin et al. 2012,
SfN annual meeting) to test the effect of adding a safety signal. The task
included 12 acquisition trials where subjects were expected to learn to
escape/avoid an aversive on-screen event by moving an object to a safe
area, followed by 12 extinction trials. Results in healthy young adults sugCognitive Neuroscience Society

213

Poster Session G
gest that the introduction of a visual safety signal during acquisition phase
facilitated performance during extinction (but not acquisition) phase. This
finding is consistent with recent work demonstrating quicker extinction of
lever-press avoidance behavior in a subgroup of rats exposed to a safety
signal during the acquisition phase (Beck et al. 2011). Furthermore, we will
analyze the impact of safety signals on subjects with high versus low trait
anxiety vulnerabilities. Such investigation has an important role for understanding the pathogenesis of anxiety disorders and might guide the development of better therapeutic approaches.

G25
NEURAL CORRELATES OF HUMOR COMPREHENSION AND
APPRECIATION: A FUNCTIONAL MRI STUDY Midori Shibata1,2, Yuri
Terasawa2,3,4, Satoshi Umeda2; 1Hokkaido University, 2Keio University, 3National
Institute of Mental Health, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, 4Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) — The perception of humor
evokes a pleasant emotional response while causing laughter or changes
in the brain and body via the autonomic system. However, little is known
about what kind of mechanism elicits the emotional response. To elucidate
this mechanism, we conducted fMRI study using the same context across
conditions (i.e., the first two sentences and the punch line were identical,
but the third sentence was different). The results indicate that despite using
the same sentences, only the punch line in the humor sentence condition
induced a perception of funniness and resulted in greater activation in
the fronto-temporal region and the mesolimbic reward region. We found
that the fronto-temporal regions are involved in processing the semantic
aspects of humor comprehension. Further, the punch line in the humor
sentence condition showed greater activation in a network of subcortical
regions, including the hippocampus, amygdala, ventral striatum, and midbrain, which have been implicated in experiencing positive rewards. In
addition, functional connectivity analyses revealed that the activity of the
ventromedial prefrontal, inferior frontal (BA 47; pars orbitalis), and middle
temporal cortex functionally interacted with that of the mesolimbic reward
region. These results suggest that the network including the ventromedial
prefrontal, inferior frontal (BA 47; pars orbitalis), middle temporal cortex
and mesolimbic region plays a critical role in the interaction between the
cognitive and affective components involved in humor comprehension and
appreciation.

G26
INTERNET ADDICTION DISORDER AND ALTERATIONS IN WHITE
MATTER INTEGRITY: A DTI STUDY HYE ILL SHIN1, Heung Sik Yoon1,
Hyeon Guk Kang1, Hyeon Min Ahn1, Sang Hee Kim1; 1Korea University, Seoul,
Korea — As Internet addiction (IA) has become more prevalent recently,
there has been increased awareness for the need of better understanding of
its neural pathology. Previous neuroimaging studies have shown abnormal
functional reactivity of the brain in Internet addiction; however, the possibility of structural abnormality in the brain associated with this condition
has not received much research attention. In this study, we wanted to investigate differences in white matter (WM) integrity in Internet addiction disorder. Adults with Internet addition (n=13, age 23.87, Female/Male=2/11)
and healthy controls (n=24, age 25.69, Female/Male=12/12) were recruited
for this study. Group assignment was based on Young’s Internet Addiction test. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) data were obtained and analyzed
using tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) implemented in FSL. Fractional
anisotropy (FA) was assessed as an index of directional diffusivity of water
molecules in the brain. Participants with IA showed reduced diffusivity
within bilateral Inferior longitudinal fasciculus (ILF), right superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF), and bilateral Inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus
(IFOF). Furthermore, individual’s FA values in the IFOF were negatively
correlated with IA scores of Young’s scale. Our preliminary results indicate a possible alteration in white matter integrity associated with Internet
addiction disorders.

G27
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN EMOTION-COGNITION INTERACTIONS: EMOTIONAL VALENCE INTERACTS WITH SEROTONIN
TRANSPORTER GENOTYPE TO INFLUENCE BRAIN SYSTEMS
INVOLVED IN EMOTIONAL REACTIVITY AND COGNITIVE CON214

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

TROL Melanie Stollstorff1,2, Yuko Munakata1,2, Harry Smolker1, Arielle Jensen2,
Ryan Guild2, Joseph Devaney3, Marie Banich1,2; 1Institute of Cognitive Science,
University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA, 2Department of Psychology &
Neuroscience, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA, 3Department
of Integrative Systems Biology, Research Center for Genetic Medicine, Children’s National Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA — The serotonin transporter gene (5-HTTLPR) influences emotional reactivity and attentional
bias towards or away from emotional stimuli, and has been implicated in
psychopathological states, such as depression. The short allele is associated
with increased reactivity and attention towards negatively-valenced emotional information, whereas the long allele is associated with that towards
positively-valenced emotional information. The neural basis for 5-HTTLPR-mediated differences in the ability to exert cognitive control over these
bottom-up biases in emotional reactivity and attention is unknown, an issue
investigated in this study. Healthy adults (two groups based on 5-HTTLPR
genotype: “Long”, “Short”) underwent functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) while completing an Emotional Stroop-like task that
varied in congruency of task-relevant and task-irrelevant information and
in emotional valence. Consistent with prior reports, bottom-up reactivity
(i.e., amygdala activation) was modulated by 5-HTTLPR, with Short-carriers showing more reactivity to negative, and Long-carriers showing more
reactivity to positive, information. Behaviorally, participants demonstrated
the classic Stroop effect, which did not differ by genotype. However, fMRI
results revealed that genotype influenced brain regions engaged depending on emotional valence. While the Long group recruited right inferior
frontal gyrus and amygdala during positive emotional conflict, the Short
group recruited these regions during negative emotional conflict. Thus,
participants successfully engaged cognitive control to overcome conflict in
an emotional context using similar neural circuitry, but the engagement of
this circuitry depended on emotional valence and 5-HTTLPR status. These
results suggest that the interplay between emotion and cognition is modulated, in part, by a genetic polymorphism that influences serotonin neurotransmission.

G28
CAN WE DISSOCIATE THE MUSICAL EMOTIONAL PATHWAY
FROM THE VOCAL ONE? Sebastien Paquette1, Isabelle Peretz1, Belin
Pascal1,2; 1University of Montreal, 2University of Glasgow — Why does music
move us? Recently, certain brain areas (e.g. striatum, amygdala) have been
associated with musical emotions processing. These same areas have also
been associated with basic biological functions (sex, pain). How can we
conceptualize the relations between music and these neurobiological substrates? One possibility is that music co-opts or invades emotional circuits
that have evolved for biologically important vocalizations (e.g. laughs,
screams). There is currently little experimental support for the existence
of a common musical and vocal channel. By using fMRI while presenting
very comparable (acoustically, ecologically) emotional musical and vocal
stimuli, we aim to provide an in-depth comparison of the musical and vocal
emotion channels and identify their common neurobiological substrates.
Two batteries of stimuli depicting basic emotional expressions (happy,
sad, scary, neutral) were used: the Montreal Affective Voices (non-linguistic vocal bursts; mean duration:1.3 sec) and the Musical Emotional Bursts
(improvisations or imitations of an emotion on a violin or a clarinet; mean
duration:1.6 sec). Twenty participants realized a one-back task while listening to the affective bursts presented in blocs of forty stimuli by timbre
(violin, clarinet, voice), and repeated four times. Univariate analyses, performed using SPM, revealed an interaction (emotion x timbre) in the temporal lobes: vocal fear elicited stronger activation than their music counterparts and the opposite was found for happy stimuli. Activation patterns by
vocal and musical emotions showed striking similarities. Ongoing analyses
using MVPA will help determine if the musical emotional pathway can be
dissociated from the vocal one.

G29
INTERACTION OF PAIN AND PLEASURE NETWORKS Eric

Porges1,
Karen Smith , Jean Decety ; University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States
— BACKGROUND: Observing another individual in pain elicits a predictable network of neural activation. Separately, pleasurable stimuli elicit a
different, but overlapping network. These networks, however, are modulated by several physiological and psychological factors (e.g. related to the
1

1 1

2013 Annual Meeting
perspective being taken, etc). fMRI, self-report of subjective appetitiveness
and aversiveness of stimuli, and autonomic measures were employed to
explore the neural pathways common to both pain and pleasure. METHODS: 60 males (18-30 yrs), selected based on their like or dislike for watching sports where the aim is to injure another person (e.g.,boxing, mixed
martial arts, etc). Subjects were shown 20 10s videos of violent sports or
control of similar content containing no injuries or intent to injure. Data
collected included fMRI, autonomic activity (heart rate variability, electrodermal activity, respiration), salivary cortisol, and testosterone. RESULTS:
Relative to control condition, increased activation was observed in the
subgenual region of the ACC, right amygdala, pre-motor cortex, primary
motor cortex and bilateral insula. Psychopathy index scores were correlated with bilateral activation in the head of the caudate. Alexithymia
scores were correlated with increased prefrontal and ACC activation, and
inversely correlated with activation of the aMCC DISCUSSION: Brain
regions previously implicated in representations of pain and pleasure
are simultaneously recruited in individuals who report enjoyment when
watching violent sports. Relations were observed between activation of the
neural networks and features of alexithymia and psychopathy. These data
have implications for understanding the relationship between personality
traits and the brain-behavior mechanisms involved in pleasure and pain.

G30
YOU LOOKIN’ AT ME? THE ROLE OF GAZE DIRECTION IN THE
MODULATION OF THE ACOUSTIC STARTLE RESPONSE BY EMOTIONAL FACES Kiran Puri1, Albert Porterﬁeld1; 1Oberlin College — It is well
established that the affective valence of foreground visual stimuli modulates the acoustic startle blink, with negatively-valenced photos generally
potentiating and positively-valenced photos generally suppressing orbicularis oculi activation in response to a sudden, intense acoustic stimulus.
Some research suggests that this effect extends to the viewing of faces
varying in emotional expression, although findings are inconsistent. FMRI
studies indicate that the amygdala, a key element of the startle circuitry,
is differentially responsive to both the emotional expression and the gaze
direction of target faces. The present study examined the role of both of
these variables on the acoustic startle blink. Orbicularis EMG was recorded
from female undergraduates as they viewed frontal photos of models displaying neutral, happy, angry, and frightened facial expressions, half with
a direct and half with an averted (left or right) gaze. Randomly, half of the
photos were probed with a 50 ms, 101 dB[a] burst of white noise. Analysis
of EMG activity indicated that target face expression did not significantly
affect blink amplitude, but gaze direction did, with averted gazes eliciting
smaller blinks than direct gazes. Although the expression × gaze interaction
was not significant, post-hoc testing revealed that happy faces with averted
gazes elicited smaller blinks than all other stimuli, either individually or in
the aggregate. These findings suggest that interpersonal engagement, as
signified by eye contact, enhances the tone of the defensive motive system
underlying the startle reflex.

G31
ACTING ON ANGER: SOCIAL ANXIETY MODULATES
APPROACH-AVOIDANCE TENDENCIES AFTER OXYTOCIN ADMINISTRATION Sina Radke1, Karin Roelofs1, Ellen R. A. De Bruijn2; 1Radboud
University Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Leiden University, The Netherlands
— Oxytocin attenuates responses to stress and threat, e.g., by fostering
social approach in animals and decreasing anxiety. However, whether the
hormone also facilitates approach-related social behaviors in humans has
not been investigated until now. To assess approach-avoidance tendencies, participants responded to images depicting happy and angry faces
with direct or averted gaze by either pulling a joystick toward (approach)
or pushing it away from themselves (avoid). Under placebo, the typical
action tendencies were present, with happy faces eliciting approach and
angry faces avoidance responses, but 24 IU of oxytocin moderated these
tendencies. Importantly, the inclination to approach angry faces with direct
gaze after oxytocin administration was negatively related to social anxiety.
These results demonstrate that oxytocin facilitated approach in humans in
response to social threat, verifying its anxiolytic potential. In addition, they
underline the moderating role of dispositional factors in endocrine research
and their therapeutic implications.

Poster Session G

G32
THE INFLUENCE OF STRESS ON EXTINCTION RECALL

Candace
Raio1, Edith Brignoni-Perez2, Rachel Goldman1, Elizabeth Phelps1; 1New York
University, 2University of Puerto Rico — Extinction learning is a form of inhibitory learning that allows an organism to associate a previously aversive
cue with new, safe outcome. Extinction learning, however, creates a competing association that may or may not be retained when the cue is again
confronted. Examining the conditions under which extinction learning is
retained is critical to the enhancement of treatments for anxiety disorders.
Stress exposure is one factor that might alter how successfully extinction
memory is retrieved, especially since the brain regions crucial to extinction
retrieval are exceptionally sensitive to the effects of stress. To investigate
this, we used a classical fear-conditioning paradigm, whereby participants
were presented with one image that was paired with shock on a subset
of trials while the other image (CS-) was never paired shock. Extinction
training directly followed, whereby both CSs were repeatedly presented
without shock. Skin conductance served as our index of fear arousal. The
next day, participants were either exposed to an acute stressor (cold-pressor) or a control task before undergoing an extinction retention test. Significant increases in cortisol relative to baseline were found in the stress
group only. We calculated a fear recovery index by examining the difference between conditioned responses (mean CS+ minus CS-) during the last
trial of extinction and the first trial of re-extinction. Participants in the stress
group demonstrated significantly lower extinction recall than those in the
control group, suggesting that acute stress may impair the recall of extinction memory and may instead prompt the return of conditioned fear.

G33
SUBSEQUENT MEMORY EFFECTS IN FRONTAL SLOW WAVES
ELICITED BY EMOTIONAL WORDS Nasreen Sadeq1, Chelsea Goodwin1, Elyse Cadena1, Siri-Maria Kamp1, Emanuel Donchin1; 1University of South
Florida — In list learning paradigms, words that “stand out” elicit a larger
P300 when they are later successfully recalled, while items encoded under
elaborative strategies and non-distinctive items elicit Frontal Slow Wave
“subsequent memory effects” (Karis et al. 1984). Another line of research
indicates that emotional words elicit Frontal Slow Waves whose lateralization depends on the valence (e.g. Cunningham et al. 2005). We investigated
whether the Frontal Slow Waves elicited by emotional stimuli are also
correlated with subsequent recall. In two sessions, 17 participants studied
and immediately recalled lists of neutral words containing an emotional
“isolate” (positive or negative), lists of emotional words (either positive or
negative) or lists with an “isolate” in a larger font size. Here, we only report
findings from the neutral- and emotional lists. Positive word lists showed
higher recall levels than negative or neutral lists. A principal component
analysis revealed two Frontal Slow Wave components: One was left lateralized and largest for positive words, and the other was right lateralized and
largest for negative words. The right- but not the left Slow Wave showed
subsequent memory effects across word types: Its amplitude was largest
for words that were later not recalled. This subsequent memory effect is in
the opposite direction as previously reported for Slow Waves. In addition,
a P300 subsequent memory effect was present for negative words only. Our
data indicate that Frontal Slow Waves that vary with emotional valence
are not the same as those previously reported to correlate with later recall.

G34
SOMATOSENSORY CORRELATES OF FACIAL EMOTION PERCEPTION: EVIDENCE FROM ERPS Alejandra Sel1, Beatriz Calvo-Merino1,2,
Bettina Forster1; 1Department of Psychology, City University London, UK,
2
Department of Psychology, Complutense University of Madrid, Spain. — Simulationist models of emotion have proposed that somatosensory regions
crucially contribute to face expression processing. In particular, rTMS over
the right face somatosensory cortex (rSC) at 100-170ms after stimuli presentation selectively impairs facial emotion discrimination. However, the
nature of the somatosensory contribution to emotional face processing is
still unknown. Here we present an ERP study where we directly measured
somatosensory processing during an emotion recognition task (fearful faces
vs. neutral faces) by delivering tactile probes to participants’ left cheek or
index finger (105 ms post-stimuli) while recording SEPs. Importantly, to isolate the somatosensory response and eliminate any contamination of SEPs
by visual processing, facial expressions were also presented alone (without
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

215

Poster Session G
tactile stimulation). We then subtracted VEPs (visual only condition) from
SEPs (visual-tactile condition), which included visual and tactile event-related activity. The resulting difference somatosensory-evoked activity was
contrasted for fearful and neutral emotional conditions. Results revealed
that observing fearful faces enhances early mean amplitude somatosensory-evoked activity as opposed to neutral faces. Interestingly, source localization analysis focuses this differential activity in primary and secondary
somatosensory areas (SI, SII). Moreover, in contrast to previous findings of
site specificity within rSC for emotion discrimination, our results showed
similar emotional effects on cheek and finger somatosensory related activity suggesting rapid involvement of non-facial somatosensory areas in at
least early face expression processing. Taken together, our findings provide novel direct neural evidence of enhanced early somatosensory evoked
activity, over and above associated visual effects during face expression
processing.

G35
PUTTING THE BODY BACK IN EMBODIED EMOTION: FMRI EVIDENCE FOR THE MODULATION OF SPINAL CORD NEURONS BY
FACIAL EXPRESSIONS Stephen D. Smith1, Jennifer Kornelsen1, Theresa
A. McIver1; 1University of Winnipeg, Canada — In addition to communicating emotional intentions, facial expressions serve important protective
and information-processing functions. For instance, facial expressions of
disgust, which involve movement of the levator labii muscles on the nose,
produce an oral-nasal rejection of aversive chemosensory stimuli. Specifically, this expression constricts the air cavities in the nostrils and reduces
the speed of air intake (Susskind et al., 2008). In the current research, we
hypothesized that generating disgusted expressions would also elicit parasympathetic activity in the vagus nerve, resulting in a tightening of chest
muscles surrounding the air pathway. We used fMRI of the thoracic spinal
cord to measure somatosensory feedback related to this muscle constriction. Twelve participants completed two spinal fMRI runs in which the
lower cervical and thoracic segments of the spinal cord were measured
using a HASTE scanning sequence. Each five-minute 40-second run consisted of three 60-second blocks in which participants repeatedly generated
a disgusted facial expression or a non-emotional expression consisting of
repeated stretching of the lips (and which did not involve the nasal cavity).
Forty-second rest blocks were interleaved between each expression block.
The results demonstrated that generating emotional expressions of disgust
produces significantly more activity than producing non-emotional facial
expressions (70 vs. 37 active voxels). This activity occurred primarily in the
dorsal horn of thoracic spinal cord segments T1-5, indicating somatosensory feedback from the chest. These results suggest that facial expressions
can influence bodily responses to emotional stimuli, and demonstrate that
spinal fMRI is a useful tool for the assessment of brain-body interactions.

G36
HUMAN APPROACH-AVOIDANCE ANXIETY ACTIVATES THE ANTERIOR HIPPOCAMPUS Dominik Bach1,2, Marc Guitart Masip2, Raymond
Dolan2; 1Department of Psychiatry, University of Zurich, 2Wellcome Trust Centre
for Neuroimaging, University College London — Anxiety behaviour in animal
approach-avoidance tasks, such as the open field, elevated plus maze, and
various conflict tests, is thought to stem from hippocampal theta oscillations. Knowledge about similar mechanisms in humans is ambiguous,
mainly because no comparable test bed exists. Human experiments commonly employ social anxiety paradigms or investigate patients with generalised anxiety disorder. Here, we develop and validate a virtual computer
game for humans, drawing on ideas from approach-avoidance conflict in
a foraging environment, that approximates an open field task. By manipulating threat probability, we vary avoidance motivation and thus conflict,
and show that humans show behavioural responses similarly to animals in
classical approach-avoidance tasks. This behaviour is non-optimal and can
not fully be explained by rational game strategies. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) demonstrates activity in the anterior hippocampus
covaries with level of threat, in keeping with findings from animal models.
Further, application of the benzodiazepine lorazepame reduces some,
but not all, behaviour components sensitive to threat. Hence, we provide
a novel paradigm that furnishes an ecologically valid measure of anxiety
behaviour in humans, building on animal models and replicating the hippocampal origin of this behaviour.

216

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

G37
ABERRANT GAZE HABITUATION IN FRAGILE X SYNDROME Jennifer Bruno1, Amy Garrett1, Eve-Marie Quintin1, Allan Reiss1; 1Stanford University
— Fragile X syndrome (FXS), the most common known cause of inherited
intellectual disability, is associated with social deficits that overlap with
characteristics of autism spectrum disorder and social anxiety disorder.
Eye contact aversion, one particularly maladaptive deficit, has been linked
to atypical neural functioning in FXS. We sought to investigate the hypothesis that individuals with FXS would demonstrate atypical neural system
habituation to eye gaze. The study participants included 27 individuals
with FXS (mean age 20.93 years, SD = 2.75, 14 females) and 24 individuals frequency matched for age, gender and general intellectual functioning
(mean age 19.27 years, SD = 3.15, 12 females) without FXS. During functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) participants viewed four different faces presented repeatedly in a randomized, jittered, event related
design. Habituation was defined as decreasing activation across the imaging session, which lasted 14 minutes. Individuals with FXS demonstrated
significantly less habituation to eye gaze in regions related to face/gaze
processing including the fusiform gyrus and temporal regions as well as in
the cingulate, a region involved in emotion processing. These results may
provide important evidence regarding how the neural systems involved in
face/eye gaze processing are altered in FXS. Reduced or lack of habituation
in specific brain regions may underlie the evolution of gaze aversion and
social avoidance in FXS. Elucidation of neural patterns underlying aberrant behavior in FXS can provide biomarkers for treatment trials and distinguish FXS from autism spectrum disorder and social anxiety disorder.

G38
THE HUMAN OPIOID SYSTEM MEDIATES ATTENTION TO OTHERS’
EYES Olga Chelnokova1, Bruno Laeng1, Jeppe Riegels1, Guro Løseth1, Marie
Eikemo1, Siri Leknes1; 1Department of Psychology, University of Oslo — Of all
facial features the eyes are typically attended the most. Looking someone
in the eyes is rewarding, and facial attractiveness increases activity in the
brain’s reward circuits when gaze is direct as opposed to when it is averted.
The human brain reward system is rich in both dopamine and opioid
receptors. There is increasing evidence for opioid system involvement in
reward processing. We assessed the role of the human opioid system in a
basic social reward: looking at someone’s eyes. In this randomized double
blind cross-over study, 30 males received a μ-opioid agonist (morphine
10 mg), a non-selective opioid antagonist (naltrexone 50 mg) or placebo
(per-oral) on three separate days. Participants viewed photos of faces while
their eye movements were recorded. Facial stimuli varied in attractiveness and included photos with both direct and averted gaze. Fixation time
for selected regions of interest of female faces was analyzed in a multiple
regression analysis. Facial attractiveness affected scan patterns so that less
time was spent looking at the eyes and more at the nose-mouth region of
the least attractive females. We also observed a linear effect of the opioid
drug manipulation on looking time for the eye region, such that morphine
increased and naltrexone decreased the time spent fixating on the eyes of
females. Overall, our results illustrate the rewarding nature of looking at
eyes, and demonstrate the role of opioids in mediating attention to this
socially significant facial region.

G39
EMOTION FROM ABSTRACT ART: A PSYCHOPHYSICAL EXPLORATION OF PERCEPTION OF EMOTION Stephanie Dubal1, Marine Taffou1,
Aure-Elise Duret1, Jerome Pelletier2, Yolaine Escande3, Kenneth Knoblauch4;
1
CNRS - La Salpêtriere Hospital, 2CNRS-ENS-EHESS, 3CNRS – EHESS, 4INSERM
— How emotion is detected and perceived from artwork is a current subject of exploration. We used Signal Detection Theory to determine whether
or not naive subjects were able to detect the emotional classification proposed by an artist. Thirty pairs of Chinese characters were produced by
an artist so as to render the same Chinese sign with different emotional
expressive intensity: one with high emotional expressivity and a second
with low emotional expressivity. Twenty one participants were asked to
rate emotional intensity on a 4 point scale while viewing each calligraphy.
d’, a sensitivity measure reflecting the capacity to detect a signal from a
noisy background, was estimated from ROC curves. If the participants
categorized the stimuli according to the artist’s classification (or in direct
opposition), d’ would differ significantly from 0. Sixteen of the participants

2013 Annual Meeting
had d’ values significantly different from 0, thereby showing that they discriminated the emotional categorization of the calligraphies. Among them,
4 had a negative d’ index, i.e. they perceived the difference between the two
categories of stimuli but classified, in opposition to the artist’s classification.
d’ for the remaining 5 subjects did not differ significantly from 0 indicating
that these participants did not detect the artist’s classification. Those results
indicate a significant resemblance in the classification of calligraphies in
emotional level between a non-Chinese speaking population ignorant of
the art of calligraphy and the artist’s own classification. Some implications
of these results for the study of emotion perception relate to the perception
of movement.

G40
EFFECTS OF BETA-ADRENERGIC ANTAGONISM ON SOCIAL
INTERACTION IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS Bradley Ferguson1, Rachel Zamzow1, Emily Reznicek1, Morgan Lewis1, Shawn Christ1, Janine
Stichter1, David Beversdorf2; 1University of Missouri — Many current pharmacologic treatments for autism spectrum disorders (ASD) target psychiatric
symptoms such as agitation and repetitive and obsessive behaviors, but
few target core symptomatology such as social functioning. Individuals
with ASD report greater generalized anxiety and social anxiety relative to
those without ASD, which may contribute to difficulties in social situations.
Therefore, it may be possible to enhance sociability in ASD by pharmacologically reducing anxiety levels. A promising agent is propranolol, a
non-selective β-adrenergic receptor antagonist which has known anxiolytic
effects. Propranolol blocks the noradrenergically mediated sympathetic
response, leading to reductions in perceived stress and anxiety, which may
lead to enhanced sociability in ASD. Thus, the present study seeks to investigate the effects of propranolol on social functioning in ASD. Participants
were administered a single 40mg dose of propranolol or placebo in a double-blinded, counterbalanced manner. After a one-hour wait period, the
researcher administered the General Social Outcomes Measure (GSOM),
a semi-structured assessment of social functioning. In an initial sample of
participants from this ongoing study, a dependent samples t-test revealed
significant improvements in performance on the GSOM for the propranolol
condition relative to the placebo condition. These initial results suggest that
propranolol may provide increases in general social functioning in individuals with ASD. Subsequent work will determine whether participants
with the greatest psychophysiological markers of arousal will be the best
responders. Having this knowledge will help guide future treatments for
those with ASD.

G41
ATYPICAL RIGHTWARD LATERALIZATION OF THE CORPUS
CALLOSUM IS PRESENT IN MALES BUT NOT FEMALES WITH
AUTISM. Dorothea Floris1, Lindsay Chura1, Rosemary Holt1, John Suckling2,
Simon Baron-Cohen1, Michael Spencer1; 1Autism Research Centre, Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK, 2Department of
Psychiatry, Herchel Smith Building for Brain and Mind Sciences, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, UK — Rightward
cerebral lateralization has been suggested to be involved in the neuropathology of autism spectrum conditions. Corpus callosum volume is related
to functional brain asymmetries and might show lateralized morphology
itself. We investigated whether rightward cerebral lateralization is (a) more
common in adolescents with autism compared to their unaffected siblings
and typically developing controls, (b) correlated with clinical measures of
symptom severity, and (c) different in males and females with autism. Participants comprised adolescents with autism (males=35; females=17), their
unaffected siblings (males=12; females=28) and typical controls (males=20;
females=20) aged 12-18 years. We assessed functional asymmetry in terms
of handedness using the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory and neuroanatomical lateralization in terms of corpus callosum asymmetry through
manual tracing. Symptom severity was assessed using subdomains of
the ADI-R and ADOS-G. Male adolescents with autism showed stronger
rightward lateralization in the posterior and anterior midbody the more
left-handed they were, compared to controls. There were no significant
differences in females with autism. In both sexes, symptom severity was
related to rightward asymmetry in several subregions (splenium, isthmus,
posterior midbody and rostral body). However, the same directional associations occurred with different symptoms in the two sexes. We did not

Poster Session G
find similar results in siblings. This sex difference might account for the
established sex differences in prevalence and clinical phenotype. Future
research should focus on the meaning of handedness and corpus callosal
morphometry as a potential marker of clinical subgroups.

G42
EMOTIONAL INTENSITY MATTERS! THE DIFFERENTIAL EFFECT
OF EMBODIMENT ON THE PROCESSING OF MODERATELY VS.
STRONGLY EMOTIONAL MATERIAL. Francesco Foroni1, Jenny-Charlotte
Baumeister1, Giovanni Papa2, Raffaella I. Rumiati1; 1SISSA - Trieste, 2Azienda
Ospedaliera Cattinara - Trieste — According to the theories of embodied cognition the processing of emotional content relies on the re-experience of
that emotion (embodied simulations) that engages the same sensory-motor systems involved in the actual experience of an emotion. That is, reading of someone happy and smiling will induce a compatible spontaneous
facial expression (i.e., a smile). Blocking the possibility of simulating the
emotional content (e.g., blocking facial muscles) generally interferes with
the recognition, processing and experience of the emotional content, even
though evidence is contradicting. We speculate that contradicting results
are due to the difference in intensity of the stimulus material (moderately
vs. extremely emotional material). We advanced the novel hypothesis
that embodied simulations play a role especially in processing emotional
information that is moderate in intensity, as the simulations provide useful
cues particularly when facing less distinct and less extreme emotional
information. Patients undergoing subcutaneous cosmetic injections of Botulinum Toxin-A (Botox) took part in the experiment, rating the emotionality of moderately and extremely emotional sentences (happy and sad)
in two different sessions (one before and one after treatment). Consistent
with embodied cognition hypothesis emotional sentences were rated significantly less emotional after the treatment. However, consistent with
our hypothesis, the impairment was significantly larger when processing
extremely emotional sentences. The results indicate that embodied simulations are crucial in processing and experiencing emotional information, but
particularly for moderately emotional material possibly because of their
indistinctness. This distinction provides an important boundary condition
to the embodied theory of emotional processing.

G43
NEURAL CORRELATES OF CHOCOLATE CRAVING DURING CUE
EXPOSURE WITH RESPONSE PREVENTION (CERP) WITH CHOCOLATE Astrid Frankort1, Anne Roefs1, Nicolette Siep1, Alard Roebroeck2, Remco
Havermans1, Anita Jansen1; 1Department of Clinical Psychological Science, Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience, Maastricht University, The Netherlands,
2
Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience, Maastricht University, The Netherlands — Cue reactivity and craving
can be influenced by cue exposure with response prevention (CERP). Usually a short exposure is accompanied by an increase in craving, whereas a
longer exposure leads to an extinction of craving. CERP could be an effective treatment for overeaters. This study investigated the neural correlates
of CERP using fMRI while participants smelled chocolate (17 participants)
or a control object (17 participants). CERP was interrupted by seven scanning sequences measuring the brain response to neutral and chocolate pictures. Chocolate craving was hypothesised to be mirrored by activation in
brain reward regions. As expected, control group craving remained similar
throughout the session. A short exposure (30 min) increased chocolate craving in the experimental group, which was mirrored by significant group
differences in activation in nine regions involved in appetitive motivation.
Unexpectedly, a long exposure (60 min) did not lead to craving extinction
in the experimental group, although craving started to decrease at this
point. On a neural level however, after the long exposure, the activation
in the same nine regions seemed to have extinguished in the experimental
group participants, as activation levels returned to control group levels.
This supposed extinction of activation in brain reward regions in the experimental group was corroborated by an additional analysis. These results
indicate that brain reward activation during CERP is linked to craving,
at least for a short exposure. Regarding a longer exposure, the decline in
brain reward activation in the experimental group may be a precursor of a
decrease in craving.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

217

Poster Session G

G44
MULTI-VOXEL PATTERN ANALYSIS OF VALENCE IN DEPRESSION Isabelle Habes1, Sarah Krall2, Stephen Johnston3, Kenneth Yuen4, David
Healy1, Rainer Goebel2, Bettina Sorger2, David Linden1; 1Cardiff University, UK,
2
Maastricht University, The Netherlands, 3Brunel University, UK, 4University
Medical Centre Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany — Neuroimaging biomarkers of depression have potential to aid diagnosis, identify individuals at
risk and predict treatment response or course of illness. Nevertheless none
have been identified so far, potentially because no single brain parameter
captures the complexity of the pathophysiology of depression. Multi-voxel
pattern analysis (MVPA) may overcome this issue as it can identify patterns
of voxels that are spatially distributed across the brain. Here we present
the results of an MVPA application to investigate the neuronal patterns
underlying passive viewing of positive, negative and neutral pictures in
depressed patients. A linear support vector machine (SVM) was trained
to discriminate different valence conditions based on the functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data of nine unipolar depressed patients. A
similar dataset obtained in nine healthy individuals was included to conduct a group classification analysis via linear discriminant analysis (LDA).
Accuracy scores of 86% or higher were obtained for each valence contrast
via patterns including limbic areas such as the amygdala and frontal areas
such as the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex. These areas have previously
been associated with emotion regulation yet were not identified by a comparable univariate analysis. This demonstrates the superior sensitivity of
MVPA. The LDA identified two areas (the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex
and caudate nucleus) that allowed group classification with 72.2% accuracy. Our preliminary findings thus suggest that MVPA can identify stable
valence patterns in depressed participants and that it may be possible to
discriminate between healthy and depressed individuals based on differences in the brain’s response to emotional cues.

G45
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTOME DIFFERENCES PREDICT PREFERRED DIVISION OF RESOURCES IN HUMANS Tim Hahn1, Karolien Notebaert2, Christine Anderl1, Philipp Reicherts3, Matthias Wieser3, Juliane
Kopf3, Andreas Reif3, Sabine Windmann1; 1University of Frankfurt, 2University
of Leuven, 3University of Würzburg — Social value orientation (SVO) characterizes individual differences regarding the division of resources. It
determines behavior in economic games and real-life situations. Prosocials
maximize the sum of resources for themselves and for others, while simultaneously minimizing the difference between the two. In contrast, individualists maximize resources for themselves. Recent evidence suggests that
automatic emotional processing of unfair splits in the amygdala is essential
for behaviour in prosocials. Here, we investigate the neural bases of SVO
in prosocials and individualists. As social dispositions influence behavior
in a wide range of situations and are highly stable over the life-span, we
hypothesize to find differences between prosocials and individualists at
rest, i.e. independent of any specific task. To this end, we measured resting-state functional Blood Oxygen Level Dependent dynamics in 29 subjects (n=15 Prosocials and n=14 Individualists), calculated functional connectivity and applied a Support-Vector-Machine-based approach to predict
SVO. We show that functional whole-brain connectivity of the amygdala
during rest is predictive of SVO (accuracy=.56; p<.001). Specifically, connectivity of the amygdala with the orbitofrontal cortex (accuracy=.71;
p<.001), the right caudate (accuracy=.75; p<.001), and occipital temporal
areas (accuracy=.71-.75; p<.001) allows for the most accurate differentiation
between prosocials and individualists. In summary, we show that stable
individual differences in the preference for the division of resources are
mirrored by differences in the functional connectivity of the amygdala at
rest. This evidence supports the idea that trait-like differences of the resting-state functional connectome determine SVO and might thus be at the
heart of individual differences in human cooperation.

G46
ALL COMPETITION IS NOT ALIKE: DISSOCIATING NEURAL PROCESSES FOR RESOLVING PREPOTENT AND UNDERDETERMINED
COMPETITION Hannah Snyder1, Marie Banich2, Yuko Munakata2; 1University
of Colorado Denver, 2University of Colorado Boulder — When we speak, we
must constantly select among competing words. This competition can

218

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
occur among multiple valid response options (e.g., multiple verb associates in the verb generation task; underdetermined selection demand) or
from strongly dominant, but task-inappropriate responses (e.g., non-verbs
in the verb generation task; prepotent selection demand). Some previous
accounts propose that left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) plays a
role in both underdetermined and prepotent selection, while others propose that areas of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) are key for resolving prepotent competition. We tested these possibilities with an fMRI study
that directly contrasted underdetermined and prepotent selection demands
within the same task for the first time. Participants completed a verb generation task, in which we manipulated underdetermined competition among
multiple verb responses and competition from prepotent non-verb associates. We found that left VLPFC is sensitive to underdetermined, but not
prepotent, competition. In contrast, an area of left DLPFC is sensitive to
both underdetermined and prepotent competition. We explored possible
neural mechanisms underlying these responses in a neural network model.
These simulations suggested that competitive lateral inhibition in VLPFC is
necessary and sufficient for resolving underdetermined competition, while
resolving prepotent competition requires active maintenance of task goals
in DLPFC to bias competition in VLPFC towards task-relevant responses.
Better understanding how these processes and brain areas interact during
language production may ultimately have implications for better understanding and treating impairments associated with prefrontal damage and
psychopathology.

G47
THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND THE INTRAPARIETAL SULCUS
DISTINGUISH BETWEEN NUMBER NOTATIONS DURING TARGET
DETECTION Lisa Sprute1, Donna Coch1; 1Dartmouth College — Number
comprehension is theorized to rely on representing a number’s magnitude
and relating that magnitude to the magnitude representations of other
numbers. These magnitude representations are theorized to be abstract
and notation-independent. However, scant evidence exists concerning the
nature of representations for numbers like decimals and fractions. In order
to examine representations of fractional quantities, we measured neural
distance effects during an fMRI oddball task. Participants (N=28) identified a red numerical target presented among a black numerical standard
and red and black deviants. Overall, fractions elicited more BOLD activity than decimals in the right intraparietal sulcus and right rostrolateral
prefrontal cortex, the superior parietal lobule, the middle cingulate gyrus,
and the bilateral cerebellum. Activation in these regions was modulated
by task demands, with more activity for numbers colored like the target.
In addition, behavioral distance effects were measured on separate comparison and conversion tasks. In the comparison task, notation accounted
for the majority of variation, with fractions eliciting longer behavioral
response times and more errors than decimals. Greater fluency in processing decimals and fractions in the behavioral tasks was associated with
reduced neural distance effects in the cerebellum and middle cingulate.
Consistently, these neural and behavioral findings suggest that there are
distinct representations of decimals and fractions representing the same
magnitudes, rather than abstract, notation-independent representations of
all rational numbers.

G48
INCREASED RESPONSE VARIABILITY AS A MARKER OF EXECUTIVE DYSFUNCTION IN COMBAT VETERANS WITH POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER Diane Swick1,2, Nikki Honzel1,2, Victoria
Ashley1,2, Jary Larsen1; 1VA Northern California Health Care System, 2University
of California, Davis — Consistency in behavioral responding is required for
the efficient performance of many cognitive tasks. Often measured as trialto-trial variability in reaction time (RT), intra-individual variability indexes
the stability of executive control processes over time (West et al., 2002). A
high level of response variability has been characterized as a marker of
executive dysfunction and inhibitory inefficiency, cognitive instability,
and mental noise. Specific regions of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) have been
associated with this aspect of executive function. Previous studies in our
lab demonstrated that combat veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) showed substantial impairments in inhibitory control (Swick
et al., 2012). Here, RT variability in the Go/NoGo response inhibition task
was assessed for 34 controls and 45 PTSD patients using the intra-individ-

2013 Annual Meeting
ual coefficient of variation (Standard Deviation/mean RT). Despite having
mean RTs that were indistinguishable from controls (patients: 370 msec;
controls: 379 msec), the PTSD patients had significantly greater RT variability. More variable RTs were in turn associated with a greater number of
false alarm errors, replicating previous findings (Bellgrove et al., 2004). RT
variability was also highly correlated with self-reported symptoms of PTSD
and depression. Stuss and colleagues (2003) have suggested that an alteration in the consistency of task performance could contribute to the PFC
patients’ difficulties in everyday life. Likewise, the combination of inconsistent performance and impaired response inhibition shown by the veterans
with PTSD could have deleterious effects on daily activities requiring these
cognitive control functions, such as driving and multi-tasking (Honzel et
al., this meeting).

G49
INHIBITORY CONTROL IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS Yukari
Takarae1, Fernanda Vieira1, Iman Mohammad Rezazadeh1, Clifford Saron1;
University of California, Davis — Impairments in inhibitory control are frequently observed in autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and likely contribute
to social difficulty and reduced flexibility in affected individuals. We investigated neural correlates of inhibitory control impairments in ASD using
124-channel ERPs. Participants were 13 children with ASD and 10 typically
developing children who were 12 to 18 years old. Participants alternated
between blocks with an antisaccade (ANTI) task that required looking
away from a suddenly appearing peripheral target, and a prosaccade (PRO)
task that required looking at the peripheral target. Reaction time and saccade suppression error rates were similar between groups. The ASD group
had greater presaccadic occipitoparietal positivity time locked to the target
onset compared to the TD group during the ANTI task, but not during the
PRO task. A frontal negativity preceding the occipitoparietal activation was
also reduced in the ASD group compared to the TD group during the ANTI
task, and the amplitude of this negativity correlated with the amplitude
of the subsequent occipitoparietal positivity. Further, the amplitude of the
occipitoparietal activation was correlated with latency of correct antisaccade responses in the ASD group, with higher amplitude predicting longer
latencies. Previous studies have suggested that top-down modulation of
early stimulus-related activation is critical in implementing cognitive control over motor output, and suppressing early sensory responses leads to
successful performance during the ANTI task. Thus, the extent of sensory
activation, likely reflecting frontally mediated top-down control, appears to
influence performance during the ANTI task in the ASD group.

1

G50
IN-TASK INFLUENCES OF VALENCE AND AROUSAL ON THE ERN
AND ACTION MONITORING Jason Themanson1, Kathleen McCortney1; 1Illi-

nois Wesleyan University — The relationships between arousal, valence, and
indices of self-regulatory action monitoring were assessed for 26 healthy
young adults during a flanker task that varied levels of arousal and valence
in-task. Previous studies have largely confounded arousal and valence in
their examination of action monitoring and have concluded that the ERN
is partially determined by negative affect, without separately examining
arousal. For our study, flanker stimuli were photographs selected from
the International Affective Picture System (IAPS) that varied on ratings
of arousal (high, low) or valence (negative, positive). The error-related
negativity (ERN) and behavioral measures of response time, accuracy,
post-error slowing, and post-error accuracy were assessed for each type of
flanker stimulus. Results revealed both an arousal main effect and an interaction effect for task performance, indicating that participants responded
most accurately and fastest for negatively valenced, non-arousing stimuli
compared to other stimuli. For post-error behavior, no significant effects
were evident when controlling for overall task performance. ERN findings
showed an arousal effect, with larger ERN amplitudes for non-arousing
stimuli, but no effects for valence. Additionally, partial correlations controlling for task performance revealed relationships between the ERN
and post-error accuracy for each stimulus type, suggesting the functional
connection between neural and behavioral indices of action monitoring is
robust to different stimulus characteristics. These findings indicate that the
activation of the ERN may be more sensitive to arousal, not valence, during
task execution as the ERN was dissociable from task valence, but was modulated by levels of task arousal.

Poster Session G

G51
DISSOCIABLE NEURAL MECHANISMS MEDIATE PROACTIVE
CONTROL OVER EMOTIONAL VS. NON-EMOTIONAL CONFLICT
Maryem Torres-Quesada1, Franziska M. Korb2, Maria Jesús Funes1, Juan
Lupiáñez1, Tobias Egner2; 1Universidad de Granada, 2Duke University — Recent
models of cognitive control distinguish between reactive and proactive
mechanisms (Braver et al., 2007). Reactive control can be observed via trialby-trial performance adjustments in reaction to conflict (“Conflict Adaptation” [CA] effects: less interference following incongruent trials); and
proactive control can be seen in strategic adjustments to the frequency of
congruent relative to incongruent stimuli over longer sequences of trials
(“Proportion Congruent” [PC] effects: less interference when incongruent
trials are frequent). The neural correlates of CA effects have been extensively investigated and much evidence points to a distinction between circuits involved in resolving cognitive (non-emotional) conflict from those
that resolve emotional conflict (e.g., Egner et al., 2008; Maier & Di Pellegrino,
2012). By contrast, the study of PC effects’ neural correlates has received
relatively little attention and it is presently unknown whether there are
dissociable neural mechanisms underpinning proactive emotional vs.
non-emotional conflict-control processes. We addressed this question in an
fMRI study where we manipulated the proportion of congruency in emotional vs. non-emotional conflict tasks. Reliable behavioral PC effects were
observed for both the non-emotional and emotional domains. At the neural
level, we found general (domain-independent) conflict-related activations
in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and pre-supplementary motor area.
More importantly, we also found clear evidence for domain-specific neural
mediators of PC effects; in particular that the dorsal striatum and anterior
insula were exclusively involved in tracking proactive control effects in the
emotional domain. These data supply the first evidence for partly dissociable neural substrates of proactive control over emotional conflict.

G52
MEASURING INHIBITION BY LOCKING EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS TO UNEXECUTED RESPONSES: ESTIMATING KNOWN
UNKNOWNS USING KNOWN KNOWNS IN THE BRAIN Avinash R.
Vaidya1, Eldad Yitzhak Hochman1, Linda Q. Yu1, Lesley K. Fellows1; 1McGill
University — Functional activity in the brain is commonly measured by
averaging recordings around a discrete external event. This allows for sampling how the brain prepares for, and reacts to stimulation (i.e. the sound
of music), or behavior (i.e. playing a note on a piano). However, in the
case of response inhibition, a behavior may be coded, but never executed
due to a rapid suppression of motor output. As a result, no overt, or electromyographic indicator may be left of the coded response, complicating
measurement of the inhibition itself, as there may be no discrete external
event to lock brain activity to. To address this problem, we have designed
a new method for locking electroencephalographic (EEG) data to estimated
lateralized readiness potentials (LRPs) in the cortex. This method uses accumulated evidence about the latency and amplitude of LRPs on trials where
responses were executed, and evidence about noise peaks, to build a Bayesian classifier that can accurately identify probable LRPs in single-trial EEG
data. This estimation technique allows us to examine the endogenously
signaled inhibition of a motor command through event-related potentials
(ERPs) directly locked to the probable LRPs of unexecuted, unwanted,
responses in an Eriksen flanker task. We found that both executed and
unexecuted unwanted responses elicit similar frontocentral negativities
shortly after the LRP peaks. We suggest that these frontocentral potentials
could reflect a common process responsible for signaling the inhibition of
an unwanted response tendency.

G53
INCENTIVE EFFECTS IN EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING ASSESSMENTS: DOES EFFORT CONFOUND MEASUREMENT OF SKILL?
Amar Hamoudi1, Margaret Sheridan2; 1Duke University, 2Children’s Hospital
Boston — Several previous studies have demonstrated a negative association between executive functioning and exposure to childhood adversity, commonly supposed to be the result of the effect of early experience
on cognitive function. However no study has examined how motivation,
known to differ by adversity exposure, contributes to differences in executive function. Here we evaluate whether assessment of executive function

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

219

Poster Session G
may be confounded by individual motivation to exert effort. We developed
task-based assessments for use on tablet PCs to measure these skills in a
representative sample of children aged 7-12 being seen for well-child visits
at a primary health clinic. Each child performed an inhibitory control task
(Simon Task) and a working memory task (spatial delayed match to sample
task; SWM). Motivation was manipulated by assigning a randomly selected
half of children to be told that they would win a prize (an age-appropriate toy worth $10) if they performed sufficiently well. Children in the control group were told they would be rewarded with a sticker regardless of
performance. Children in the incentivized condition had longer response
times and improved accuracy in the SWM task and faster reaction times but
decreased accuracy on the Simon task compared to controls. It is apparent
from these findings that incentivizing performance affects speed-accuracy
tradeoffs, suggesting that standard executive functioning assessments may
be confounded by individual characteristics like motivation and that these,
instead of (or in addition to) stable individual characteristics, could account
for group differences in performance.

G54
EXAMINING THE STRUCTURAL UNDERPINNINGS OF EXECUTIVE CONTROL PROCESSES Jason Hubbard1, Ulrich Mayr1; 1University
of Oregon — In psychometric work, working memory and task-switching
ability emerge as two dissociable individual differences constructs. However, potential neuroanatomical underpinnings of this behavioral-level dissociation have received little attention, and are primarily examined from a
pathological perspective (e.g., G. Sánchez-Benavides et al., 2010; Hartberg
et al., 2011). The present study sought to determine the structural brain
characteristics responsible for individual differences in executive processes
in healthy adults. We assessed cortical thickness, surface area, and white
matter volume in normal adults, along with measures of task-switching and
visual working memory. Each of the two ability constructs were assessed
reliably, but––in line with previous work––were not related to each other.
We hypothesized that this behavioral dissociation would be mirrored in the
brain anatomy, and each behavioral measure would correlate with distinct
components of brain structure. In line with these predictions, we found
moderate correlations between our behavioral measures and brain structure in regions consistent with previous fMRI research. Furthermore, each
task correlated with distinct aspects of brain structure in a non-overlapping
fashion. Working memory exhibited consistent positive correlations with
cortical thickness, primarily in prefrontal and medial regions (e.g., DLPFC).
Switch costs, by contrast, were associated with cortical surface area in parietal and premotor areas (e.g., precuneus), and the white matter volume
underlying those regions. Consistent with previous findings showing clinical and ontogenetic dissociations between cortical thickness and surface
area (e.g., Rakic et al., 2007; Rosas et al., 2002), these structural parameters
appear to underlie these dissociable functions of executive control.

G55
A COMBINED ALZHEIMER’S RISK GENOTYPE ADDITIVELY
AFFECTS MEDIAL TEMPORAL ACTIVITY DURING EXECUTIVE
ATTENTION IN YOUNG ADULTS Jessica L. Ihne1, Megna P. Raksit1, Jeremy
R. Gray2, Colin G. DeYoung3, Robert Padilla4, Timothy R. Mhyre4, G. William
Rebeck4, Adam E. Green1; 1Georgetown University, 2Yale University, 3University
of Minnesota, 4Georgetown University Medical Center — A recent history of
failed clinical trials suggests that waiting until even the early stages of onset
of Alzheimer’s disease may be too late for effective treatment, pointing to
the importance of early intervention in young people. Early intervention
will require markers of Alzheimer’s risk that track with genotype but are
capable of responding to treatment. Here, we sought to develop a novel
neurocognitive marker for Alzheimer’s risk in young people using a task of
executive attention during functional MRI in a sample of 160 participants
genotyped for two Alzheimer’s risk alleles: APOE-ε4 and CLU-C. Executive
attention is a sensitive indicator of the progression of Alzheimer’s even in
the early stages of mild cognitive impairment, but has not yet been investigated as a marker of Alzheimer’s risk in young adults. Functional MRI
revealed that both APOE-ε4 and CLU-C were associated with decreased
neural activity during executive attention. Possession of CLU-C augmented
the effect of APOE-ε4 in parahippocampal gyrus, a brain area affected
early in Alzheimer’s pathogenesis. Behavioral performance also differed

220

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
by APOE-ε4 status, indicating that executive attention may be a sensitive
marker of the effects of Alzheimer’s risk alleles on neurocognitive function
in young people.

G56
GREATER DEFICITS OF COMPLEX ACTION PLANNING WITH
EVERYDAY OBJECTS IN PATIENTS WITH ANTERIOR COMPARED
TO POSTERIOR LEFT BRAIN DAMAGE Arianne Johnson1, Laurel Buxbaum2, Scott Grafton1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara, 2Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute — The present study assessed whether patients
with left frontal lobe damage make qualitatively different types of sequential planning errors with everyday objects than patients with left parietal
lobe damage. Seven subjects with left parietal brain damage (POST) and
6 subjects with left frontal brain damage (ANT) completed a computerized grocery bagging task on a touchscreen that required bagging 6 items
according to object properties (weight, temperature, fragility). There were
3 conditions: nesting, parse-hard, and parse-easy. The nesting condition
required separating cold items from non-cold items while ordering the cold
items according to weight, the parse-hard condition required keeping three
item properties in mind and greater look-ahead planning, while the parseeasy condition required keeping two item properties in mind. Both groups
showed increased errors in the nesting and parse-hard conditions relative
to the parse-easy condition. Overall mean percent error was similar for both
groups: 21.7% for POST and 21.5% for ANT. However, the ANT and POST
groups showed significant differences in the proportion of types of errors
made. Specifically, on average, 36% of errors made in the ANT group were
in the parse-hard condition, whereas the POST group made an average of
only 15% errors in this condition. Both groups had a similar proportion
of errors in the other two conditions. Thus, while overall performance on
a sequential planning task may be similar in patients with anterior and
posterior brain damage, anterior damage may result in particularly higher
proportion of errors in trials involving increased number of item properties
and look-ahead.

G57
FRONTOPARIETAL ACTIVATION DURING PROCESSING OF GUILTY
KNOWLEDGE: A CORTICAL SOURCE LOCALIZATION STUDY Eun
Kyung Jung1, Young Youn Kim1; 1Kyonggi University — Standardized low-resolution electromagnetic tomography (sLORETA) analysis was applied to
localize cortical source during guilty knowledge processing. Guilty group
(n=15) and innocent group (n=15) performed a guilty or an innocent scenario. P300-based guilty knowledge test (GKT) with 64 channels electroencephalogram (EEG) was used to test the participants’ memory about the
mock crime scenario they experienced. During the EEG recording, target
(task-relevant), probe (crime-relevant), and irrelevant sentences were presented on a computer screen. Each sentence had a ‘subject-object-verb’ or
an ‘object-complement-verb’ structure, and each sentence element was
presented separately. It was hypothesized that a guilty participant would
respond to probe, a crime-relevant stimulus, as to target, which was a
task-relevant stimulus. It was also hypothesized that the verb of a probe
sentence would elicit distinct cortical activation compared to the verb
of a target or an irrelevant sentence. As a result, P300 amplitude evoked
by probe stimulus was larger than irrelevant in the bilateral frontoparietal region in the guilty group. In addition, sLORETA analysis for probe
found significant activation increases in frontal and parietal region in the
guilty group compared to the innocent group: the guilty group had parietal maximum for the complement and the object element of a probe sentence, and had frontal maximum for verb elements of the probe sentence.
In summary, the frontal source activity for verb elements seems to reflect a
working memory process, episodic memory retrieval, and response inhibition, while parietal activation for complement and object elements seems to
reflect selective attention and target discrimination.

G58
REGIONAL BRAIN FDG PET IN ADULT SURVIVORS OF CHILDHOOD CANCER TREATED WITH CRANIAL RADIATION Kevin Krull1,
Satoshi Minoshima2, Tara Brinkman1, Michelle Edelmann1, Leslie Robison1,
Melissa Hudson1, Barry Shulkin1; 1St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, 2University of Washington — The goal of this study was to examine associations
between regional brain metabolism, as measured by positron emission

2013 Annual Meeting
tomography with fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG-PET), and neurocognitive
outcomes in adult survivors of childhood cancer treated with cranial radiation. Fifty-six adult survivors of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) or
medulloblastoma (MB) were randomly selected from a large cohort treated
with cranial radiation (19 ALL survivors treated with 18 Gy, 19 ALL survivors treated with 24 Gy and 18 MB survivors treated with 35Gy whole
brain radiation). At a mean age of 27.3 years, and 21.9 years since diagnosis, patients underwent comprehensive neurocognitive evaluations and
brain FDG-PET imaging in a resting condition. Predefined regions-of-interest analysis and voxel-based correlation analysis between brain activity
and neurocognitive scores were performed. Compared to national norms,
survivors demonstrated lower performance in multiple cognitive domains,
including verbal intelligence (p<0.001), focused attention (p=0.006), working memory (p<0.001), verbal fluency (p=0.02) and cognitive flexibility
(p<0.001). MB survivors had lower metabolic activity in parietal cortex and
cerebellum, but higher metabolic activity in basal ganglia and thalami. Metabolic activity was positively correlated with verbal intelligence (rho=0.37,
p=0.02) and working memory (rho=0.38, p=0.02) in temporal brain regions,
and negativity correlated with cognitive flexibility (rho=-0.45, p=0.005)
and activity in the thalami was associated with verbal fluency (rho=-0.43,
p=0.008). Results suggest adult long-term survivors of childhood cancer
treated with cranial radiation are at risk for neurocognitive impairment,
which appears associated with increased activity in subcortical regions,
possibly due to decreased regulatory input from cortical structures.

G59
SPATIAL ATTENTION PLAYS NO FUNCTIONAL ROLE IN COLOR
WORKING MEMORY MAINTENANCE: AN ERP STUDY Motoyuki
Sanada1, Koki Ikeda1, Toshikazu Hasegawa1; 1The University of Tokyo — Previous research has indicated that spatial attention plays an important role
to retain spatial working memory (Awh et al., 1998; 2000), whereas it may
not be necessary for the maintenance of feature-based working memory
(Wheeler & Treisman, 2002). There has been, however, little evidence
supporting the latter argument. To test this, we investigated early visual
attention in color working memory, utilizing P1/ N1 event related potential (ERP) components. It is well known that stimuli presented in spatially
attended locations enlarge P1/ N1 amplitudes as compared to those unattended (Mangun et al., 1993). We presented probes (white dots) during the
retention interval of a color working memory task and examined P1/ N1
elicited by the probes. If spatial attention is necessary for color working
memory maintenance, a larger P1/ N1 effect should be observed for probes
presented in the same locations as to-be-remembered targets. Our results
suggested that this is not the case, indicating that spatial attention plays no
functional role in color working memory maintenance.

G60
WORKING MEMORY TRAINING EXERTS STRONGER EFFECTS ON
RISK AVERSION THAN STIMULATION OF PREFRONTAL CORTEX.
B. Sarbone1, P.M. Greenwood1, J. Smelser1, R. Parasuraman1; 1George Mason
University — A critical component of decision-making is the ability to assess
risk, especially when consequences might be dire. Lesion and imaging data
indicate that dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) plays an important role
in risk assessment. People become risk averse following transcranial direct
current stimulation (tDCS) of dlPFC in the Balloon Analog Risk Task (BART,
Fecteau et al., 2009). However, dlPFC also has a role in control processes of
working memory (WM). We hypothesized that risk assessment depends on
WM, and predicted that WM training would exert effects similar to tDCS
on the BART. We directly compared effects of WM training with effects of
PFC tDCS. Participants were paid per balloon “pump,” but lost it all if the
balloon popped. We predicted PFC tDCS would heighten memory of experiences with previous balloons. Healthy young participants were randomly
assigned to one of 3 conditions, each with 30 min “Training” followed by 30
min of BART with tDCS: 1. Sham (easy) WM training followed by 2mA PFC
tDCS; 2. Adaptive (difficult) WM training followed by Sham PFC (.01mA)
tDCS; or 3. Sham WM training followed by 2mA M1 tDCS (motor control).
Risk aversion was measured in the number of pumps to 120 virtual balloons. The greatest increase in risk aversion (decreased number of pumps
over trials) was seen following the adaptive WM training condition. The
weakest effect was seen following M1 stimulation. These results indicate
that better WM is associated with greater risk aversion, presumably due to
more accurate memory for previous relevant events.

Poster Session G

G61
DOES CHEMOTHERAPY ALTER VISUOSPATIAL WORKING
MEMORY? AN FMRI STUDY. Carole Scherling1,2, Barbara Collins2,3,
Joyce MacKenzie3, Rocio Lopez2, Andra Smith2; 1University of California, San
Francisco, SF (CA), USA, 2University of Ottawa, Ottawa (ON), Canada, 3Ottawa
Hospital, Ottawa (ON), Canada — Working memory is a commonly reported
impairment manifesting after chemotherapy-treatment in cancer patients.
In particular, visuospatial memory is important in everyday functioning
and has not yet been studied in this population. Breast cancer patients and
individually-matched non-cancer controls were scanned prior to- and afterchemotherapy (time 1 and time 2) during a visuospatial working memory
N-back task. Task error rates and reaction times, as well as neuropsychological tests, hospital records, and salivary biomarkers were also examined.
Patients show increased activity in the right insula compared to controls,
along with slower reaction times. This activation pattern is modulated
by covariates such as depression and anxiety scores, as well as task reaction times. At time 2, patients increasingly activate right frontal and left
parietal/temporal gyri while controls show increased activity in bilateral
frontal, bilateral parietal and right temporal. Regression analyses reveal an
opposite relationship between brain activity and reaction time, with controls revealing decreased activity with longer reaction times and patients
showing increased activity with slower responses. Additionally, patients
reveal increased brain activations with larger depression scores and with
longer time post-surgery. Results indicate that there are post-treatment
effects that may not be apparent when simply investigating performance
markers such as error rates and reaction times. Patients consistently reveal
increased neural activity compared to controls which may help explain
cognitive fatigue and memory complaints often expressed as a concern in
this chemotherapy-treated population.

G62
VISUAL SHORT TERM AND WORKING MEMORY ARE BEHAVIORALLY AND NEURALLY SEPARABLE Alexander Schlegel1, Peter J. Kohler1,
Sergey Fogelson1, Peter Tse1; 1Dartmouth College — Ask a bonobo what you
get when you cross an elephant with a rhino and he likely won’t have the
slightest clue. But if you ask me, I can vividly imagine an elephino with
two tusks and horns charging through the savanna. Humans have evolved
robust machinery for synthesizing new concepts that we can use for a range
of pursuits including art and science. However, we know little about the
neural basis of this machinery. Here we use functional magnetic resonance
imaging to investigate visual working memory, defined as the manipulation of the contents of visual short term memory. We developed a set of
abstract parts that could be assembled into 2x2 arrays to generate figures
of varying complexity. Subjects performed two types of tasks: they either
held stimuli in short term memory for later recall or mentally manipulated
stimuli using working memory. Behaviorally, performance among the
tasks was only partially correlated, suggesting that they rely on different
neural machinery. This was supported by our neuroimaging data: a univariate analysis revealed a network of 11 cortical and subcortical brain regions
with differing activity between short term and working memory tasks.
Multivariate pattern classification within these regions revealed a subset
of mainly fronto-parietal areas whose informational structure could distinguish between different working memory tasks. Functional connectivity
between these regions differed across the tasks as well. Thus, a multi-region
network of areas dominated by fronto-parietal connections underlies visual
working memory.

G63
CAN REPEATED TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION CONTINUE TO IMPROVE WORKING MEMORY PERFORMANCE? Lotte J. Talsma1, Heleen A. Slagter1; 1University of Amsterdam, The

Netherlands. — Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) is a new,
promising method to non-invasively and painlessly modify neuronal activity and thereby alter cognitive functioning in the working brain. For example, several studies have shown that anodal tDCS (atDCS) applied over the
left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (lDLPFC) can improve working memory
(WM) performance. Although promising, recent studies have only looked
at the effects of one single stimulation session on WM. To see if we can continue to improve WM functioning with repeated stimulation, we examined

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

221

Poster Session G
the effects of multiple session atDCS on WM performance. Healthy adult
participants received three sessions (on consecutive days) with either active
(1 mA, 20 min) or sham (1 mA, 1 min) anodal stimulation over the lDLPFC,
while simultaneously performing a visual letter N-back task. We explored
the effects of repeated atDCS on WM performance by comparing groups
before, during and after stimulation at each session. Additionally, in separate pre- and post sessions, we also administered a spatial N-back task and
an Operation Span task. This allowed us to investigate possible transfer of
effects to different tasks of WM, as well as explore whether stimulation-induced changes in WM may be retained after on-line effects of stimulation
have washed out (48 hrs after stimulation). Initial findings showed continuous improvements in WM performance with repeated atDCS, providing
preliminary evidence that tDCS may improve cognitive functioning in a
cumulative manner. Results of this study may shed further light on the
possibilities to use atDCS as method to effectively enhance cognitive functioning.

G64
WORKING MEMORY IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE UNDER DISTRACTION: THE ROLE OF THE BASAL GANGLIA ACROSS VERBAL
AND SPATIAL DOMAINS Mitchell G. Uitvlugt1, Susan M. Ravizza1; 1Michigan State University — Distractions are ubiquitous; our brains receive a
plethora of task-irrelevant information. Thus, to remember successfully,
one must actively maintain relevant information and prevent distracting
information from entering working memory (WM) (Vogel et al., 2005).
Some researchers suggest the basal ganglia-prefrontal pathways are vital
to this process; the basal ganglia may act as a gatekeeper of WM—allowing in relevant information and excluding distracters (McNab & Klingberg,
2008). The present study aims to better understand the cognitive and neural
mechanisms of this process by using Parkinson’s disease (PD) as a model of
frontostriatal functioning. Medication status was manipulated to assess the
contribution of “Go” and “NoGo” pathways on WM tasks with and without distraction. Given that dopaminergic medication is believed to increase
functioning of the “Go” pathway over the “NoGo” pathway, we predicted
that patients tested on medication would be more susceptible to distraction
than those tested off medication. Moreover, as a domain-general process,
this should occur regardless of the type of information maintained—verbal
or spatial. PD patients and age-matched controls were given a verbal and
a spatial WM task consisting of three conditions: low-load with no distraction; low-load with distraction; and high-load with no distraction. Patients
were tested both on and off dopaminergic medication with the order counterbalanced. Results supported the hypothesized pattern across verbal and
spatial domains, in which PD patients off medication handled distraction
better than on medication. This evidence provides strong support for a
model in which frontostriatal pathways gate information into WM, regardless of domain.

G65
HOME LITERACY EXPOSURE MITIGATES THE EFFECT OF FAMILY
HISTORY OF DYSLEXIA REFLECTED IN THE EEG MISMATCH NEGATIVITY RESPONSE Sara D. Beach1, Elizabeth S. Norton1, Ola Ozernov-Palchik2, Candice M. Coulter1, Abigail B. Cyr1, Nadine Gaab2, John D.E. Gabrieli1;
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Boston Children’s Hospital — Developmental dyslexia (DD) is characterized by difficulty learning to read
despite adequate reading instruction. Recent work has focused on identifying genetic, early behavioral, and neural risk factors for DD. Individuals
with DD, as well as infants with a family history of DD, show attenuated
EEG mismatch negativity (MMN), an automatic, pre-attentive response to
deviant auditory stimuli. However, it is not known whether environmental
factors such as language and literacy exposure (LLE) may affect the MMN
in young children. Here, we examined how home LLE relates to the MMN
signal in kindergarten children with or without a familial risk for DD, and
what role socio-economic status (SES) plays within this relationship. We
examined 73 pre-k and kindergarten children with and without a familial
risk for DD (FHD+/FHD-) using 64-channel EEG while children listened to
syllables “ba” and “da” (90% standards/10% deviants). Parents completed
SES and home literacy/language questionnaires. Results indicate that in the
whole sample, LLE, particularly weekly hours spent reading to the child,
was significantly correlated with a stronger MMN response. An ANOVA
with MMN amplitude over frontal electrode sites as the dependent variable

1

222

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
revealed an interaction effect: LLE did not affect MMN amplitude in FHDchildren, but FHD+ children who had greater LLE had a stronger MMN
relative to children with less LLE. SES measures of parental education and
occupation were not related to the MMN. These results suggest that home
literacy behaviors may be a protective factor for children at familial risk of
reading difficulty.

G66
BUILDING A BETTER MODEL OF WHITE MATTER CHANGES IN
AGING: THE MYELODEGENERATIVE HYPOTHESIS AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING Simon W Davis1, Kaustuv Joshi1, Lorraine K Tyler1,
CamCAN; 1University of Cambridge — Proponents of the myelodegenerative
hypothesis of aging claim that age-related changes in white matter (WM)
are driven by changes in the neuroglia supporting the formation of myelin,
and that this degeneration has negative consequences for cognition. This
claim is largely based upon studies using diffusion-weighted imaging
(DWI) metrics such as radial diffusivity (RD), which measures the diffusion
of water and should increase as myelin degrades. However, this inference
is poor because RD reflects only one aspect of myelin’s imaging profile.
This analysis addressed this problem by comparing RD to the magnetization transfer ratio (MTR), which measures the myelin-bound proton pool,
and represents information normally invisible to conventional MRI or DWI.
Therefore, if MTR and RD capture the same underlying physiological characteristic they should show similar morphology and similar consequences
for cognition. MTR, DWI, and behavioral performance in an array of cognitive measures were collected from a population-representative sample of
adults (aged 20-85). We found a high degree of voxelwise similarity (r >
0.6) between MTR and RD images across 44 of 48 WM regions. Furthermore, MTR/RD measures in similar regions mediated age-related declines
in cognitive performance. Both MTR and RD in anterior callosum mediated
declines in fluid intelligence, while MTR/RD in posterior temporal regions
mediated declines in semantic comprehension, face matching, and famous
face recognition. Taken together these results support the idea that RD and
MTR measure the same underlying physiological characteristic, and provide convergent evidence that age-related declines in WM health reflect a
myelodegenerative pattern with important cognitive consequences.

G67
DIFFUSION TENSOR IMAGING (DTI) OF CEREBRAL WHITE
MATTER INTEGRITY: GLOBAL VERSUS TRACT-SPECIFIC EFFECTS
AND MEDIATION OF AGE-RELATED SLOWING Micah A. Johnson1,
Michele T. Diaz1, David J. Madden1; 1Duke University Medical Center —
Although both global (brain-general) and regional (tract-specific) variations
in cerebral white matter properties have been well documented, research to
date has not fully defined their relative contribution or their mediational
roles in age-related differences in cognition. Towards these goals, we used
DTI to collect four measures of white matter: fractional anisotropy (FA),
and axial, radial and mean diffusivities (AD, RD, MD) within eight tracts
(bilateral superior longitudinal fasciculi [SLF], corticospinal tracts [CST],
optic radiations [OR], plus the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum)
from 125 participants 18-85 years of age. To assess global versus specific
effects, we submitted each DTI measure to principal component analysis (PCA), using the individual tracts as dependent variables. The results
yielded two significant components for FA: the first comprised high loadings from the SLF and CST tracts, and the second comprised high loadings
from the genu, splenium, and OR tracts. However, variation in AD, RD,
and MD was primarily global and yielded a single-component solution in
each case. Further analyses suggested that individual differences in these
components of the DTI measures do not have a mediational role in the relation between adult age and elementary perceptual speed (digit symbol substitution). However, age was a significant mediator of the relation between
the second FA component and perceptual speed. These data suggest that a
slowing of perceptual speed is associated with decreasing FA in the genu,
splenium, and ORs because the speed-FA relation in these tracts is particularly pronounced for older adults.

G68
GROWTH IN READING SKILLS MEASURED WITH BRAIN ACTIVATION DURING PHONOLOGICAL FMRI TASKS IN CHILDREN WITH
DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA Emily Farris1, Timothy Odegard2, Jeremiah

2013 Annual Meeting

Ring3, Jeff Black3, Reid Lyon2; 1University of California San Francisco, 2University of Texas at Dallas, 3Texas Scottish Rite Hospital for Children — Children
with developmental dyslexia exhibit deficits in a wide variety of reading
skills that are attributable to underlying deficits in phonological processing. Functional neuroimaging studies show that these children exhibit differences in the activation of a distributed network of brain regions during
reading tasks when compared to children without reading impairments.
Furthermore, research has shown that activation of a distributed network
of brain regions during reading tasks can be used to predict changes in children’s reading skills over time. The present study extends this research to
a sample of children who completed a multisensory reading intervention.
Specifically, the present study predicts children with dyslexia’s growth in
word reading and reading comprehension following a 2-year multisensory
intervention through analyses of activation during two functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) tasks completed prior to the intervention.
One task required the child to match phonemes and graphemes and the
other task required the child to indicate if pictures representing real words
rhymed. Analyses suggested that the children with dyslexia exhibited significant growth in their reading skills. Brain activation across both tasks
was associated with growth in reading skills throughout the intervention.
A general pattern emerged from the fMRI analyses such that negative correlations with growth in reading were more likely to occur in occipito-temporal regions and positive correlations with growth in reading were more
likely to occur in prefrontal regions. These analyses help to further identify
pre-intervention factors that may facilitate reading skill improvements in
children with developmental dyslexia.

G69
FUNCTIONAL AND BEHAVIORAL AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN
PHONOLOGICAL AND SEMANTIC PROCESSES UNDER DISTRACTING CONDITIONS Michele T. Diaz1, Micah A. Johnson1, Anthony Pecoraro1, Deborah M. Burke2, David J. Madden1; 1Duke University Medical Center,
Pomona College — At the behavioral level, the pattern of age-related differences within the domain of language is marked by both retention (e.g.,
semantic processing) and decline (e.g., phonological processing), although
the neurobiological basis of this pattern is not clear. Previously, we have
shown that an age-related decline occurs in phonological but not semantic retrieval efficiency, and that phonological and semantic retrieval are
associated with distinct patterns of neural activation. Further, individual
differences in phonological activation accounted for a substantial portion
of age-related variance in phonological retrieval. In the present study we
examined phonological and semantic processes in the presence of task-irrelevant information. Previous studies have reported age-related decline
in the ability to ignore task-irrelevant information, but how this interacts
with language processes is unclear. In the present study, older and younger
adults made semantic and phonological decisions about pictures in the
presence of either semantically-related or phonologically-related words
that were unrelated to the decision. Behaviorally, there was a main effect
of age (older > younger) and a main effect of condition (phonological >
semantic). Additionally, older adults elicited less activation than younger
adults for the phonological task, but not for the semantic task. Response
times from the current experiment were slightly faster overall than our previous experiment. These findings support greater age-related differences in
the neurobiological bases of phonological processes compared to semantic
processes and suggest that older and younger adults respond to task-irrelevant information similarly.
2

G70
MISMATCH NEGATIVITY TO LANGUAGE OF ADOPTION AND
LANGUAGE OF ENVIRONMENT SPEECH-SOUNDS IN CHILDREN
WHO ARE INTERNATIONALLY ADOPTED Reem Khamis-Dakwar1, Kathleen Scott2; 1Adelphi University, 2Hofstra University — Interest in the language acquisition of children who are internationally adopted (CWIA) has
increased greatly over the last several years due to the increase in the numbers of children who are adopted from foreign countries into the US (U.S.
Department of State, 2011). Despite rapid language acquisition in the early
years postadoption, children who are internationally adopted (CWIA)
appear to present with language difficulties when they reach the schoolage years (Scott, Roberts, & Glennen, 2011, Beverly, McGuinness, & Blanton, 2008). To evaluate whether later language difficulties can be related

Poster Session G
to differences in phonemic system organization, we investigated auditory
MMN responses from three CWIA (3 -5 years old) adopted from China
and exposed to LE for at least 2 years, and one non- adopted monolingual
English speaking child. The participants’ selection enables control for the
effect of age of adoption and time in US on children’s’ MMN responses in
comparison to the control. Participant 1 shared age of adoption (8 month)
with participant 2, while sharing time spent in US (exposure to English)
with participant 3. Words were presented in randomized order in passive
listening oddball paradigms in three conditions. Chinese only, English only
phonemic contrast, and phonemic contrast evident in both languages. The
MMNs to different speech contrast deviants were elicited within an auditory oddball paradigm and recorded by a 32-channel. Differences in MMN
presence, latency and amplitude reveal differences in the phonological representations in CWIA children, depending on time of adoption in interaction with amount of exposure to LE.

G71
TONE-EVOKED BRAIN RHYTHMS IN INFANTS Gabriella

Musacchia1,
Naseem Choudhury1,2, April Benasich1; 1Rutgers University, 2Ramopo College
— Learning to speak and understand language is a complex and challenging task, requiring representation of rapid (e.g. formant transitions) and
also slowly-changing (e.g. segmental and prosodic) acoustic features. In
order to understand the developmental mechanisms of auditory processing over several temporal scales, we recorded infant EEG brain responses
to repeated tone pairs of different rates as well as during a stimulus-free
epoch. Typically developing infants were fitted with a 128-electrode net
while seated in the parent’s lap and silently entertained. Tone pairs (800
Hz, 70ms duration for each tone) in two rate conditions (70 or 300ms ISI)
were presented in free-field. Stimulus onset asynchrony between pairs
was 915 or 1140ms, respectively. The event-related spectra of individual
ERPs were averaged after visual inspection and artifact removal, (EEGLAB,
ERPLAB). Co-registered, age-appropriate MRIs were used to model a
two-dipole source solution for each individual and for the grand average
ERP (BESA, Inc.). This model localized left and right auditory centers. Preliminary results show differential processing for left and right dipole activity for the control rate and decreased hemispheric differences during rapid
presentation. A hierarchy of theta, beta and gamma oscillations in discrete
frequency bands was also observed in both conditions, with rapid tone presentation increasing the time course and power of theta oscillations. Activity in the gamma frequency band was preserved across conditions. These
data indicate differential tone processing in left and right auditory areas
and suggests how developing brain mechanisms may encode auditory
changes over different temporal scales.

G72
RAPID AUTOMATIZED NAMING SKILL IS ASSOCIATED WITH
BRAIN ACTIVATION FOR ORTHOGRAPHIC PROCESSING IN KINDERGARTEN CHILDREN Elizabeth S. Norton1, Sara D. Beach1, Ola Ozernov-Palchik2, Abigail B. Cyr1, Nadine Gaab2, John D. E. Gabrieli1,3; 1Massachustetts Institute of Technology, 2Laboratories of Cognitive Neuroscience, Boston
Children’s Hospital, 3Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology
— Individuals with developmental dyslexia (DD) show reduced brain activation in left-hemispheric regions such as the occipito-temporal and temporo-parietal areas. It has been suggested that these deficits predate reading onset and correlate with pre-reading skills. Rapid automatized naming
(RAN), a pre-reading skill, is correlated with word reading ability and difficulty with RAN is thought to be a core deficit in many individuals with DD.
RAN skill may represent the efficiency of visual, linguistic, and executive
functioning systems which also underlie reading. Here, we investigated
whether performance on RAN is associated with orthographic processing
within the reading network in pre-k and kindergarten children. Sixty-four
children (age 4;10-6;2) completed behavioral assessments and functional
MRI (fMRI). During fMRI, children completed a one-back task using letters
and false-font letters. A whole-brain correlation was conducted between
the mean standard score for RAN objects and colors and activation for letters >false fonts. Furthermore, a region-of-interest (ROI) analysis was performed using literature defined, independent ROIs which have been shown
to differentiate proficient from struggling readers. Whole-brain analysis
revealed that RAN scores significantly correlated with activation in left
temporo-parietal cortex (p<.001, cluster-level corrected). Furthermore, the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

223

Poster Session G
mean RAN standard score was significantly correlated with activation in
the literature-defined left temporo-parietal ROI (r=.51, p<.001), whereas
performance on RAN and activation within the left fusiform gyrus was
not related. Multiple regression revealed that RAN accounts for significant
unique variance in ROI activation. These findings suggest that RAN may
contribute to the development of orthographic processing within left temporo-parietal cortex in beginning readers.

G73
THE HUMAN BRAIN PROCESSES SYNTAX IN THE ABSENCE OF
CONSCIOUS AWARENESS Laura Batterink1, Helen Neville1; 1University

of Oregon — Syntax is the core computational component of language.
A longstanding idea about syntactic processing is that it is generally not
available to conscious access, operating autonomously and automatically.
However, there is little direct neurocognitive evidence on this issue. Using
event-related brain potentials and a novel cross-modal distraction task, we
demonstrated that syntactic violations that were not consciously detected
nonetheless produced a characteristic early neural response pattern, and
also significantly delayed reaction times to a concurrent task. This early
neural response was distinct from later neural activity that was observed
only to syntactic violations that were consciously detected. These findings
provide direct evidence that the human brain reacts to violations of syntax
even when these violations are not consciously detected, indicating that
even highly complex computational processes such as syntactic processing
can occur outside the narrow window of conscious awareness.

G74
LANGUAGE RECURSION OVERLAPS WITH MOTOR RECURSION:
BRAIN POTENTIALS EVIDENCE OF EMBODIED SENTENCE PROCESSING Pilar Casado1,2, Manuel Martin-Loeches1,2, Manuel de Vega3, Inmaculada Leon3, Laura Jimenez-Ortega1,2, Sabela Fondevila1, David Hernandez-Gutierrez1; 1Center for Human Evolution and Behavior (UCM-ISCIII), Madrid, Spain,
2
Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 3University of La Laguna, La
Laguna, Spain — Theories of embodied cognition claim that symbols supporting human cognition are grounded on perceptual, motoric, and emotional experience. When language is concerned, this applies to both syntax
and semantics. This contrasts with traditional views of language, that consider that syntax is amodal in generating hierarchical, recursive structures.
In this study, we used Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) in order to find
support for the theories of embodied language, exploring whether the syntactic processing of sentences in the brain overlaps with areas devoted to
organize hierarchical and recursive non-linguistic motor movements. ERPs
were recorded while subjects read sentences with a center-embedded subject-relative clause and their unacceptable versions –with a word-category
violation, that is, the verb of the main clause was replaced by a noun-. Prior
to a set of sentences, subjects performed one of either two motor tasks. One
consisted on pressing a series of buttons in a sequential order, the other
being the same but also including a recursive sequence. As expected,
syntactic violations elicited LAN and P600 components. Importantly, the
amplitude of both components was modulated by the previous performance of the motor task with the recursive structure. These findings add
to growing evidence supporting models of embodied language processing.

G75
HEADLESS COWS ARE HARD TO PROCESS: AN ERP STUDY OF
MANDARIN CLASSIFIERS Shiao-hui Chan1, Chia-hsuan Liao1, Li-chuan Ku1;
National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan — Mandarin has around
400 classifiers (Huang et al., 1997), many of which can only be paired with
certain nouns (e.g. “one-CL(head)-cow” is fine, but not “one-CL(head)horse”) (“CL” stands for classifier and “head” is the literal meaning of
the classifier). Some researchers claimed that such arbitrary pairing was
similar to agreement morphology in Indo-European languages (Sproat &
Shih, 1993). However arbitrary, previous studies (Zhou et al., 2010; Zhang
et al., 2012) indicated that mismatched Classifier-Noun pairings induced
an N400 effect, suggesting that these combinations were analyzed semantically, rather than syntactically. The goal of the current ERP study was
to examine whether processing Mandarin classifiers was indeed semantic
in nature by studying two types of materials not previously examined: (1)
the ungrammatical omission of classifiers and (2) the inappropriate use
of the general classifier Ge, which could replace classifiers and be paired

1

224

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
with nouns in many, but not all, cases. Twenty-one subjects were recruited
to judge the grammaticality of 3 types of consecutively-presented visual
word pairs: grammatical Classifier-Noun combinations (“seven-CL(head)
+ cow”), ungrammatical GE-Noun combinations (“seven-GE + cow”), and
ungrammatical omission of classifiers (“seven + cow”). The results revealed
that the two ungrammatical conditions induced a stronger N400 effect than
the grammatical one, although the scalp distribution was more anterior and
bilateral than would normally be expected. This finding was in line with
earlier research that Classifier-Noun processing was semantic in nature.
Future research using current materials in sentence context is needed to
verify if the effect still holds.

G76
THE ROLE OF SYNTACTIC CATEGORY IN LEXICAL ACCESS: AN
ERP STUDY OF CHINESE HOMOGRAPH Chih-Ting Chang1, Chia-Ying
Lee1,2, Chia-Lin Lee3, Jie-Li Tsai4, Chia-Ju Chou1; 1National Yang-Ming University,
2
Academia Sinica, 3National Taiwan University, 4National Chengchi University
— Whether syntactic properties are processed during isolated word recognition has been a matter of debate. While the syntactic mediation model
claims that syntactic processing is obligatory and occurs prior to meaning
processing, the semantic mediation model holds that syntactic properties of
a word are not specified in the lexicon and syntactic category information is
made available only during sentence integration. The present event-related
potential study aims to investigate the processing of syntactic and semantic information in isolated word recognition by utilizing the characteristics of homographs. Homograph is a word has two or more semantically
unrelated meanings which may associate with different word classes. Two
kinds of ambiguity (semantic and word-class) were orthogonally manipulated in a set of Chinese two-character words. Participants were instructed
to judge the semantic relatedness between the target word and its following
probe. Our results showed an interaction between word-class ambiguity
and semantic ambiguity during the time windows of N1 (100 to 135 ms)
and P200 (200 to 250 ms). The word class effect, in which the word-class
unambiguous words elicited a more negative N1 and a less positive P200
than the word-class ambiguous words did, was only observed in reading
the semantic unambiguous words. In the N400 time window, only the main
effect of semantic ambiguity was found. The semantic ambiguous words
elicited a greater N400 than the semantic unambiguous words. These finding support that both semantic and syntactic information are processed
during isolated word recognition.

G77
EXPLORING FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE PROCESSING IN MANDARIN-ENGLISH BILINGUALS: AN FMRI STUDY Yu-Chen Chang1, Fan-pei
Yang1; 1National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan — The present study
investigated the neural network of similes, anomalous and literal language
processing in Mandarin- English bilinguals during interpretation of English
comparison statements. We characterized the neural networks involved
for processing English similes. We also compared the neural activations
of similes with those of anomalous and literal sentences to see whether
processing of anomaly and literal sentences involves different networks.
Eleven healthy bilingual speakers (6 females, 5 male) participated in the
fMRI experiment. Images were acquired on a 3 T MR scanner (Brucker,
Germany). Stimuli consisted of 200 short English sentences created for
three conditions: literal sentences (e.g., he is a donor), anomalous sentences
(e.g., a school is like a sandwich), and similes (e.g., jealousy is like acid). In
the simile>literal condition, significantly higher activations were evoked in
the left medal frontal gyrus, middle occipital gyrus, middle frontal gyrus,
in addition to the cingulate and fusiform gyrus in the right hemisphere.
In the anomalous>literal condition, significantly higher activations in the
bilateral superior frontal gyrus, left middle gyrus, as well as the inferior
frontal gyrus and fusiform gyrus were observed. In the anomalous>simile
condition, significantly greater activations were observed in the superior
and middle frontal gyrus, and anterior cingulate in the right hemisphere.
Our findings suggest that comprehension of anomaly demands the greatest cognitive resources among the three conditions as several regions were
significantly activated in the right hemisphere. Comprehension of similes is
different from comprehension of anomaly in that it evokes regions that are
related to inference making.

2013 Annual Meeting

G78
NEURAL CORRELATES OF AFRICAN AMERICAN ENGLISH
SYNTAX: AN ERP PILOT STUDY Felicidad Garcia1, Reem Khamis-Dakwar2, Karen Froud1; 1Teachers College, Columbia University, 2Adelphi University
— This experiment compares event-related potential (ERP) responses to
syntactic differences between African American English (AAE) and Standard American English (SAE). Recent research has shown that distinct ERP
signatures are associated with switching between languages compared to
switching between dialects or registers (Khamis-Dakwar & Froud, 2007;
Moreno et al., 2001). The current investigation builds on these findings to
investigate whether AAE syntax elicits differing neural responses in bidialectal speakers of AAE and SAE, compared to monolingual speakers of
SAE. ERP responses in this investigation were measured in two experiments: Experiment 1 recorded ERP effects for auditorily presented sentences in each of two syntax types in its use or omission of a third-person
singular agreement on a present tense verb (e.g., The young child lights/
light the fire). Experiment 2 served to confirm the presence of similar ERP
effects in both participant groups for grammaticality violations shared
between both language varieties (e.g. The distant fire reaches them/*they in
the morning). Initial results were compared between a bidialectal speaker
of AAE/SAE and a monolingual SAE speaker. In experiment 1, monolingual speakers showed a P600 response to stimuli violating the 3rd person
agreement restriction, but no such response was observed for the speaker
of AAE. Experiment 2 produced P600 effects in both participants. Results
of this preliminary study warrant further investigation of brain responses
to syntactic variation in SAE and AAE. Implications include potential for
greater understanding of language processing in AAE, that could influence
appropriation of therapy and educational resources (Cole & Taylor, 1990).

G79
DISCOURSE MODULATIONS OF SYNTACTIC PROCESSING: AN
EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIALS STUDY David Hernández-Gutiérrez1, Manuel Martín-Loeches1,2, Laura Jiménez-Ortega1,2, Sabela Fondevila1, Pilar Casado1,2; 1Center for Human Evolution and Behavior, UCM-ISCIII,
Madrid, Spain, 2Complutense University of Madrid, Spain — For almost 20
years, there has been a debate on the nature and specificity of the working memory resources employed in language processing. Whereas Just
and Carpenter (1992) proposed the existence of a general pool of working
memory resources, common to all levels of language processing, Waters
and Caplan (1996) endorsed instead a partition between working memory
resources specifically used for syntactic processes, and more general linguistic resources. The aim of this research was to test how the processing
of gender and number agreement is affected by working memory load
occurring across discourse processing, this manipulated as the amount of
elements (ideas) stored as well as difficulty of processing (global coherence). To this end, we compared the performance and ERP (event-related
potentials) results of a group of 24 participants while they read and memorized coherent and incoherent short stories containing morphosyntactic
violations. Morphosyntactic agreement mismatches elicited LAN and P600
effects. Only the P600 was however modulated by the amount of “idea
units” that participants held in memory, a measure of working memory
load. Increases in P600 amplitude were positively related to the reorganization and incorporation of a larger amount of information to the mental
model of the stories. Taken together, these results would agree with the
idea of a common working memory store for language processing. We have
interpreted the data in the frame of more recent connectionist approaches
to the debate by MacDonald and Christiansen (2002).

G80
METAMEMORY INTO MEMORY: THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF
ADAPTIVE ENCODING Natalie Mandel1, Rebecca Shukhman1, Laura
Endris1, Izabelle Rymut1, Krishna L. Bharani1, Robert Hurley2, Robert G. Morrison1; 1Loyola University of Chicago, 2Northwestern University Feinberg School
of Medicine — Pathologic and exceptional memory studies in older adults
have pointed to executive processes as important for good memory functioning. Older adults with better memory monitoring may adjust executive
processes to maximize acquisition during subsequent encoding opportunities. Herein, we used face-name associations as the basis for an EEG
memory paradigm utilizing retrieval practice to optimize learning. After

Poster Session G
attempting to recall the name of a specific face, younger adults made a prospective memory judgment (Judgment of Learning, JOL) intended to predict their subsequent memory recall performance. Following the JOL, they
saw the correct face/name combination again thereby providing another
study opportunity. Recall was high (M = 92.3%) with correspondingly
good preceding JOLs (M = 3.1); however, participants used the full range
of ratings (1-4) across trials allowing us to compare event-related potentials
(ERPs) for high and low JOLs. A late-positive complex (LPC) ERP, associated with explicit long-term memory, was reliably more positive on successful than unsuccessful recall trials. We also calculated ERPs during face/
name study after a JOL. This ERP was more positive on lower than higher
JOLs in frontal and parietal electrodes suggesting that participants engaged
their fronto-parietal network more during subsequent study when they
deemed their prospective memory for the face-name pairings to be poor.
We believe this paradigm offers an effective way to look at the influence
of memory monitoring on adaptive encoding in older adults as we try to
understand how executive processes can contribute to resilience in memory
functioning during cognitive aging.

G81
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN COGNITIVE ABILITY DIFFERENTIALLY AFFECT NEURAL MODULATION ACROSS THE LIFESPAN:
A MULTIVARIATE SPATIO-TEMPORAL PATTERN ANALYSIS Ian
McDonough1, Jenny Rieck1, Andrew Hebrank1, Patricia Reuter-Lorenz2, Denise
Park1; 1Center for Vital Longevity, University of Texas at Dallas, 2University of
Michigan — A fundamental question in cognitive aging research is how
aging affects neural recruitment with increasing task demands. Brain activity often increases in frontal-parietal regions with increasing demands, but
this modulation depends on individuals’ processing capacity (Nagel et al.,
2009; Reuter-Lorenz & Cappell, 2008). The present study investigated the
extent that processing capacity influences neural recruitment across the
adult lifespan. Participants from the Dallas Lifespan Brain Study (N = 316)
were divided into higher and lower ability subgroups within each of four
age spans (20-39, 40-59, 60-79, and 80-89) with the assumption that lower
cognitive ability and older age would be associated with lower processing
capacity. Cognitive ability was based on speed, working memory, and fluid
reasoning. From each age span, we identified the 20 highest performers and
the 20 lowest performers, matched on age, sex, and education. The fMRI
task required living/non-living judgments to easy (cat) or hard (virus)
words. Partial least squares (PLS) analysis, a multivariate technique, was
used to assess patterns of brain activity that distinguished easy from hard
trials. The expression of brain activity patterns associated with increasing
task demands peaked earlier in the lifespan and showed greater age-related
declines for lower compared with higher ability individuals. Differences
between ability groups were due to greater activity during easy trials and
lower peak activity during harder trials. Thus, older adults with higher
cognitive ability were able to maintain “youth-like” patterns of neural
modulation in response to task demands until late adulthood.

G82
LEARNING SUNG INSTEAD SPOKEN LYRICS ENHANCES CONSOLIDATION IN MEMORY IN NORMAL AGING AND MILD ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Aline Moussard1, Emmanuel Bigand2, Sylvie Belleville3, Isabelle Peretz4; 1Rotman Research Institute, 2University of Burgundy, 3University
of Montreal, 4Geriatric Institute of the University of Montreal — The aim of this
study is to investigate if mild Alzheimer’s participants (N = 8) and elderly
controls (N = 7) better memorize lyrics whether they are presented in a
spoken or a sung mode. Each participant learned four new lyrical excerpts,
randomly assigned to one of these conditions: (1) spoken, (2) sung on an
unfamiliar melody, (3) sung on an unfamiliar melody previously learned
(before adding the lyrics), and (4) sung on a life-long familiar melody. Each
excerpt was learned during separate sessions, presented randomly. The percentage of words correctly recalled was measured with a free recall task in
immediate and delayed recall (after 10 minutes). In immediate recall, lyrics
sung on an unfamiliar melody were more difficult to learn than spoken
ones. Performance increased with melodic familiarity, but did not surpass
the spoken condition. This pattern was the same for both normal elderly
and AD participants. In delayed recall however, Controls performed better
in the life-long familiar sung condition, and AD participants recalled more
words for the sung lyrics – independently of the melodic familiarity – with
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

225

Poster Session G
very poor recall for the spoken condition. Our results show that learning
both lyrics and melody at once is more difficult than spoken lyrics only,
or than lyrics sung on an already familiar melody. However, music may
reinforce the consolidation process, even despite memory impairment of
ADs. The specificity of music in these findings, as well as the possibility
to use them in clinical applications will be investigated in further studies.

G83
A LONGITUDINAL STUDY OF MEMORY DECLINE IN ELDERLY
WOMEN WITH AND WITHOUT HORMONE REPLACEMENT THERAPY Beth A. Ober1, Gregory K. Shenaut1; 1University of California, Davis —

The well-known, nationwide WHI-SCA (Women’s Health Initiative Study
of Cognitive Aging) tested 2302 women aged 66-84 annually on a cognitive
battery, starting three years after beginning the double-blind WHI hormone replacement therapy (HRT: estrogen and progesterone) study, until
the WHI-HRT ended prematurely two years later. This poster summarizes
data from an independent, exploratory WHI ancillary study carried out
at U.C. Davis alone, that tested 100 WHI-HRT enrollees aged 65-85 on a
different cognitive battery, starting 0-6 weeks after beginning HRT, with
1-7 annual follow-ups. Based on then-available observational data on HRT
and cognition, we hypothesized that HRT would reduce the normal agingbased decline of episodic memory, attention, and working memory, but
not that of language and semantic memory. Overall (3-8 annual sessions),
the placebo group (N=47) displayed negative slopes for the Positive and
Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) positive score, and Category Fluency,
whereas the HRT group (N=36) displayed negative slopes for Letter Fluency, and positive slopes for PANAS negative, Memory Assessment Clinics
Self-rating (MAC-S) frequency of occurrence score, and immediate Story
Recall. The between-group difference in slope approached significance for
PANAS negative. Neither group’s slopes differed from zero for MAC-S
ability, delayed Story Recall, Computation Span, Digit Vigilance, Digit
Span (forward, backward), Self-Ordered Pointing, or the Repeatable Episodic Memory Test (unrelated word lists). In contrast to the WHI-SCA findings of a detrimental effect of HRT on episodic memory, our results suggest
that HRT may facilitate episodic memory for conceptually structured material, such as stories, but not for unstructured word lists.

G84
EFFECTS OF AGING AND BETA-AMYLOID DEPOSITION ON EPISODIC ENCODING BRAIN ACTIVITY IN COGNITIVELY NORMAL
ELDERLY Hwamee Oh1, Elizabeth C. Mormino2, William J. Jagust1,3; 1University
of California- Berkeley, 2Harvard Medical School, 3Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory — About 30% of cognitively normal older adults harbor β-amyloid (Aβ), a prominent feature of Alzheimer’s disease that often relates to
functional and structural changes as well as episodic memory decline in
aging. In this study, we sought to tease apart effects of aging and Aβ deposition on brain activity and functional connectivity during episodic encoding using [11C] Pittsburgh compound B (PIB) positron emission tomography (PET) and fMRI. Fifteen young and 36 older adults were scanned
during an episodic encoding task with visual scenes and later performed
an unscanned surprise recognition task with old/new judgment and confidence rating. Based on PIB index quantifying brain Aβ deposition, older
adults were classified as either PIB−Old or PIB+Old groups. For successfully encoded (high confidence hit: HC) compared to forgotten (INCORRECT) items, YOUNG subjects showed increased activity in frontal, parietal
and visual association (VA) areas compared to PIB−Old. PIB+Old showed
increased activity in frontal, hippocampus/parahippocampal gyri (PHG),
and VA areas compared to PIB−Old. Psychophysiological interaction (PPI)
analyses revealed stronger coupling between the right PHG (rPHG) and
medial and lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) in PIB−Old than YOUNG for HC
compared to INCORRECT items. Stronger coupling between the rPHG and
the right/medial PFC and VA areas was seen in PIB−Old than PIB+Old for
the same contrast. Our results suggest that aging-related decreases in brain
activity are compensated by increased functional connectivity between
rPHG and PFC and VA in support of successful visual encoding while Aβ
deposition relates to aberrant increases in regional activity with disrupted
functional connectivity.

226

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

G85
BEHAVIORAL AND ERP CORRELATES OF UNITIZATION IN ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY IN YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS Amy A. Overman1,
Ursula G. Saelzler1, Joseph D. W. Stephens2; 1Elon University, 2North Carolina
A&T State University — Research has demonstrated that older adults have
more difficulty than young adults in linking together pieces of information
into one unit, a problem known as the associative deficit (Naveh-Benjamin,
2000). This study investigated the associative deficit by examining differences in the strength of associations between paired items in young and
older adults, as indexed by the N400 ERP component. Prior research has
found that unitization of pairs influences the strength of the N400 difference between intact versus rearranged pairs (Rhodes & Donaldson, 2007).
The present experiment manipulated unitization by presenting pairs of
items (faces and names) that were congruent or incongruent in terms of
gender. The experiment consisted of 10 study/test phases. Each study list
consisted of 32 face-name pairs, which was immediately followed by a test
phase in which participants were asked to identify previously-presented
pairings, while ERPs were recorded. Study lists consisted of congruent
(female face/female name, male face/male name) pairs, and incongruent
pairs (female face/male name, male face/female name), and test lists consisted of target pairs (intact pairs from study list) and lure pairs (items from
study rearranged into new pairs) for all four conditions. ERP waveforms
for each participant were compared between intact and rearranged pairs in
the congruent and incongruent conditions in order to compare the size of
the N400 based on congruency. Comparisons between age groups suggest
that the ERP correlates of pair recognition and unitization differ between
young and older adults, providing evidence regarding the neural basis of
the associative deficit.

G86
LONGITUDINAL EFFECTS ON EPISODIC MEMORY OF BODY
MASS INDEX, CATECHOL-O-METHYLTRANSFERASE (COMT),
AND BRAIN-DERIVED NEUROTROPHIC FACTOR (BDNF) Ninni Persson1,2,3, Åke Wahlin1,2,4; 1Department of Psychology, Stockholm University,
Sweden, 2Stockholm Brain Institute, Sweden, 3Institute of Gerontology, Wayne
State University, USA, 4School of Medicine, University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Australia — Normal cognitive aging is heterogeneous and characterized
by both fluctuation and change. Health and genetic factors are important
determinants of such individual differences in cognitive development.
Genetic polymorphisms may play different roles throughout the lifespan
and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), important for cognitive
functions, are also involved in the regulation of peripheral body functions.
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), and Brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF), have been associated with both cognitive performance, and
Body mass index (BMI). We wanted to explore moderator effects on cognitive development of such agents. Data from 1 034 non-demented subjects
(35-80 years at base-line), participating in the Betula study in the northern
part of Sweden, were analyzed using a growth curve model approach. First,
we investigated effects of epistasis on cognitive growth trajectories. Second,
we examined if higher BMI at base-line moderates the effects of COMT ×
BDNF on cognitive growth-trajectories over time. We found that possession of two copies of the COMT 158 Met allele combined with the BDNF 66
Val/Val variant had protective effects on development in episodic memory
performance. Further, we found BMI × COMT × BDNF × time effects, such
that higher baseline BMI was associated with steeper decline over 10 years
in episodic memory slopes among carriers of COMT 158 Val and BDNF 66
Met/Met variants, independent of sex, education, and cardiovascular diseases. The semantic memory domain was spared from such effects.

G87
MODIFYING MEMORY: SELECTIVELY ENHANCING AND UPDATING PERSONAL MEMORIES FOR A MUSEUM TOUR BY REACTIVATING THEM Peggy L. St. Jacques1, Daniel L. Schacter1; 1Harvard Univer-

sity — Memory can be modified when reactivated, but little is known about
how the quality of reactivation modulates its influence on subsequent
memory. We developed a novel paradigm to investigate reactivation-induced plasticity in personal memory. Participants reactivated memories
triggered by photos taken from a camera they wore during a museum tour
and made relatedness judgments on a novel photo taken from a different

2013 Annual Meeting
tour of the same museum. Across two behavioral studies we found that
subsequent recognition memory for events conducted at the museum was
better for photographs depicting events that were highly reactivated, but
reactivation also increased endorsement of novel museum photographs. In
a functional MRI (fMRI) study, we found that subsequent true and false
memory were both predicted by neural activity in retrieval-related regions
sensitive to parametric variation in reliving, a finding that is consistent with
our behavioral studies linking these effects to the quality of retrieval. Both
true and false subsequent memory effects were observed in retrosplenial
cortex, posterior parietal cortex and posterior parahippocampal cortex, a
network of regions that mediates processing of contextual associations.
In sum, our results suggest that reactivation-induced changes in memory
are modulated by the quality of reactivation and supported by a subset of
regions involved in the retrieval of contextual associations.

G88
THE PRECUNEUS MAKES THE DIFFERENCE: PRECUNEAL ACTIVITY DURING RECOLLECTION OF CONCRETE COMPARED TO
ABSTRACT NOUNS IS LINKED TO RETRIEVAL SUCCESS Eva Stening1, Jonas Persson1, Johan Wikström2, Hedvig Söderlund1; 1Uppsala University, 2Uppsala University Hospital — Episodic memory is widely known to
depend on the hippocampus, with especially the left hippocampus being
implicated in verbal memory and retrieval. More recent research suggests
that also the precuneus might be involved in episodic memory processing
in general and episodic retrieval in particular. Being important for mental
imagery, it may, together with the hippocampus, be part of an episodic
memory retrieval network, enhancing memory detail. It is unclear, however, whether the precuneus is differentially active as a function of the concreteness of the material, or engaged regardless of imaginability. To assess
this, we had twenty-one participants (24.9±3.02) encode and retrieve a list
of abstract and concrete words while being scanned with fMRI. During
encoding, participants categorized words as either concrete or abstract, and
thereafter took a yes/no recognition test. During recognition of previously
presented words (hits), those previously categorized as concrete showed
increased activity in the left anterior hippocampus and the bilateral precuneus compared to those categorized as abstract. This was not due to better
recollection, as words from both categories were equally well recalled.
Rejections of previously seen concrete words (misses) as compared to
abstract misses activated only the left hippocampus, suggesting the hippocampus is engaged during the presentation of previously seen items, but
the precuneus is specifically engaged during correct recognition of these
items. Overall, these findings suggest a particular role for the precuneus in
correct recollection of concrete words, which may be especially susceptible
to mental imagery.

G89
THE EFFECTS OF CAFFEINE AND EXERCISE ON IMPLICIT AND
EXPLICIT MEMORY PERFORMANCE IN YOUNGER ADULTS: AN
INVESTIGATION OF PHYSIOLOGICAL AROUSAL Timothy Buckley1,
Stephanie Sherman2, Elsa Baena1, Lee Ryan1; 1University of Arizona, 2University of Texas at Austin — Memory performance is best during an individual’s optimal time-of-day, when physiological arousal is naturally
highest, and decreases significantly during the non-optimal time-of-day
when arousal declines. Previous research suggests that the time-of-day
at which a memory task is completed may contribute to age-related disparities in memory performance. Ryan et al. (2002) found that this deficit
could be eliminated in older adults by administering caffeine during their
non-optimal time-of-day, the late afternoon. It remains unclear whether the
same enhancement in memory would be seen in younger adults during
their non-optimal time-of-day, early morning. Experiment 1 examined
whether caffeine enhanced memory in the early morning. Thirty minutes
after consuming a cup of coffee (caffeinated or decaffeinated), participants completed implicit explicit versions of a word-stem completion task.
Young adults who consumed caffeinated coffee demonstrated significant
improvements in explicit memory, but not implicit memory. Experiment
2 examined whether exercise would also ameliorate time-of-day deficits.
Participants complete 15 minutes of either cardiovascular exercise or gentle
stretching. Heart rates were taken throughout the experiment to measure
physiological arousal. While exercise increased physiological arousal, exercise had no effect on either explicit or implicit memory. Taken together,

Poster Session G
these results suggest a unique mechanism for caffeine-induced arousal that
compensates for time-of-day memory deficits. These findings have realworld application for classroom settings where students are expected to
perform optimally during early morning testing sessions.

G90
AGING’S IMPACT ON THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF MENTAL
REPLAY Marie St-Laurent1, Bradley R. Buchsbaum1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest, 2Department of Psychology, University of Toronto — Recent
work indicates that aging can reduce the specificity of brain activity patterns elicited by a variety of cognitive states. In the current study, we investigated how aging affects the neural specificity of mental replay, the act of
conjuring up vivid stimuli in one’s mind from memory. We used functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to quantify brain activity in young and
older adults as they viewed short videos, and mentally replayed them. We
used a set of 11 videos, each of which was viewed and recalled multiple
times. Overall brain activity elicited by the viewing condition did not differ
between age groups. During mental replay, young adults suppressed activity in the auditory cortex to a greater extent than older adults; no other
brain regions showed significant age differences in activation levels. We
then performed a multivariate searchlight analysis to identify brain regions
whose activity showed the highest correlation between encoding and recall.
High correlations indicated the reactivation of stimulus-specific patterns of
activity during mental replay. Comparisons between patterns of correlations in young and older adults revealed higher correlations in cortical
regions involved in visual, spatial, somatosensory and auditory processing in young adults. Although the univariate analysis did not reveal age
differences in activity levels among these perceptual cortical regions, the
searchlight analysis indicates reduced cortical reinstatement in the seniors.
Our results are consistent with evidence that the specificity of memory’s
neural signature declines with old age.

G91
REPRESENTATIONAL SIMILARITY IN CA3/DG TRACKS CHANGES
IN SPATIAL CONTEXT Jared Stokes1, Arne Ekstrom; 1University of Califor-

nia - Davis — While the hippocampus plays a role in processing the spatial
aspects of our environment, the exact role of different subregions within
the hippocampus in this process remains unclear. Based on previous rodent
studies suggesting that CA3 is particularly sensitive to environmental
changes compared to CA1, we hypothesized that CA3 would differentiate
small changes in spatial context compared to CA1. To address this, participants viewed a series of randomized video clips taken from distinct virtual cities. Each of the four cities involved a parametric change in spatial
geometry; all four cities though involved the same buildings. While viewing video clips of the different cities, participants indicated whether the
video was taken from the same or different city as the preceding video.
Participants underwent high-resolution structural (.4 X .4 X 2mm3) and
fMRI (1.6X1.6X2mm3) during the task in order to discriminate hippocampal subfields. To evaluate changes in underlying representations of spatial context, we utilized representation similarity (RS) analyses to assess
information conveyed through subfield specific activation patterns. We
found significantly lower RS scores for correctly differentiated dissimilar
compared to the identical cities, an effect that was significant in CA3/DG
(t(10)=2.24,P<.05) but not CA1. Additionally, we created a distance score
that assessed the rate of RS change as a function of environmental geometry; changes in RS in CA3/DG but not CA1 correlated negatively with
environment change (T(10=-5.64, P<.001). Our results support the idea that
CA3/DG plays a specific role in sensitivity to changes in spatial context,
possibly contributing to pattern separation.

G92
DOPAMINERGIC MODULATION OF REWARD-MOTIVATED
MEMORY Elizabeth Sumner1, Kristin Duffy1, R. Alison Adcock1; 1Duke Univer-

sity — A fundamental question about the selectivity of episodic memory is
how neural states like motivation influence memory encoding. Our previous fMRI study using the monetary incentive encoding (MIE) task provided
early support for the hypothesis that motivation shapes memory via the
effects of dopamine on encoding in the hippocampal memory system. The
MIE task incorporates high and low value reward cues into an intentional
memory-encoding paradigm, allowing the demonstration of an encoding

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

227

Poster Session G
enhancement for scenes preceded by high-value cues. Coactivation of the
ventral tegmental area and hippocampus occurring after these cues predicted lasting episodic memory formation. This finding, together with the
convergence of animal data highlighting dopaminergic enhancement of
hippocampus-dependent memory, suggests a role for dopaminergic neurotransmission in the modulation of reward-motivated episodic memory
in humans. To further investigate this potential role, we tested the effects
of the dopamine precursor levodopa (L-DOPA) and placebo on motivated
episodic memory encoding in a double-blind crossover study. Participants
completed the MIE task after administration of L-DOPA or placebo and
returned the following week to complete the task with the other agent.
Results revealed an enhancement of the motivated memory effect with
L-DOPA. Consistent with literature on dopamine in working memory
tasks, there was an interaction with baseline performance: poor baseline
performers (by median split) showed significant overall encoding enhancements, and this overall enhancement was driven by enhancements for highvalue trials. Together these results suggest that increased dopamine levels
selectively enhance memory for valuable information in individuals who
would most benefit from memory enhancement.

G93
REWARD-MOTIVATED ENHANCEMENT OF PATTERN SEPARATION IN RECOGNITION MEMORY Nanthia Suthana1, Nicole Yap1, Wesley
Wong1, Barbara Knowlton1; 1Department of Psychology, University of California,
Los Angeles — The hippocampus may use a mechanism of pattern separation to distinguish overlapping memory representations. We investigated
whether pattern separation performance is affected by reward motivation,
or if reward generally enhances recognition memory. Thirteen participants
learned photographs (targets) of faces in 3 blocks. Half of the targets were
cued with a high ($1.00), or a low ($0.05) monetary value, and subjects
would be able to earn the corresponding amount by subsequently recognizing these items. Targets varied in face direction (0 degrees, and 45 degrees
left or right). For every target learned, a similar (view angle changed by 45
degrees) photograph of the same face (lure) and a completely new face (foil)
were presented during recognition. During recognition, subjects determined whether photographs were old (targets) or new (lures and foils).
Subjects were penalized $0.15 for false alarms. Performance was measured
by calculating the pattern separation bias score, which subtracts subjects’
false alarm rate to foils from correct rejection rate to lures. In addition, we
calculated a familiarity score (percent hits across targets and lures). Pattern
separation bias scores were significantly higher during blocks 2 and 3 for
high vs. low value items (p<0.05). However, there was no difference in performance measured by the familiarity score for high and low value targets
(p=n.s.). Overall, our results show that the ability to discriminate between
highly similar instances in memory can be influenced by reward. Because
the effects of reward developed across blocks, subjects appear to learn to
encode distinctive memory representations with practice.

G94
DIFFERENTIAL MODULATION OF POST-ENCODING RESTING
CORRELATIONS FOLLOWING ENCODING OF NEUTRAL AND
EMOTIONAL COMPLEX SCENES Arielle Tambini1, Ulrike Rimmele1, Eyal
Bar-David1, Elizabeth Phelps1,2, Lila Davachi1; 1New York University, 2Nathan
Kline Institute — Long-term memory storage is thought to be mediated by
off-line hippocampal-cortical and cortico-cortical interactions. Numerous
rodent studies provide evidence for coordinated activity across large-scale
networks during off-line periods. In humans, we and others have provided
evidence for enhanced connectivity during post-encoding rest periods that
was related to memory for pre-rest experiences. In the present study, we
asked whether post-encoding connectivity is enhanced following exposure
to emotional stimuli, a factor known to enhance memory encoding and
consolidation processes. To this end, we collected fMRI data while subjects
rated the complexity of neutral and emotional scenes during separate scans
and during pre- and post- task rest scans. The order of the emotional and
neutral scans was counterbalanced across subjects. Subjects’ memory for
complex scenes was queried in a surprise memory test. Interestingly, the
typical enhancement in emotional vs. neutral memory was found for subjects that encoded neutral scenes before emotional scenes, but was not seen
when neutral scenes were encoded after emotional scenes. Follow-up analyses suggest that neutral scene encoding may be influenced by a carry-over

228

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
of heightened arousal from emotional encoding when emotional encoding
precedes neutral encoding. In the fMRI rest data, we replicated our prior
work finding enhanced correlations between regions engaged during
encoding during post-neutral-encoding rest. Furthermore, we found that
post-encoding resting connectivity within distinct hippocampal and amygdala networks was related to subjects’ later neutral and emotional memory,
respectively. These results suggest that emotional and neutral memory may
be mediated by distinct patterns of connectivity during post-encoding rest
periods.

G95
THE HIPPOCAMPUS IS SENSITIVE TO THE DISJUNCTION
BETWEEN ITEM AND CONTEXT REPETITIONS Preston P Thakral1,
Michael D Rugg1; 1Center for Vital Longevity and School of Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, University of Texas, Dallas — Previous fMRI studies of continuous
recognition memory have reported that new items elicit greater hippocampal activity than old (repeated) items (i.e., hippocampal ‘novelty effects’).
The current fMRI study was conducted to assess whether these effects are
modulated by the context with which a test item is associated. We employed
a continuous recognition paradigm where, within a single list, new and old
items (words) and new and old contexts (objects) were intertwined. Each
trial was comprised of a presentation of a word-object pair. Words were
repeated after between 2 and 31 intervening items (with a mean lag of 15
items). The repeated words were paired with either the same object as on
their first presentation (old-old), a different but previously presented object
(old-old’) or a new object (old-new). The task was simply to judge whether
each word was old or new. Behaviorally, accuracy was higher for old-old
trials than for old-old’ or old-new trials, whereas accuracy between the
latter two trial types did not significantly differ. Thus, subjects successfully
encoded word-object associations. Greater hippocampal activity was evident for old-new trials relative to all other trial types, including ‘new-new’
trials (initial presentations). These findings suggest that the hippocampus
is sensitive not necessarily to the absolute novelty of a stimulus event, but
rather to disjunctions in the novelty of the components of an event.

G96
WHAT COUNTS AS ‘REST’?: LOW–FREQUENCY CORRELATIONS
WITHIN THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE DURING AN UNRELATED
TASK PREDICT MEMORY Alexa Tompary1, Katherine Duncan2, Lila Davachi1; 1New York University, 2Columbia University — Previous investigations
of resting connectivity have shown that low frequency correlations within
the medial temporal lobe (MTL) can predict individual differences in performance on standardized memory tasks (Wig et al., 2008). However, it is
unclear whether MTL correlations during an unrelated cognitive task, where
the MTL may act as if at rest, are also related to memory performance. We
used hi-resolution fMRI to investigate whether MTL connectivity during a
math task predicts associative memory for object-pairs presented in a separate block. Subjects first completed a ‘baseline’ math task, and then performed 4 runs comprised of blocks of encoding, more math, and retrieval.
During the encoding block, subjects were asked to form vivid mental images
of pairs of objects. They then solved a block of math problems, and then
performed a cued recall task for the object associations. Long-term item and
associative memory was also tested after a 24-hr delay. Preliminary results
show that individual differences in connectivity between parahippocampal
cortex and hippocampal subregions during the baseline math task predict
long-term item memory, while connectivity between CA3 and MTL cortical
areas predicts immediate associative memory. Given that recent work has
provided evidence for enhanced resting connectivity after learning (Albert
et al., 2009), and shown that post-encoding resting connectivity predicts
memory (Tambini and Davachi, 2010), further analysis will investigate how
changes in hippocampal-cortical connectivity during post-encoding math
predicts memory. Representation similarity analysis will also be used to
characterize the activity of MTL regions as they relate to memory.

G97
ASSESSING THE TIMING OF MEMORY REACTIVATION USING
MEG Shannon Tubridy1, Aaron Apple1, Lila Davachi1,2; 1Dept of Psychology, New
York University, 2Center for Neural Science, New York University — Retrieval
of episodic associations is hypothesized to be supported by the hippocampally mediated reactivation of information processed in content-specific

2013 Annual Meeting
cortical regions. Accumulating fMRI and neurophysiological data indicate
a role for the hippocampus during episodic retrieval and neuroimaging
studies have shown cortical responses consistent with the reactivation of
specific representations. However, the temporal resolution of fMRI does
not allow specification of the within trial temporal dynamics of responses
in hippocampus, medial temporal lobe, and other cortical regions. Here,
we leverage the temporal resolution of magnetoencephalography (MEG)
to explore the timing of content-specific reactivation signals and their relationship to medial temporal lobe memory mnemonic responses. During
MEG recording, participants learn and are tested on a series of word-picture and word-sound associations. During retrieval trials, participants
are presented with a word and asked to report the presentation modality
associated with its prior encounter. Participants learned the associations,
with behavioral memory performance well above chance on retrieval trials.
MEG data identify expected differences during encoding of sound relative
to picture association trials. Differences in the signal topography are also
observed during retrieval trials for which the presented stimuli (words) are
matched but the retrieved association differs (sound or picture), indicative
of content-specific activity during associative retrieval. The timing of these
cortical signal differences will be related to memory signals in the MTL to
address predictions of standard models of episodic memory retrieval.

G98
DISSOCIATING MEMORY PROCESSES BY THEIR DIFFERENCES
IN NEURAL STABILITY Benjamin O. Turner1, Christa-Lynn Donovan1,
Michael B. Miller1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara — Recently, the
issue of reliability in fMRI (e.g., Bennett & Miller, 2010; McGonigle, 2012)
has gained substantial attention. However, this work has generally focused
on fMRI methodology, rather than on asking any particular cognitive neuroscientific question. Although it has been observed that reliability varies
across tasks, there has been little interest in asking if we can learn anything
meaningful about the underlying processes themselves by looking at the
reliability of their concomitant activity patterns. Here, using a rich data set
with repeated measurements within individuals across a year, including
encoding, retrieval, and resting state scans for each session, we investigate
the stability of activity accompanying various processes in a recognition
memory task. We find systematic differences in intra-subject stability across
these processes, even after accounting for a variety of other nuisance variables. Moreover, we demonstrate that the relationship between behavioral
stability (using measures such as reported strategy or response bias) and
activity-pattern stability varies across processes. These results support the
assumption that performance during a recognition memory task reflects
the operation of multiple distinct cognitive processes. They also shed light
on the influence of factors including mood and resting state activity on such
processes, which in turn informs our theoretical understanding of the processes in a manner distinct from the mapping of functions to regions or
networks (often followed by reverse inference to draw theoretical conclusions) that is the end goal of much fMRI research. Funding statement: this
research was supported by the Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies
under grant W911NF-09-D-0001.

G99
CONTEXT-DEPENDENT SAVINGS IN PROCEDURAL CATEGORIZATION Matthew Crossley1, Todd Maddox2, Greg Ashby3; 1University of California, Berkeley, 2University of Texas, Austin, 3University of California, Santa
Barbara — Evidence suggests that information-integration (II) category
learning recruits procedural memory and requires reinforcement learning mediated within the striatum. We have recently demonstrated savings
in II category learning after several hundred trials of random feedback
(Crossley, Maddox & Ashby, 2012, J. of Experimental Psychology: General). Specifically, we showed that while accuracy dropped to near chance
during random feedback, it was fully recovered in fewer trials than was
required for initial learning. Here, we show that the amount of savings (i.e.,
the number of trials required to recover from chance performance during
random feedback) depends on environmental contextual cues. Each condition included an acquisition, intervention, and reacquisition phase, which
occurred in different environmental contexts (i.e., with different background colors). Participants received veridical feedback during the acquisition and reacquisition phases, and they received random feedback during
the intervention phase. We found the most savings when acquisition and
reacquisition occurred in one context, and intervention occurred in a differ-

Poster Session G
ent context. On the other hand, we found the least savings when acquisition
and intervention occurred in one context, and reacquisition occurred in a
different context. To account for these results, we augmented our published
model - which assumed that II category learning is instantiated via plasticity at cortico-striatal synapses and that this plasticity is gated by striatal
cholinergic interneurons (i.e., the TANs) - by assuming that the input to the
TANs (e.g., the centre-median and parafascicular nucleus of the thalamus)
display context-specific firing (i.e., they fire only when specific features of
the environment are present).

G100
LEARNING SKILLS IN DEVELOPMENTAL DYSLEXIA

Cristina Dye1,
Carolina Janacseck , Dezso Nemeth ; Newcastle University, 2University of
Szeged, 3University of Texas at Austin — Implicit learning underlies the
acquisition of various critical skills, including reading. Previous research
has reported that certain implicit learning tasks are impaired while others
are spared in developmental dyslexia (e.g., Pothos & Kirk, 2004; Vicari et
al. 2005; Howard et al. 2006; Russeler et al. 2006). In the present study, we
used the Alternating Serial Reaction Time (ASRT) paradigm (Howard &
Howard, 1997; Nemeth et al., 2010) to assess implicit probabilistic sequence
learning in both children (18 dyslexic and 20 normally-developing 12-yearolds), and adults (15 dyslexic and 22 normal 20-year olds). The ANOVA
revealed sequence-specific learning (p < 0.001), as well as general skill
learning (p < 0.001). The two groups (dyslexic and control) did not differ
either in overall sequence-specific or in general skill learning, regardless of
the age group (all p’s > 0.34). However, dyslexic children were generally
slower compared to the normally-developing children (p = 0.015), though
this difference disappeared in the adult groups (p = 0.71). Results are discussed with regard to previous findings. In particular, it is suggested that
the mixed pattern of results of implicit sequence learning in dyslexia can be
accounted for by the type of the sequence, the explicitness of the stimuli,
and the nature of the task demands.
2

2,3

1

G101
EFFORT IN SKILL LEARNING: MORE PERSISTENT BENEFITS FOR
CHILDREN Amy Finn1, Neil Albert2, Carla L. Hudson Kam3; 1Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 2Spencer Foundation, 3University of British Columbia —
Relative to subcortical and cerebellar regions that are associated with skill
learning, regions associated with effort and executive function (prefrontal
and parietal regions), mature rather late (Lenroot & Giedd, 2006; Ostby et
al., 2009). What is the impact of this ongoing maturation for skill learning?
Does this change if effort is directed toward skill learning? To investigate
this, we used a serial reaction time task in children and adults (19 adults
and 10 children (aged 5-12)). Participants were directed to press a button
corresponding to the location of an octopus. The octopus would appear
randomly and in two distinct sequences: a learning-directed and performance-directed sequence. Participants were only aware of the learning-directed sequence; they were told that when the octopus turned a color (blue
or purple), he we would go in the same locations and to try and learn his
pattern. Subjects were not told about the performance-directed sequence
in which the color of the octopus was the same as the random trials. We
observed significant learning (as measured by reaction time relative to
random trials) of both sequences in both children and adults. Early on,
adults showed a significant learning advantage for the learning-directed
sequence, which disappeared over time. In children a significant learning advantage for the learning-directed sequences also occurred initially
but remained throughout the experiment. Despite ongoing maturation of
effortful abilities, directing children’s effort toward learning appears to
provide a persistent benefit, as the performance-directed sequence is never
learned as well as the learning-directed one.

G102
CROSS-MODAL EFFECTS ON IMPLICIT PERCEPTUAL-MOTOR
SEQUENCE LEARNING Kiersten Reznik1, Kiley Virag1, Jamie Connolly1,
Daniel J Sanchez2, Paul J Reber2, David Fraser1; 1Chatham University, 2Northwestern University — Repeated experience with environmental stimuli
allows an individual to take behavioral advantage of structural regularities.
This is often supported by implicit learning where performance improves
despite the lack of any conscious (explicit) awareness of the underlying
structure. Using the Serial Interception Sequence Learning (SISL) task, we

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

229

Poster Session G
tested the effect of cross-modal visual and auditory perceptual stimuli on
implicit and explicit learning of a covertly embedded repeating perceptual-motor sequence. In the SISL task, circular cues scroll vertically down four
horizontal columns towards ring-shaped target zones. Participants attempt
to press a corresponding key when a cue reaches its target zone. Participants
were divided into sound (cross-modal) or non-sound (unimodal) groups.
Group conditions were identical except that an auditory tone was delivered
to the participants in the sound group when a cue reached the target zone.
A different tone was used for each of the four target zones and they were
delivered irrespective of response accuracy. All participants trained on a
12-item repeating sequence (240 total sequence performances, 80% repeating, 20% novel/non-repeating) and then performed tests of implicit and
explicit sequence knowledge. The cross-modal condition failed to provide
a significant benefit to implicit learning but this group showed significantly
better recognition of the training sequence. This suggests that the addition
of the sound modality may encourage the more rapid development of an
explicit representation for the trained sequence but that the enhancement
of explicit sequence knowledge during learning does not contribute to task
performance.

G103
A COMPUTATIONAL COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE MODEL OF CRITERION LEARNING IN RULE-GUIDED BEHAVIOR Sebastien Helie1,
Shawn W. Ell2, J. Vincent Filoteo3,4, Brian D. Glass5, W. Todd Maddox6; 1Purdue
University, 2University of Maine, 3VA San Diego Healthcare System, 4University
of California, San Diego, 5Queen Mary University of London, 6University of Texas,
Austin — Rule-guided behavior is essential in adapting to an ever changing
environment. Rule learning involves at least two different cognitive operations, namely rule selection and criterion learning. Rule selection consists
of selecting one or several stimulus-dimensions to be used to categorize the
stimuli (e.g, categorize lines according to their length). Once a rule has been
selected, criterion learning consists of defining how stimuli will be grouped
using the selected dimension(s) (e.g., if the selected rule is line length,
define ‘long’ and ‘short’). Very little is known about the neuroscience of
rule learning. Here we propose a biologically-realistic model of criterion
learning and apply the model to category-learning data. In the new model,
rule cells in lateral prefrontal cortex are used to modulate stimulus-response associations using pre-synaptic inhibition (Helie & Ashby, 2009).
Each neuron is implemented using two differential equations to calculate
cell voltage at every millisecond (Izhikevich, 2007). Axons delays and neurotransmitter release are modeled using an alpha-function (Ashby & Helie,
2011). Criterion learning is implemented using a new type of heterosynaptic error-driven Hebbian learning at GABAergic (i.e., inhibitory) synapses
that uses feedback to drive cell activation above/below NMDA thresholds.
The model is used to account for single-cell recordings in monkey ruleguided behavior, and human categorization data showing that participants
are more impaired by a shift in rule-relevant dimensions than when both
relevant and irrelevant dimensions are changed. Additional results and
predictions made by the computational cognitive neuroscience model will
also be discussed.

G104
TRAINING OF DIGITS-IMAGES ASSOCIATIONS ENHANCES
SHORT-TERM MEMORY PERFORMANCES: A BEHAVIORAL AND
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY (EEG) STUDY Yixuan Ku1, Ning Hao1,
Yijie Zhao1, Yanqiu Wu1, Di Zhao1, Lijia Lin1, Yi Hu1; 1The Key Lab of Brain
Functional Genomics (MOE and Shanghai), Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
School of Psychology and Cognitive Science, East China Normal University,
Shanghai, China — Previous studies have revealed that encoding memory
materials into meaningful pre-stored units (e.g., images) played a key role
in achieving the highest level of memory performance (Hu, et al., 2009;
Hu & Ericsson, 2012). However, the effects of associations between digits
and images on memory performance for average people, and the neural
mechanisms underlying it, remained unknown. In current study, a group
of ~12-year-old children was trained to use digits-images associations to
help memorize digit sequences. Three memory experiments were performed twice, before and after the training. All behavioral performances
improved significantly after the training. In experiment 1, the mean digit-memory-span of the subjects increased from 7.68 to 8.8. In experiment
2, subjects memorized a matrix of 4 X 5 1-digit numbers in one minute,

230

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
the mean recalled digits increased from 11 to 16. In experiment 3, subjects
memorized 80 20-digit sequences, and the average amount of correctly
recalled digits increased significantly at ~2 after training. Meanwhile, two
ERP components changed significantly after the training in experiment 3:
FN400, ~400ms after the stimulus (presenting digits) onset, which indicated
the familiarity of recognition memory, increased at frontal recording sites;
P600, within the range of 500ms-700ms, which indicated the recollection
of recognition memory and visual imagery, increased at parietal recording
sites. Furthermore, the improvement of the amount of memorized digits
correlated with the change of P600 amplitudes after training. To summarize, subjects’ short-term digit memory performances could be enhanced
by the training of digits-images associations, which help them recollecting
the digits.

G105
TIME-VARYING THE ONSET OF TMS STIMULATION DURING CONCURRENT TMS-FMRI: A METHOD FOR HIGH TEMPORAL RESOLUTION EXPLORATIONS OF THE INTERACTIONS BETWEEN BRAIN
REGIONS Colin Hawco1, Jorge Armony1, Marcelo Berlim1, Bruce Pike2, Martin
Lepage1; 1Douglas Mental Health University Institute, McGill University, 2Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University — Concurrent transcranial magnetic stimulation and fMRI (TMS-fMRI) is a method which allows for a
direct examination of the functional connectivity between brain regions.
When a TMS pulse is fired, it modulates neural activity at the site of stimulation. This then has task-specific effects on activity in regions interacting
with the site of stimulation. We performed a TMS-fMRI study in which
we time-varied the onset of TMS pulses with regard to trial onset during
a memory encoding task. Eighteen participants were presented with pairs
of images, and instructed to memorize the pairs (an associative memory
task). The images could either be semantically related or unrelated. Three
pulses of TMS (ISI 100ms) were presented to the left dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (L-DLPFC) starting either 200ms, 600ms, or 1000ms into the trial.
Time-varying the onset of TMS stimulation for different trials makes it possible to examine which regions are interacting with the stimulated region
during discrete time windows. Time and condition (related or unrelated
pairs) specific effects were observed in several regions. For example, TMS
stimulation during the 200ms condition increased activity in the anterior
insula and left supramarginal gyrus for related pairs only, while increased
activity for related pairs in the 600ms condition was observed in the caudate nucleus and cerebellum, as well as the posterior regions of the left
superior temporal gyrus (a region implicated in semantic processing) This
suggests that time-varying TMS-fMRI can be used as a highly temporally
specific measure of the interaction between brain regions.

G106
THE NEUROIMAGING INFORMATICS TOOLS AND RESOURCES
CLEARINGHOUSE (NITRC) David Kennedy1, Arnaude Delorme2, Randy
Gollub3, Nina Preuss4, Christian Haselgrove1; 1University of Massachusetts Medical School, 2UCSD, 3Harvard Medical School, 4TCG, Inc. — We report on the
use of a neuroimaging informatics knowledge environment for MR, PET/
SPECT, CT, EEG/MEG, optical imaging and now clinical neuroinformatics
and genetics/genomics imaging tools and resources entitled: Neuroimaging Informatics Tools and Resources Clearinghouse (NITRC). Initiated
in October 2006 through the NIH Blueprint for Neuroscience Research,
NITRC’s mission is to foster a user-friendly knowledge environment for
the neuroinformatics community. By continuing to identify existing software tools and resources valuable to this community, NITRC’s goal is to
support its researchers dedicated to enhancing, adopting, distributing, and
contributing to the evolution of neuroimaging analysis tools and resources.
Located on the web at www.nitrc.org, this site promotes software tools
and resources, vocabularies, test data, and databases, thereby extending
the impact of previously funded, neuroimaging informatics contributions
to a broader community. NITRC gives researchers greater and more efficient access to the tools and resources they need, better categorizing and
organizing existing tools and resources, facilitating interactions between
researchers and developers, and promoting better use through enhanced
documentation and tutorials—all while directing the most recent upgrades,
forums, and updates. In Summary, NITRC facilitates access to an ever
growing number of neuroinformatics tools and resources (540 to date).
We encourage the community to continue providing design and content

2013 Annual Meeting
feedback. Averaging monthly 17,000 visits and 82,000 pageviews, NITRC is
now an established knowledge environment for the neuroimaging community where tools and resources are presented in a coherent and synergistic
environment for the advancement of neuroinformatics research.

G107
CONNECTIVITY MEASURES FOR REAL-TIME FMRI NEUROFEEDBACK. Yury Koush1,2, Maria Joao Rosa3, Fabien Robineau1,4, Klaartje Heinen3,
Nikolaus Weiskopf3, Patrik Vuilleumier1,4, Dimitri van de Ville1,2, Frank Scharnowski1,2; 1University of Geneva, 2Swiss Institute of Technology Lausanne,
3
University College London, 4Geneva Neuroscience Center — Neurofeedback
based on real-time fMRI is an emerging technique that can be used to train
voluntary control of brain activity. Such brain training has been shown to
lead to behavioral effects that are specific to the functional role of the targeted brain area. Recent studies even demonstrated therapeutic effects in
specific patient populations. However, real-time fMRI-based neurofeedback so far was limited to training localized brain activity within a region
of interest. Here, we overcome this limitation by presenting near real-time
dynamic causal modeling in order to provide neurofeedback information
based on connectivity between brain areas rather than activity within a
brain area. Using a visual-spatial attention paradigm, we show that such
a connectivity feedback signal can be used to train voluntary control over
functional brain networks. Because most mental functions and most neurological disorders are associated with network activity rather than with
activity within a single brain region, this novel method is an important
methodological innovation in order to more specifically target such brain
networks.

G108
THE CONFIGURABLE PIPELINE FOR THE ANALYSIS OF CONNECTOMES (C-PAC) Daniel J. Lurie1, Sharad Sikka2,4, Ranjit Khanuja1, Brian
Cheung1, Qingyang Li1, Joshua T. Vogelstein3, Chao-Gan Yan2, Randal Burns5,
Stanley Colcombe2, Maarten Mennes6, Clare Kelly7, Adriana Di Martino4, F.
Xavier Castellanos2,4, Michael P. Milham1,2, Cameron Craddock1,2; 1Center for
the Developing Brain, Child Mind Institute, New York, NY, 2Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY, 3Department of Mathematics
and Statistics, Johns Hopkins University, 4Phyllis Green and Randolph Cowen
Institute for Pediatric Neuroscience, New York University Child Study Center,
5
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, 6Donders Institute
for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 7Phyllis Green and Randolph Cowen Institute for Pediatric Neuroscience,
New York University Child Study Center — In order to successfully study the
brain’s functional architecture (connectome) and its behavioral associations,
researchers need tools that facilitate reliable, replicable connectivity analysis. Here we introduce C-PAC, a configurable, open-source, automated
processing pipeline for functional MRI data which builds upon a robust set
of existing software packages including AFNI, FSL, and FreeSurfer. Users
can rapidly orchestrate automated pre-processing and data analysis for
multiple subjects, and can easily explore the impact of processing decisions
on their findings by specifying multiple analysis pipelines to be run simultaneously. C-PAC can reliably process hundreds or thousands of subjects
in a single run, and has been optimized for use on large data sets such as
those made public by the International Neuroimaging Data-sharing Initiative (INDI). Preprocessing options include: motion correction, anatomical/
functional coregistration, spatial normalization, spatial and temporal filtering, automatic tissue segmentation, slice-timing correction, nuisance signal
removal, and volume censoring (motion “scrubbing”). C-PAC also includes
a number of advanced analysis methods that facilitate detailed exploration
of connectivity patterns, network structure, and brain-behavior relationships. Individual-level measures include: Seed-based Correlation Analysis,
Independent Component Analysis, Amplitude of Low Frequency Fluctuations (ALFF) and Fractional ALFF, Regional Homogeneity, Voxel-Mirrored
Homotopic Connectivity, and Network Centrality (Degree and Eigenvector). At the group level, C-PAC features Connectome-Wide Association
Studies, Bootstrap Analysis of Stable Clusters, and integrated group statistics using FSL/FEAT. Additionally, users can easily extract preprocessed
time-series data and connectivity matrices for analysis with other packages.

Poster Session G

G109
A PRECISE PROBLEM IN MODEL-BASED FMRI.

Erik Peterson1,
Carol A Seger2; 1University of Pittsburgh, 2Colorado State University — In a
series of Monte Carlo simulations, treating Rescorla–Wagner (RW) reinforcement learning models as a case study, we investigated the precision
of model-based fMRI. The RW model is a popular computational model
used to predict the magnitude of the BOLD signal in human subjects. We
intuitively assumed the temporally variable, trial-level, RW predictions
were sufficiently complex such that a predictor reaching significance (in
a versus-baseline contrast) strongly suggests the model, or an otherwise
very similar pattern of activity, is present in the BOLD data. Our simulations suggest this assumption is invalid. For example, when noisy BOLD
timecourses were created based on simulated behavioral accuracy, and
regressed onto the two RW predictors (value and reward prediction error)
the predictors reached significance about 30% of the time, with over 15%
of the 10,000 simulations at p < 0.005. Follow-up analyses suggest that this
loss of expected precision is due the convolution of RW predictors with the
haemodynamic response function (HRF). The HRF temporally blurs each
model’s predictions, causing otherwise dissimilar models to converge. As a
result, we suggest that model-based analyses should be confined to a model
comparison framework, focused on degree of fit between alternative hypothetical models. Model comparison approaches are immune to the specificity issue our simulations suggest is possible, even likely, using standard
null hypothesis tests.

G110
META-ANALYSIS OF FUNCTIONAL READING SYSTEMS IN READERS WITH AND WITHOUT DYSLEXIA IN DIFFERENT LANGUAGES
Courtney Pollack1, Joanna Christodoulou2, Gigi Luk1; 1Harvard University, 2Massachusetts Institute of Technology — Functional brain activations in readers
with and without dyslexia have been based on comparisons of relatively
small homogenous groups of readers. While this approach has been informative in identifying signatures of brain activation in dyslexia and typical reading, it is unclear the extent to which findings are consistent across
age and language. Using Activation Likelihood Estimation (ALE), two
meta-analyses were conducted to investigate the difference in letter processing and word processing between readers with and without dyslexia,
spanning all age groups and alphabetic languages. Out of 508 PUBMED
results (search criteria: ((dyslexia) OR “reading difficulty”) AND ((fMRI)
OR (PET))), 13 were retained because they used fMRI or PET, were not case
studies, did not apply to special populations (e.g., schizophrenics), used
whole brain analysis, reported foci by reader groups, used visual tasks that
involved letter or word processing, and only involved alphabetic languages.
For letter processing tasks, typical readers showed reliable activation in the
middle, inferior and superior frontal gyri, precentral gyrus, cingulate gyrus
and thalamus. Readers with dyslexia recruited a smaller left hemisphere
frontal region, but larger regions in the right inferior frontal gyrus. For
word processing, typical readers showed more bilateral activation in the
inferior frontal region while readers with dyslexia showed activation in left
inferior and middle frontal regions, left lingual gyrus and cerebellum. The
present study increased the heterogeneity of tasks, samples and languages
to identify different brain regions supporting letter and word processing in
readers with and without dyslexia.

G111
SPATIAL SMOOTHING AND THE FUNCTIONAL LOCALIZATION OF
NUCLEUS ACCUMBENS ACTIVITY Matthew Sacchet1, Brian Knutson1;
Stanford University — Neuroimaging suggests that the subcortical striatum
plays a critical role in human reward processing. Analysis of FMRI data
requires several preprocessing steps, some of which entail tradeoffs. For
instance, while spatial smoothing can enhance statistical power, it may also
bias localization towards regions that contain more gray than white matter.
In a meta-analysis and reanalysis of an existing dataset, we sought to
determine whether spatial smoothing could systematically bias the spatial
localization of foci related to reward anticipation in the nucleus accumbens
(NAcc). An Activation Likelihood Estimate (ALE) meta-analysis revealed
that peak ventral striatal ALE foci for studies that used smaller spatial
smoothing kernels were more anterior than those identified for studies that
used larger kernels. Additionally, subtraction analysis of findings for studies that used smaller versus larger smoothing kernels revealed a significant

1

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

231

Poster Session G
cluster of differential activity in the left relatively anterior NAcc (Talairach
coordinates: -10, 9, -1). A second meta-analysis revealed that larger smoothing kernels were correlated with more posterior localizations of NAcc activation foci (p < 0.015), but revealed no significant associations with other
potentially relevant parameters. Finally, repeated analysis of a representative dataset processed at different smoothing kernels (i.e., 0-12 mm) also
indicated that smoothing systematically yielded more posterior activation
foci in the NAcc (p < 0.005). The current results suggest that spatial smoothing can systematically bias the spatial localization of striatal activity. These
findings have implications both for historical interpretation of past findings
related to reward processing and for the analysis of future studies.

G112
THE EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS REFLECT THE PERCEPTIVE
INTERACTION BETWEEN COLORFUL STIMULI AND RGB-MODULATED BACKGROUND ILLUMINATION Kwangsub So1, Myeonghoon
Ryu1, Hyensou Pak2, Yeonhong Jung2, Sejin Oh1, Byoung-Kyong Min1; 1Korea
University, 2LG Electronics Inc. — One’s favorance of commercial products
would be susceptible to the surrounding illumination condition. However,
neurophysiological effects of background illumination on favorance-decision still remain unclear. Therefore, using EEG, we investigated the illumination effect on one’s favorance of the RGB-modulated shirt-design with
manipulating the RGB values of surrounding illumination. We examined
the early dominant event-related potentials. All measures were analyzed
with a repeated measures analysis of variance, which included three within-subjects factors labeled as ‘illumination’ (Red vs. Green vs. Blue vs.
White), ‘stimulus’ (Red vs. Green vs. Blue vs. Gray), and ‘favorance’. We
observed a significant main effect of ‘illumination’ (F(3,24)=4.464, p<0.05)
and an interaction effect (‘illumination’ x ‘stimulus’; F(9,72)=2.461, p<0.05)
in the frontal P220. The post-hoc test revealed that the frontal P220 amplitudes were significantly modulated by the RGB ratios of the surrounding
illumination when the green (F(3,27)=2.930, p=0.052) and blue stimuli
(F(3,33)=3.064, p<0.05) were presented. These observations indicate that
illumination might be evaluated around the frontal region after 200ms poststimulus. In addition, the parieto-occipital P270 amplitudes were significantly influenced by the background illumination (F(3,24)=3.976, P<0.05),
and exhibited a three-way interaction (F(9,72)=2.097, P<0.05), revealing the
‘illumination’ main effect on the red (F(3,30)=4.297, p<0.05) and green stimuli (F(3,30)=3.484, p<0.05) particularly within the favorable design. Presumably, the evaluation of colorful design is considerably dependent on
the perceptive interaction with its colorful surroundings. Such neurophysiological reflection of the surrounding illumination indicates the substantial
involvement of cognitive processing of the background illumination in the
assessment of product-favorance, which potentially affects the purchase
intention.

G113
ACTION VIDEO GAMES AS A TOOL FOR IMPROVING VISION IN
INDIVIDUALS WITH ‘LAZY EYE’ Mor Nahum1, Indu Vedamurthy2, Jessica
D. Bayliss3, Daphne Bavelier1,4, Dennis M. Levi1; 1UC Berkeley, 2University of
Rochester, 3Rochester Institute of Technology, 4University of Geneva — Action
video games have been shown to improve various aspects of normal vision,
including contrast sensitivity, spatial visual acuity, crowding, and visual
attention (see Green & Bavelier, 2006, for review). Thus, they may be useful
as a therapeutic tool to enhance visual skills in clinical populations. The goal
of the current study was to test the effectiveness of action video games as
a treatment for amblyopia (‘lazy eye’), a developmental visual impairment
that is characterized by reduced visual acuity, and (sometimes partial) loss
of stereo-vision. Sixteen adults with amblyopia were trained for 40 hours
over the course of 10-20 weeks using a custom-dichoptic version of the
’Unreal Tournament’ action game, in which the input to the non-amblyopic
eye was degraded (Bayliss et al., 2012). Visual acuity (VA) and stereo-vision
were assessed at regular intervals and following a two-month no-contact
period. Crowding and reading speed were assessed pre- and post-training.
We found that VA significantly improved by, on average, 41% (p<.00001).
VA continued to improve up to at least 26 hours of game play, and plateaued between 26 and 40 hours (post-hoc: p=.72). Benefits were retained
following two months of no-contact (p<.0001; n=8). Stereo vision improved
for 8 of the subjects (p<0.04). Crowding ability improved following training
(p<.005), and improvements in reading speed approached statistical sig-

232

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
nificance (p=.09). We conclude that action video games can help improve
vision for individuals with amblyopia. Our results further strengthen the
therapeutic potential of action video games as a tool for improving vision
in clinical populations.

G114
SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL CHARACTERISTICS OF NEURAL PATTERNS UNDERLYING FACE FAMILIARITY Vaidehi Natu1, Alice O’Toole1;
The University of Texas at Dallas — Humans can recognize familiar faces
from challenging viewing conditions. The goal of this study was to investigate differences in brain response patterns as unfamiliar faces become
visually familiar. Using a pattern-based classification approach, we examined spatial and temporal characteristics of brain activations across areas
implicated in familiar face processing (FFA, OFA, lateral-occipital areas,
precuneus, and parietal areas). First, a behavioral paradigm was developed
to train participants to acquire high-, medium-, and low-degrees of familiarity, varying exposure levels to multiple views of faces. Recognition performance for naturalistic, whole-body images of the learned faces increased
with increasing familiarity. Next, in an fMRI experiment, a new set of participants learned faces in the high, medium, and low familiarization conditions before the scan. Neural data were recorded while participants viewed
the familiarized faces, unfamiliar faces, and scenes. The classifier discriminated brain responses to faces from all pairs of familiarity conditions (e.g.,
high vs. low). The best discrimination was found using a combination of
face-selective (FFA-OFA), lateral-occipital, and parietal areas, suggesting
coordination across areas for neural coding of familiarity. For FFA-OFA,
we found increased neural separability as familiarity-level differences
increased. A temporal pattern analysis of FFA-OFA showed that the neural
responses to highly familiar vs. unfamiliar faces were discriminated earlier in time than lower familiarity conditions. Thus, larger differences in
familiarity status were detectable earlier in the temporal sequence. Finally,
neural differences underlying familiar face representations were based on
patterns rather than magnitude differences, confirming that brain regions
interact during the formation of face codes.

1

G115
SEX HORMONE INFLUENCES ON GLOBAL-LOCAL PROCESSING
Ourania Petasis1, Belinda Pletzer2, Larry Cahill1; 1University of California, Irvine,
2
University of Salzburg, Austria — Few studies have looked at sex differences
in the processing of global (e.g. gist) and local (e.g. detail) information. We
investigated the effects of sex hormones on global-local processing in the
Navon figure visual perception task. Participants included healthy, naturally cycling women in the follicular (low hormone) phase and luteal
(high hormone) phase of the menstrual cycle. Subjects were presented with
stimuli that consisted of large letters (global level) made up of small letters (local level) and were instructed to indicate whether or not they saw
either of two target letters at a specified level (i.e. global level only; local
level only). When instructed to attend to targets at the global level (“global
targets”), women in the follicular phase reacted more slowly if the target
was present at the local level than if no target was present at all (local-toglobal interference; p<0.001), and this effect was also seen when they were
instructed to attend to targets at the local level (“local targets”) and the
target was present at the global level (global-to-local interference; p<0.001).
The mean reaction times of women in the follicular phase were comparable
for global and local targets (no precedence effect). By contrast, women in
the luteal phase responded significantly faster to global targets than to local
targets (global precedence effect; p<0.001), though they did not show global-to-local or local-to-global interference. These findings suggest that levels
of sex hormones can affect global-local processing. Further investigation of
this experiment in men and women on hormonal contraception is ongoing.

G116
CHOLINERGIC ENHANCEMENT OF SINGLE SESSION PERCEPTUAL LEARNING IS LOCATION SPECIFIC Matthew Peters1, Elizabeth
McDevitt2, Summer Sheremata1, Sara Mednick2, Michael Silver1; 1University of
California, Berkeley, 2University of California, Riverside — Perceptual learning
is an essential feature of everyday life, allowing people to acquire expertise about the visual details of their environment. The neural processes
underlying perceptual learning remain unclear. Previous studies demonstrate that the neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh) may modulate the

2013 Annual Meeting
magnitude and specificity of perceptual learning. The goal of the current
study was to determine whether administration of the acetylcholinesterase
inhibitor donepezil increases the magnitude and specificity of perceptual
learning on a texture discrimination task (TDT). We utilized a double-blind,
placebo-controlled crossover design (N=8). On each experimental day, participants took a pill and were trained on the TDT. Perceptual learning was
tested the following day. Subjects were also tested for long-term learning
effects at the locations trained during donepezil and placebo administrations, as well as a third, untrained location. We found significant perceptual learning for the trained locations under both placebo and donepezil,
and long-term perceptual learning was greater for the trained locations
compared to the untrained location. There was a trend for greater longterm learning for the location trained under donepezil compared to placebo (p=0.08). These data suggest that increased ACh levels during training
influence the magnitude and specificity of perceptual learning within a
single training session.

G117
COARSE-TO-FINE CATEGORIZATION OF SCENES WITHIN THE
PARAHIPPOCAMPAL PLACE AREA Carole Peyrin1, Benoit Musel1, Louise
Kauffmann1, Nathalie Guyader2, Cédric Pichat1, Stephen Ramanoël1,3, JeanFrançois Le Bas3, Alan Chauvin1; 1LPNC, CNRS UMR5105, 2GIPSA-lab, CNRS
UMR5216, 3GIN, INSERM U836 — Neurophysiological, behavioural and
computational data indicate that visual analysis may start with a parallel
extraction of different elementary attributes at different spatial frequencies,
and follows a predominantly coarse-to-fine processing sequence (low spatial frequencies-LSF are extracted first, followed by high spatial frequencies-HSF). In the present fMRI study, we tested whether such processing
occurs in scene-selective cortical regions. Fourteen participants were run
on functional scans during which they performed a categorization task of
indoor vs outdoor scenes, using dynamic scene stimuli. Dynamic scenes
were composed of six spatial frequency-filtered images of the same scene,
from LSF to HSF or from HSF to LSF, allowing us to mimic a coarse-to-fine
(CtF) or the reverse fine-to-coarse (FtC) sequence. In order to determine
scene selective regions, participants were run on a localizer scan during
which they viewed scenes and faces and performed a one-back task.
Participants categorized CtF sequences faster than FtC sequences, supporting the idea that CtF processing is an advantageous strategy for scene
categorization. Both CtF and FtC sequences (relative to fixation) activated
occipito-temporal areas bilaterally, involving the parahippocampal gyrus.
Data from the localizer showed that the contrast between scenes and faced
elicited activation within the parahippocampal place area (PPA) and the
retrosplenial cortex (RSC). These regions were defined as regions of interest
(ROI) and ROIs activity was compared between CtF and FtC sequences.
Only the PPA was more activated by the CtF than the FtC sequences. The
present study suggests the coarse-to-fine strategy as a plausible modus
operandi in the PPA.

G118
LOOMING EMOTIONAL FACES MODULATE THE MOTION AFTEREFFECT, BUT RECEDING FACES DO NOT. John Plass1, Kevin Hartstein1, Emmanuel Guzman-Martinez1, Marcia Grabowecky1, Satoru Suzuki1;
1
Northwestern University — Emotional faces help us to orient to behaviorally
relevant information and are known to attract attention (e.g., Vuilleumier,
Armony, Driver, & Dolan, 2001), but is this true under all circumstances?
Looming visual stimuli are also known to attract attention compared to
receding stimuli, presumably because looming stimuli are more behaviorally relevant than are receding stimuli (Franconeri & Simons, 2003). These
results suggest that emotional faces should produce stronger modulation of
visual processing when looming than when receding. We investigated this
hypothesis using an indirect measure, a motion aftereffect. Adaptation to
a moving stimulus generates a motion aftereffect, the apparent motion of a
static stimulus in the direction opposite of that of the adapting stimulus. It is
known that attention strengthens motion aftereffects (Huk, Russ, & Heeger,
2001). We compared motion aftereffects generated by looming and receding emotional (angry or happy) faces or neutral faces. Observers adapted to
the moving stimulus for 20 sec., and then viewed a static test stimulus that
was a scrambled composite of neutral and emotional face parts, and they
reported the duration of the motion aftereffect. Motion aftereffects were
longer after adaptation to emotional faces (happy or angry) than to neutral

Poster Session G
faces, but did not differ for receding faces. Our results suggest that emotional stimuli do not always modulate the motion aftereffect, perhaps due
to less effective capture of attention by receding emotional faces.

G119
SPATIAL PROGRESSION OF PERCEPTUAL LEARNING IN VISUAL
FEATURE CONJUNCTION SEARCH Eric Reavis1, Sebastian Frank1, Peter
Tse1; 1Dartmouth College — Search for conjunctions of visual features is typically slow and demanding. However, search efficiency can improve with
practice. The specific characteristics of this type of learning and the mechanisms underlying it are poorly understood. To investigate the properties
of conjunction search learning, we trained observers on a color-location
conjunction search task with a variable number of distractors for ten days.
Search time increased linearly as a function of the number of distractors.
Participants searched a circular array of stimuli containing 4 concentric
rings of up to 8 stimuli each while maintaining central fixation. Eye movements were monitored with an eye-tracker. Over the course of the training,
search efficiency improved dramatically. Early in training, searches took
longer the more distractors were presented, but, by the end of training,
the number of distractors had little effect on search times. This increase in
efficiency reflects perceptual learning of the different conjunctions of features defining the target and distractors. Here we demonstrate that the perceptual learning of feature conjunctions has a distinct spatial progression.
Learning begins near the fovea and gradually spreads outward across the
visual field as training proceeds. This spatial progression of learning offers
clues about possible mechanisms whereby the brain might alter processing
of the stimuli to enable more efficient detection of the search target. Specifically, the gradual spatial spread of the learning suggests that changes
in processing within retinotopically organized brain areas may occur with
learning, corroborating recent neuroimaging findings (Frank, Reavis, Tse,
& Greenlee, Under Review).

G120
THE NEURAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING PASSIVE AND ACTIVE
PROCESSING OF NUMEROSITY Bert Reynvoet1, Titia Gebuis1; 1Univer-

sity of Leuven — To investigate the difference in passive viewing and active
processing of numerosity, we presented participants arrays of dots and
concurrently measured their EEG. In the first condition participants, naïve
to the subject under study passively viewed the dot-arrays. In the second
condition, the participants were informed about the changes in numerosity and had to actively process numerosity. Occasionally, the participants
had to judge the number of dots presented. The visual properties of the
dot-arrays were controlled and could therefore not explain possible numerosity related effects. The results revealed no numerosity related effects in
the passive and active condition. Instead, when the data was reorganized
according to visual cue size, strong effects of the visual cues were present at
lateral occipital and parietal electrode sites. These electrode sites and time
windows correspond to the ERP components often suggested to support
numerosity processes. Furthermore, a larger central-parietal P3 amplitude
effect was present for active versus passive numerosity processing. This
result was not influenced by numerosity itself and could not be explained
by response processing. It therefore appears to reflect general cognitive
processes. Together, our results show that we do not (automatically)
extract numerosity from a visual scene during passive or active processing
of numerosity. Instead, these results are consistent with the notion that we
rely on the continuous visual sensory properties of numerosity to make
numerosity judgments.

G121
ILLUSORY ALIGNMENT ACROSS THE BLIND SPOT DISTORTS
PERCEPTION OF NEARBY SPACE Nicholas Root1, Azaadeh Goharzad1,
Vilayanur Ramachandran1; 1University of California, San Diego — Lettvin (1976)
observed that when offset vertical line segments are displayed such that the
gap between them falls in the blind spot, an illusory alignment of the segments occurs: when they are perceptually completed across the blind spot,
a single vertical line is perceived. It is an open question whether this illusory alignment affects nearby space: can other objects get “dragged along”?
To investigate this question, we induced perceptual completion across the
blind spot using either collinear or offset line segments. Dot probes, which
were either collinear or offset, were presented near, but not on, the line seg-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

233

Poster Session G
ments. Subjects indicated whether or not they thought the perceived line
was straight, and whether or not they thought the two dots were aligned.
Despite being unable to distinguish between collinear and offset line segments (the line always appeared straight), subjects consistently made more
errors judging the collinearity of the dots when the line segments were
offset. Our results demonstrate that illusory alignment across the blind spot
distorts the perception of nearby space, and confirms that the perceptually
completed offset lines are perceived as collinear due a true illusory alignment rather than a lack of visual acuity (as previously suggested by Durgin
et al 1995).

G122
IS THE CONTRALESIONAL HEMISPHERE HYPERACTIVATED IN
NEGLECT? Silvia Savazzi1, Sonia Mele2, Debora Brignani3, Chiara Bagattini1;
1

University of Verona and National Institute of Neuroscience, Italy, 2University of
Udine, Udine and IRCCS Eugenio Medea, San Vito al Tagliamento Pordenone,
Italy, 3Cognitive Neuroscience Unit, IRCCS “Centro S. Giovanni di Dio FBF”, Brescia, Italy — The dysfunction underlying neglect syndrome is traditionally
explained on the basis of “rivalry models” which postulate a pathological
hyperactivation of the unaffected hemisphere due to the reduced inhibitory
influences from the lesioned hemisphere. The aim of the present study is to
test these models analyzing the effect that repetitive Trancranial Magnetic
Stimulation (rTMS) exerts on the stimulated and contralateral hemispheres
in the processing of visual stimuli. Specifically we aim at assessing the
contribution of left and right parietal cortices in an impaired neglect-like
functioning induced rTMS in healthy participants. 14 healthy volunteers
performed a Line Bisection task and a simple detection task of unilateral
checkerboards stimuli. Both tasks were performed either before and after
30 minutes of rTMS (1 Hz) over the right posterior parietal cortex. The EEG
signal was continuously recorded throughout the experiment. The efficacy of rTMS in inducing neglect-like phenomena was confirmed by the
Line Bisection task where participants showed a rightward deviation after
rTMS, a performance comparable to that of neglect patients. Detection task
results showed that the effect of rTMS was a lengthening of reaction times
for both left and right visual stimuli and a reduction of the amplitude of
P200 component registered both on left and right parietal sites. Therefore,
our results did not show an hyperactivation of the left hemisphere due to
the inhibition of the right hemisphere (as theorized by “rivalry models”).
Conversely, the inhibition of the right parietal cortex induced a spreading
of the inhibition to the homologous left hemisphere.

G123
GENERALIZABILITY OF LEARNING IN THE VISUAL PERIPHERY OF
ADULT HUMANS Danielle Shaked1, Aaron Levi1, Anasuya Das1, Krystel R.
Huxlin1; 1University of Rochester — Retraining vision may be an important
therapeutic tool for people with vision loss and for the elderly, who can
experience difficulties with peripheral discriminations, particularly under
visually noisy conditions. Our goal here was to characterize the impact of
training the visual periphery with noisy stimuli, and to assess the specificity of visual learning to training parameters related to the stimulus, visual
field location, and trained eye. Outcome measures were contrast sensitivity
for direction and orientation discrimination – two basic measures of lowlevel visual performance. Twelve naïve, healthy adults, between the ages of
19-42 were recruited. They were trained on a global direction discrimination task with noisy, random dot stimuli, and their contrast sensitivity was
measured before and after training. Training and testing were performed
monocularly, while fixation was enforced with an eye-tracker. All subjects
demonstrated perceptual learning on the noisy, global direction discrimination task, and that learning transferred across the eyes and to different
(untrained) visual field locations, suggesting that it occurred in higher level
visual areas. Moreover, training significantly improved contrast sensitivity
for direction discrimination of drifting gratings, especially at low spatial
frequencies. While learning also transferred to orientation discrimination, it did so to a lesser extent, especially when stimuli were stationary.
Thus, training subjects to discriminate noisy motion stimuli in their visual
periphery improved visual performance across stimuli, eyes, and visual
field locations. These results suggest that there are fundamental benefits
of directed visual training for altering the efficacy of visual processing in
normal, healthy adults.

234

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

G124
INVESTIGATING THE GENETIC BASIS OF LEARNING IN STRATEGIC GAMES: A GENE SET ANALYSIS Eric Set1, Lusha Zhu2, Songfa
Zhong3, Daniel Houser4, Richard Ebstein3, Soohong Chew3, Ming Hsu5; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute,
3
National University of Singapore, 4George Mason University, 5University of California, Berkeley — Decision-making in the presence of other competitive
intelligent agents requires individuals to anticipate and respond to actions
of others, in addition to learning about the rewards and punishments available in the environment. There is now substantial evidence that dopamine
and frontostriatal circuits are critically involved in such strategic behavior.
Our previous neuroimaging data suggest medial prefrontal cortices and the
striatum underlie dissociable systems involved in strategic learning. Here
we study the impact of variations in genes that differentially impact striatal and prefrontal dopamine function. Using a well-established model of
strategic learning, we studied the behavior of 217 individuals in a repeated
competitive economic game. To incorporate genetic information, we used
principle component analysis to transform SNPs in each gene in the dopaminergic pathway to eigenSNPs. Unlike SNP-level analysis, this procedure
retains more of the genetic variation available for analysis, while remaining computationally tractable. We found that variations in the COMT gene,
which preferentially modulates prefrontal dopamine degradation, and to
a lesser extent, MAO, influences behavioral weighting between belief and
reinforcement learning. In contrast, we found that DRD2 and DAT, which
differentially affect striatal dopamine functioning, influenced discounting
of past experiences. Statistical significance was assessed through both permutation tests and comparison to the empirical distribution of other genes
with similar statistical properties. Our results suggest that genes associated
with dopamine functioning affects strategic learning in humans. Furthermore, compared to candidate gene and traditional GWAS methods, geneset analysis is a promising means of combining greater power with existing
knowledge of biological mechanisms.

G125
REWARD EXPECTATION AND PREDICTION ERROR IN HUMAN
MEDIAL FRONTAL CORTEX: COMPUTATIONAL MODELING AND
NEUROIMAGING. Massimo Silvetti1,2, Elena Nuñez Castellar1, Clémence
Roger3, Tom Verguts1,2; 1Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2GIFMI (Ghent
Institute for Functional and Metabolic Imaging), Ghent, Belgium, 3NeuroSpin,
Gif/Yvette, France — Various competing theories of human ACC function
have been proposed, such as reward computation, error detection, conflict
monitoring, error likelihood estimation, and estimation of reward volatility. In nonhuman primates, this area formulates reward expectations
(value) and computes differences between reward expectations and the
actual outcomes (prediction error). In previous computational and fMRI
work, we presented a unifying Reinforcement Learning-based theory for
ACC functions (Silvetti et al., 2011, 2012). This theory was instantiated in
a biologically plausible computational model (Reward Value and Prediction Model (RVPM)). Here, we used the RVPM to generate predictions on
the EEG time course of human ACC during a reinforcement learning task.
Independent component analysis (ICA) was used to localize the signal
source corresponding to the ACC. The RVPM correctly predicted the ACC
activity during both reward expectation (value) and prediction-outcome
comparison (prediction error). During the cue period of each trial, the ACC
generated a negative slow wave whose amplitude was proportional to the
probability of receiving a reward. During the outcome phase, the ACC
activity, measured as error related negativity (ERN), correct related negativity (CRN) and feedback related negativity (FRN), was proportional to
the prediction error magnitude. This suggests a role for human ACC in the
online formulation of reward expectations by mean of prediction errors.
More generally, it provides further corroboration to the reinforcement
learning-based explanation of the ACC functions.

G126
DORSAL ANTERIOR ACTIVATES WHEN DISAGREEING ONLY WITH
PERCEIVED EXPERT NOT PEER ADVICE Victoria Suen1, Matthew R.G.
Brown1, Randall K. Morck1, Peter H. Silverstone1; 1University of Alberta — The
brain mechanisms involved in decision-making, particularly obedience to
various forms of advice, remain uncertain. We designed a task in which

2013 Annual Meeting
individuals were presented with a choice to buy or not buy a stock, along
with advice on which action to take. This advice was given by either
an “external financial expert” or a by a non-financial “peer”. In the first
1/3 of trials all advice was good, so participants were trained to follow
it. During the rest of the trials the advice became increasingly poor until
it was always wrong. We examined what brain changes occurred when
individuals decided to disobey the advice. Forty-two adult subjects completed the task during a 60 minute fMRI session. No significant activation
was found when participants were agreeing with the advice made by the
“expert” (n=23) or with their “peer” (n=19). However, when choosing to
“disobey” the “expert” marked activation was found in the dorsal anterior
cingulate cortex. In contrast, participants who chose to “disobey” a “peer”
showed no such activation. These results suggest that “disobedience” to
a perceived expert, but not a peer, causes activation in the dorsal anterior
cingulate cortex. This novel finding supports previous findings that this
brain region is involved in error detection, but that activation also depends
on the perceived authority of the advisor. These results may have relevance
for understanding fluctuations in financial decision-making and the stock
market, as well as for gambling behavior, particularly when individuals or
groups follow “expert” advice.

G127
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EXPECTED RISKS AND RETURNS IN
CHILDREN’S, ADOLESCENTS’ AND ADULTS’ RISKY CHOICE Anna
Van Duijvenvoorde1,2, Hilde Huizenga1, Leah Somerville3, Alisa Powers4, Wouter
Weeda1, Mauricio Delgado5, B.J. Casey4, Elke Weber6, Figner Bernd1,6,7; 1University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Leiden University, The Netherlands,
3
Harvard University, U.S.A., 4Weill Medical College of Cornell University, U.S.A.,
5
Rutgers University, U.S.A., 6Columbia University, U.S.A., 7Radboud University,
The Netherlands — Risk taking in adolescence has been explained by an
imbalance between affective-motivational versus cognitive-control processes, caused by differential subcortical versus prefrontal maturational
trajectories. So far, it is unknown which specific processes drive adolescent
risk-taking and there is growing interest to examine the psychological and
neural mechanisms of adolescent risk-taking. To investigate the processes
that underlie age differences in risk taking, we decomposed risky choices
into components of the risk-return model. In an fMRI-scanner, 72 participants (23 children, 25 adolescents, 24 adults) played a dynamic risky-choice
task: the Columbia Card Task. For each decision a player faced--to either
turn over a card or move on to the next round--we calculated the expected
value (EV: gain-probability*gain amount + loss-probability*loss amount)
and the expected risks (standard deviation of the values of possible choice
outcomes). Results showed that greater EV increased the probability to take
a card (people liked returns), whereas greater risk decreased this probability (people disliked risks). Age analyses showed a linear increase in EV-sensitivity, whereas risk-sensitivity increased steeply from childhood to adolescence. As expected, whole-brain analyses showed that greater EV led to
increased activation in the ventromedial PFC (vmPFC) and the ventral striatum. Moreover, vmPFC activation increased linearly across age groups.
Increasing risk led, as expected, to increased activation in thalamus, but
also in the dorsal striatum. Thalamus activation increased linearly across
age groups, whereas activation in the striatum peaked in adolescents.
These results illustrate the different developmental trajectories of risk- and
return-sensitivity underlying risky choice across adolescence.

G128
CHOICE AND REWARD PREDICTION IN MEDIAL PREFRONTAL
CORTEX Eliana Vassena1,2, Ruth Krebs1,2, Massimo Silvetti1,2, Wim Fias1,2,
Tom Verguts1,2; 1Ghent University, 2Ghent Institute for Functional and Metabolic
Imaging — Accurately predicting benefits is crucial for survival. Medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) is a core structure for such predictions (Jessup et al.,
2010, Silvetti et al., 2012). It has been suggested that the possibility to make
a choice influences this prediction (Peterson et al., 2010) but this relationship has not been systematically investigated. A growing body of evidence
outlines different functional profiles for subregions in the mPFC. Anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC) is assigned a prominent role in action value estimation and prediction. In contrast, orbifrontal cortex (OFC) is thought to
be primarily dedicated to reward representations (Rushworth et al., 2007).
In order to disentangle the contrasting roles of these regions, as well as the
potential interaction between choice and prediction, a gambling paradigm

Poster Session G
was implemented (adapted from Jessup et al., 2010). On each trial, participants were given two options, a safe small win and a gamble. The gamble
could be risky with an unlikely but high payoff, or less risky but with lower
pay-off. The possibility of choosing between the two options was manipulated between trials. Functional MRI data (at 3Tesla) were collected. In the
analysis, feedback-related activation was systematically sampled along a
dorso-ventral trajectory throughout the mPFC. The ACC region responded
strongly and selectively to a positive unexpected outcome, irrespective of
choice condition. In contrast, the OFC region was sensitive to positive outcomes only, irrespective of probability. In addition, OFC showed greater
involvement in the no-choice condition. This study identifies complementary roles for different parts of mPFC in value computation.

G129
BOUNDARIES OF HUMAN SOCIALITY: THE CASE OF PSYCHOPATHY Daniel Walsh1, Eric Set2, Edelyn Verona2, Ming Hsu1; 1University of California, Berkeley, 2University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Individuals with
psychopathy generate a disproportionate share of societal damage, comprising 15 to 30% of correctional offenders in North America. Yet, despite
these striking abnormalities, studies of social behavior have been relatively
rare and have yielded mixed findings. Here we studied social preferences
of a cohort of prison parolees evaluated for psychopathy using a battery
of economic games. We found that psychopathic individuals exhibited a
surprising degree of prosocial behavior. First, they were willing to sacrifice
their own payoffs in order to increase the payoffs of another. In addition,
they made consistent choices when adjudicating between the payoffs of
two anonymous participants. Indeed, using a behavioral model from economics, a quantitative comparison of the psychopath group to matched
controls found similar behavior in the pure distribution task, suggesting
shared norms of distributional fairness. However, in the dictator game,
the psychopathy group showed greater sensitivity to whether they were
earning more than the other person. When ahead, the psychopathy group
showed relatively greater generosity. Conversely, they were sharply less
generous in situations when they were earning less than the other person.
These findings are consistent with qualitative descriptions of narcissism
in psychopaths. Taken together, we demonstrate that these tasks, along
with behavior models of choice, elucidate differences in meaningful ways,
which may provide a deeper understanding of psychopathy.

G130
THE DYNAMICS OF PROBABILITY DISTORTION IN DECISION
UNDER RISK Tze Yun Wang1, Shih Wei Wu1,2; 1Institute of Neuroscience,
National Yang-Ming University, 2Brain Research Center,National Yang-Ming University — In decision under risk, there is accumulating evidence suggesting that people distort information about probability and that the pattern
of distortion tends to change depending on how probability information
is revealed to the chooser. When probability is explicitly described to the
subjects, subjects tend to overweight small probabilities but underweight
moderate to large probabilities. In contrast, when information about probability is acquired through experience, the opposite pattern of distortion was
observed. Despite recent advances, it remains little known how the pattern
of distortion might dynamically change as people gather more information about probability through experience. We investigated the dynamics
of probability distortion in a lottery decision task. In each trial, the subjects first sampled from a deck of cards with replacement that contained
two possible fractal images. After the sampled outcome was revealed, each
fractal image was assigned a monetary amount ($x or $0) and the subjects
were asked to choose between the deck and a sure gain. We systematically
manipulated the probability distribution over possible outcomes and the
monetary gains. By having the subjects make a decision after collecting
each sample point, we could estimate how the subjects distort probability
when making decisions at different phases during the experiment. Preliminary results (n=8) suggested that the subjects’ choice changed as a function
of both the probability of reward and experience. In addition, there was an
interaction between probability and experience on choice behavior, suggesting that the pattern of distortion dynamically changed as a function of
experience.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

235

Poster Session G

G131
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN P100 PREDICT COGNITIVE COMPONENTS OF GENERAL INTELLIGENCE AND CREATIVITY Joseph
Frantz1, Michael Weisend3, Jessica Carrasco1, Ranee Flores1, Kim Paulson3,
Sephira Ryman1, Iris Toribio1, Andrei Vakhtin1, Rex Jung1,2; 1University of New
Mexico Department of Neurosurgery, 2University of New Mexico Department
of Psychology, 3The Mind Research Network — Arthur Jensen’s lifetime of
research led to many theories on intelligence; one being that neural conduction velocity (NCV) could predict General intelligence (g). We hypothesized that, through the improved spatial resolution of MEG, we would
detect relationships between the P100 primary visual response and aspects
of cognition including intelligence. 30 subjects (16 female) performed 100
trials of an Inductive reasoning task while seated in an Elekta Neuromag
Vector View 306 channel MEG. They also completed a broad battery of tests
of intelligence (e.g., Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence), personality
(e.g., NEO-FFI), and creative cognition (e.g., Torrance) outside of the scanner. Temporal Signal space Separation (TSSS) and 100 Hz low pass filters
were applied using Neuromag Maxfilter. Data was epoched into 10 second
averages using MNE. A mask of each subject’s bilateral occipital region
was used to create an average activation time-course of peak amplitude
and latency (75 – 145ms) estimates for right, left, and total occipital regions.
Using a stepwise linear regression, controlling for sex, with amplitude and
latency as the independent variables, and factor scores representing “g”
and aspects of creative cognition (e.g., Implicit Reasoning, Torrance, processing speed) as dependent variables, we found that the maximum amplitude of the right occipital lobe predicted g (r2 = .20), and latency of the P100
response predicted creative cognition ( r2 = .18). This supports Jensen’s
theory regarding conduction velocity and “g”, and to our knowledge is the
first time that correlation between the P100 and other cognitive measures
has been described.

G132
CROSSING ZERO IN SIMPLE ARITHMETIC WITH POSITIVE AND
NEGATIVE NUMBERS Margaret M. Gullick1,2, George Wolford2; 1Northwestern University, 2Dartmouth College — Recent work has begun to investigate
the neural mechanisms involved in understanding arithmetic with negative numbers, and their similarity to those used with positives. Simple
subtraction with negatives may particularly involve procedural arithmetic
knowledge and problem transformations (e.g., “minus a negative is plus
a positive”), unlike with positive numbers (Gullick & Wolford, in press).
However, this report used only problems where operands and solutions
had the same sign (e.g., -5 - -3 = -2), though subtraction with negatives
can also involve solutions which cross zero (e.g., -3 - -5 = 2). These crossing problems may be more difficult, as they require a relatively continuous number line representation for expedient solution. We investigated
whether these crossing subtraction problems were understood differently
from their non-crossing counterparts, and whether there were differences
in processing between operand sign conditions, using fMRI. Negative-operand subtraction problems did not demonstrate a significant effect of
crossing, either behaviorally (in RT or accuracy) or neurally in any brain
region. However, positive crossing problems were significantly slower
and less accurate than non-crossing, and demonstrated increased activity
in the left superior parietal lobule (including the intraparietal sulcus) and
the bilateral inferior frontal gyrus, potentially reflecting increased use of
calculation strategies due to difficulty. As such, changing from negative
operands to a positive result does not seem to increase or decrease problem
difficulty, but moving from the positive to the negative side of the number
line (e.g., from generally easier to generally harder problems) may be particularly taxing.

G133
STRATEGIC TRAINING TO ENHANCE FRONTAL LOBE REASONING
IN ADULT TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Stephanie Tuthill1, Tiffani Jantz1,
Asha Vas1, Molly Keebler1, Carlos Marquez de la Plata1, Nellie Evenson1, Weikei
Yu1, Guido F. Schauer1, Sandra B. Chapman1, Daniel C. Krawczyk1; 1Center
for BrainHealth, University of Texas at Dallas — Traditional cognitive remediation following a traumatic brain injury falls short of addressing higher-order cognitive deficits that hinder optimal functioning in daily life.
This randomized, controlled study compared the benefits of two intensive

236

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
short-term training programs. Sixteen participants (10 male, 6 female), 20
to 63 years old (M = 39, SD = 15.95), completed 18 hours of group training
over eight weeks. Of the 16 participants, 7 received advanced reasoning
training, and 9 participated in an education based program. The advanced
reasoning training taught cognitive strategies of strategic attention, integration, and innovation. The education based program informed participants
about brain anatomy and effects of lifestyle on brain health. Both were
equally engaging training programs that involved group activities, discussions, and home assignments. The advanced reasoning training group
showed significant gains in the trained domain of abstract reasoning (p <
.05). The benefits of the training extended to the untrained frontal domains
of switching and verbal fluency (p < .05). Positive trends (p < .10) were also
found on inhibition and working memory performance. Furthermore, participants in the advanced reasoning group reported significantly improved
functional outcomes (FSE and GOS-E) and improved sense of well-being
(BDI) (p < .05). In contrast, gains in the education based program were
limited to verbal fluency and BDI (p < .05). This current study provides
preliminary evidence that improvements in higher-order cognitive abilities
of abstract reasoning have wide-ranging benefits, including improved cognitive performance and enhanced functional recovery.

G134
NEURAL UNDERPINNINGS OF REASONING: A CLOSER LOOK
AT PARIETAL CORTEX Elizabeth L. Johnson1, Carter Wendelken1, Silvia A.
Bunge1; 1University of California, Berkeley — Numerous studies have implicated a lateral frontoparietal network in reasoning, and we have shown that
left parietal cortex and left lateral frontal pole are tightly coupled during
performance of tasks that require reasoning about either visuospatial or
semantic relations between stimuli (Wendelken et al., 2011a). Here, we
sought to examine more closely the parietal contribution to relational reasoning. We measured task-related functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) activation in a set of parietal regions of interest (ROIs) that had been
defined previously on the basis of their patterns of structural and functional
connectivity with other brain regions (Mars et al., 2011). Our fMRI data
were drawn from 77 participants between ages 6-18 who had performed
a relational matching task that requires 1st-order and 2nd-order relational
reasoning (Wendelken et al., 2011b). We measured task-related activation in five inferior parietal lobule (IPL) and five superior parietal lobule/
intraparietal sulcus (SPL/IPS) ROIs in each hemisphere, ordered 1-5 from
anterior to posterior. A 2 Hemisphere (left, right) × 2 Lobule (IPL, SPL/
IPS) × 5 ROI (anterior-to-posterior) × 2 Condition (1st-order, 2nd-order)
ANOVA revealed three significant interactions (all p<.02): H×L×R, H×L×C,
and H×R×C. Post hoc paired t-tests revealed that left mid-IPL was more
strongly engaged by 2nd > 1st-order relations than other parietal regions.
Notably, Mars et al. (2011) had identified this left mid-IPL region as being
most tightly connected to the left lateral frontal pole. These results, along
with lesion data (Baldo et al., 2010), indicate that left mid-IPL plays a central
role in relational reasoning.

G135
SEMANTIC DISTANCE IN VERBAL ANALOGICAL REASONING
MODULATES THE N400 EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL Matthew J.
Kmiecik1, Ryan J. Brisson1, Robert G. Morrison1; 1Loyola University Chicago —
Computational accounts have traditionally focused on mapping and inference between structured representations as core components of analogical reasoning. This perspective has received support from neuroimaging
studies showing rostrolateral prefrontal cortex, an area associated with the
instantiation and integration of abstract relations, is engaged during analogy. However, recent connectionist models (Leech, Mareschal, & Cooper,
2008) have proposed that solving 4-term verbal analogies may be possible
without structured representations, possibly via a mechanism involving
analogical priming (Spellman, Holyoak, & Morrison, 2001). Green and colleagues (2010) have shown that more anterior regions of prefrontal cortex
become more engaged with greater semantic distance between the source
and target of verbal analogies suggesting that mapping becomes increasing important when the simple semantic similarity between terms becomes
less. We have previously shown that the N400 event-related potential
(ERP), a marker of semantic congruity, is differentially modulated by
verbal analogy. Herein we present results using a new set of asymmetric
verbal analogies characterized for semantic distance using Latent Semantic
Analysis (LSA). Participants saw word pairs sequentially presented. After

2013 Annual Meeting
the second pair of words they made an analogical comparison. Participants
were more accurate and slightly faster for semantically near than far word
pairs. Likewise, their N400 was more negative for far than near pairs. The
magnitude of the N400 ERP correlated with participant performance for
near, but not far analogies, providing converging evidence that the mechanism of analogical reasoning may shift from priming to mapping as analogies become more distant.

G136
SPATIOTEMPORAL CORRELATES OF PERCEPTUAL AND INFERENTIAL CAUSAL REASONING: AN EEG STUDY Ada Le1, Kevin
Dunbar1,2; 1University of Toronto Scarborough, 2University of Maryland — The
classical cause-detector view of causal reasoning assumes that causality is
distinct across two domains: a) perceptual causality, which is associated
with the right parietal and frontal cortex; and b) inferential causality, which
is associated with the frontal cortex. Alternatively, the causal-schema view
assumes that all causality representations are due to nonmodular inferences, suggesting that perceptual and inferential causality share neural
substrates. One way to discern between these models is to examine how the
timing of neural activations may or may not differ for the two types of causality. The cause-detector view would predict different neural time courses:
Perceptual causality would have early right parietal activity followed by
later frontal activity, whereas inferential causality would only exhibit later
frontal activity. In contrast, the causal-schema view would predict that
perceptual and inferential causality have similar activity time courses. To
test this, we recorded EEG while participants performed perceptual and
inferential causality tasks. We found positive P300 components at parietal
electrodes for both types of causality. Later at around 500 ms, inferential
causality had increased left prefrontal positivity, whereas perceptual causality had increased right prefrontal positivity. These results are consistent
with the causal-schema view such that both types of causality had similar
neural time courses, and reveal new insight into the asymmetric frontal
activity for the two types of causality perhaps due to differences in allocations of attentional resources.

G137
AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF TWO MODES OF REASONING Chaille
Maddox1, Karen Froud2, John Black3; 1Teachers College Columbia University
(1,2,3) — We investigate neural correlates of representational systems
underlying human reasoning: mental models (MM) and mental rules
(MR). Semantic cognitive processes are postulated to be a property of model-based representational systems of reasoning (Gentner & Stevens, 1983;
Johnson-Laird, 1983), whereas syntactic processes are posited to operate
over symbol-based systems (Braine & O’Brien, 1998; Fodor, 1975; Plylshyn,
1984; Rips, 1994). The N400 and P600, long associated with semantic and
syntactic processing in language (Kutas & Hillyard, 1980; Osterhout & Holcomb, 1992), were hypothesized to index cognitive processes underlying
MM and MR reasoning, respectively. Participants were trained in MM or
MR reasoning strategies (Schwartz & Black, 1996), and then viewed stimuli
consisting of rotating gears. Their task was to use the learned reasoning
paradigm to predict direction of gear turn. Predictions were either met (the
“expected” condition) or violated (the “unexpected” condition). High-density EEG was concurrently recorded and ERPs were derived offline. Grandaveraged responses to expected and unexpected stimuli were compared
for MM and MR. In the MM condition, N400 responses were observed,
reflecting unexpectedness within image-specific representational networks
(Federmeier & Kutas, 2001; McPherson & Holcomb, 1999; Sitnikova, et al.,
2006). By comparison, in the MR condition, P600 was observed, reflecting a
rule-governed representational system underlying this strategy (Friederici,
Hahne, & Saddy, 2002; Hagoort, Brown & Osterhout, 1999; Kaan & Swaab,
2003; van Berkum, Brown, & Hagoort, 1999). ERP topographies differed
from language-specific components, hypothesized to reflect execution of
complex reasoning processes (Goel, 2009; Kroger, et al., 2002; Prabhakaran,
et al., 1997).

Poster Session G
abstract rules and relationships among elements of information to provide
predictable representations of the environment. Reasoning performance is
affected by a range of cognitive components, including basic abilities such
as change detection (CD), rule verification (RV), and rule generation (RG).
Several intelligence tests, such as Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPM), indicate considerable variability in reasoning performance among individuals.
In capacity-based theories of reasoning, performance variation is attributed
to variability in the number of features or rules that can be processed.
However, little attention has been paid to the notion that CD, RV, and RG
abilities can independently account for performance differences. We examined this hypothesis using three experimental conditions that additively
recruited CD, RV, and RG components. Problems (48 per condition) consisted of three panels, each containing four geometrical shapes. In CD, participants searched for a shape-change across the panels. In RV, participants
verified whether a shape-change followed one of four learned rules. In
RG, participants inferred whether a shape-change followed a to-be-discovered rule. Hierarchical multiple linear regression analysis of performance
measures (n=83) provided evidence that the CD, RV, and RG abilities each
uniquely account for a portion of variance in RPM performance. Furthermore, fMRI analyses (n=21) revealed similar bilateral occipitoparietal and
prefrontal networks when the RV and RG conditions were contrasted by the
CD condition. We found increased involvement of left-inferior-frontal and
left-orbital-frontal gyri when rule generation requirements were emphasized. Our study provides insight into how neural networks reconfigure
to mediate distinct cognitive components affecting reasoning performance.

G139
CHANGES IN SELECTIVE NEURAL PROCESSING FOLLOWING
STRATEGIC LEARNING TRAINING IN PATIENTS WITH TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Fanpei Yang1, Anthony Chen2,3,4, Cody Andrews5,
Kamini Krishnan5, Jerome Fuller5, Jyh-Shing Jang6, Sandra Chapman5, Daniel
Krawczyk5,7; 1Department of Foreign Languages and Literature, National Tsing
Hua University, Taiwan, 2UC Berkeley, 3VA Medical Center, 4San Francisco and
UCSF, 5Center for Brain Health, University of Texas at Dallas, 6Department of
Computer Science, Tsing Hua University, Taiwan, 7Department of Psychiatry,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Texas, USA — This
study aimed to characterize cognitive and neural mechanisms responsive
to cognitive rehabilitation in patients with traumatic brain injury (TBI). We
hypothesized that prefrontal cortex (PFC ) would be modulated by training
in the goal-based process of strategic learning. We performed functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) on eighteen patients with chronic TBI
(>2 years after injury). Nine patients underwent strategic learning training
sessions and nine patients (comparison group) were enrolled in educational
sessions that did not involve strategic learning training. Patients in the
experimental group showed significant improvements on neuropsychological tests measuring frontally-mediated functions of switching and working
memory, as well as on measures of gist-based learning. Patients performed
a task requiring them to attend to and hold in mind images depending on
their goal relevance. We performed pattern analyses of fMRI multi-voxel
data in addition to conventional univariate and region-of-interest analyses. The pattern classification analysis revealed that activation patterns in
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
were able to distinguish the experimental group’s post-rehabilitation scans
from the control group’s post-session scans. Exploratory whole brain analyses also revealed increased activation in PFC for patients who participated
in strategic learning training, but not those in the comparison group. These
results showed increased modulatory control over neural processing, providing candidate neural mechanisms that may underlie cognitive improvements with strategic learning training.

G138
AN FMRI STUDY OF NEURO-COGNITIVE COMPONENTS OF
HUMAN REASONING Ehsan Shokri Kojori1, Carrie McAdams2, Sunbola
Ashimi2, Daniel Krawczyk1,2; 1The University of Texas at Dallas, 2The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center — Reasoning involves identifying

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

237

Poster Session H
H1
THE EFFECT OF IMAGE FREQUENCY AND SALIENCE ON AVERAGED EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIALS AND SINGLE-TRIAL
CLASSIFICATION Anthony Ries1, Amar Marathe1, Jonathan Touryan1, Victor
Paul1; 1US Army Research Laboratory, Human Research & Engineering Directorate, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD — Research has shown that classification algorithms accurately discriminate infrequent target-related neural
features associated with the P3 event-related potential (ERP) from the
neural activity associated with frequent non-target distractors in a rapid
serial visual presentation (RSVP) paradigm. Much of this research has used
salient target images that have generally been the only infrequent stimulus presented. It is not known if image salience and additional infrequent
non-target images affect the neural features and the accuracy of single-trial
classification algorithms. To address this issue we used a RSVP paradigm
containing three image classes: 1) frequent background distractors, 2) infrequent targets, and 3) infrequent non-targets. Infrequent images were either
moving (high salience) or static (Low salience). Analysis focused on the
neural activity surrounding the P3 using averaged ERPs as well as single-trial classification. At early P3 latencies infrequent images (targets and
non-targets) induced similar neural activity, but were significantly different from the frequent distractors, suggesting attetional engagement to the
infrequent images. Subsequent categorization of the image was reflected at
later P300 latencies where all three image classes were significantly different from each other. This pattern was found across both image salience conditions. Single-trial classification accuracy was significantly better for high
compared to low salience targets; however, many infrequent-non targets
were misclassified as targets. The results show that both image frequency
and salience significantly affect averaged ERPs as well as single-trial classification and suggest that image classification algorithms may select neural
features more associated with target frequency and less with target specificity.

H2
RESTORATIVE EFFECTS OF NATURE IMAGE BREAKS ON MULTITASKING PERFORMANCE Camarin Rolle1, Meike Gugel1, Taha Jabbar1,
Joaquin Anguera1, Adam Gazzaley1; 1University of California at San Francisco
— Studies have shown that cognitive performance on directed attention
tasks can be improved after viewing nature images. Here, across 3 different experiments, we investigated the effect of the following 3-min break
types on multitasking performance relative to taking no break: images of
nature, geometrical patterns, or a technology break (checking either email/
texts messages). Experiment 1 compared multitasking performance following an unfilled break and a nature photography break: a benefit of nature
was present beyond an unfilled rest period early in the experiment. Experiment 2 compared multitasking performance following a abstract pattern
break and a nature image break: similar to Experiment 1, multitasking
performance immediately after viewing nature images improved versus
the abstract pattern break. In Experiment 3, to evaluate the impact of the
break that so many of us actually take in today’s society (email or text), we
compared multitasking performance following a tech break and a nature
photography break. While nature images showed a trend towards being
better than tech break early in the experiment, a significant difference was
evidenced later in the experiment. These findings indicate that viewing
nature-based images can provide a restorative boost in performance, with
this benefit emerging at different times dependant upon the break type contrasted against.

H3
TRANSIENT ATTENTION IN MARTIAL ARTS ATHLETES SKILLED
VS. NOVICES. EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL Javier Sanchez-Lopez1,
Thalia Fernandez1, Juan Felipe Silva-Pereyra2, Juan Antonio Martinez-Mesa3,
Steven A. Hillyard4; 1Instituto de Neurobiologia, Universidad Nacional Autonoma
de Mexico, 2Facultad de Estudios Superiores de Iztacala, Universidad Nacional
Autonoma de Mexico, 3Instituto de Medicina del Deporte de Cuba, 4University

238

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

of California San Diego — Different studies have found that sport practice
produce changes on cognitive processes and brain activity. Event-related
potentials (ERPs) studies on attention have found differences in terms of
sport expertise. The aim of this study was to identify differences in behavioral performance and ERPs between martial arts athletes skilled and novices while performing a task of transient attention. Eleven skilled and ten
novices martial arts athletes were involved in this study. Cue Continuous
Performance Task was performed with three conditions: Target (target
stimulus preceded by signal), non-Target (any stimulus except target and
signal) and False Signal (any stimulus non-Target preceded by signal), and
both behavioral and electrophysiological data were analyzed. Behavioral
results showed no significant differences between groups, but electrophysiological data showed significant differences in Condition (Target and
non-Target) x Group interaction that indicated larger amplitude of P100,
P200 and P300 components and of later positivity (600 to 1000 ms) in novices athletes compared to skilled athletes. A similar effect occurred in the
Condition (False Signal and non-Target) x Electrode x Group interaction, in
which novices athletes showed higher amplitude of P100 component, and
Condition x Group interaction in later positivity (600 to 800 ms) than skilled
athletes. Amplitude maps of such effects showed a more posterior reduced
activation of all components in skilled compared to novices. Results suggest a better cue facilitation and economical that is more efficient information process in skilled than novices, which may reflect a more efficient
neural response during attention processes related to the sport expertise.

H4
CONSCIOUS ATTENTION MODULATES SUBCONSCIOUS PROCESSING OF VALENCED STIMULI Anais Stenson1, Gwen Frishkoff2;
Emory University, 2Georgia State University — Prior work suggests that conscious attention to a task impacts subconscious stimulus processing. However, some argue that valenced stimuli cannot be attended without producing conscious awareness, and therefore deny the existence of unconscious
emotions. The present study tests whether subconsciously processed,
valenced primes can be selectively attended. Participants (N=37) saw pairs
of negative and positive words, while completing word-classification task.
The first word, a prime, was presented subconsciously (35 ms). The second
word, a target, was consciously perceived. Participants classified these targets as upper or lower case in one block, and as negative or positive valence
in the other. Prime-target pairs were either task-congruent or task-incongruent. For instance, the pair “peace-SILK” was task-congruent during the
valence task, and task-incongruent during the case task. Participants saw
the same 480 pairs (SOA=70ms) in each block. Attention-based priming
effects were assessed with evoked-response potential (ERP) and behavioral measures. As predicted, case-congruency speeded response times
and modulated the N170, an ERP associated with orthographic processing,
only during the case task. Contrary to expectations, valence-congruency
did not speed responses or modulate the N400, an ERP associated with
semantic evaluation, during the valence task. However, valence-congruency did modulate ERPs at orbitofrontal and centro-parietal sites during
the valence task. Both ERP and reaction time differences suggest that priming depended on prime-target task-congruity. These outcomes suggest that
valenced primes were selectively attended according to task, thus supporting the claim that attention modulates subconscious processing of valenced
stimuli.

1

H5
TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION MODULATES
WORKING MEMORY AND SUSTAINED ATTENTION AS A FUNCTION OF ATTENTION DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER SYMPTOMATOLOGY Jaclyn Stephens1, Marian Berryhill1; 1University of Nevada,
Reno — Neuroimaging data reveal under activity in the pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA) in people with attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) during sustained attention (Stop-Signal, Go/No-Go)
tasks (Mulligan et al., 2011). Additionally, these individuals have reduced
short interval cortical inhibition (SICI) correlated with their ADHD symptoms (Gilbert et al., 2006). Furthermore, in healthy adults, recent findings

2013 Annual Meeting
indicate that stimulating the pre-SMA with anodal (+ current) transcranial
direct current stimulation (tDCS) improves sustained attention (Hsu et al.,
2011). Here, we investigated whether anodal tDCS to the pre-SMA would
provide a greater attentional benefit to those with more ADHD symptoms.
First, participants completed the Adult ADHD Self-Report Scale (ASRSv1.1) (Kessler et al., 2005). Low (<18) or high (>38) scorers received anodal
and sham tDCS to the right pre-SMA. After either anodal or sham tDCS participants performed working memory (O-SPAN, visuospatial N-Back) and
sustained attention (Go/ No-Go) tasks. There was an interaction between
ADHD scores and tDCS condition. Unexpectedly, however, anodal tDCS
improved performance on both sustain attention (Go/No-Go) and working
memory (O-SPAN, visuospatial N-Back) tasks for the low ADHD group,
but impaired performance for the high ADHD group. Methylphenidate, an
ADHD medication, can have opposing effects in individuals with ADHD
compared to healthy individuals (Moll, Heinrich, and Rothenberger, 2003).
Therefore, it is plausible that anodal tDCS could be exerting opposing
effects such that anodal tDCS further reduced SICI in the high ADHD
group while enhancing SICI in the low ADHD group.

H6
AMYGDALA GUIDES BOTTOM-UP ATTENTION IN TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT BUT NOT IN AUTISM Vanessa Troiani1,3, Robert Schultz1,2,3;
1
Department of Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania, 2Departments of Pediatrics & Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania, 3Center for Autism Research,
Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia — The amygdala is thought to guide attention towards motivationally-relevant stimuli, even suppressed from awareness (Whalen et al. 1998,2004; Troiani et al., in press). This type of attention
might be impaired in autism, contributing to their poor social functioning
and motivation (Chevallier et al., 2012). Using a novel fMRI paradigm combining continuous flash suppression and an orthogonal letter-detection
task, we suppress fearful face and house stimuli from conscious awareness.
We compared neural activation in 29 typically developing children (TDC)
and 32 children with an autism spectrum disorder (ASD) to examine the
integrity of bottom-up amygdala activation in ASD. In both TDCs & ASDs,
the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) is more active for suppressed images
compared to a no-stimulus control, indicating the stimuli have reached
this portion of the visual processing pathway. In contrast, activation to the
suppressed stimuli was decreased compared to the no stimulus control in
early visual cortex (EVC), indicating suppression of the fearful faces and
houses. TDCs activate the superior colliculus, thalamus, amygdala, and
hippocampus in response to suppressed images. Additionally, we find a
category-specific (fearful faces > houses) increase in amygdala connectivity
with the right pulvinar and left inferior parietal cortex. Thus, TDCs activate
the amygdala in response to objects presented outside of their conscious
awareness and differentiate between objects based on an amygdala connectivity profile. We find no amygdala activation in response to suppressed
stimuli in ASD, which indicates impaired bottom-up amygdala-guided
attention and a disturbance of adaptive processing of visual categories even
prior to awareness.

H7
TOP DOWN MODULATION OF THE PHASE OF ALPHA ACTIVITY
Rosanne van Diepen1,2, Mike Cohen2, Damiaan Denys1, Ali Mazaheri1; 1Psychiatry Department, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Psychology Department, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
— Previous research has shown that the phase of ongoing alpha (8-12Hz)
oscillations can influence the perception of visual stimuli. In the current
EEG study (256 EGI) we examined if it was possible to actively (i.e topdown) adjust the phase of alpha activity in order to facilitate or suppress
stimulus processing. Specifically we looked at how cues signalling whether
to attend to the visual or auditory modality of bimodal targets modulated
pre-target alpha phase in the associated sensory cortices. We had two
conditions 1) a rhythmic presentation of cues and targets which made it
possible to predict target onset and 2) a random condition where target
onset was not predictable. We found that in the rhythmic condition the
phase-locking of alpha activity in auditory channels shortly prior to target
onset was significantly stronger for cues signalling visual stimuli than cues
signalling auditory. In the random condition where target onset was unpredictable we found no evidence for cue induced phase-adjustment of alpha
activity. This suggests that there can be top-down modulation of the phase
of alpha activity such that its inhibitory nature can be optimally exploited.

Poster Session H

H8
INCREASED IMPACT OF SALIENCY IN ACTION VIDEO GAME
PLAYERS: EVIDENCE FROM EYE MOVEMENTS. Wieske van Zoest1,
Benedetta Heimler1, Francesco Pavani1; 1Center for Mind/Brain Sciences
(CIMeC), University of Trento — Enhanced visual performance in action video
game players (AVGPs) has often been explained by improved top-down
control over the allocation of visual attention compared to the non-gamers
(NVGPs). To investigate when in time these differences in control between
groups come about, the time-course of visual selection was investigated
using an oculomotor additional singleton paradigm. It was predicted that
the more efficient top-down strategies in AVGP would reduce the overall
influence of early saliency-driven influences and that this control would
appear earlier in time in AVGP than in NVGP. In the task, participants
were instructed to make a saccadic eye movement to a unique orientation
singleton. The target was presented in a display of homogenous nontargets and one additional orientation singleton that could be more, equally
or less salient than the target. The results demonstrated that short-latency responses were driven by saliency in both groups; these eye movements were directed to the most salient element regardless of whether it
was defined as a target or distractor. Long-latency eye movements were
directed in line with the task instructions. AVGPs were overall faster than
NVGPs in initiating a saccade. Strikingly, AVGPs revealed a significant
greater impact of stimulus- saliency early in time and were less accurate
later in time than NVGPs. The present results demonstrate that under certain circumstances AVGPs show enhanced stimulus-driven processing and
an inability to implement more efficient top-down strategies.

H9
SEARCHING FOR SINGLE OR MULTIPLE EXEMPLARS AND CATEGORIES: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MARKERS OF CATEGORY-BASED ATTENTIONAL GUIDANCE Rachel Wu1, Rebecca Nako2,
Gaia Scerif3, Martin Eimer2; 1University of Rochester, 2Birkbeck, University of
London, 3University of Oxford — Visual search is often guided by top-down
attentional templates that specify target-defining features. But search can
also occur at the level of multiple objects or categories. With adults, we
measured the N2pc component, an event-related potential (ERP) marker
of attentional target selection in two visual search experiments where
targets were defined as either one item (e.g., the letter C), multiple items
(e.g., the letters C, F, and X), or categorically (e.g., any letter). Experiment
1 encouraged category-based selection by consistently presenting targets
among distractors from a different category (e.g., numbers). Reaction times
(RTs) were fastest and the N2pc largest during search for a single item,
demonstrating that target selection is most efficient when it is guided by a
feature-specific template. There were no RT and N2pc differences between
the category-based search task and search for two or three items in Experiment 1, indicating that category-defined templates were used in all three
tasks. In Experiment 2, a category-based search strategy was not available
because letter targets were now presented among letter distractors. Search
efficiency decreased as the number of candidate target letters increased,
suggesting that within-category search was based on multiple templates for
each target. Results demonstrate that category-based search can operate at
early visual stages, and that it is more efficient than within-category search
for multiple targets, but less efficient than feature-guided search.

H10
INDIVIDUALS WITH SELF-REPORTED ADHD SYMPTOMS HAVE
A MERIT IN OBJECT-BASED ATTENTION: AN ERP STUDY IN A
NON-CLINICAL POPULATION Yuji Yamada1, Tetsuko Kasai2, Harumitsu
Murohashi2; 1Graduate School of Education, Hokkaido University, 2Faculty of
Education, Hokkaido University — It has been shown that individuals with
higher ADHD (attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder) symptoms have
a decline in the ability to suppress task-irrelevant information. The present
study examined whether the decline is associated with selective attention
in early perceptual processes, by using event-related potential (ERP). We
used an ERP paradigm of object-based attention with region commonality, in which the extent of competition across bilateral stimuli was manipulated (Yamada et al., CNS2012). ERPs were recorded from 24 normal
(non-ADHD) participants whose ADHD symptoms were measured by
Adult ADHD Self-Report Scale (ASRS). Stimuli consisted of two letters,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

239

Poster Session H

2013 Annual Meeting

one in each hemifield, encircled by an oval (same-region condition) or two
semiellipses aligned like Greek x-shape (different-region condition). Participants covertly attended to one hemifield while ignoring the other and
detected an infrequent target letter at the attended hemifield. Participants
with higher ASRS scores produced more false alarms. The N1 attention
effect (160-205ms post stimulus, amplitude enhancement at occipito-temporal electrodes contralateral to attended visual fields) was decreased for
the same-region condition in participants with higher ASRS score, only
in the attend-left condition. Additionally, P1 amplitudes (80-130ms) were
smaller over the left than right hemisphere in the higher ASRS participants.
These results indicate that individuals with higher ADHD symptoms
caused a greater object-based attention effect: attention obligatory spread
over task-irrelevant stimuli that were involved in an object or a perceptual
group. Such an effect may be associated with differences in hemispheric
lateralization or transfer.

H11
TWO DISTINCT ATTENTION OR CONTROL EFFECTS RELATED TO
DIVERGENT THINKING VERSUS CREATIVE ACHIEVEMENT. Darya

lamic connectivity in 90 schizophrenia patients versus 90 matched controls
via: i) subject-specific anatomically-defined thalamic nuclei; ii) anatomical
and data-driven clustering to assay within-thalamus dysconnectivity; iii)
machine learning to classify diagnostic membership via thalamic connectivity for schizophrenia and for 47 bipolar patients and 47 matched controls. Schizophrenia analyses revealed functionally related disturbances:
over-connectivity with all bilateral sensory cortices, which predicted
schizophrenia symptoms, but thalamic under-connectivity with prefrontal-cerebellar regions relative to controls, possibly reflective of both sensory
gating and top-down control disturbances. Clustering revealed that this
dysconnectivity was most prominent for thalamic nuclei densely connected
with prefrontal cortex. Classification and cross-diagnostic results suggest
thalamic dysconnectivity may be a marker for neural disturbances across
schizophrenia and bipolar illness. Collectively, these findings, using large
clinical neuroimaging samples, inform our basic understanding of largescale thalamo-cortical systems and provide vital clues about the nature of
its disturbances in severe mental illness.

H13
FEARFUL VS. ANGRY FACIAL EXPRESSIONS DIFFERENTIALLY
ALLOCATE ATTENTIONAL RESOURCES TO ENVIRONMENTAL TARGETS James Taylor1, Paul Whalen1; 1Dartmouth College — We previously

Zabelina , Mark Beeman ; Northwestern University — Real world creative
achievement is thought to encompass creative potential as well as motivation or persistence. We report two different effects of attention or cognitive
control that independently relate to two different measures of creativity.
Our previous work demonstrated that people with high creative achievements are more likely to perseverate on a particular attentional level,
which, in the real world, may encourage more persistent engagement with
a creative endeavor. In the present study, 56 undergraduates completed
two tests of creativity: one assessing divergent thinking, and the other
assessing real world creative achievements. Subsequently, participants
identified whether stimuli contained the target letter S or H within hierarchically constructed letters. Critically, 80% of the trials were preceded by a
valid cue indicating at which level the target would appear (local or global),
and 20% of the trials were preceded by an invalid cue. Participants scoring
high on divergent thinking were not slowed by invalid cues compared to
low divergent thinkers. This result demonstrates that high divergent thinkers’ primary mode of attention may indeed be defocused, which aids them
in detecting alternate foci (external stimuli or internal associations), represented here as a quick overcoming of an invalid cue. Together with our previous results, it appears possible to disentangle basic underlying cognitive
processes, such as capture of attention, in creative achievers versus people
with creative potential (as assessed by divergent thinking tasks). Result
from these studies form the basis for future investigations of the neural
correlates of attentional and cognitive control in creative individuals.

demonstrated that fearful facial expressions differentially direct attention
towards the environment and away from the expresser, while angry facial
expressions direct attention towards the expresser and away from the environment (Davis et al., 2011). This study implemented a rapid serial visual
presentation paradigm in which neutral faces were presented sequentially
while bordered by four gray hash marks. Participants were presented with
faces of one gender and told to watch for a gender change at some point
in the sequence (T1). Critically, T1 displayed either a neutral, fearful, or
angry expression. Subjects were then told to detect a color change (i.e., gray
to green; T2) at one of the four hashtag locations appearing after T1. T2
could appear at one of six temporal positions (128, 256, 384, 512, 640, 768
ms) following T1. Though the fearful and angry stimuli were similar in
valence and arousal value, we hypothesized that only the fearful expressions should augment T2 detection. Indeed, we found that, compared to
the neutral T1 faces, fearful expressions significantly increased the ability
to detect the target at four of the six temporal locations (all p’s < .05) while
anger showed no such effect at any temporal location. The results of this
study suggest that, even when task demands are high, fearful expressions
have the ability to differentially allocate attentional resources. Further, this
work highlights the importance of considering the information value conveyed by facial expressions in addition to their valence and arousal values.

H12
ELUCIDATING THALAMO-CORTICAL FUNCTION THROUGH THE
LENS OF PSYCHOPATHOLOGY: FOCUS ON SCHIZOPHRENIA AND
BIPOLAR ILLNESS Alan Anticevic1,2,3, Michael Cole6, Grega Repovs5, John

H14
INTENT PERCEPTION GATES THE EFFECT OF EMOTIONAL STIMULI ON PUNISHMENT DECISIONS THROUGH CORTICOLIMBIC
CIRCUITS CISIONS THROUGH CORTICOLIMBIC CIRCUITS Michael

Murray7,9, Margaret Brumbaugh4, Anderson Winkler1,4,10, Aleksandar Savic1,3,8,
John Krystal1,2,3, Godfrey Pearlson1,4,7, David Glahn1,4; 1Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, 2NIAAA Center for the Translational
Neuroscience of Alcoholism, 3Abraham Ribicoff Research Facilities, Connecticut Mental Health Center, 4Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center, Institute of
Living, Hartford Hospital, 5Department of Psychology, University of Ljubljana,
6
Department of Psychology, Washington University in St. Louis, 7Department of
Neurobiology, Yale University, 8University Psychiatric Hospital Vrapce, University
of Zagreb, 9Department of Physics, Yale University, 10Oxford University, John
Radcliffe Hospital — Understanding the function of large-scale distributed
neural systems is critical for complete characterization of higher cognitive
function. A fundamental aspect of large-scale brain organization across
mammalian species are recurrent thalamo-cortico-striatal circuits. Its complex multi-nuclear structure enables the thalamus to serve as a nexus for
parallel circuits through which diverse cortical and subcortical functions are
integrated. Growing evidence implicates significant thalamo-cortical communication disturbances in schizophrenia on the bases of neuropathology,
neuroanatomical and computational studies. Incomplete characterization
of thalamic connectivity in schizophrenia limits our understanding of its
relationship to symptoms and to diagnoses with shared clinical presentation, such as bipolar illness. Using resting-state fMRI, we characterized tha-

Treadway1, Joshua Buckholtz2, Justin Martin3, Katharine Jan4, Christopher
Asplund5, Owen Jones6, Rene Marois Marois7; 1Harvard Medical School/McLean
Hospital, 2Department of Psychology, Harvard University, 3Department of Cognitive, Linguistic and Psychological Sciences, Brown University, 4University of
Pennsylvania Law School, 5Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School Singapore,
6
Vanderbilt University Law School, 7Department of Psychology, Vanderbilt University — It is increasingly recognized that emotions hold sway over multiple forms of social decision-making, including the determination of just
punishment for unfair or criminal acts. However, the influence of emotions
over punishment decisions is critically dependent on the mental state of
the perpetrator: We frequently abstain from punishing acts committed accidentally compared to those committed purposefully, even when the harm
is identical. While much neurobiological work has focused on how emotion affects decision-making, including punishment decisions, it is not yet
understood how the emotional modulation of decision-making is regulated
by intent. To address this question, we scanned 30 community volunteers
using fMRI while they determined appropriate punishment for actions
varying in both level of perpetrator responsibility (Intentional or Accidental) and harm severity. Importantly, subjects were randomly assigned to
read scenarios that described victim harm using either lurid, graphic language or unadorned, fact-based language. This language manipulation
produced an intent-by-language interaction on punishment decision-mak-

1

240

1

1

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
ing, such that the presence of graphic language resulted in more severe
punishments only when the perpetrator’s actions were described as being
intentional, and not when they were accidental. Neuroimaging analysis
found that amygdala activation mirrored this behavioral interaction effect.
Further, effective connectivity analysis revealed an amygdalar-prefrontal
network that was selectively engaged during conditions of high criminal
intent and affectively salient language. These results establish a novel
neural circuit that mediates interactions between emotion and perceptions
of intent affect decision making, with broad implications for understanding
how we judge and punish the actions of others.

H15
EFFECTS OF WORKING MEMORY AND WORRY ON ALGEBRAIC
PROBLEM SOLVING Kelly Trezise1, Robert Reeve1; 1University of Melbourne

— Researchers interested in the relationship between math anxiety/worry
(MA), working memory (WM) and math ability have treated it as a special cognitive case. Nevertheless, fMRI data suggests that problem solving
anxiety is associated with DLPFC activation across various problem solving domains. On the basis of these findings, MA-WM-performance relationships may not be a special case after all. Math researchers have found
modest associations between MA/worry, WM and arithmetic ability using
generic MA/worry (questionnaires) and WM (backward digit span) measures. It is unclear whether (1) this pattern of findings generalizes to other
math domains (e.g., algebra), (2) more domain sensitive measures of MA
and WM would yield more robust associations, or (3) differences in MA/
worry and WM differentially affect math problem solving. To examine
these possibilities, 80 14-year-olds completed (1) an algebraic judgment/
worry task, (2) an algebra WM task, and (3) an algebra problem solving
task. Latent profile analysis identified four algebraic WM-Worry profiles
(Hi/Lo WM x Hi/Lo Worry). Algebraic problem solving performance
differed among the four subgroups (F (3, 72) = 15.63, p < .001, η2=.394).
Subgroups with high WM and low Worry showed better algebraic problem solving than other groups. The impact of low WM and high worry
was associated with poor algebraic performance. The findings suggest that
WM and worry affect algebraic abilities in ways analogous to anxiety-WM
relationships in non-math research domains. They also suggest that those
interested in anxiety-WM relationships and math ability would do well to
examine these relationships in other knowledge/learning domains.

H16
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF THE ROLE OF DISTINCTIVENESS IN THE EMOTIONAL ENHANCEMENT OF MEMORY
Sarah Watts1, Luciano G. Buratto1, Alexandre Schaefer1; 1University of Durham
— The emotional enhancement of memory (EEM) is a robust phenomenon
defined as an improved memory performance for emotional compared to
neutral items. Despite its robustness, the cognitive mechanisms underlying
this effect are still largely undetermined (Pottage & Schaefer, 2012; Talmi
& McGarry, 2012). Behavioural evidence indicates that the distinctiveness of emotional information (the fact that emotional stimuli “stand out”
relative to neutral stimuli) is a significant mediator of the EEM, which is
potentially in line with attentional explanations of the EEM. The goal of
the present study was to further investigate the role of distinctiveness in
the EEM using an electrophysiological marker of memory encoding, the
“Subsequent Memory Effect” (or the “Dm” effect). Participants were shown
emotional and neutral pictures in either mixed lists (emotional and neutral
items intermixed) or pure lists (only emotional or only neutral), while scalp
event-related potentials (ERP) were recorded. Memory for the pictures was
tested in a free recall procedure. Behavioural results revealed a significant
memory advantage for emotional pictures compared to neutral pictures in
mixed but not pure lists. For emotional items, a larger late (post-800 ms)
occipito-parietal Dm effect was found in mixed lists compared to pure lists.
For neutral items, the same Dm effect was larger for pure compared to
mixed lists. Consistent with recent behavioural findings (Pottage & Schaefer, 2012), these results suggest that the EEM is a consequence of differences
in the relative allocation of attentional resources between emotional and
neutral items at encoding.

Poster Session H

H17
TUNING-IN: INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THE EFFECT OF EMOTION ON VISUAL SEARCH Kristin E. Wilson1, Rebecca M. Todd1, Rayan
Kosnik1, Susanne Ferber1; 1University of Toronto — Currently, there is conflicting evidence about the influence of emotional valence on attention.
While some researchers tried to resolve this debate by focusing on stimulus
characteristics, we tested whether an individual differences approach can
account for the conflicting results. One of the Big Five personality attributes,
Openness to experience, which includes emotional awareness/expressiveness as an attribute, may be marked by a more diffuse or open attentional
style. The present study examined the influence of viewing facial expressions on visual search performance in the presence and absence of an attentional control set. Participants performed two versions of a visual search
task in which search arrays were preceded by happy, angry, or neutral
faces. One task required the establishment of an attentional control set
(CS) – i.e., look for a house – enabling category-specific features to facilitate search. The other task provided no control set (NoCS) – i.e., look for
a unique item – thus requiring more flexible processing in order to track
multiple comparisons in search of the unique item. Results showed that,
as hypothesized, the influence of facial expression on search performance
varied with individuals’ Openness scores. This relationship was modulated
by control set. In the CS task, individuals low in openness (LO) showed an
RT advantage with happy faces, while individuals high in openness (HO)
showed an inverse pattern. In the NoCS task, LO showed no effect of emotional faces, whereas HO a facilitation with happy faces. Thus, emotional
content may tune attention, however this varies across individuals.

H18
COGNITIVE REAPPRAISAL INFLUENCES PAIN VALUATION, NOT
NOCICEPTION Choong-Wan Woo1, Mathieu Roy1, Jason T. Buhle2, Tor D.
Wager1; 1The University of Colorado Boulder, 2Columbia University — Behavioral studies of cognitive reappraisal have shown that cognitive reappraisal
(reinterpreting the meaning of emotional stimuli) profoundly alters reports
of affective experience. Such changes may reflect changes in core affective
processes in the brain, decision-making processes, or a combination of the
two. Prior neuroimaging studies are inconclusive on this point, because
biomarkers for affective vs. decision processes have not been developed.
Recently, we have developed an fMRI-based biomarker (a pattern of activity) that is sensitive and specific to physical pain. In the present study, participants (N=33) reinterpreted noxious heat stimuli as either more or less
painful. Cognitive reappraisal strongly modulated pain report, but had no
impact on the biomarker. Instead, cognitive reappraisal influenced activity
in the nucleus accumbens, ventromedial prefrontal cortex, and dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex, which are not responsive to noxious input or diagnostic
of pain. In addition, connectivity between nucleus accumbens and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex mediated the influence of cognitive reappraisal
on pain report. These results provide evidence that cognitive reappraisal
does not change early nociceptive processing, but rather influences brain
circuits involved in affective meaning and value-based decision-making.
In addition, it suggests a critical role for a ventromedial prefrontal-striatal
pathway in pain valuation independent of nociceptive information from
the periphery.

H19
INDEPENDENT VERSUS INTERDEPENDENT SELF-CONSTRUAL
PRIMING ELICITS DIFFERENCES IN THE SPONTANEOUS REGULATION OF POSITIVE EMOTIONS IN CHINESE PARTICIPANTS Kate
Woodcock1,2, Yi Liu1, Dian Yu1, Shihui Han1; 1Peking University, China, 2University of Birmingham, UK — When compared to those from independent cultures (like the US), people from more interdependent cultures (like China)
tend to report less experience and expression of positive emotions and
greater emotion differentiation across social contexts. We used self-construal priming in Chinese participants to investigate the effect of activating more independent versus interdependent thinking on spontaneous
emotion regulation in specific contexts. 32 Chinese students (16 males)
observed positive photographs in two sessions following independent or
interdependent priming. Imagined ingroup versus outgroup social context
was manipulated in separate blocks. Participants reported more suppression of positive emotion (questionnaire) and less self-reported arousal (post

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

241

Poster Session H
picture ratings) following interdependent priming. However, the decrease
in arousal was greater in the ingroup context. Gender differences emerged
in a performance based measure of cognitively effortful regulation. 20 Chinese male students observed positive photographs during fMRI acquisition. In order to localize brain areas involved in emotion regulation, participants were instructed not to regulate, or to up- or down-regulate their
emotions on separate trials. To investigate the effect of self-construal priming on spontaneous emotion regulation, experimental trials were administered in two blocks following independent or interdependent priming.
Participants either observed photographs with no specific instructions
or regulated their positive emotion as they would in an ingroup context.
Using areas of neural activation associated with up- or down-regulation
in the localization scans as regions of interest, we compared spontaneous
and ingroup-context linked regulation following independent versus interdependent priming. Results revealed effects of self-construal priming on
spontaneous regulation of positive emotions.

H20
THE EFFECTS OF STRESS-RELATED NORADRENERGIC CHANGES
ON ATTENTIONAL SELECTION AND FLEXIBLE THOUGHT William O.
Wright1, Evangelia G. Chrysikou1; 1University of Kansas — Research on the neurobehavioral effects of acute stress has shown a shift in brain activity in the
presence of stressors, which is thought to reflect a reallocation of resources
toward functions that can promote survival. The aim of the present study
was to expand on past literature by examining whether the modulation of
noradrenergic pathways during stress-related situations in humans affects
the reallocation (or narrowing) of attention at the possible expense of flexible thinking. In a between-subjects design, participants were exposed to
either a fear-related or an aversive video clip or to one of two neutral video
clips matched with the experimental videos for audiovisual characteristics.
Stress responses were measured by changes in subjective affect, heart rate,
salivary cortisol, and alpha-amylase levels after participants viewed the
brief video clips. Following the stress-related manipulation, participants
were administered a task associated with creative thought (the Remote
Associates Task), which requires flexible access to conceptual networks in
memory. Participants were also administered a task of attentional selection
(the Neisser task). The order of the tasks was counterbalanced. Measures of
individual differences attributed to cognitive, personality, and emotional
factors, including susceptibility to anxiety, were also collected. Analyses of
performance on the cognitive measures revealed dissociable effects of the
different kinds of stressors on attention and breadth of access of semantic memory. These results extend past literature by suggesting possible
tradeoffs between attentional focus and flexible thought in the presence of
acute stress that can have consequences for performance in real life circumstances.

H21
CURRENT AFFECTIVE STATE AFFECTS EMOTIONAL VISUAL PROCESSING – AN EEG CONNECTIVITY STUDY Miroslaw Wyczesany1,
Szczepan Grzybowski1; 1Psychophysiology Laboratory, Jagiellonian University,
Krakow, PL — Emotional stimuli are preferentially processed and this preference is an additive influence of top-down and bottom-up processes. We
aimed to determine how changes in current emotional state affect functional connectivity during perception of affective stimuli. Subjects took part
in two counterbalanced sessions (positive and negative). Each session consisted of randomly sequenced emotional pictures intermixed with adjectives from the mood checklist, followed by an inquiry to assess subjects’
emotional state on three scales: Energy Arousal (EA), Tension Arousal (TA)
and Hedonic Tone (HT). To quantify the information flow between the electrodes, the average Direct Transfer Function (DTF) in the β and θ band was
determined for 2 sec epochs following picture onset. Correlations between
DTF values and emotional state scales were then calculated separately for
both sessions. Significant and consistent effects were observed only in the β
band. Most were related to the TA scale, which correlated with: increased
flow from the AF3 electrode to the left and right centroparietal region, from
F8 to the prefrontal and right centroparietal area, and from T8 to bilateral
centroparietal sites, the latter being visible only in the negative session. HT
scores (positive valence) correlated with a decrease in connectivity from
T7 to the left centroparietal area in the negative session. No effects for EA
were observed. The results were interpreted in terms of increased activa-

242

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
tion of the fronto-parietal attentional network related to the state of tension.
Additionally, the role of the right temporal area in mediating a negative
subjective state was supported.

H22
EMOTION INTENSITY AFFECTED AUTOMATIC EMOTION REGULATION CHOICE: EVIDENCE FROM AN ERP STUDY Meng Yang1, Siyi
Chen1, Mizhi Hua1, Renlai Zhou1; 1Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China —
According to the Process-Specific Timing Framework raised by Sheppes
and Gross (2011), the intensity of emotion will affect the choice of emotion
regulation strategy, specifically, healthy people will show preference for
late selection filter (during semantic analysis) in low-intensity emotional
context and early-selection filter (during selective attention filtering mechanism) in high-intensity emotional context. But this prediction needs further verification as the existed studies were trapped in subjective report
in method and deliberate regulation in theme. To extend this theoretical
framework, we conducted an implicit emotional Go/Nogo task combined
with ERPs to explore whether the emotion intensity will change the strategy choice. Twenty participants (10 males) were told to press a bar or
withhold the response according to the gender of faces showed with three
expressions (fearful, happy and neutral). N1, N170, N2 and LPP components were chosen to reflect different cognitive processing stages during
emotion generation, including attention deployment, emotion detection,
semantic conflict, and further emotion encoding. The results showed that
for fearful emotion, when emotion intensity enhanced, the regulation effect
took place on the early selection phase including attention deployment
(N1) and emotion detection (N170) rather than late selection phase including semantic conflict(N2) and further analysis (LPP) phase. This result supported the Process-Specific Timing Framework on the angle of automatic
emotion regulation.

H23
CHANGES IN VALENCE AND AROUSAL DURING TWO TYPES OF
COGNITIVE REAPPRAISAL Pareezad Zarolia1, Iris Mauss2, Danny Lumian3,
Bethany Ciesielski1, Tchiki Davis2, Brett Ford2, Kateri McRae1; 1University of
Denver, 2University of California, Berkeley, 3University of California, Los Angeles
— Typically, cognitive reappraisal research focuses upon the ability of individuals to decrease negative affect in response to a negative stimulus. The
current research examined reappraisal strategies with different emotional
goals: to decrease negative affect and increase positive affect towards a negative stimulus. During a picture-based reappraisal task, 50 female participants viewed a series of negative images during which they were instructed
to view (look), decrease the amount of negative (decrease negative) or
increase the amount of positive affect (increase positive) they were feeling.
At a threshold of t = 2.95, p< 0.005, we observed successful down-regulation of amygdala activity for both the decrease negative and the increase
positive conditions. Further analyses revealed that self-reported ratings of
arousal were most strongly coupled with negative affect during the look
condition (r = .619, p < .001), less coupled during decrease negative (negative rating, r = .450, p < .001), and least coupled during increase positive
(negative rating, r = .259, p < .048). These results reveal that both decreasing negative and increasing positive affect towards negative images leads
to successful emotion regulation, and that there is a qualitative difference
between these two strategies as exemplified by the differential uncoupling
of valence and arousal ratings.

H24
PROSODY SPECIFIC DISTRACTION DURING DIRECTING OF
VISUAL SPATIAL ATTENTION Ulrike Zimmer1, Marie-Theres Keppel1,
Christian Poglitsch1, Anja Ischebeck1; 1University of Graz — TV-advertisements successfully manipulate us by presenting the picture of their
“best-to-buy-immediately” product with tempting emotional voices. Such
hidden emotional manipulation has been evidenced by recent studies
indicating that prosodic fear stimuli enhance directing of visual spatial
attention when compared to neutral sounds. However, it remains unclear
how the effectiveness of spatial cuing depends on the emotional valence
(positive/negative) and the context-relation between cue and target (identical versus different emotional meaning). In an EEG experiment with 21
healthy students, using a modified Posner-paradigm, an emotional voice,
inducing either an emotion of disgust or deliciousness, was presented as

2013 Annual Meeting
spatial cue in equal ratio to the left or right side, followed 1200-1300ms
later by two laterally (left/right) presented apple pictures: one with a slug
(visual disgust), the other a polished apple (visual delicious). The subjects
detected if the slug was on the left or right apple. Control trials included
this detection task without sound stimulation. Behaviorally, slug detection
was faster when preceded by an invalid versus valid disgusting sound, presumably because subjects tried to avoid the ‘disgusting’ sound by shifting
attention to the opposite side, thus enhancing invalid detection, whereas
the ‘delicious’ sound was cuing as expected. ERP-results for invalid versus
valid differences indicated a posterior negativity at 350-400ms over right
parietal sites for disgust, however, a late frontal ERP-negativity at ~500650ms for delicious prosody, thus indicating differential processing due to
emotional valence. We conclude that both the prosodic valence and cue/
target-context determine the success of directing spatial attention to the
expected object.

H25
THE INFLUENCE OF PTSD ON AMYGDALA-MEDIATED EMOTIONAL AROUSAL SYSTEMS Jennifer Stevens1, Ebony Glover1, Negar
Fani1, Timothy Ely1, Bekh Bradley1,2, Kerry Ressler1, Tanja Jovanovic1; 1Emory
University School of Medicine, 2Atlanta Veterans Administration Medical
Center — An up-regulation of the systems underlying emotional arousal
responses has been hypothesized to form a major component of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and a large body of neuroimaging evidence
has shown exaggerated amygdala responses to negative emotional stimuli
in PTSD. The goal of the current research was to further investigate links
between increased amygdala activation and exaggerated fear responses
in PTSD. 40 women (20 PTSD+, 20 traumatized non-PTSD controls) were
recruited from a large urban hospital. Participants viewed fearful and neutral face stimuli during an fMRI scan, and completed a fear conditioning
task during a separate visit. In response to fearful face stimuli, PTSD participants showed increased right amygdala responses relative to controls
(pcorr<.05), and decreased functional connectivity between the right amygdala and left medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC; pcorr<.05). Initial analyses
showed that PTSD participants also showed over-generalized startle EMG
responses during fear conditioning. Whereas controls showed decreased
startle potentiation to the CS- (safety cue) relative to the CS+ (threat cue),
p<.05, PTSD participants did not, p=.49. Scores representing the discrimination of threat and safety were calculated using startle potentiation to
threat – safety cues. Increased mPFC responses to fearful faces were associated with greater discrimination scores (r^2=.10). The findings are consistent with the idea that PTSD development after a trauma is accompanied
by an exaggerated and over-general response of amygdala-mediated emotional arousal systems, likely linked with disruption of an amygdala-mPFC
circuit. This is the first study to demonstrate such links in an understudied
civilian population.

H26
NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF AROUSAL IN COMPASSION TRAINING Helen Weng1, Julian Motzkin1, Diane Stodola1, Gregory Rogers1, Richard
Davidson; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison — Compassion increases altruistic behavior, in part, by decreasing personal distress when witnessing the
suffering of others; however, the neural mechanisms of this are unknown.
Here, we investigated the relationship between altruistic behavior, arousal,
and neural responses to human suffering after compassion training compared to reappraisal training. Participants were randomized to compassion
(N=20) or reappraisal training (N=21), and practiced for 2 weeks (30 min/
day) via the Internet. Brain activity was measured with fMRI both pre and
post-training while participants implemented their assigned regulation
strategies. They viewed negative or neutral social images and reported
subjective arousal. Altruistic behavior was measured post-training using
the Redistribution Game, where personal funds could be spent to redistribute money after witnessing an unfair transaction. Compassion trainees
were more altruistic compared to reappraisal (t(39) = 2.09, p < 0.05). Furthermore, decreases in arousal predicted greater redistribution after compassion training (r(18) = -0.45, p < .05) but not reappraisal training (r(19)
= 0.09, p = 0.70). A Group Arousal change interaction test on the analogous neural change scores identified the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC)
and left brainstem (pons; p = 0.005, uncorrected). In compassion training,
decreases in arousal after training were associated with increases in mPFC
and decreases in brainstem activation. In reappraisal training, decreases in

Poster Session H
arousal were predicted by decreases in mPFC but not brainstem activation.
These data suggest that decreased arousal after compassion training contributes to greater altruistic behavior, and this is subserved by neural systems implicated in emotion regulation and autonomic arousal.

H27
DELECTABLE DESSERTS & BEAUTIFUL BLOOMS: THE AFFECTIVE
SALIENCE OF NATURAL CATEGORIES Christy Wilson-Mendenhall1,2, Lisa
Feldman Barrett1,2, Linda Bartoshuk3, David Clark4, Thomas Colquhoun4; 1Dept
of Psychology, Northeastern University, 2Martinos Center for Biomedial Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, 3Center for Taste and Smell, University
of Florida, 4Environmental Horticulture Dept, University of Florida — Visual
categorization can rapidly elicit affective changes that are experienced
as pleasant and that guide future action. In an fMRI study, we examined
the neural patterns underlying two hedonic categories that are frequently
encountered in today’s world: the homeostatically relevant category of
sweet foods and the culturally inspired category of colorful flowers. To
assess implicit reactions to the hedonic stimuli, high-resolution images of
sweets and flowers were presented rapidly in blocks, amidst blocks of within-category hedonic control images (neutral/slightly pleasant vegetables/
fruits and green plants) and low-level visual control images (scrambled
versions of the images). Participants performed a simple one-back task in
the scanner, with a post-scan manipulation check confirming the pleasantness of the sweets and the flowers. In subcortical regions hypothesized to
underlie affective salience and motivated action (including the amygdala,
pallidum, and putamen), the sweet foods showed greater right-lateralized
activity than all other conditions. In contrast, a cluster in the left amygdala showed heightened activity for the foods and the flowers relative to
all other conditions. The flowers also elicited left-lateralized activity in the
pallidum/putamen that was significantly greater than all other conditions.
Cortical regions involved in integrating internal bodily and external sensory information (e.g., orbitofrontal cortex) generally showed more activity
for the food categories than for the plant categories. These findings suggest
that the brain swiftly deploys attention and action resources upon viewing
natural categories that people later report as pleasant, with lateralized patterns appearing to distinguish delectable desserts from beautiful blooms.

H28
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS REVEALED GENDER DIFFERENCES
FOR POSITIVE AND BLOODY PICTURES Nai-Shing Yen1,2,3, Bethany C.
Y. Wu2,3, Chieh-Ning Lee1, Wan-Lin Lee1; 1Department of Psychology, National
Chengchi University, 2Research Center for Mind, Brain and Learning, National
Chengchi University, 3Taiwan Mind & Brain Imaging Center, TMBIC — The present study asked 28 participants (half males) to make judgments on valence
and arousal levels to 96 emotional (positive, erotic, neutral, bloody and
negative) pictures while electroencephalogram (EEG) was recorded. The
mean amplitudes across five emotion categories reached significant level
between 350 and 750 ms, F (4, 108) = 4.335, p = .003. Arousal was significantly affected by electrode sites (Fz, Cz and Pz), F (2, 46) = 21.941, p <
.001. The mean amplitude for high arousal pictures was significantly larger
than low arousal ones between 400-800 ms at Fz, t (23) = 2.126, p < .05.
Comparisons between male and female participants suggested no gender
differences on levels of valence and arousal (assessed by Self-Assessment
Manikin) across five categories. Event-related potentials elicited by erotic,
neutral and negative pictures were also similar between male and female
participants. Gender differences were found for positive and bloody pictures while female participants showed more positive going waveforms
than male participants 400 ms after stimuli onset. The present study thus
concluded that event-related potentials revealed gender differences for
positive and bloody pictures.

H29
RAPID VISUAL CORTICAL SUBTYPING OF THREAT IN HIGH (NOT
LOW) SPATIAL FREQUENCY Yuqi You1, Wen Li1; 1University of Wiscon-

sin-Madison — Visual cortical categorization of emotion can consummate
in as little as 100 ms after stimulus onset. Controversies arise whether this
operation is cortically based or dependenet on the amygdala via “quickand-dirty” subcortical pathways. Combining high-density electroencephalography (EEG) and emotion-ladden images of natural scenes containing
either low spatial frequency (LSF, < 3 cycles/degree) or high spatial freCognitive Neuroscience Society

243

Poster Session H
quency (HSF, > 7 cycles/degree) information, we isolated neural markers
reflective of cortical and subcortical threat processing systems. An early
visual potenital (P1) emerging at 110 ms and concomitant extrastriate cortical activity revealed qualitatively divergent response patterns for two threat
prototypes, represented by response augmentation in fear and suppression
in disgust relative to a neutral condition (t(39)’s > 2.53, p’s < .05). Critically, this subcategorization within the threat domain was only present in
HSF images, which exclusively stimulate the cortical (vs. subcortical) visual
pathway. By contrast, LSF images preferentially transmitted by subcortical
routes failed to induce such refined discrimination, only to evoke similarly
potentiated visual response to both threat (relative to neutral) emotions in
N1 at a delayed latency (135 ms). The initial (P1) response thus contradicts
the characteristics of amygdala threat processing, which however align
nicely with subsequent (still fairly swift) generalized representation of LSF
threat cues (in N1 response). Taken together, our findings support the view
that the sensory cortex can sustain rapid threat analysis independently of
limbic input, echoing long-standing evidence in animal research (Weinberger, 2007) and accruing human data (Li et al., 2008; Tsuchiya et al., 2009).

H30
THE VOICE OF CONSCIENCE: NEURAL BASES OF INTERPERSONAL GUILT AND COMPENSATION Hongbo Yu1, Jie Hu1, Li Hu2,
Xiaolin Zhou1; 1Peking University, 2Southwest University — People feel bad
for inflicting harms upon others; this emotional state is termed interpersonal guilt. Although interpersonal guilt has fundamental impacts upon
people’s social life and well-being, the understanding of the neural bases
of this emotion is limited by the lack of an appropriate behavioral paradigm to both elicit and measure guilt in an interpersonal context. Here, the
participant played multiple rounds of a dot-estimation task with anonymous partners while undergoing fMRI. Regardless of whether it was the
partner or the participant who responded incorrectly (or both), the partner
would receive the resulting pain stimulation; the subject was then given
the option to intervene and bear pain for the partner The level of pain voluntarily taken and the brain activations in anterior middle cingulate cortex
(aMCC) and bilateral anterior insula (AI) were higher when the participant
was solely responsible for the stimulation (Self_Incorrect) than when both
committed an error (Both_Incorrect). Moreover, the gray matter volume in
the aMCC predicted the individual’s compensation behavior, measured
as the difference between the level of pain taken in the Self_Incorrect and
Both_Incorrect conditions. Furthermore, a mediation pathway analysis
revealed that activation in a midbrain region mediated the relationship
between aMCC activation and the individual’s tendency to compensate.
These results demonstrate that the aMCC and the midbrain nucleus play
important roles in not only generating interpersonal guilt, but also in promoting compensation behaviors.

H31
INTER-BRAIN SYNCHRONIZATION DURING BEHAVIORAL SYNCHRONIZATION BETWEEN TWO INDIVIDUALS IN AN ALTERNATE
TAPPING TASK Masahiro Kawasaki1,2, Keiichi Kitajo1,2,3, Yoko Yamaguchi4;
1
Rhythm-based Brain Information Processing Unit, RIKEN BSI-TOYOTA Collaboration Center, Japan, 2Laboratory for Advanced Brain Signal Processing,
RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Japan, 3PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology
Agency (JST), Japan, 4Neuroinformatics Japan Center, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Japan — Behavioral rhythms of different individuals are known
to be spontaneously synchronized through social interactions, however, it
is not clear whether the inter-brain synchronization emerges or not when
behavioral rhythms are synchronized between two individuals. Here, we
simultaneously recorded electroencephalograms (EEGs) from a pair of subjects (in total, 34 right-handed subjects) during an alternate tapping task
where two subjects faced to each display and tapped a key alternately with
their right finger. Subjects were asked to tap the key with an equal time
interval of previous tapping of the other subject, presented by visual feedbacks. In a control condition, each subject did the same task with a virtual
person (a PC program) who tapped at a constant interval. According to
behavioral performance in the control condition, we divided the subjects
into good and bad groups. In both two groups, wavelet analyses for EEG
data revealed mu (about 10Hz) and beta (about 20Hz) amplitude modulations on the left motor areas. Interestingly, the mu amplitudes were positively correlated between individuals in the good group, whereas the bad

244

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
group showed the negative correlations. In contrast, the beta amplitudes
were negatively correlated between them in both two groups. The mu and
beta phases were synchronized between visual and motor areas within
individuals just before the tapping timings in both two groups. Furthermore, the visual-motor mu but not beta phase synchronization between
individuals was observed only in the good group. The results suggest that
mu and beta inter-brain synchronization plays different functional roles in
behavioral synchronization.

H32
CREATIVITY TRAINING ENHANCES CREATIVE PERSISTENCE AND
INCREASED ABSTRACT CONNECTIONS Eliza Kienitz2, Nicholas Bott2,
Eve-Marie Quintin1, Manish Saggar1, Grace Hawthorne1, Adam Royalty1, Allan
Reiss1; 1Stanford University, 2Palo Alto University — Previous studies have
focused on creativity, the ability to synthesize novel connections and create
meaningful outcomes, as a static construct measured at one point in time. In
this study, we tested the hypothesis that creativity is a fluid construct. We
hypothesized that a creativity training intervention would increase creative
thinking. A 5-week long creativity-training program (CTP) was conducted
in collaboration with the Hasso Plattner Institute of Design at Stanford University, and in parallel a 5-week long language-training program (LTP) was
designed as a control intervention. Twenty-eight participants took part in
this study, 15 (Age (± 5.64)=29.1 years; 8F) were randomly assigned to CTP
and the other 13 (Age (± 6.3)=29.69 years; 7F) were assigned to LTP. Creativity was measured, at pre- and post-training, using standardized Torrance
Test of Creative Thinking (TTCT) scores. An ANCOVA, with pre-training
TTCT scores as a covariate, revealed a greater increase (at post-training
assessment) for CTP than LTP on two (out of five) primary factors of the
TTCT – Resistance to closure (F(1, 28)= 4.891,p=.036) and Abstractness of
Titles (F(1, 28)= 4.357,p=.047). We also found a moderate effect size for
group differences on the TTCT total score post-training (Cohen’s d=.503;
p=.079). Altogether, our results indicate that creative potential is a fluid
construct, one that can be individually strengthened through targeted training. Specifically, the results suggest that creativity training can enhance the
ability to persist in the creation of new ideas as well as the ability to create
abstract connections between visual output and verbal labeling.

H33
OUTCOME EVALUATIONS IN THE COLLECTIVE DECISION USING
THE MAJORITY RULE: AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY Kenta
Kimura1, Jun’ichi Katayama1,2; 1CAPS, Kwansei Gakuin Univ, Nishinomiya,
Hyogo, Japan, 2Dept Psychol Sci, Kwansei Gakuin Univ, Nishinomiya, Hyogo,
Japan — One of the fundamental points that human beings differ from
other social animals is to have an explicit rule to decide the collective behavior. The present study examined the evaluative processes for two different
types of outcomes accompanied by the collective decision making using
the majority rule. First, we examined the evaluative processing of outcomes
associated with collective decisions. Second, we investigated whether the
conflict of opinions among group members was evaluated as a motivationally significant outcome. During the gambling task with collective decision , feedback-related negativity (FRN), which is a frontal ERP reflecting
motivational significance of outcomes, is recorded from three individuals
simultaneously. In the task, individual choice was divided into three conditions; the unanimous choice, the majority, and the minority conditions. We
found that FRN for monetary loss associated with the collective decision
was reduced when the participant’s opinion was in the minority compared
to when their opinion was in the majority and the unanimous choice. In
addition, the FRN was smaller in the unanimous choice than in the majority
condition. Furthermore, conflict of opinions among group members elicited
FRN, the amplitude of which was greater when the participant’s opinion
was in the minority. These results indicate that the evaluation of outcome
accompanied by collective decision is modulated by the personal feeling of
agency for the decision. In addition, the conflict of opinions among group
members could be processed by the same mechanism as outcome evaluation and evaluated as important outcomes for performance monitoring.

2013 Annual Meeting

H34
FAIRNESS CONSIDERATIONS MODULATE FEEDBACK-RELATED
BRAIN ACTIVITY WHEN OBSERVING STRATEGIC INTERACTIONS
Claudio Lavín1, René San Martín1,2, David Huepe1, Agustín Ibáñez1,3, Camilo
Melis1, Pablo Isla4, Alvaro Rivera1; 1Universidad Diego Portales, Chile, 2Duke
University, 3Instituto de Neurología Cognitiva, Argentina, 4Universidad Técnica
Federico Santa María, Chile — Previous studies have shown that fairness
considerations about behavior are associated with different empathy-related response in the brain. What remains unclear, however, is whether
the neural mechanisms supporting the evaluation of one’s own gains and
losses are affected by such fairness considerations. To shed light on this
issue, we recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) from 40 participants
(i.e., the observers) while they observed two persons (i.e., the performers) playing an iterative prisoner dilemma game. One of the performers
played as a defector, and the other one played as a cooperator. A group of
20 observers were told they would get the amount of money accumulated
by the defector (i.e., defector-inclined observers), and the other 20 were told
that they would get the money accumulated by the cooperator (i.e., cooperator-inclined observers). Overall, there were 4 types of trials: defector wins,
cooperator wins, mutual cooperation and mutual defection. Our ERP data
analyses focused on the feedback-related negativity (FRN), an ERP that
tends to be larger for negative compared to positive results. As expected,
we found that cooperator-inclined observers exhibited a large FRN when
the defector won, and a small FRN when the cooperator did. Strikingly,
however, defector-inclined observers did not present this pattern of results;
instead they showed a large FRN when either player won, and smaller negativity when there was a mutual cooperation. We suggest that the operation
of the neural mechanisms in charge of signaling one’s own gains may be
disrupted when such gains result from an unfair social interaction.

H35
ATTENTIONAL BIAS TO FACES ACROSS MULTIMODAL EMOTION-RECOGNITION: SOCIAL PREFERENCES IN WILLIAMS SYNDROME Rowena Ng1, Anna Jarvinen1, Andrew Arnold1, Ursula Bellugi1; 1Salk
Institute for Biological Studies, Laboratory for Cognitive Neuroscience — Williams syndrome (WS) is a genetic disorder characterized by an unusual
social phenotype, which manifests behaviorally (attraction to faces, positive/prosocial disposition), neuroendocrinologically (dysregulation of
‘social’ hormones, oxytocin and vasopressin; Dai et al., 2012) and neurologically (aberrant emotion-processing neural network; Meyer-Lindenberg et al., 2005). Although previous research reported WS individuals
exhibit a social bias in emotion processing (Ng et al., 2010), it is unclear
whether faces are uniquely preferred above other social dimensions. We
examined emotion-recognition accuracy of WS and typical-developing controls across uni/bimodal sensory paradigms. In Study 1, participants were
asked to identify emotions (anger, happiness, fear) portrayed by isolated
faces or non-verbal voices. In Study 2, these groups were instructed to identify emotional voices while simultaneously presented with a face matched/
mismatched on affect. Results show both groups similarly demonstrate
superior emotion-recognition of faces over voices in Study 1. In Study 2, TD
controls show comparable emotion-identification performance across congruent/incongruent conditions, implicating a relatively strong ability to
flexibly and selectively attend to the auditory domain across affect despite
the distractors. Conversely, WS group performed with greater accuracy in
the matched condition, indicating a stronger attention to faces in incongruent trials. Specifically, faces were more effective in diverting attention
away from negative voices in WS, highlighting their reduced sensitivity
to negative-valenced stimuli. Altogether, WS possess relatively strong
emotion-processing capacity and attention for faces coupled with diminished sensitivity toward negative affect, which explicates their exaggerated
approach behaviors. Implications of the genetic deletion on the foundation
of social behaviors will be discussed.

H36
RED LIGHT PROMOTES THE AVERSIVE EVALUATION OF UNPLEASANT STIMULI: AN EEG STUDY Sejin Oh1, Hyensou Pak2, Yeonhong Jung2,
Kwangsub So1, Myeonghoon Ryu1, Byoung-Kyong Min1; 1Korea University, 2LG
Electronics Inc. — The degree of emotional processing is possibly susceptible to the surrounding illumination condition. However, illumination-me-

Poster Session H
diated neurophysiological changes during emotional assessment still
remain unclear. Therefore, we measured EEG signals from 10 healthy participants during the presentation of affective pictures (pleasant, unpleasant, and neutral) rated by the International Affective Picture System (IAPS)
with manipulating RGB values of the background illumination. We measured the peak amplitude in the time window from 200 to 400ms poststimulus (i.e., P300). Since the P300 amplitude was most pronounced around
the parieto-occipital region during the presentation of affective pictures, we
selected seven electrodes representing these brain areas and averaged the
P300 amplitudes across these electrodes. These measures were analyzed
with a repeated measures ANOVA, which included two within-subjects
factors labeled as ‘RGB-combination’ and ‘stimulus-category’. We found
a significant interaction effect between these two factors (F(6,54)=2.543,
p<0.05) in P300 amplitudes. The post-hoc test revealed that only the red
light yielded significantly strong differences (F(2,18)=9.547, p<0.005). Presumably, red light might be related to unpleasant associations such as fire,
danger, and blood, so red illumination may promote the aversive evaluation of unpleasant stimuli, reflected in higher P300 amplitude. Indeed,
people usually consider red to be more arousing than the other color, and
red color is often used as a warning sign to attract attention. Further refinement of the illumination parameters and subsequent exploration of emotional-modulation will be needed to disseminate these findings across a
wide range of research and application fields.

H37
UNDERSTANDING LANGUAGE FROM WITHIN: EVIDENCE FOR
DIFFERENTIAL INVOLVEMENT OF PERIGENUAL CINGULATE,
INSULA, AND INFERIOR FRONTAL GYRUS WHEN PROCESSING
SENTENCES DESCRIBING MENTAL STATES. Suzanne Oosterwijk1,2,
Scott Mackey3, Piotr Winkielman3, Martin P. Paulus3; 1Northeastern University,
2
University of Amsterdam, 3University of California, San Diego — Language
is a common way to communicate mental states to others. Theories of
embodied cognition hypothesize that bodily and sensory states are simulated in order to understand linguistic references to mental states. In an
fMRI experiment we examined whether neural regions that are important
for processing of bodily sensations engage when individuals understand
sentences that describe mental states with a focus on internal experiences.
Subjects were presented with sentences describing emotional (e.g., fear,
joy) and non-emotional (e.g., hunger, thinking) mental states from an internal perspective (i.e., focusing on bodily sensations and introspection) or an
external perspective (i.e., focusing on expression and action). Participants
judged whether sentences described a mental state or not; non-mental
states sentences served as control. We hypothesized that external sentences
would engage prefrontal regions associated with action representation
(e.g., inferior frontal gyrus) and that internal sentences would engage prefrontal regions associated with internal experience and bodily sensations
(e.g., anterior insula, anterior cingulate). Both external emotion and external non-emotion sentences significantly engaged the inferior frontal gyrus.
Furthermore, internal emotion sentences engaged the anterior cingulate
gyrus and the ventral medial prefrontal cortex significantly more than
all other sentence categories. Surprisingly, non-emotion sentences, both
internal and external, significantly engaged the anterior insula. Together,
these results show that perspective matters in the way the brain represents
mental states communicated through language. These findings are consistent with theories of embodied cognition that argue for flexible, multimodal
simulations that depend on the context in which a mental state is processed.

H38
THE NEURAL UNDERPINNINGS FOR EMPATHY FOR PAIN IN ADOLESCENCE Sandy Overgaauw1,2, Berna Güroglu1,2, Eveline A. Crone1,2,3;
1

Leiden University, 2Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition (LIBC), 3University
of Amsterdam — Empathy is an important ability for understanding and
sharing emotional states of others, which help us to understand and predict others’ intentions. This fMRI study investigated the neural underpinnings of individual differences in empathic concern across adolescence.
Thirty-seven participants aged 12 to 19 viewed pictures of social situations
depicting intentional harm inflicting acts, harmed victims, and neutral scenarios. Subsequently the participants played a Dictator Game, where they
were asked to divide money between themselves and the denoted other
player, who was a person involved in the social scenarios viewed previ-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

245

Poster Session H
ously. The behavioral results showed that participants of all ages acted prosocially towards victims, fair towards neutral individuals and punishing
towards offenders. fMRI results revealed a higher neural response in the
superior temporal sulcus (STS) during the perception of stimuli depicting
victims and offenders relative to neutral individuals. The reversed contrast showed an increase in hemodynamic activity in the temporo-parietal
junction and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Possibly, this activation is
related to participants identifying themselves more with neutral individuals than victims or offenders. In addition, brain activation in the STS while
watching harm involving situations was correlated negatively with individual levels of empathic support. This finding suggests that participants
reporting more empathic traits filter irrelevant information from social situations, as indicated by lower activation of the STS. Taken together, our
findings emphasize the important role of individual differences in empathy
during adolescence, both at the level of social behavior and level of neural
underpinnings of social cognition.

H39
AN EYETRACKING INVESTIGATION OF INTENTIONAL MOTION
PERCEPTION IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Paul Roux1,2,3, Christine Passerieux2,3, Franck Ramus1; 1Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique, UMR 8554, CNRS-ENS-EHESS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France,
2
Centre Hospitalier de Versailles, Le Chesnay, France, 3Laboratoire ECIPSY
Université Versailles Saint Quentin en Yvelines, Versailles, France — Individuals with schizophrenia have been shown to have difficulties attributing
intentions to abstract geometrical shapes involved in complex and mentalistic interactions (Koelkebeck et al., 2010). However, these tasks impose
large demands on explicit reasoning and on verbal abilities, making it
difficult to distinguish deficits in perception from deficits in higher-level
inferences. To address this limitation, the perception of intentional motion
was assessed in schizophrenia using a quantitative, psychophysical methodology focusing on one specific intentional behavior, chasing, in which
one shape pursues another one. 29 patients with schizophrenia and 29 control participants completed a chasing detection paradigm (Gao, Newman,
& Scholl, 2009) while their eyes movements were recorded. Participants
watched animations in which 5 circles randomly moved. One circle chased
another one in half of the trials. At the end of each trial, participants had to
say if they had seen a chase or not. Using signal detection theory, we computed measures of chasing detection sensitivity from explicit responses.
We also computed a more implicit and online measure of chasing detection based on participants’ eye movements. Patients and controls were
matched on age, education, sex, intelligence and smooth pursuit abilities.
The sensitivity of chasing detection was significantly lower in patients than
in control. Eyetracking measures revealed that patients were significantly
less able to distinguish circles chasing each other from randomly moving
circles. Patients with schizophrenia demonstrate an online disturbance in
intentional motion perception at an implicit level, even before they make
an explicit judgment about this motion.

H40
ADAPTIVE OBSERVATIONAL INSTRUMENTAL LEARNING

Ida Selbing1, Björn Lindström1, Armita Golkar1, Andreas Olsson1; 1Karolinska Institutet
— Social learning through observation can be safe and efficient because it
does not incur the potential costs of individual trial and error. However,
compared with individual learning, the information gained via observation might be less reliable. When observing the choice behavior of others,
information about both their choices and the outcome of these choices are
normally available. However, it is unclear how humans use these sources
of information to adaptively guide their own learning when the model is
more or less reliable. To address this, we used a probabilistic two-choice
task where subjects learned to minimize the amount of received electric
shocks. Subjects observed the behavior of a learning model under three
levels of available observational information; no information, choices only,
both choices and choice outcomes. In order to vary the reliability of the
observational information, the choices of the learning model were either
rational (near optimal) or irrational (random). The results showed that
observing only the choices of a rational model resulted in similar performance as observing both choices and their outcomes, whereas observing
only the choices of an irrational model led to performance on par with
individual learning (no information condition). Reinforcement learning
modeling showed that both sources of observational information were dis-

246

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
counted when the observed choice was irrational although the observed
outcomes of these choices in theory still could inform choice behavior.
Taken together, the results show that humans estimate the reliability of
social information to adapt their individual learning although not necessarily in an optimal manner.

H41
INCREASED COGNITIVE CONTROL DURING NOREPINEPHRINE
RELEASE THROUGH ACUTE VAGUS NERVE STIMULATION Marlies
Van Bochove1, Leen De Taeye2, Kristl Vonck2, Robrecht Raedt2, Alfred Meurs2,
Paul Boon2, Ine Dauwe2, Wim Notebaert1, Tom Verguts1; 1Ghent University,
2
Ghent University Hospital — When something exciting happens, we become
more alert, partly due to a norepinephrine (NE) boost (Sara & Bouret, 2012).
It has been proposed that this NE boost not only increases alertness but also
cognitive control, the ability to suppress an instantaneous urge in order to
execute a more appropriate response (Verguts & Notebaert, 2008, 2009).
We currently investigate the role of NE in cognitive control. In the present
study epileptic patients who are pharmacoresistant were investigated. To
reduce seizure frequency these patients have been implanted with a Vagus
Nerve Stimulation device (VNS). Preclinical experiments show that VNS
activates the locus coeruleus and increases NE release in the brain which
plays a crucial role in the anti-epileptic effect of VNS (Raedt et al, 2011). We
asked 17 VNS patients to execute a flanker task, both on and off VNS stimulation (order counterbalanced across subjects). We investigated the effect
of stimulation on the congruency effect, the difference in reaction time (RT)
between congruent and incongruent stimuli. The congruency effect was
significantly smaller in the on stimulation condition, compared to off stimulation. The effect was significantly stronger for ‘responders’ (patients with
more than 50 % reduction of seizure frequency per months in response to
VNS, as determined independently from our cognitive control task), compared to ‘non responders’. This suggests that VNS, via increased NE signaling, improves cognitive control, possibly due to increased binding between
stimuli and responses, which allows better suppression of unwanted action
tendencies (Verguts & Notebaert, 2008, 2009).

H42
INDIRECT INFLUENCE OF MEDIAL ORBITOSTRIATAL PROJECTIONS ON RESPONSE SELECTION: CHECK YOURSELF BEFORE
YOU RECTUS YOURSELF Timothy Verstynen1, Jean Vettel2; 1Psychology
& CNBC, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, 2U.S. Army Research
Laboratory, Aberdeen Proving Grounds, MD — The lateral and medial orbitofrontal gyri are associated with affect, reward processing and inhibitory control. Yet we know very little about the role of the most medial
segment of orbitofrontal cortex, the Gyrus Rectus (GR), in cognition. We
looked at functional responses during a color-word version of the Stroop
task in a group of healthy adults (N=28, 19 male, ages 19-45 years) using
a 3T MRI. Of twenty regions with significantly different responses during
incongruent trials (i.e., the word “red” written in blue ink) compared to
neutral trials that used non-color words, only a cluster in the left GR exhibited a decrease in its responses. A single-trial GLM analysis detected that
fifteen of the twenty regions also had significant correlations between trial-by-trial BOLD responses and response times; however, the GR cluster
was not directly correlated with response speed. Using structural equation
modeling, we found a significant indirect pathway between GR activity
and response times via a network of lateral frontal regions and the anterior-medial caudate nucleus. We confirmed a structural link between the
GR and the caudate using streamline tractography from diffusion spectrum
imaging. The location of Stroop-related activity in the Caudate was situated
directly between where fibers from GR and rostral middle frontal gyrus
terminate, an ideal spatial location for integrating information from these
two areas. These results suggest that the GR may indirectly modulate the
speed of response selection through convergent cortico-striatal pathways
with lateral frontal regions.

H43
REWARD RELATED BRAIN ACTIVITY IS INCREASED FOLLOWING EFFORTFUL SELF-REGULATION Dylan D. Wagner1, Myra Altman1,
Rebecca G. Boswell2, William M. Kelley1, Todd F. Heatherton1; 1Dartmouth College, 2Yale University — Successful self-regulation requires that individuals match the strength of desires with sufficient control to overcome them.

2013 Annual Meeting
One popular model of self-control failure posits that self-control relies on a
domain general resource which can become temporarily depleted through
use, thereby leading to impaired self-control in subsequent tasks. In the
present study, we investigated the role of self-regulatory depletion on
subsequent neural responses to a natural reward (i.e., high-calorie foods)
in thirty-one female chronic dieters, half of which completed a difficult
attention control task prior to viewing food images. Compared to dieters
whose self-regulatory resources had not been depleted, depleted dieters
demonstrated greater food-cue related activity in a region of the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) associated with coding the rewarding and liking aspects
of desirable foods. Moreover, functional connectivity analysis (i.e,, psychophysiological interactions analysis) revealed differential connectivity
between control and depleted dieters, such that depleted dieters exhibited
reduced connectivity between the OFC and the inferior frontal gyrus. These
results suggest that prior self-regulatory exertion provokes subsequent
self-control failure by reducing top-down regulation of the OFC which in
turn enhances the reward value of temptations.

H44
THE DEVELOPMENT OF INHIBITORY CONTROL: FACT, FICTION,
OR ATTENTIONAL CONTROL? Warren Winter1, Margaret Sheridan1,2;
Boston Children’s Hospital, 2Harvard Medical School — The Go/NoGo task
(GNG) has been widely used to measure the development of inhibitory
control across childhood. However, the prepotency manipulation (frequent
Go trials preceding infrequent NoGo trials) confounds inhibition with
attentional control by requiring context monitoring, or vigilance for rare
signals. Moreover, developmental studies using the GNG inconsistently
reveal improvements in NoGo performance over and above improvements
on Go trials. Indeed, maturation of attentional control may underlie developmental variation in GNG performance. We test this hypothesis in 137
typically developing children (ages 4-13 years) in two experiments (Exp1
and Exp2). In Exp1, prior to the GNG we rewarded one picture that became
a NoGo stimulus and found that this previously rewarded NoGo (R-NoGo)
stimulus generated fewer errors of commission relative to a previously
unrewarded NoGo (UR-NoGo) stimulus. This finding demonstrates that
attention to the NoGo stimulus increases behavioral control. Exp2 added
to the paradigm feedback (which did not indicate accuracy) following each
button press. Errors of commission increased in Exp2 relative to Exp1, suggesting that increasing the salience of the “Go” goal interfered with maintenance of the “NoGo” goal. Age was associated with errors of omission
in both experiments and with errors of commission on UR-NoGo trials in
Exp2. After controlling for baseline Go performance, the effect of age on
errors of commission on UR-NoGo trials lost significance. Altogether, our
results suggest that NoGo performance primarily reflects attentional control that might be more important than motor inhibition for the maturation
of everyday self-regulation.

1

H45
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL DIFFERENCES IN INHIBITORY CONTROL BETWEEN ADHD ADULTS AND THEIR PEERS. Alan Rokeach1,
Steven Woltering1, Zhongxu Liu1, Rosemary Tannock1,2; 1University of Toronto,
2
The Hospital for Sick Children — Inhibitory control allows individuals to
suppress prepotent responses and resist irrelevant stimuli, and is thought
to be a core deficit in Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
While research documenting difficulties in inhibitory control in children
with ADHD is extant, less is known about the neural mechanisms underlying this deficit in college students with ADHD – a population that, despite
comparatively high educational attainment, still show marked functional
impairments in academic, social, and occupational functioning. The present
study investigated the neural correlates of inhibitory control in a sample of
60 college students with ADHD and 25 typically developing peers. Specifically the fronto-centrally located N2 and P3 event-related potential (ERP)
components were examined due to their known association with response
inhibition. Dense array electroencephalography (EEG) data was collected
during a Go/Nogo task. Results show significant reductions in the N2 and
P3 ERP components during a 200ms -600ms period after subjects correctly
inhibited a response. We conclude that when compared to their typically
developing peers, ADHD college students show a deviant neural signature,
possibly mediated by frontal systems. These results contribute to the grow-

Poster Session H
ing literature of adult ADHD, increase our understanding of the neural
correlates of inhibitory control in ADHD, and may have important implications for clinical and academic practice.

H46
LEFT INFERIOR PARIETAL LOBE AS BOTTLENECK IN DUAL-TASKING: EVIDENCE FROM TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION Britta Worringer1, Houpand Horoufchin1, Antonello Pellicano1,
Harshal Patel1, Jiun-Yiing Hu2, Iring Koch3, Ferdinand Binkofski1; 1Division of
Clinical and Cognitive Neurosciences, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University,
Germany, 2Department of Neuroscience, Wellesley College, USA, 3Institute of
Psychology, RWTH Aachen University, Germany — Recent literature of dualtask studies indicate that brain activation, especially in the left inferior parietal cortex, is associated with delayed processing of the second task, which
presumably reflects the competition for neuronal resources (bottleneck)1.
Consequently we hypothesized that transcranial direct current stimulation
(tDCS)-induced lowered or enhanced excitability of neurons in the left inferior parietal cortex results in decreased or increased performance particularly of the second task. To test our hypothesis we set up a colour and
shape discrimination reaction-time-dual-task with different stimulus onset
asynchronies (SOAs of 0ms, 300ms, 900ms). Participants responded to the
stimuli with both hands and underwent a baseline measurement without
any stimulation before they repeated the task under anodal, cathodal, or
sham stimulation condition. Results of 30 right-handed participants show
a significant 3-way interaction between SOA, stimulation, and block. Participants who received cathodal-tDCS on their left inferior parietal lobe
were slowest in responding to the second stimulus, while participants
who received anodal-tDCS on their left inferior parietal lobe were fastest
in responding to the second stimulus, specifically at short SOAs. There
was no difference in response times to the second stimulus at long SOAs.
Our results not only support previous findings that the left inferior parietal lobe is associated with the interference effects in dual-tasks, moreover
they explicitly demonstrate a causal relationship between the excitability of
neurons in this area and the performance of the second task in dual-tasking. 1Sigman & Dehaene (2008). Brain mechanisms of serial and parallel
processing during dual-task performance. Journal of Neuroscience,28(30),
7585—7598.

H47
FALSE MEMORIES CAN BE MODULATED BY TRANSCRANIAL
DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION (TDCS) Bastian Zwissler1, Sina
Aigeldinger1, Christoph Sperber1, Sebastian Schindler2, Johanna Kissler2, Christian Plewnia1; 1University Hospital Tübingen, 2University of Bielefeld — Studying false memories gives insights into basic memory (control) mechanisms
and executive functioning. One paradigm that allows for the systematic
investigation of false memories - directed forgetting (DF) - has been investigated in a multitude of design variants and populations. In its item-method
variant, participants are presented an array of stimuli, each of which is followed by a remember (R) or a forget (F) instruction. On a subsequent surprise memory test, recognition rate for R stimuli is generally higher than for
F stimuli. Previous studies of the authors suggest this effect to be borne not
only by veridical but also by false memories. The present study aimed at
modulating false alarms by transcranial direct current stimulation (TDCS).
TDCS is a non-invasive, well-tolerated technique that is used to investigate
healthy and impaired neuronal functions. Cortical activity is thought to be
enhanced by anodal TDCS and to be reduced by cathodal TDCS. Eightythree healthy subjects participated in a double-blind sham-controlled crossover study. TDCS (20min, 1mA) to the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(dlPFC) or sham stimulation were applied during the encoding phase of a
DF task. Whereas hits yielded the classic DF effect in all three groups, false
alarm patterns differed massively. Under anodal stimulation, false alarm
rates were significantly higher than under sham stimulation. Under cathodal stimulation, in turn, they were significantly lower. No between-group
response bias difference was observed. To our knowledge, this is the first
study that shows a dose effect of brain stimulation on a complex cognitive
task.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

247

Poster Session H

H48
EFFECTS OF REDUNDANT FEEDBACK ON THE RESPONSE
RELATED ERN Loni Lebanoff1, Siri-Maria Kamp1, Yael Arbel1, Emanuel Donchin1; 1University of South Florida — Incorrect responses in speeded reaction time tasks are associated with the elicitation of two ERP components,
the Error Related Negativity (ERN) and the P300. When the accuracy of
the performance cannot be evaluated without an external feedback, the
ERN is known to be elicited by the informing feedback. The purpose of
the presented experiment was to elucidate the extent to which redundant
feedback (feedback which is not necessary for task performance) affects
the attributes of the error related ERP components. Nine participants completed a Flanker task in two sessions which differed in the extent to which
performance feedback followed the participant’s responses. In one session,
no feedback was provided, while in the other session, each response was
followed by performance feedback. Participants were instructed to perform
as quickly and as accurately as they can. The results of the study indicated
that the amplitude of the response ERN was larger when no feedback
was provided, while the P300 amplitude remained constant. These results
suggest that the presence of feedback, regardless of its usefulness for task
performance affects performance monitoring. Our data suggest that when
feedback is provided, participants tend to rely on it to some degree, or in
other words, to shift some of the monitoring “responsibility” to the external
source.

H49
SAME STIMULI BUT DIFFERENT INSTRUCTIONS INDUCE DIFFERENT ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES Kazufumi Omura1,
Asuka Otsu1, Ai Sakamoto1, Kenji Kusumoto1; 1Yamagata University — We
investigated the influence of instructional differences on electrophysiological responses in an arrowhead-type hybrid flanker-Go/Nogo task. Twenty-nine right-handed healthy participants (mean age: 20.97 years; S.D.: 0.50)
performed a hybrid flanker-Go/Nogo task with simultaneous electroencephalographic recording. Four arrowhead strings (congruent: <<<<<,
>>>>>; incongruent: <<><<, >><>>) were prepared as the stimuli. Participants had to focus on the central target arrowhead. In the flanker task,
participants were instructed to respond to the central target arrowhead by
pressing the left or right button depending on the direction the arrowhead
pointed, i.e., left or right, respectively (congruent condition: <<<<<, >>>>>;
incongruent condition: <<><<, >><>>). In the Go/Nogo task, they were
asked to press the left or right button upon appearance of the central target
arrowhead when all arrowheads pointed in the same direction (Go condition: <<<<<, >>>>); the prepared motor response had to be suppressed
upon appearance of the central target arrowhead when all arrowheads
pointed in the opposite direction (Nogo condition: <<><<, >><>>). We
compared the congruent condition in the flanker task with the Go condition in the Go/Nogo task. Both conditions required the same responses to
the same stimuli but involved different instructions. The amplitude of the
P3 in the Go condition was significantly larger than that in the congruent
condition. Further, the behavioral reaction time in the Go condition was
significantly longer than that in the congruent condition. It is plausible that
the task strategy involving same stimuli but different instructions induces
different neural processing.

H50
DIFFERENCES IN FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY DURING RESTING STATE FMRI IN INDIVIDUALS WITH ANIRIDIA Jordan Pierce1,
Amanda Rodrigue1, Cynthia Krafft1, Anastasia Bobilev1, James Lauderdale1,
Jennifer McDowell1; 1University of Georgia — Aniridia is a congenital disorder caused by heterozygous null mutations within PAX6, a paired-box
transcription factor, or cytogenetic deletions of chromosome 11p13 that
encompass PAX6. This condition is relatively rare, affecting one in sixty
thousand individuals, and is typically associated with congenital eye
defects. Abnormalities in brain structure have also been reported including
reduced volume of the interhemispheric commissures and polymicrogyria.
Previous studies also have indicated subtle cognitive deficits in executive
function and social cognition, though few have investigated this population using functional neuroimaging. “Resting state” functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) can be used to investigate co-activations of
widespread brain networks when no task is being performed. One such

248

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
network, the default mode network (DMN), is often found to be anti-correlated with brain activity during tasks and may reflect ongoing neural
processes including self-referential thought. In the present study, resting
fMRI scans have thus far been collected from 13 adults with aniridia and 8
age- and gender-matched controls. Group-level independent components
analysis with dual regression was performed on the resting state data to
obtain individual functional maps corresponding to group networks. Preliminary group comparison results show that the aniridia group has greater
functional connectivity with the DMN in a region of the left middle frontal
gyrus. This region is involved in higher cognition and the increased connectivity may indicate a greater need for top-down control of DMN functioning. Alterations in neural structure in individuals with aniridia may
also contribute to the observed differences in functional connectivity.

H51
NEURAL CORRELATES OF CONFABULATION Mara Serra1,2, Raffaella
Migliaccio2, Valentina La Corte2,3, Marta Brazzarola4, Ilaria Zannoni4, Gianfranco
Dalla Barba1,2,3,4,5; 1Dipartimento di Scienze della Vita, Università degli Studi
di Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Centre de Recherche de l’Institut du Cerveau et de
la Moelle épinière, UMR-S975, Paris, France, 3Université Pierre et Marie CurieParis, Paris, France, 4Centro di Foniatria, Unità Operativa per l’Afasia, Villa Valmarana, Padova, Italy, 5Service de Neurologie, AP-HP, Hôpital Henri Mondor,
Créteil, France — Confabulation is the production of statements and actions,
unintentionally incongruous to the subject’s history, present and future situation (Dalla Barba, 1993a). It is mostly common among patients affected
by Korsakoff syndrome and those with rupture of aneurysms of the anterior communicant artery. In this study we used a modified version of the
confabulation battery (Dalla Barba & Decaix, 2009) to quantify confabulations in seven confabulating amnesics (CA) compared to six non confabulating amnesics (NCA) and matched healthy controls. For each patient a CT
scan or a MRI was obtained in order to describe the brain lesion underlying
the cognitive profile. Overall CA produced 203 confabulations whereas
NCA only nine. Grey matter lesion analysis showed a greater involvement
of the ventral and parasagittal prefrontal cortex, right-lateralized in six CA
and left-lateralized just in one CA patient. By using a white matter atlas we
estimated that all CA patients’ lesions involved the frontal branches of the
uncinate fasciculus, connecting anterior e medial temporal lobe portions
with ventro-medial prefrontal cortices. NCA presented isolated lesions in
the medial temporal lobe (MTL) without lateralization. The NCA lesions
indicate that an isolated damage of the MTL causes amnesia but no confabulation. The CA patients’ performances were associated with lesions in the
ventral and parasagittal prefrontal cortices with greater right lateralization,
involving the uncinate white matter bundle. Within this framework, the
confabulation might be caused not only by frontal lesions, but also by a
functional disconnection between the frontal cortex and the MTL, through
the uncinate fasciculus.

H52
NETWORKS INVOLVED IN CONFLICT-RELATED MODULATION OF
VISUAL PROCESSING: A COMBINED EEG-DTI STUDY. Marlies E.
Vissers1, Heleen A. Slagter1, Rudy L. van den Brink1, Michael X Cohen1; 1University of Amsterdam — Selective attention to a visual feature such as color
involves top-down modulation of visual processing. At present, it remains
unclear whether similar modulations also occur in a situation that requires
fast reactive control, for example in the case of response conflict. Therefore,
we examined whether performance on a color-motion response conflict
task involves top-down modulation of activity in visual areas using electroencephalography (EEG). In addition, we explored whether these modulations are predicted by anatomical brain connectivity using white matter
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). In the task, subjects responded to one visual
feature (e.g., color) while ignoring the other stimulus feature (i.e., motion).
Time-frequency analyses of the EEG-data showed a conflict-related increase
in low theta power (3 – 6 Hz) over mediofrontal regions, as predicted from
previous research. Moreover, conflict enhanced fronto-posterior functional
connectivity in the upper theta band (6 – 8.5 Hz; measured through phase
synchronization between mediofrontal and parietal electrodes). Using DTI,
we investigated the relationship between this conflict-related functional
connectivity and the strength of anatomical pathways related to color (V4)
and motion (hMT+) processing (regions were defined via fMRI localizers).
Cross-subject correlations showed that anatomical pathways connecting V4

2013 Annual Meeting
and hMT+ to regions in the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, and to regions
within the ventral visual pathway, differentially predicted individual differences in conflict modulation of fronto-posterior connectivity. These findings provide novel insights into the role of the frontal cortex in conflict-related top-down control over visual processing, and reveal a functional role
of individual differences in the underlying structural brain networks.

H53
PERSISTENT COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENTS FOLLOWING SEPSIS
Erin Zelinski1, Janice Sutherland1,3, Scott Oberg1, Derrice Knight2,3, Matt Tata1,
Christopher Doig2,3, Robert Sutherland1,3; 1Canadian Centre for Behavioural
Neuroscience; Dept of Neuroscience; University of Lethbridge, 2Dept of Community Medicine; Faculty of Medicine; University of Calgary, 3Alberta Sepsis
Network — Sepsis is a pervasive bacterial infection that can overwhelm the
immune system, potentially resulting in organ failure, coma, or death in
severe cases. Sepsis typically results in admission to a hospital’s intensive
care unit (ICU) because of its relatively high mortality rate. Sepsis survivors often complain of memory or attention problems following recovery,
but few empirical investigations into such cognitive changes have been
conducted. Therefore, a subset of tests from the Cambridge Neuropsychological Automated Test Battery (CANTAB) and electroencephalography
recording during Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) performance were administered to measure levels of cognitive abilities using standardized testing.
Participants included individuals who recovered from Sepsis that required
care in the ICU 12 to 18 months prior to participating in the study. Ageand sex-matched controls were used for all between group comparisons.
Impairments were observed among the Sepsis group on various CANTAB
subtests, particularly in the domains of visual memory and executive
functions. Relative to controls, the Sepsis group also exhibited poorer performance on the IGT. Together, these results support the hypothesis that
alterations in cognitive performance are observed amongst Sepsis survivors following recovery that can significantly impact daily function. The
observed cognitive impairments are associated with long-term neurobiological dysfunction of prefrontal and temporal cortical regions.

H54
ALTERED PATTERNS OF NEURAL CONNECTIVITY ARE ASSOCIATED WITH COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE AND DISEASE SEVERITY
IN RELAPSING-REMITTING MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS Alisha Janssen1,
Aaron Boster2, Amir Abduljalil3, Ruchika Shaurya Prakash1; 1Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, 2Department of Neurology, The Ohio State
University, 3Wright Center for Innovation, The Ohio State University — Multiple sclerosis is a neurodegenerative, inflammatory disease of the central
nervous system, resulting in physical and cognitive disturbances. The goal
of the current study was to examine the association between resting-state
network integrity and composite measures of cognitive and disease decline
through the recruitment of thirty-seven individuals with a clinically definite
diagnosis of relapsing-remitting MS and thirty age, gender and education
matched healthy controls. ICA and dual-regression techniques revealed
nine networks of interest, six of which exhibited group level differences
including the Fronto-Executive network, Left and Right Fronto-Parietal
networks, Motor network, Lateral and Medial visual networks. An analysis of brain-behavior correlations revealed significant associations between
functional integration in the Left-Frontoparietal network and Fronto-Executive network with a composite of processing speed performance. Specifically, increased synchronization in RRMS patients between the Fronto-Executive network and the left post-central gyrus was positively related to
processing speed abilities, signifying a possible compensatory activation of
motor areas during executive processing. Functional integration between
the left fronto-parietal network and the dorsal posterior cingulate gyrus
(dPCC) was also positively associated with processing speed performance,
exemplifying the importance of the dPCC in task-positive and task-negative network dynamics involved in preserved cognitive functioning. Progression in disease severity, as measured by a composite score of disease
advancement, displayed negative associations with network synchrony in
the lateral visual network, responsible for visual association processing.
These findings illustrate a defined association between the MS brain at rest
and behavioral measures of disease progression, supporting the existence
of neural based behavioral changes in disease.

Poster Session H

H55
EVENT RECONSTRUCTION REVEALS RELATIONAL REPRESENTATIONS THAT DO NOT OVERLAP WITH THE SEMANTIC INFORMATION PRESENT IN THE EXPERIMENT. Patrick Watson1,2, Wang Jane3,
Cohen Neal1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Sandia National
Laboratories, 3Northwestern University — Recent research highlights the
importance of default network structures to constructed experience: imagining, configuring, manipulating, and remembering compositions of items
and relations. We present a method designed to examine reconstruction
of specific compositions. Participants viewed a short movie clip and then
immediately reconstructed the configuration of items, locations, and times
present in the clip. By examining the overlap between participants’ reconstructions and reconstructions from prior trials we were able to disambiguate participants’ performance which was due to memory for the current
configuration, from that which what was due to shared semantic structure
present across study trials. This helps provide a clean signal separating
brain activity modulated by information present in a particular trial from
activity coding information across trials. Behaviorally, we observed no
benefit for reconstructing relations that appeared simultaneously versus
those that appeared at different times. In addition, after controlling for the
complexity of bindings, there was no difference in performance for within-domain bindings (e.g., inter-item or inter-location bindings), yet there
were pronounced performance differences for cross-domain bindings (e.g.,
item-to-location bindings). Additionally, performance on one type of binding often predicted performance on another type, suggesting that these
bindings were not encoded independently, but rather as a single “chunk,”
and these chunks closely corresponded to bindings which one could infer
from the experiment’s cross-trial shared semantic structure. This suggests
that participants are using complementary systems to represent within and
across trial information and it may be possible to examine different brain
networks’ contribution to the interaction of these systems.

H56
“REAL-TIME EEG-BASED PREDICTION OF MENTAL WORKLOAD
IN A MULTITASKING ENVIRONMENT” Monica Weiland1, Dan Roberts1,
Matthew Caywood1, Hal Greenwald1, Jeffrey Colombe1; 1The MITRE Corporation
— In evaluating new Air Traffic Control (ATC) automation, it is critical
to objectively measure its impact on controllers’ mental workload. To this
end, we investigated neurophysiological correlates of traffic load in ATC
simulations using electroencephalography (EEG). We had three goals: 1)
develop machine learning methods that predict mental workload imposed
by varying traffic levels (taskload) , 2) identify EEG features that correlate
to taskload, and 3) understand individual differences in EEG features that
measure workload. In this study, eight subjects matched for gender and
age performed realistic ‘human-in-the-loop’ ATC simulations with taskload as a within-subject variable. This multitasking environment required
controllers to intermix visual, speaking, motor, and listening tasks. Our
Gaussian process regressor achieved moderate power in predicting taskload. Comparisons of significant features between linear regression analysis and machine learning indicate that beta and gamma were consistently
significant and were among the most informative EEG features for all subjects. These results are consistent with studies using the MATB and military training exercise, suggesting that beta and gamma power increases
are related to workload in multitasking environments. Gamma effects were
more global, whereas beta effects were occipital-temporal, distinct from
the frontal, central and parietal taskload effects reported by others in their
ATC task. However, their ATC task did not include speaking and listening,
which could explain why our subjects had more temporal effects. These
results indicate that EEG-based measures of workload can be developed for
multitasking environments such as ATC.

H57
ALPHA OSCILLATIONS VARY WITH TEMPORAL PREDICTIONS
COUNTERACTING WORKING MEMORY DEMANDS Anna Wilsch1,
Molly Henry1, Björn Herrmann1, Burkhard Maess1, Jonas Obleser1; 1Max
Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany —
Increased alpha power (8--13 Hz) has been associated with increasing working memory demands, e.g. for speech in noise, likely reflecting increased
inhibition of task-irrelevant information. In contrast, temporal predictions

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

249

Poster Session H
are hypothesized to reduce memory demands, but the neural dynamics of
this trade-off are not well understood. Using magnetoencephalography,
we presented syllable pairs (S1–S2) in an ongoing, individually adjusted
noise masker while subjects (N=18) performed a delayed-matching-to-sample task. Temporal predictability was manipulated with “short”, “long”,
or “neutral” (unknown foreperiod) cues indicating the approximate onset
time of S1. We performed event-related (ERFs) and time–frequency analyses (also in source space). First, behavioral and ERF results indicated that
temporal predictability reduced cognitive demands: Informative foreperiod cues elicited shorter reaction times and higher accuracy than neutral
cues. Also, ERFs to S1 were reduced for long-foreperiod trials. Second,
non-phase-locked alpha power was increased during memory retention
for unknown-foreperiod compared to cued-foreperiod trials, highlighting
the tradeoff between cognitive demands and temporal predictability. An
interaction with actual foreperiod duration showed that longer foreperiods
attenuated alpha power only following neutral cues. Third, alpha power
dynamics were also directly correlated with performance modulation: Individual alpha power differences between unknown-foreperiod and cued
long-foreperiod trials predicted the respective difference in performance.
Alpha power changes during memory retention originated from bilateral
Heschl’s gyri and posterior cingulate cortex, implicating functional inhibition in the auditory system. The results underline that temporal predictions
not only benefit performance, but can directly counteract neural signatures
of increased cognitive demand for speech in noise.

H58
MEG EVIDENCES FOR DISSOCIATIONS OF WORKING AND EPISODIC MEMORY Bethany C. Y. Wu1,2, David E. J. Linden3,4, Stephan G.
Boehm5; 1Taiwan Mind & Brain Imaging Center, TMBIC, 2Department of Psychology, National Chengchi University, Taiwan, 3School of Psychology, Cardiff
University, United Kingdom, 4School of Medicine, Cardiff University, United
Kingdom, 5Wolfson Centre for Clinical and Cognitive Neuroscience, School of
Psychology, Bangor University, United Kingdom — Working memory refers
to the temporary storage and manipulation of information in the service
of ongoing task demands, and episodic memory to the long-term storage
of events. Working memory and episodic memory have long been considered to be two distinct but interacting memory systems, where working
memory acts as the pathway to and from episodic memory. Studies on the
neural underpinnings of working and long-term memory have shown that
both engage widely overlapping brain regions, questioning the dissociation
of the two systems. However, preliminary studies in our lab have shown
that successful performance of faces in working memory does not result in
better episodic memory for these faces, questioning the ingoing direction
of the pathway from working to episodic memory. Here we investigated
the neural underpinning of these memory systems with Megnetoencephalography and the importance of working memory for successful episodic memory with behavioral means. Participants performed a working
memory test with faces, followed by an episodic memory for the faces from
the working memory task. Evoked magnetic fields for working memory
showed old/new effects around 300-500 ms and 500-700 ms at frontal-central sensors and for episodic memory around 500-800 ms at left-parietal
sensors. Successful performance for faces in working memory test did not
lead to better memory for these faces in the episodic memory test. These
results show that the functional dissociation of working and episodic
memory is supported by distinct neural underpinnings, but suggest that
the creation of episodic memory does not depend on successful working
memory performance.

H59
CHOLINERGIC ENHANCEMENT IMPROVES VISUAL SHORT-TERM
MEMORY PERFORMANCE Sahar M. Yousef1,2, Summer L. Sheremata1,2,
Rachel K. Kaneta2, Michael A. Silver1,2; 1UC Berkeley Helen Wills Neuroscience
Institute, 2UC Berkeley Vision Science Dept., School of Optometry — Visual
short-term memory (VSTM) refers to the retention of visual information
from the immediate environment over brief intervals. In patients with
mild cognitive impairment, pharmacologically increasing synaptic levels
of acetylcholine (ACh) facilitates VSTM by boosting the rate of information
processing (Bublak et al., 2011). We therefore hypothesized that cholinergic enhancement would improve VSTM performance in healthy subjects.
Synaptic ACh levels were elevated by administration of the cholinester-

250

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
ase inhibitor donepezil in a placebo-controlled, double blind crossover
design. Subjects were presented with a set of colored squares for either
100 or 200 ms, and consolidation of the set was disrupted by subsequent
presentation of a visual mask. A second set of colored squares was then
presented that was either identical to the first set or contained one square
of a different color. Subjects were asked to report whether the second set
was identical to the first set or not. We assessed the effects of donepezil for
set sizes that were based on each subject’s VSTM capacity (k), measured
prior to the pharmacological manipulation. We found that for 100 ms stimulus presentation, cholinergic enhancement improved VSTM performance,
consistent with the hypothesized beneficial role of ACh in information processing in VSTM. However, no effect of donepezil on VSTM performance
was observed for longer stimulus durations (200 ms). Our results suggest
that cholinergic enhancement can improve VSTM performance but that this
may occur only for conditions in which memory performance is limited by
the amount of time subjects view the material to be encoded.

H60
TIMING OF CORTICAL EXCITABILITY DURING A VISUAL WORKING MEMORY TASK Theodore Zanto1, James Chadick1, Adam Gazzaley1; 1University of California San Francisco — Alpha band (8-12 Hz) phase
dynamics in the visual cortex are thought to reflect cortical excitability. As
such, visual stimuli are better detected when presented during specific
phases of the alpha cycle. However, it is unclear whether critical temporal
windows around stimulus onset exist that are optimal for cortical excitability. To address this, participants performed a delayed-recognition working memory task for visual motion direction during two separate visits.
The first visit utilized functional magnetic resonance imaging to identify
neural regions involved in the task. These data showed involvement of
visual cortical area V5, as well as a region in the PFC, the inferior frontal
junction (IFJ). During the second visit, transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) was applied to the IFJ and V5 (and vertex as control) while electroencephalography (EEG) was recorded. During each trial, a single TMS
pulse was applied to one of six time points (-200, -100, -50, 0, 80, 160 ms)
relative to the encoded stimulus onset. Results showed that a TMS pulse
applied to V5 that happened to occur during the trough of the posterior
alpha phase yielded slowed subsequent response times to the target stimulus 2 seconds later (compared to stimulation during peak alpha phase)
and increased early event related potential (ERP) amplitudes of the target.
Interestingly, this occurred regardless of when the TMS pulse was applied
relative to stimulus onset. These results suggest that ongoing alpha phase,
and not specific time-windows relative to stimulus onset, serve to modulate
processing states that in turn influences working memory.

H61
HOW THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF RECOGNITION MEMORY
CHANGE OVER BRIEF DELAYS Halle R. Zucker1,2, Elizabeth A.
Kensinger1,2; 1Boston College, 2Harvard Center for Brain Science — Extensive
research has examined how memory retrieval is affected by the remoteness of memories. Most of this research has compared retrieval of information with delay intervals that differ in days or even in years. In the present
study, we examined whether recognition memory processes would also
differ across much shorter delays, ranging from 1 to 11 seconds. While
undergoing fMRI scanning, 17 healthy young adults (mean age=21.8 years;
8 female) studied 4-item lists of semantic associates related to a common
non-presented semantic theme (e.g., hope, want, desire, dream all related
to WISH). A parametrically varied delay interval (1000, 3400, or 11,000 milliseconds) followed during which participants completed a number shadowing task to prevent rehearsal of the memory set. Following this delay,
participants were given a recognition probe (studied, related/unstudied,
unrelated/unstudied) to assess memory. Activity in regions implicated in
semantic interference resolution (left inferior frontal gyrus; Talairach coordinates [Tal] -44, 27, -5) as well as familiarity processes (parahippocampal
gyrus [PHG]; Tal 26, -37, -10) parametrically varied for hits more than for
correct rejections of unrelated items. Correctly rejecting related themes as
compared to unrelated themes showed a parametrically varying relationship in familiarity regions (PHG; Tal 20, -36, -12). Thus, we replicate the
finding that veridical memory relies on semantic interference resolution
processes. Additionally, we demonstrate an increased reliance on familiarity traces with increasing retention time both when correctly remembering
studied and non-studied themes.

2013 Annual Meeting

H62
BRAIN DYNAMICS COMPARISON BETWEEN INFANTS AND
ADULTS DURING PERCEPTION OF NATIVE VERSUS NON-NATIVE CONSONANT-VOWEL CONTRASTS Silvia Ortiz-Mantilla1, Jarmo A.
Hämäläinen2, April A. Benasich1; 1Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
USA, 2University of Jyväskylä, Finland — Evoked (phase-locked) and induced
(non-phase-locked) stimulus-related modulation of cortical rhythms has
been described in theta (3-8Hz) and gamma (30-80Hz) bands during speech
perception. To explore the spectral composition of event-related potentials
(ERPs) during perception of native versus non-native consonant-vowel
contrasts, 6-month-old infants born into monolingual families, and righthanded, monolingual adults were presented with an oddball paradigm
using consonant-vowel contrasts with a standard (phonetically relevant in
English and Spanish), a native English deviant and a non-native Spanish
deviant. Dense array EEG/ERPs were collected using a 62-channel EGI
net and mapped into age-appropriate brain templates. Source modeling
placed dipoles in auditory and frontal cortices. Temporal-spectral analyses were conducted in source space using a 2-80Hz frequency band range
(-300 to 930 ms) with 1Hz wide frequency bins and time resolution of 50
ms. Changes in frequency band amplitude, as a function of time relative to
stimulus presentation, were evaluated using measures of temporal spectral
evolution. Inter-trial phase locking values measured how consistently the
phase at different frequency bands synchronized across trials. Permutation
testing in combination with data clustering analyses showed that similar to
adults, but at different frequencies, 6-month-olds infants already favored
processing of native over non-native contrasts. Theta oscillations underlay infant and adult evoked responses in auditory cortices during syllable perception particularly for native contrasts. Induced activity was also
prominent in theta band, 4-6Hz in infants and 3-8Hz in adults with frontal
enhancement of low gamma oscillations for the native deviant in infants
and left temporal high gamma oscillations in adults.

H63
ANATOMICAL CORRELATES OF LANGUAGE VARIABILITY IN
AUTISM Emmaly Owens1,2, Brandon Kopald1, Sephira Ryman2, Carly
Demopoulos1, Karen Cooper1, Jeffrey Lewine1,2; 1Mind Research Network,
University of New Mexico — Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are characterized by deficits in social reciprocity and communication. Research has
demonstrated a significant heterogeneity in communication abilities across
the phenotypic presentation of autism, but the neurobiological underpinnings of this intra-subject variability in language abilities are poorly understood. This study sought to determine the extent to which variability in
language function in the ASDs could be accounted for by variability in cortical gray matter volume. A total of twenty-four children with an ASD were
evaluated (ages 5-18 years). Communication ability was assessed using the
Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals (CELF-IV). Magnetic resonance images (MRIs) were obtained on a 3-T scanner and were analyzed
via voxel-based morphometry (VBM, Ashburner and Friston, 2000), using
the CCHMC pediatric template. Total language index scores (i.e., CELF
Core) on the CELF were positively correlated with GM volume in the right
inferior parietal lobe, and negatively correlated with GM volume of the
right superior temporal gyrus. Examination of specific language sub-domains revealed that the relationship was driven selectively by expressive
language abilities, there being no significant correlations between receptive language scores and GM volume for any brain region. It is noteworthy
that language skills in the ASD group were more closely associated with
GM volume profiles in the right versus left hemisphere. This is a somewhat
unexpected response since the left hemisphere is typically dominant for
language. However, the observation is consistent with an emerging body
of literature suggesting that atypical cerebral dominance for language is
common for many children with ASDs.
2

H64
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES OF CHILDREN WITH
SPECIFIC LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT TO VIOLATIONS OF MORPHOSYNTAX J.D. Purdy1, Laurence B. Leonard1, Christine Weber-Fox1,
Natalya Kaganovich1; 1Purdue University — Children with Specific Language
Impairment (SLI) exhibit delays in the development of language abilities,
and these deficits may persist into adolescence and beyond. In the pres-

Poster Session H
ent study, sentences with two distinct types of morphosyntactic violations
were presented auditorily to children with SLI between the ages of 7 and
11 years, and to a group of age-matched control children. Sentences of the
first type were simple, containing a subject-verb number violation (“When
it snows they builds a snowman”). The second type consisted of complex
sentences, with a verb in its grammatical non-finite form replaced with
an ungrammatical finite verb in the subordinate clause (“She watches the
green frog jumps into the water”). Recognition of the violation in the complex sentences depends on knowledge of long-distance syntactic dependencies, which may be diminished in children with SLI. Electrophysiological (ERP) responses showed that the children with SLI displayed a much
smaller P600 response to violations in both simple and complex sentences
compared to the children in the age-matched control group. Furthermore,
in the simple sentences, the children with SLI exhibited a negative voltage deflection (N400), which may indicate that they were using a semantic,
rather than morphosyntactic, strategy for recovering the meaning of the
sentence. The results are discussed not only in terms of the group differences, but also in terms of why, in the SLI group only, the two types of
ungrammatical sentences yielded distinctly different ERP signatures.

H65
COGNITIVE TRAJECTORY IN MALES AND FEMALES WITH FRAGILE X SYNDROME Eve-Marie Quintin1, Scott Hall1, Booil Jo1, Jennifer Bruno1,
Lindsay Chromik1, Mira Raman1, Amy Linghtbody1, Allan Reiss1; 1Center for
Interdisciplinary Brain Sciences Research, Stanford University — Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the leading known cause of inherited cognitive deficits and
impairments. To date, cross-sectional studies have shown that, as a group,
males show more severe cognitive impairments than females. However,
few studies have compared of cognitive trajectories of males and females
with FXS. With a prospective longitudinal design, we measured cognitive
functioning of 117 males and 73 females using the Wechsler Scale of Intelligence for Children, 3rd edition (WISC). Over the course of 14 years, we
administered the WISC a second time to 51 males and 45 females and a third
time to 30 males and 21 females. Participants’ ages therefore ranged from
6 to 25 years. We compared cognitive trajectories of males and females for
the ten WISC subtests using growth curve analysis. Given significant flooring on standardized scores, we employed percent raw scores. Our analyses
revealed that percent raw scores for females increased at a faster rate than
scores for males for all subtests. However, how percent raw scores trajectories changed over time was significantly different for females compared to
males for the information, similarities, block design, picture arrangement,
coding subtests but not for the other subtests. These results significantly
expand our knowledge of the role of sex differences in the developmental
trajectories of specific cognitive domains in FXS. Our findings suggest that
sex is an important factor to consider for interventions targeting cognitive
functioning of individuals with FXS from childhood to early adulthood.

H66
WORD LEARNING SHAPES THE INFANT BRAIN: TRAINING
INDUCED EFFECTS ON THE PROCESSING OF PHONOTACTIC
REGULARITIES IN 6-MONTH-OLD INFANTS Maria Richter1,2, Micol
Vignotto1,2, Hellmuth Obrig1,2, Sonja Rossi1,2; 1University of Leipzig, Medical
Faculty, Day Clinic for Cognitive Neurology, Liebigstr. 18, D – 04103 Leipzig,
Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences,
Stephanstr. 1A, D – 04103 Leipzig, Germany — In language acquisition infants
use phonotactic knowledge to segment the incoming auditory speech
stream, with phonotactics describing the combinatorial rules of phonemes
in a given language. Already 3-month-old infants are sensitive to phonotactic properties of their native language. The present study investigates
how brain activity responses to native (i.e., legal) and non-native (i.e., illegal) phonotactic regularities are modulated through training in 6-monthold infants. We therefore acoustically presented phonotactically legal and
illegal pseudowords embedded in a semantic training. Each infant underwent a pretest, training, and posttest on three consecutive days. Pretest and
posttest included trained and untrained pseudowords. During training the
pseudowords were combined with pictures of real objects to create an associative learning setting. Brain activity responses were monitored by means
of event-related brain potentials (ERPs) and functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS). ERPs and fNIRS results revealed a familiarization effect
for phonotactically legal and illegal trained pseudowords leading to modu-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

251

Poster Session H
lations of brain activity over time. For the ERP data the familiarization was
indexed by an increasing frontally distributed positivity, displayed from
day 1 to day 3. The modulation was larger for legal than for illegal trained
pseudowords and was not present for untrained words. These findings
show that word learning mechanisms emerge very early in life eliciting
changes in the brain. The familiarization effect indicates that acoustically
oriented perceptual mechanisms guide word learning at this early age even
within a semantic learning context rather than pure associative learning.
Probably, more lexically oriented brain processes establish later during language acquisition.

H67
OUT OF USE, OUT OF SIGHT? WHAT THE EYES GIVE AWAY ABOUT
THE UNUSED LANGUAGE: GRAMMATICAL GENDER PROCESSING Bregtje Seton1,2, Christopher Bergmann1, Sanne Meike Berends1, Susanne
Brouwer1,3, Simone Sprenger1, Nienke Meulman1, Laurie A. Stowe1, Monika S.
Schmid1; 1University of Groningen, 2Rotman Research Institute, 3Northwestern
University — Eye-tracking is often used to investigate language processing
of a first or a second language. However, the first language of a second
language speaker is often forgotten. So far, there are no eye-tracking studies
that focus on the first language of those who moved to a country where their
second language became the more prominent language. These so-called
first-language attriters (length of residence > 7 years) are the subject of
investigation in the present eye-tracking study. A visual world paradigm
was used to investigate whether attriters still rely on morphological cues in
their first language to predict upcoming targets on the screen. German and
Dutch emigrants living in North America were given the task to click on
one of four pictures on the screen, as they heard sentences like the German
“Wo ist dermasc grüne Apfel?” (Where is themasc green apple?) and “Wo
ist ein grünermasc Apfel” (Where is a greenmasc apple?). The target picture would either have a different grammatical gender than the three other
pictures (3 distractors) or share the same gender with one of the three other
pictures (1 competitor and 2 distractors). Results show that attriters can still
rely on grammatical gender cues, but do so less than the native controls
that were tested in Germany and the Netherlands. Moreover, German participants seemed to benefit more from gender cues than Dutch participants,
suggesting that the importance of grammatical gender in a language influences the ability to rely on gender cues in speech.

H68
SOLID AS A ROCK THE BOAT: HOW AGING AFFECTS DOWNSTREAM COMPREHENSION FOLLOWING LEXICAL AMBIGUITY
RESOLUTION Mallory Stites1, Kara D. Federmeier1; 1University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign — The current study uses eye-tracking to investigate
the downstream consequences of difficult ambiguity resolution during
natural reading in both young and older adults (60+). Noun/verb (NV)
homographs (e.g. duck) and unambiguous words were embedded in
semantically neutral but syntactically constraining contexts, followed by
a prepositional phrase that was plausible for only one of the word’s meanings. Using event-related potential measures with the same materials,
Lee and Federmeier (2012) found a sustained frontal negativity in young
adults, thought to reflect frontally-mediated meaning selection processes,
to homographs in these contexts. Additionally, they found plausibility
effects on the head noun of the prepositional phrase following both word
types, suggesting that the frontal negativity reflected successful meaning
selection. In the current eye-tracking study, young, but not older adults,
showed inflated first fixation durations to ambiguous relative to unambiguous words. This finding replicates other work showing increased first fixation durations in young, but not older, adults when readers must disambiguate NV homographs using only syntactic cues. Both age groups exhibited
plausibility effects in the form of significantly increased reading times on
the head noun of the implausible prepositional phrase, which were smaller
following homographs than unambiguous words. Furthermore, for both
age groups in the ERPs and eye-tracking, the size of an individual’s initial
effect (first fixation or negativity) was positively correlated with the size of
their plausibility effect, suggesting the magnitude of the initial effect may
reflect the degree to which the meaning selection mechanisms have been
successfully recruited, leading to larger plausibility effects downstream.

252

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

H69
A NOVEL META-ANALYTIC TECHNIQUE IDENTIFIES CONSISTENT
ABNORMALITIES OF THE CAUDATE NUCLEUS AND FRONTAL
CORTEX IN SPECIFIC LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT Michael T. Ullman1,
Mariel Y. Pullman1, Jarrett T. Lovelett1, Elizabeth I. Pierpont1, Peter E. Turkeltaub1; 1Georgetown University — GOAL: This study aims to reveal any localized neuroanatomic abnormalities that are consistently present in Specific
Language Impairment (SLI). KNOWLEDGE GAPS: Despite numerous
studies, a consensus on the neuroanatomy of SLI has yet to emerge. This is
likely due to various factors, including small sample sizes and the difficulty
in synthesizing the literature while accounting for study-specific features
such as sample size and sensitivity/specificity. SOLUTION: A rigorous
quantitative meta-analysis of the neuroanatomy of SLI should provide
an accurate assessment of the literature. However, no current neuroanatomic meta-analytic technique is statistically rigorous and flexible enough
to handle the literature of SLI and other brain disorders. We developed
an innovative new neuroanatomic meta-analytic technique, Co-localization Likelihood Estimation (CLE). CLE incorporates the best features of
different current techniques, while adding new capabilities. We applied
CLE to all studies of the neuroanatomy of SLI: 25 studies encompassing
270 individuals with SLI and 265 typically-developing controls. RESULTS:
Only the basal ganglia and frontal cortex are consistently abnormal across
SLI studies. Within the basal ganglia only the caudate nucleus is affected.
Within frontal cortex, Broca’s region is anomalous in functional imaging
studies, whereas structural abnormalities are distributed over frontal subregions (primarily motor regions and Broca’s region). No left/right differences were observed. SIGNIFICANCE: The results (1) are consistent with
the Procedural Deficit Hypothesis of SLI; (2) have clinical implications (e.g.,
the abnormalities could serve as biomarkers); (3) suggest that CLE may be
useful at revealing the neuroanatomy of other brain disorders.

H70
SUPERIOR PITCH PERCEPTION IN AUTISM? EVIDENCE OF AUDITORY MISMATCH NEGATIVITY FROM CHINESE Luodi Yu1, Yuebo Fan2,
Zhizhou Deng1, Dan Huang2, Yang Fan1, Suiping Wang1; 1South China Normal
University, Guangzhou, China, 2Guangzhou Rehabilitation & Research Center for
Children with Autism, Guangzhou Cana School, Guangzhou, China — Studies in
non-tonal languages using auditory stimuli of various levels of complexity
have reported superior pitch perception in autism. To further investigate
this phenomenon, an oddball paradigm which elicits the mismatch negativity (MMN) was adopted to examine whether and how autistic children
show distinct neural responses to a tonal language. Mandarin-speaking
children with autism and TD controls’ electroencephalography (EEG) signals were recorded while listening to three oddball sequences. In the pure
tone condition, 216Hz and 299Hz tones served as the standard and deviant
stimuli. In the non-lexical tone condition, non-word syllables /rai2/ and
/rai4/ served as the standard and deviant. In the lexical tone condition,
Chinese words “bai2” and “bai4” served as the standard and deviant. The
MMN in each condition was derived by subtracting the average response
to the standard from that to the deviant. The results showed that autistic children displayed an enhanced MMN for pure tone compared to TD
children, suggesting they have greater sensitivity to pitch information in
physically simple stimuli. Whereas the MMN elicited by non-lexical and
lexical tone change were smaller for autism than for TD, suggesting autistic children’s deficits in discriminating linguistic pitch information. Taken
together, autistic children have speech-specific impairment in pitch perception. According to the perception alteration model (Kuhl, 2008), social
impairment may lead to interruption of phonetic learning in autism. We
thus propose that the differences between the current results and previous
findings on non-tonal languages may be linked to language abnormalities
in autistic population.

H71
AUTOMATICITY OF HIGHER COGNITIVE FUNCTIONS: NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR UNCONSCIOUS SYNTACTIC
PROCESSING OF MASKED WORDS Laura Jimenez-Ortega1,2, Marcos
García-Milla1, Sabela Fondevila1, Pilar Casado1,2, David Hernández-Gutiérrez1,
Manuel Martín-Loeches1,2; 1Center for Human Evolution and Behavior (UCM-ISCIII), Madrid, Spain., 2Complutense University of Madrid, Spain. — Most widely

2013 Annual Meeting
known models of language comprehension assume that syntactic processing is automatic, at least at early stages. However, the degree of automaticity of syntactic processing is still a controversial topic. Furthermore, evidences of automaticity are either indirect or have been observed for pairs
of words, which might provide a poor syntactic context in comparison
to sentences. The present study investigates the automaticity of syntactic
processing using Event-Related Brain Potentials (ERPs) during sentence
processing. To this end, subliminal masked adjectives that could be either
correct or incorrect appeared just prior to the presentation of supraliminal
adjectives that could also be correct or incorrect relative to the sentence
being processed. For the first time it is established that subliminal gender
agreement violations embedded in a sentence trigger an early LAN component, whereas supraliminal gender agreement violations elicited a late LAN
component. Therefore, first-pass syntactic parsing can be unconsciously –
and, consequently, automatically- elicited. In addition, subliminal syntactic
processes also modulated the P600 component elicited by unmasked targets, probably reflecting that controlled mechanisms of revising a structural
mismatch appear affected by subliminal information. Therefore, according
to our findings, both conscious and unconscious processes contribute to
syntactic processing. These results are discussed in line with most recent
theories of automaticity and syntactic processing models.

H72
STRUCTURE-DRIVEN EXPECTATIONS FOR ANIMACY DRIVE
EARLY LEFT EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL NEGATIVITIES THAT
ARE NOT OVERRIDDEN BY CONTEXTUAL EXPECTATIONS Alexis R.
Johns1,2, Heather K. J. van der Lely3, James S. Magnuson1,2; 1University of Connecticut, 2Haskins Laboratories, 3Harvard University — In English, Wh-words
provide strong expectations for animacy of upcoming words in syntactically pertinent positions (e.g., a filled potential Wh-gap). Adults asked to
fill blanks in sentences like “Who/What did Barbie push the ___ into?” reliably provide referents that mismatch animacy projected by the Wh-word
(“who”:”car”, but “what”:”clown”; Fontenau & van der Lely, 2008 [FvdL
henceforth]). FvdL argue this follows from animacy predicted for missing
Wh-word referents (“who”:animate, “what”:inanimate). When presented
with spoken sentences, animacy expectation violations (AEVs) generated
early left anterior negativities (ELANs) in typically developing individuals
but not individuals with “Grammatical-Specific Language Impairment”,
suggesting grammatical features of the Wh-word and filled gap were evaluated syntactically. However, to focus attention on the task, FvdL added
final noun phrases to AEV items (“Who did Barbie push the clown into
THE WALL?”) but not to expected animacy items (“What did Barney push
the clown into?”). Rather than ELANs indicating pre-existing grammatical
animacy expectations, participants might implicitly learn to predict sentence-final anomalies from AEVs. We tested this by presenting one group
with the original contingency (AEV + ungrammatical final noun phrase)
and another with the contingency reversed (no AEV + ungrammatical final
noun phrase). Contra the learning hypothesis, we observed ELANs for
both groups. Thus, violations of structural expectations for animacy drive
ELANs, even for sentences participants judge to be grammatical (“Who did
Barbie push the clown into?”), suggesting ELANs index processes sensitive
to subtle grammatical feature expectations that incur hierarchical syntactic dependencies, and not just outright grammatical structure or category
violations.

H73
NEURAL CORRELATES OF PROCESSING PASSIVE SENTENCES
Aya Meltzer-Asscher1, Jennifer Mack1, Julia Schuchard1, Cynthia Thompson1;
1
Northwestern University — Research examining the neural mechanisms
of noncanonical sentence processing indicates a left-hemisphere network
including anterior and posterior perisylvian regions (Ben-Shachar et al.,
2003; Fiebach et al., 2005; Thompson et al., 2010). This work has primarily focused on wh-structures (e.g, object relatives). Although passive sentences likewise involve noncanonical argument mapping, they differ from
wh-structures in their syntactic properties (Chomsky, 1981) and processing
(Osterhout & Swinney, 1993). In several previous studies, passive sentences
have elicited inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) activation (Kinno et al., 2008; Ye
& Zhou, 2009; Yokoyama et al., 2006, 2007), but mixed findings have been
reported with respect to posterior activations. 12 young adults performed
a sentence-picture matching task using fMRI. Reversible active and pas-

Poster Session H
sive sentences were presented auditorily in separate blocks. Scanning took
place on a Siemens TIM Trio 3T scanner. Data analysis was performed in
SPM8 with group analyses thresholded at p < .005 (uncorrected). Passive
sentences, relative to active sentences, elicited greater activation in the left
IFG (BA 44, 45) and left superior temporal gyrus (STG)/angular gyrus
(AG). The reverse contrast showed no activated areas. English passive sentences activated a network similar to that found for wh-structures. Greater
activation in the left IFG likely reflects the increased syntactic processing
demands of noncanonical structures. Passive sentences also recruited the
left STG and AG, which may support non-canonical argument mapping
(Hirotani et al., 2011). This suggests that despite linguistic and processing
differences between passives and wh-structures, their neural correlates
overlap substantially.

H74
LEFT ANTERIOR NEGATIVITIES (LANS) AND MORPHO-SYNTACTIC
PROCESSING IN ERP READING STUDIES Bradley T. Marcinek1, Michael
T. Ullman2, John E. Drury1; 1Stony Brook University, 2Georgetown University —
We present new data relevant to our understanding of the etiology and reliability of LANs (left anterior negativities) in language ERP studies. LANs
may index detection of a mismatch between morphosyntactic features of
incoming items in online processing and those expected on the basis of
previously encountered information. For example, biphasic LAN/P600
responses have previously been demonstrated for subject/verb agreement
violations. However, though LANs for morphosyntactic violations are by
no means a rare finding, questions have been raised about their reliability
as a number of studies have failed to detect them (i.e., found only monophasic/P600 responses). Factors relevant to the presence/absence of LANs for
agreement violations generally (see Molinaro et al. 2011) include, for example: the types of features involved, test languages, and construction type
(e.g., subject-verb, determiner-noun, noun-adjective). Here we document
another relevant factor: whether English subject/verb agreement violations
are realized by the presence of an illegal affix or absence of a required one.
In an ERP reading study (N=30) we found only the -s-marked violations
(The boys *walks) elicit the biphasic LAN/P600 pattern. The morphophonologically unmarked case (The boy *walk) elicited only a P600. This asymmetry may help explain inconsistencies across past studies: reliable LANs
for sub-conditions in such paradigms may sometimes have been averaged
out in analyses probing violation main effects. This asymmetry may also
be interestingly related to MEG findings documenting very early sensory
effects (in visual cortex) for violations marked by the presence (but not the
absence) of illegal functional morphemes (Dikker et al. 2009).

H75
DYNAMIC FREQUENCY CORRELATES OF (MORPHO-)SYNTACTIC
PROCESSING: INDUCED THETA AND LOWER BETA BAND ACTIVITY DISTINGUISH DEEP SYNTACTIC AND MORPHOSYNTACTIC
PROCESSES Jessamy Norton-Ford1, Jon Sprouse1; 1University of California, Irvine — Recent work has begun to uncover the dynamic frequency
correlates of grammatical processing. Work by Bastiaansen, Magyari and
Hagoort (2009) describes lower beta (13-18Hz) and theta (4-7Hz) band activity as representative of unique aspects of sentence processing, including
successful composition of syntactic structure (lower beta) and sequential
construction of a working memory representation (theta). Using wavelet
analysis and RSVP, this work examines the electrophysiological response
to three grammatical violations, in which morphological or syntactic form
is degraded: case violations (e.g., *The shoppers can find they at the store),
subject-verb agreement violations (e.g., *The shoppers can finds them at the
store), and Theta criterion violations, in which a verb’s requisite argument
is omitted (e.g., *The shoppers can find at the store). Non-parametric cluster-based permutation tests find significant decreases in lower beta activity
in posterior regions ~500-800ms post-cw following case and agreement violations, and similar but weaker decreases ~300-700ms following disruption
of thematic role processing. These results are broadly consistent with Bastiaansen et al., but crucially expand such findings to cases of morphosyntactic agreement and (to a lesser extent) thematic role assignment. Furthermore, cluster analyses uncover a sustained decrease in posterior theta band
activity ~650-1000ms post-cw following only the (coincidentally-named)
Theta criterion violation. These latter results differ from Bastiaansen et al.,
indicating a correlation of theta band activity and deep syntactic process-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

253

Poster Session H
ing. Taken together, these results are consistent with a model in which theta
band activity facilitates composition of syntactic structure, and lower beta
activity isolates a morphosyntactic level of syntactic processing.

H76
HOW EARLY IS GRAMMATICAL GENDER INFORMATION AVAILABLE TO ITALIAN READERS? Sendy Caffarra1, Francesca Pesciarelli1,
Cristina Cacciari1; 1University of Modena and Reggio Emilia — Syntax-first
models (Friederici, 2002) posit that syntactic analysis starts at a very early
stage (100-300 ms). Consistently, a number of MEG and ERP studies have
shown syntactic effects as early as 150 ms after stimulus onset (Dykker et al.,
2009; Pulvermuller et al., 2007). The aim of the present study was to establish how early grammatical gender became available to the reader. Given
its important role in syntactic structure building (especially in Romance
languages), we hypothesized that grammatical gender information should
become available between 100 and 300 ms, as predicted by syntax-first
models. To this aim, we conducted an ERP study adopting a paradigm
designed to monitor an early ERP component, the N2pc. This attentional
component was chosen because of its early sensitivity to linguistic variables
(Dell’Acqua et al., 2007). 600 Italian noun-adjective pairs whose gender
agreed or disagreed were selected. The noun was presented centrally and
was followed by two lateralized stimuli (the adjective and a distractor) presented for 200 ms. Participants judged noun-adjective gender agreement.
ERP results showed that agreement violations influenced the amplitude of
the N2pc between 170 and 310 ms. Specifically, a greater negativity was
observed at P7 for the agreement condition relative to the disagreement
condition. These results suggest that grammatical gender information is
available at an early stage of language comprehension (100-300 ms).

H77
WHEN SYNTAX BEATS SEMANTICS: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
CORRELATES OF CUE-DEPENDENCE IN SECOND LANGUAGE
SENTENCE PROCESSING Darren Tanner1, Eleonora Rossi1, Janet G. Van
Hell1; 1The Pennsylvania State University — Successful language comprehension requires the integration of lexical-semantic and morphosyntactic information. However, some recent proposals claim that individuals largely
ignore morphosyntactic cues when comprehending a second language (L2)
(Clahsen & Felser, 2006). This proposal holds that bilinguals rely nearly
exclusively on semantic and pragmatic cues to sentence meaning in their
L2. We investigated this hypothesis by recording event-related potentials
while proficient native Spanish speakers of L2 English read sentences
that were correct (“The broken television was repaired…”), syntactically
anomalous (“The broken television was repairs…”), semantically anomalous (“The hearty meal was repairing…”) or contained a conflict between
syntactic and semantic cues (“The broken television was repairing…”). The
anomaly in the final sentence is signaled by the active morphology on the
verb “repairing”: the semantic relationship between the subject noun and
verb is fully felicitous, though the morphosyntax renders the sentence pragmatically implausible. Previous research in this domain in English monolinguals shows that these semantic role reversals elicit a robust P600-effect,
indicating that the syntactic representation becomes vulnerable to reanalysis in the face of a strong semantic attraction between the subject noun and
verb (Kim & Osterhout, 2005). However, in addition to showing standard
N400- and P600- effects in the semantic and syntactic conditions, results in
the conflict condition showed only an N400-effect in our bilinguals. This
suggests not only that bilinguals attend to L2 morphosyntactic information,
but also that the strength of the syntactic cue can ‘win’ over lexical-semantic
information, leading to vulnerability and reanalysis of the semantic representation.

H78
NUMBER AGREEMENT WITHOUT SURFACE SYNTAX

Ming Xiang1,
Genna Vegh ; Linguistics, University of Chicago — Although number-mismatch in overt syntax is ungrammatical in English (“John is teachers”),
VP ellipsis appears insensitive to such mismatch. “They are teachers, and
John is too” is acceptable, although the predicate of the ellipsis site must be
recovered from the antecedent, which presents a number-mismatched candidate. Such examples pose questions about whether syntactic agreement
can be computed without surface syntax. An ERP study was conducted
to investigate processing sensitivity to such number-feature mismatch. 160
1

254

1

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
sets of 4-condition items were constructed (“The workers/worker here
are writers/is a writer, the worker/workers there is/are too”). Behavioral
acceptability norming showed no difference between conditions (ps>.4;
ranging 5.7-6 on a 7-point scale). For the ERP, 160 4-condition controls were
created that contain an explicit subject-predicate number match/mismatch
(“The man/men in command is a general/generals”). Preliminary results
(n=14) showed that for control items, the determiner in the mismatched
agreement case (“are a…”) elicited an early positivity between 100-200ms,
and a late positivity peaked at 600ms, compared to matched agreement
(“is a…”); the plural noun with mismatched agreement (“is generals”) elicited an extended late positivity between 600-800ms compared to matched
agreement (“are generals”). For target items, in the ellipsis site, for the singular auxiliary “is”, the antecedent-mismatched condition elicited an early
positivity between 100-200ms; there was little difference on the plural auxiliary “are” between the matched/mismatched conditions. These results
suggest number agreement without surface syntax is calculated in online
parsing, but unmarked mismatched antecedents (singular) have a smaller
effect than marked mismatched antecedents (plural).

H79
THE EFFECTS OF AGING ON THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF MULTIFEATURAL EPISODIC ENCODING Milton Picklesimer1, Neil Mulligan1,
Kelly Giovanello1; 1University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill — It has been
shown that association cortices assist the medial temporal lobes (MTLs)
with the formation of rich, multifeatural memories (Uncapher, Otten, &
Rugg, 2006). As we age, deficient binding makes it difficult to form such
rich memories. Thus, we sought to understand how aging affects the neural
correlates of multifeatural encoding. We used a paradigm that required
participants to learn words, their font color, and their spatial location.
Modifications were made to accommodate older adults and equate their
performance with that of young adults. As a result, memory for items and
their features did not significantly differ between the two groups. Event-related fMRI, combined with a subsequent memory analysis, was employed.
Analyses of trials in which participants successfully encoded an item, its
color, and its location revealed several group differences. MTL activity was
observed in both age groups, yet this activity was left lateralized in young
adults and right lateralized in older adults. Additionally, both age groups
showed mostly left-lateralized activity in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), with
dorsomedial PFC activity observed in young adults and ventrolateral PFC
activity seen in older adults. Finally, older adults showed more left parietal
activity, while young adults exhibited more activity in “old brain” brain
regions (i.e., left caudate, putamen, and thalamus). Thus, even though multifeatural encoding was behaviorally equivalent between the two, age-related differences in neural activity were observed.

H80
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY,
FUTURE-IMAGINATION AND MEMORY FOR SCENES BASED ON
REAL-WORLD LANDMARK CUES Jessica Robin1,2, Jordana Wynn2,3,
Morris Moscovitch1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Hospital, 3McGill University — Studies have shown that older adults provide fewer relevant (internal) details and more irrelevant (external) details
than younger adults when describing autobiographical memories and
imagined future events (Levine et al., 2002; Addis et al., 2008). This coincides with a decrease in hippocampal activity in older adults (Addis et al.,
2011). It has been suggested that memory and imagination are related via a
mutual dependence on the ability to conjure a complex spatial scene, a task
also dependant on the hippocampus (Hassabis & Maguire, 2007, Hassabis
et al., 2007). It follows, then, that older adults should have parallel impairments in autobiographical memory, future-imagination and remembering
real-world scenes, owing to a decline in hippocampal function. This study
used landmark cues to prompt descriptions of autobiographical memories,
imagined events and remembered scenes. We found that across all three
conditions, older adults provided fewer internal details (unique to the
event or scene) and more external details, than younger adults. Despite this
difference, self-ratings of detail and vividness were no different in younger
and older participants. We also found that across young and older adults,
a more personally familiar cue led to more detailed remembered events,
scenes, and imagined events. These results replicate previous findings that
older adults provide fewer internal details and more external details than

2013 Annual Meeting
younger adults when describing remembered and imagined events. By
showing the same age-related pattern in a scene memory task, our findings
support the hypothesis that memory for scenes is closely linked to episodic
memory and imagination.

H81
PREDICTING RECOLLECTION: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INDICES OF RECOLLECTION AT ENCODING USING OBJECTIVE AND
SUBJECTIVE MEASURES IN CHILDREN AND ADULTS Leslie Rollins1, Alison Robey1, Tracy Riggins1; 1University of Maryland, College Park
— Dual-process models of recognition memory propose that memory is
subserved by familiarity and recollection. Familiarity is an assessment of
memory strength, whereas recollection supports retrieval of qualitative
information (i.e., contextual details). The current study examines age-related differences in subjective and objective recollection effects at encoding.
Event-related potentials (ERPs) are collected while participants make color
(i.e., red/green) and semantic judgments (i.e., animacy/size). At retrieval,
participants make recognition judgments and three recollection judgments.
For the subjective judgment, participants complete the remember/know
paradigm. For the objective judgments, participants are asked the original
color of the item and which semantic task was performed. Accuracy for the
contextual detail is used as an index of recollection. Adults correctly recognized more items than children, t(37) = -2.78, p < .01. However, children
and adults were similar in providing “remember” judgments, t(37) = 1.11,
p = .27, identifying the original color t(37) = .42, p = .68., and identifying
the task performed, t(37) = .59, p = .56. For the subjective measure adults
showed a subsequent recollection effect characterized by more positive
mean amplitude ERPs to remembered compared to familiar and missed
items at right parietal leads. In contrast, children showed a subsequent
recognition effect characterized by amplitude differences between later
identified (i.e., remembered or familiar items) and missed items. Consistent
with Friedman and Trott (2000), neither children nor adults displayed subsequent recollection effects on the objective tasks. These findings suggest
processes supporting subjective recollection at encoding undergo developmental changes between childhood and adulthood.

H82
LIFESPAN AGE DIFFERENCES IN EPISODIC MEMORY FORMATION Yee Lee Shing1, Ulman Lindenberger1, Hauke Heekeren2, Lars Bäckman3, Yvonne Brehmer3; 1Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, 2Free University, Berlin, 3Aging Research
Center, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm — The two-component framework of
episodic memory (EM) across the lifespan posits dissociable neural mechanisms of memory performance patterns observed in children and older
adults’ of (Shing et al., 2008). According to this model, children’s difficulties
in EM reflect the protracted development of the prefrontal cortex (PFC),
whereas EM deficits in older adults stem from senescent changes in the
PFC and medial temporal lobes (MTL). We performed functional magnetic
resonance imaging with children (n = 34; aged 10-12), younger adults (n
= 34; aged 20-25), and older adults (n = 34; aged 63-68) during word-pair
encoding. Subsequent-memory effects were examined using a region-of-interest approach focusing on areas within the PFC and MTL. Compared to
younger and older adults, children showed lower activations in the left
and right middle frontal gyrus (BA9). In a psychophysiological interactions analysis that measures functional coupling across regions, younger
adults, compared to children and older adults, showed stronger connectivity between bilateral BA9 and other prefrontal (BA10) and parietal (BA39)
regions, revealing a more integrated EM network. Contrary to predictions
based on the two-component model, there were no age differences in parahippocampal gyrus and hippocampal activation. In a whole-brain analysis, children showed higher activation in left and right fusiform cortex
relative to adults. Children who reported using inefficient strategies (e.g.,
repetition) showed higher activation in these regions and lower memory
performance. In sum, these results provide support for the two-component framework but also point to existence of EM network maintenance in
high-functioning older adults (Nyberg et al., 2012).

Poster Session H

H83
RELATIONSHIP OF COGNITIVE RESERVE AND CEREBROSPINAL
FLUID BIOMARKERS TO CLINICAL SYMPTOM ONSET IN ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Anja Soldan1, Corinne Allen Pettigrew1, Shanshan Li2, MeiCheng Wang2, Abhay Moghekar1, Richard O’Brien1, Ola Selnes1, Marilyn Albert1;
Johns Hopkins University Medical Center, 2Johns Hopkins School of Public
Health — Alzheimer’s disease is pathologically characterized by amyloid
plaque and tau tangle deposition in the brain. Levels of ß-amyloid and phosphorylated tau (ptau), as measured in cerebrospinal fluid, have been shown
to be associated with risk of progressing from normal cognition to onset of
clinical symptoms [preceding the diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment
(MCI)]. This study examined whether cognitive reserve (CR) modifies this
association. CR is the notion that individual differences in lifetime experiences, such as education and cognitive activity, modify the negative effects
of brain pathology on clinical expression of symptoms. Cerebrospinal fluid
was obtained at baseline from 239 participants (mean age 57.2 years) who
have been subsequently followed up to 17 years with annual neuropsychological and clinical assessments. A composite score based on the National
Adult Reading Test (NART), WAIS-R vocabulary, and years of education
at baseline was used to index CR. Using Cox regression models, we examined the interaction of baseline ß-amyloid, tau, and ptau with CR, using age
of onset of clinical symptoms as the outcome. Increased risk of progressing from normal cognition to symptom onset was associated with lower
baseline ß-amyloid, higher p-tau, and lower CR. There was no interaction
between ß-amyloid and CR, indicating that the protective effects of higher
CR are independent of ß-amyloid. In contrast, both tau and p-tau interacted
with CR, such that CR was less protective with higher levels of tau and
p-tau. This suggests that CR modifies clinical outcome when tau-related
pathology in the brain is low but not high.
1

H84
INCREASING WHITE MATTER COHERENCE BETWEEN HIPPOCAMPUS AND PREFRONTAL CORTEX SUPPORTS IMPROVING
MNEMONIC CONTROL IN CHILDREN Carter Wendelken1, Joshua Lee2,
Jaqueline Pospisil2, Marcos Sastre III2, Julia Ross2, Silvia A. Bunge1, Simona
Ghetti2; 1University of California at Berkeley, 2University of California at Davis
— Mnemonic control, the capacity to initiate and maintain processes that
guide encoding and retrieval operations, is associated with increased functional connectivity within a large-scale network including hippocampus,
prefrontal, cingulate, and parietal cortices. If the degree of connectivity
among these regions is critical for mnemonic control, then integrity of
white matter tracts connecting these regions should predict the development of this ability. Thus, we tested for a relationship between mnemonic
control and white matter integrity in 8-to 11 year-old children (N = 64).
We examined three white matter tracts that connect the hippocampus with
other parts of the brain: Uncinate Fasciculus (to prefrontal cortex), Cingulum (to cingulate gyrus), and Fornix (to subcortical structures). Participants
attended, ignored, or passively viewed sequences of 4 outdoor scenes, and
their memory for the scenes was later tested. Attended items were remembered better than Ignored items, and this attentional modulation significantly increased with age. Fractional anisotropy (FA) within the Uncinate
Fasciculus was significantly and positively correlated with attentional
modulation, suggesting that developmental improvements in mnemonic
control may depend on the development of white matter integrity in a tract
that connects the hippocampus and lateral temporal lobes with prefrontal
cortex. Neither Fornix nor Cingulum demonstrated this pattern, suggesting
a specificity of these findings to the Uncinate Fasciculus.

H85
REPLICATION OF A NOVEL METHOD FOR QUANTIFYING COGNITIVE RESERVE IN AGING BASED ON THE DECOMPOSITION OF
EPISODIC MEMORY VARIANCE Laura B Zahodne1, Jennifer J Manly1,
Adam Brickman1, Karen Siedlecki2, Yaakov Stern1; 1Columbia University, 2Fordham University — The theory of cognitive reserve attempts to explain why
some individuals are more resilient to age-related brain pathology than
others. Study of this key concept is hindered by measurement difficulties, as common proxy variables (e.g., education) are static, imprecise, and
restricted. Using a larger, randomly sampled and community-based cohort,
this study replicates a novel method for quantifying cognitive reserve
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

255

Poster Session H
(Reed et al., Brain 2010). In this method, cognitive reserve is operationalized
as residual variance in memory performance after accounting for demographics and brain pathology. Longitudinal data from 704 diverse, non-demented older adults in the Washington Heights Inwood Columbia Aging
Project were analyzed using structural equation modeling. Variance in a
memory composite derived from the Selective Reminding Test was decomposed into portions explained by demographics (race, ethnicity, education)
and brain variables (hippocampal, total brain, white matter hyperintensity
volumes). Cognitive reserve was associated with lower likelihood of meeting criteria for mild cognitive impairment (beta=-.573; p<.001), higher literacy (beta=.156; p<.001), 49% reduced risk of dementia conversion over 3
years (p<.001), and less 3-year decline on a language composite (beta=.181;
p=.003). In addition, cognitive reserve moderated the relationship between
the brain variables and 3-year decline in language (interaction B=-6.169;
p=.002). These results provide independent evidence for the utility of this
method for quantifying cognitive reserve, which predicted clinical and
cognitive outcomes. A potential advantage of this approach over proxy
variables is that cognitive reserve can be measured over time, making it a
viable outcome measure in intervention studies aimed at imparting cognitive reserve.

H86
FUNCTIONAL HETEROGENEITY ACROSS THE INFERIOR PARIETAL
CORTEX IN MEMORY RETRIEVAL AND MAINTENANCE OF RECOLLECTED CONTENT Kaia Vilberg1, Michael Rugg1; 1Center for Vital Longevity,

University of Texas Dallas — There is growing evidence that the inferior parietal cortex is not only anatomically, but also functionally heterogeneous.
Recently, the patterns of functional connectivity between voxels across the
inferior parietal cortex and the rest of the brain have been shown to differ
along the anterior/posterior axis of this region. In the present study, we
addressed the question of whether the patterns of activity in an episodic
retrieval task would also vary across the anterior/posterior extent of the
inferior parietal cortex. Two experiments were conducted in which recollected information had to be maintained in working memory prior to a
behavioral response. In both experiments, word-image pairs were studied
in an intentional encoding task. In one experiment, words served as test
items, and in the other experiment, images served as test items. Participants
were instructed to try to recall the paired associate of the test item and hold
it in mind until a question appeared at which time they were to answer the
question with respect to the retrieved information, or if not recollected, to
respond ‘old, associate not recollected’ or ‘new’. The paradigm enables the
identification of brain activity that occurs transiently in response to the test
item, as well as that which is sustained over the maintenance interval. In
line with prior findings of functional heterogeneity in the inferior parietal
cortex, the pattern of activity associated with associative hit, item hit, and
correct rejection conditions differed qualitatively along the anterior-posterior axis of this region.

H87
ACTIVE LEARNING STRATEGIES IMPROVE MEMORY FOR CONTEXT-DEPENDENT ASSOCIATION RULES Joel Voss1, Jane Wang1;
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine — Volitional control of
exploration is central to adaptive behavior, and previous findings from our
laboratory have linked control of learning to a network of brain structures
centered on the hippocampus, including prefrontal cortex. In this study,
we investigated how benefits conferred by volitional control generalize to
abstract information types, such as context-dependent rules that are relevant for real-world environments. We used a contextual association task,
in which subjects were required to learn object-face associations presented
in one of four contexts (locations) on the screen. Object-face associations
varied contextually based on object features, with context governing which
object feature (shape or texture) should be used to guide the face selection.
In the volitional condition, subjects selected a testing context on each trial
and then chose the face associate, whereas this information was presented
in a predetermined order in the passive condition. Learning was based on
feedback in both conditions. We found that volitional control significantly
enhanced learning relative to passive study in subjects with higher overall levels of task performance, and was associated with use of an optimal
context-selection strategy. fMRI activity differences were found between
individuals employing optimal learning strategies and those employing
suboptimal strategies in prefrontal cortex, and we will discuss hippocam-

1

256

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
pal-cortical connectivity differences in the context of volitional versus passive learning. Our findings highlight the vital contributions of strategies
that emerge during volitional behavior to learn abstract rule structure and
provide a framework for understanding the neural processing that supports adaptive behavior in humans.

H88
CONTENT-SELECTIVE CORTICAL REINSTATEMENT EFFECTS IN
OLDER AND YOUNGER ADULTS Tracy H. Wang1, Jeffrey D. Johnson2,
Unal Sakoglu3, Michael D. Rugg1; 1The University of Texas at Dallas, 2University
of Missouri, 3Texas A&M University - Commerce — Numerous fMRI studies
of memory have demonstrated cortical reinstatement effects –the overlap
between content-selective encoding- and retrieval-related neural activity.
The present study compared content-selective, recollection-related cortical
reinstatement effects in young (18-29 yrs) and older adults (63-77 yrs) that
were matched for recollection performance. The study phase comprised of
the presentation of a series of pictures and words. While undergoing scanning, subjects performed size judgments on the objects denoted in the pictures, and indoor/outdoor judgments on objects denoted by the words. All
test items were words – one third of these corresponded to studied pictures,
one third to studied words, and one third were new. The test requirement
was to perform a ‘Remember/Know/New’ judgment on each item. fMRI
data from the test phase acquired from performance-matched older and
young subgroups revealed extensive, age-insensitive cortical reinstatement
effects in association with the recollection of previously studied pictures.
These regions included bilateral hippocampus, posterior parahippocampal
gyrus, parietal and inferior temporal cortex. Additionally greater picture
reinstatement effects were evident in occipital cortex in older subjects.
Effects for recollected words were markedly more modest, but did not
differ according to age. The findings converge with prior results to suggest
that there is little age-related attenuation in the neural correlates of episodic
retrieval when performance is matched.

H89
HOW LONG DOES IT TAKE TO PREPARE FOR A NEW MEMORY?
AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION INTO THE INFLUENCE OF ANTICIPATION TIME ON MEMORY ENCODING Danying
Wang1, Leun J. Otten1; 1University College London (UCL), UK — The effectiveness with which events are encoded into long-term memory depends
on processes engaged beforehand. Here, we asked how such anticipatory
processes differ depending on the amount of time that is available before
event onset. Scalp-recorded electrical brain activity was obtained from 24
healthy adults while they made size judgments on pictures of objects. Each
picture was preceded by a cue 1.5 or 3 s before picture onset. Cues either
gave no information about when the picture would occur or indicated that
the interval would be short or long. Memory for the objects was probed
one day later with a recognition test. Event-related potentials before picture
onset predicted later memory of the picture, but only when the cue interval was long. This encoding-related activity was largest over frontal scalp
sites when the interval was known in advance and largest over parietal
sites when it was not. Time-frequency analyses showed encoding-related
differences in the alpha (8-12 Hz) frequency range. The nature of these differences depended on predictability and length of the cue interval. Alpha
decreases were particularly evident when information accrued that only
a short amount of time would be available until picture onset (i.e. shortly
after cue onset in the predictable short condition and after 1.5 s in the
unpredictable long condition). Together, the findings indicate that encoding-related activity before an event differs depending on the opportunity
to engage such activity. Anticipatory influences on memory may reflect the
beneficial effect of strategic preparatory processes engaged ahead of stimulus presentation.

H90
MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE STRUCTURE AND ITS RELATIONSHIP
TO RECOLLECTION AND FAMILIARITY IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Weichun Wang1, Maria E Montchal1, Andrew P Yonelinas1, J Daniel Ragland1; 1University of California, Davis — Schizophrenia is characterized by an array of
cognitive impairments, including those of episodic memory. However, the
extent to which specific retrieval processes are impaired in patients, and
whether abnormalities in medial temporal lobe structures are related to

2013 Annual Meeting
these retrieval deficits is less well known. The current study utilized a dataset of 22 patients and 30 controls from whom structural MPRAGEs and recognition measures of recollection and familiarity estimated with Receiver
Operating Characteristics were collected. Preliminary analyses of manual
tracings of medial temporal lobe subregions revealed significant group
differences within the left parahippocampal gyrus. Specifically, patients
relative to controls showed a reduced volume of the left parahippocampal
cortex (PHC) and an increased volume of left entorhinal cortex. Consistent
with previous research linking the PHC with recollection, we found positive correlations with PHC volume and recollection in the patient sample
in that those patients who had larger PHC volumes also had better recollection performance. Additionally, left hippocampal head volume was also
positively correlated with recollection performance. These results suggest
that previously documented reductions in PHC volume in schizophrenia
may be contributing to their prominent recollection deficits during episodic
retrieval.

H91
THE LASTING BENEFITS OF THE SPACING EFFECT ON RECALL
DESPITE COMPROMISED HIPPOCAMPAL AND EPISODIC
MEMORY DEVELOPMENT Tina Weston1, Janet L. Green2, Nicholas J.
Cepeda1, R. Shayna Rosenbaum1,3; 1York University, 2Dalhousie University,
3
Rotman Research Institute — The spacing effect is a robust memory phenomenon where items reviewed after a spaced interval of time are remembered better than items reviewed immediately. Evidence reported by
Cermak and colleagues (1996) suggests that spaced review is a successful
memory strategy for patients of adult-onset amnesia. However, it is unclear
whether the spacing effect exhibited by these patients was the result of an
uncontrolled retention interval (timing between the second presentation of
an item and the item at test). Moreover, these patients would have had
pre-morbidly intact episodic memory. Experience with episodic memory
and prior intact hippocampal function may be a necessary foundation for
spacing effect benefits even after the onset of amnesia. To investigate these
questions, we examined the spacing effect in a developmental amnesiac
patient, an individual with impaired episodic memory in relation to underdeveloped hippocampi from birth. The results of two experiments confirmed the patient’s superior memory recall for items reviewed by spacing,
both in a single-session paradigm where we properly controlled the retention interval, and in a multi-day paradigm where we assessed the patient’s
memory after one week. These results suggest that there may be alternate
routes to the spacing effect that circumvent the use of episodic memory.
Theoretical considerations are discussed.

H92
BRAIN ACTIVATION WHEN RECOGNIZING OR CATEGORIZING
OLD AND NEW PICTURES Mathias Weymar1, Margaret M. Bradley1, Peter
J. Lang1; 1University of Florida — Recent neuroscience research, using the
ERP old/new effect as a measure of prior occurrence, suggests that the
amplitude of the difference is often affected by whether the post-encoding
task explicitly probes episodic memory. The goal of the present study was
to use functional brain imaging (fMRI) to investigate the neural networks
in different instructional contexts when the task either explicitly probes episodic memory or not. Participants viewed a series of emotional and neutral
pictures (n= 46) followed by a post-encoding procedure, in which 36 old
and new pictures were presented in the context of either an explicit recognition (old vs. new) task or a categorization task (one person vs. more). Whole
brain analyses revealed shared memory (old > new BOLD activity) regions
in the two tasks in cuneus, posterior cingulate cortex, and middle frontal
gyrus, with a more extensive network (e.g., precuneus, angular gyrus,
cerebellum) activated during explicit recognition. Novelty effects (new >
old BOLD activity) were also observed in both tasks across various brain
regions (e.g., hippocampus, precentral gyrus, fusiform gyrus), particularly
in sensory cortex, where activation was more enhanced during categorization. The presence of shared memory and novelty regions in the two tasks
suggests that both prior occurrence and novelty were registered regardless
of task. Specific memory regions activated during explicit recognition indicate a broader network mediating episodic retrieval. On the other hand,
enhanced activity in sensory cortex suggests stronger perceptual processing of new pictures during categorization.

Poster Session H

H93
A FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING INVESTIGATION OF THE EFFECTS OF PRENATAL DRUG EXPOSURE ON EMOTIONAL PROCESSING AND MEMORY PERFORMANCE Vanessa
Williams1, Betty Jo Salmeron2, Thomas J. Ross2, Maureen Black3, Tracy Riggins1; 1University of Maryland, College Park, 2National Institute on Drug Abuse,
Intramural Research Program, 3University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore — Rodent models of the postnatal effects of prenatal drug exposure (PDE) provide evidence of dysfunctions in emotional (Salas-Ramirez
et al., 2011) and cognitive (Harvey, 2004) functioning. These preclinical
studies have elucidated the neurobiological effects that PDE may have on
the developing individual by altering the dopaminergic system ultimately
leading to atypical development of the cortex and behavior. Given that
humans encounter more complex environments and social interactions
than rodents and recent empirical evidence suggesting that the effects of
PDE on memory may be delayed until the demands of adolescence (Betancourt et al., 2011), exploration of how these neurobiological effects manifest
through human development is strongly needed. In the current fMRI study,
thirty-nine participants underwent a source memory paradigm to investigate the influence of emotion on memory in prenatally exposed and community comparison adolescents. Behavioral results revealed differences in
recognition memory with the community comparisons outperforming the
PDE group. Regions of interests (ROI) analysis revealed that the exposed
adolescents exhibited increased amygdala activation when viewing emotional as opposed to non-emotional pictures, whereas there was no difference between conditions in the community comparisons. In addition, the
exposed adolescents showed altered patterns of activation within the ROI
of the hippocampus during memory formation. These results suggest alterations within the neural processes that underlie emotional processing and
memory formation. Consistent with previous findings within the animal
literature, the present study provides evidence that gestational exposure to
drugs can cause long-term impacts on cognitive and emotional functioning.

H94
EXPECTANCY MODULATES NOVELTY ENCODING

Jessica Wilson1,
Vishnu Murty , Alison Adcock ; Duke University, New York University —
Experience may or may not produce expectancy. Consequently novelty
may be expected or unexpected. Prediction error models of learning suggest that memory formation benefits from novelty that violates expectations; however, anticipatory signals modulate hippocampal activation
and may also enhance memory encoding. Memory encoding can thus be
augmented by two distinct neural processes, investigated in this study. We
sought first to determine whether participants better encode expected or
unexpected novel stimuli into long-term memory. We then aimed to elucidate mechanisms of novelty encoding associated with participants’ expectancy for novel events. For these purposes, we developed an incidental
encoding paradigm in which participants generated expectancy for either
familiar objects or trial-unique novel objects, with rare violations of those
expectancies. Following encoding, participants completed a surprise recognition memory test. We examined memory performance and functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) activation in the hippocampus and its
functionally connected regions for trials in which novelty was expected or
was an expectancy violation. Behaviorally, we found individual differences
in memory performance across expectancy conditions, such that some
participants demonstrated better memory for expected novel objects and
others showed better memory for novel objects that were expectancy violations. Using fMRI, we observed positive correlations that were selective
for expected versus unexpected novelty encoding, as follows: memory for
expected novelty correlated with activation in left inferior frontal gyrus,
whereas memory for unexpected novelty correlated with activation in lateral occipital cortex. Together these findings suggest two routes whereby
prior expectations modulate hippocampal-dependent encoding of novel
events.
1,2

1

1

2

H95
SEMANTIC AND EPISODIC MEMORY CORRELATE WITH MEDIAL
TEMPORAL LOBE SUBFIELDS IN SEMANTIC DEMENTIA Khaing
Win1,2, John Pluta1, Danielle Weinberg2, Jenna Glasenberg2, Paul Yushkevich1,
David Wolk1,2, Murray Grossman1,2; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2Hospital of the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

257

Poster Session H
University of Pennsylvania — Semantic memory (SM) is the representation of
concepts about objects, facts, and people. Patients with semantic dementia
(SD) have difficulty communicating because of progressive deterioration
of expressive and receptive vocabulary, and loss of conceptual knowledge.
Most work has related SD deficits to neocortical disease and has suggested
the relative preservation of episodic memory (EM), the recollection of specific events, but this remains controversial. Here we examined the atrophy
of medial temporal lobe subfields in SD, and performed direct correlations
between atrophy and SM/EM performance. Twelve SD patients underwent
high resolution (0.4x0.4mm in-plane) T2 MRI with contrast allowing visualization of the dark band separating cornu ammonis (CA) from dentate
gyrus. A semi-automated process using in vivo 4T MRI template, informed
by hippocampal histology, was applied to these images, with subsequent
manual correction. Verbal EM recall was assessed with Philadelphia Verbal
Learning Test (PVLT), visual EM recall with Rey Figure Test (RFT), and
SM with Boston Naming Test (BNT) and Pyramid and Palm Trees (PPT).
In SD, we found: 1) impairments in SM and EM; 2) atrophy in all subfields
[hippocampal subfields and entorhinal cortex (ERC)]; 3) right hippocampal
head (HH), bilateral CA1 and ERC (bCA1/ERC) atrophy correlated with
PVLT recall(p<0.05); 4) bCA1/ERC atrophy with RFT recall (p<0.05); 5) left
CA1 and left HH atrophy correlated with BNT (p<0.05); and 6) left HH
atrophy correlated with PPT pictures (p<0.05). These findings suggest that
these hippocampal and entorhinal subfields atrophy may contribute to SM
and EM deficits in SD.

H96
DISSOCIATION BETWEEN ITEM-ITEM AND ITEM-CONTEXT
MEMORY ASSOCIATIONS Jenny Wong1, Marianne de Chastelaine1, Derek
Beaton1, Hervé Abdi1, Michael D. Rugg1; 1The University of Texas at Dallas —
Numerous fMRI studies have used the subsequent memory paradigm to
investigate the neural correlates of encoding item-item and item-context
associations. In the present experiment, the two classes of subsequent
memory effect were directly compared. Subjects viewed a series of study
trials, each containing the sequential presentation of a picture and a word.
The picture was presented to either the left or right of fixation, whereas
the word appeared in central vision. Outside of the scanner, each test trial
began with a recognition test of a single picture. For pictures that were
judged old, either an item-item or an item-context memory judgment was
required. Analysis of the fMRI data with a general linear model (GLM)
revealed anatomically dissociable subsequent memory effects for successfully retrieved item-item and item-context associations (left inferior frontal
gyrus and right posterior fusiform, respectively). Effects common to both
tasks were found in bilateral fusiform cortex and anterior hippocampus.
Additionally, we sought differences in whole-brain patterns of fMRI signal
between four conditions of interest (item-item correct, item-item incorrect,
item-context correct, item-context incorrect) by using a PCA-based multivariate approach (barycentric discriminant analysis; BADA). This analysis
identified two components that, together, accounted for approximately 80%
of the between condition variance. One factor discriminated study trials
on the basis of whether item-item associations were successfully encoded,
whereas the other discriminated trials according to whether encoding
was successful for item-context associations. The findings converge with
the GLM results to suggest that encoding these two classes of association
depends on partially independent neural mechanisms.

H97
AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF ASSOCIATIVE RECALL Brion Woroch1,2,
Brian Gonsalves1,2; 1University of Illinois, 2Beckman Institute — Cued recall
is often associated with reactivation of cortical regions that were initially
involved in perception of the associated information. For example, encoding of word-scene pairs followed by recall of the scene when cued with
the word involves reactivation of scene processing regions. However, it is
unclear what this cortical reactivation represents- a search for scene information, activation of the general category of scene, or reactivation of the
specific scene stimulus? In our study, we had participants study adjectives
paired with scenes from one of four different categories: forests, mountains,
cities, and highways. Participants were presented with just the word at test
and asked to remember the category the associated scene belongs to, followed by a confidence judgment in that decision. They were then given a
three-alternative forced choice test, consisting of the associated item and
two within-category lures, and asked to identify the associated stimulus.

258

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
ERPs time-locked to the presentation of the word cue were used to assess
whether retrieval-related activity varied with successful category-level
recall, specific item-level recall, or both. Initial results indicate that the
amplitude of ERPs in the time window of the late parietal complex (LPC;
500-800ms) vary with memory confidence in the category decision, with
a larger LPC associated with higher confidence. More broadly distributed
ERPs, after the LPC, differ depending on whether or not the correct item
was subsequently chosen on the 3-alternative force choice test. This suggests that the neural activity during recall differs for category-level and
specific item-level recall.

H98
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN ANTICIPATORY SOURCE MEMORY
MECHANISMS Jiangyi Xia1, Giulia Galli1, Leun J. Otten1; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London (UCL) — A key feature of aging
is deficits in episodic memory, a form of long-term memory for events
bound with their spatial and temporal context. Effective episodic memory
functioning relies on brain activity before and after an event. The present
study investigated how encoding-related brain activity associated with the
binding of information into episodic memory is affected by aging. Electrical
brain activity was recorded during a source memory task in which healthy
younger and older participants memorized visually-presented word pairs.
Each pair was preceded by a neutral warning stimulus. Within each pair,
an object word (e.g. pigeon) was preceded by a location word (e.g. garden)
that served as the to-be-retrieved source information. Both event-related
potentials and oscillatory activity in the theta (4-8 Hz) and alpha (8-12 Hz)
ranges were analyzed. All types of neural activity that followed the object
word predicted later successful source memory. This activity differed in
size and nature depending on an individual’s age. Oscillatory activity
before object onset also predicted later recollection. This was observed in
both groups, but was restricted to the theta frequency range in the middle
of the location-object interval for older individuals. For younger individuals, encoding-related activity already occurred shortly after the onset of
the neutral warning stimulus and extended across theta and alpha ranges.
These findings indicate that aging affects the neural correlates of episodic
binding. Younger and older individuals differ not only with respect to the
processes engaged during episodic binding, but also while such binding is
being anticipated.

H99
NEURAL BASIS FOR LEARNING A S-R MAPPING SEQUENCE
Hsin-Ju Lee1, Wen-Jui Kuo1; 1Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan — Sequencing is a fundamental ability for our daily
lives, e.g., sequencing sounds for speech and sequencing actions during
biking. There is research on sequence learning providing evidence that performance improvement can occur over a relatively short time period. However, the cortical and subcortical neural bases underpinning this dynamic
learning process is not really clear yet. The sequence reaction time task is
a task often used for research of sequence learning, in which participants
will be asked to react by pressing one of the four keys to a flash appearing
at one of the four possible locations on a computer screen. Reaction times
often show a significant decrease when the locations of the flashes follow
a particular sequence, as compared to the random ones. In this study, we
used the functional magnetic resonance images to examine the neural correlates of this type of sequencing learning. In our results, in addition to the
learning effect revealed by RT reduction, we also found that the learning
effect seemed to be consolidated after a short period of rest. The overall
neural networks related the learning effect included motor and premotor cortex, intraparietal sulcus, and cerebellum. On the other hand, while
the caudate and putamen showed higher activities for random sequences,
activities of the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and right intraparietal
sulcus tracked RT decrease of the fixed sequences.

H100
INDIVIDUAL VARIATION IN LOCAL GREY MATTER DENSITY OF
HEALTHY YOUNG VOLUNTEERS CORRELATES WITH PERFORMANCE IN PERCEPTUAL LEARNING Matthew Mundy1; 1School of Psychology and Psychiatry, Monash University — Differential patterns of activation occur in medial temporal lobe during perceptual discrimination
of distinct classes of visual stimuli (e.g., places - posterior hippocampus,

2013 Annual Meeting
Lee et al., 2008; face/objects - perirhinal cortex, Barense et al., 2009). Similarly, extrastriate cortex is thought to contain a number of class-preferential
regions (e.g. places - parahippocampal place area (PPA), faces - fusiform
face area (FFA), Downing et al., 2006). Perceptual learning (PL) has been
shown to produce such brain activity, which is thought to vary with task
performance (Mundy et al., 2012). However, it is currently unclear exactly
how task performance relates to the differential recruitment of these
regions. A cohort of healthy young (18-30 years) volunteers were screened
for performance on a PL task. Eight ‘good’ face perceptual learners were
selected, along with eight ‘good’ scene learners (performance 80% or
higher). Eight ‘poor’ perceptual learners (performance 55-65%) were also
recruited. Structural MRI images were acquired for all participants. Comparing grey matter density between groups, via a voxel-based morphometry technique, revealed good learners (irrespective of stimulus-type) had
significantly denser grey matter in caudate nucleus and pulvinar regions,
along with the hippocampus. Good face learners, specifically, also showed
greater grey matter density in posterior fusiform gyrus (within which FFA
is found), whilst good scene learners had greater density within posterior
parahippocampal gyrus (within which PPA is found). Further volumetric
analysis confirmed that good learners had significantly larger hippocampi
and caudate nuclei than poor learners. These findings illustrate how task
performance may relate to grey matter density.

H101
MIND THE GAP: FLEXIBLE USE OF EXPLICIT KNOWLEDGE
DURING SKILLED SEQUENCE PERFORMANCE Daniel J. Sanchez1,
Paul J. Reber1; 1Northwestern University — Implicit and explicit learning play
distinct roles in skill acquisition based on their different operating characteristics. It is hypothesized that implicit learning leads to increasingly fluid
action sequence performance while explicit knowledge provides top-down
control and flexible knowledge use. Using Serial Interception Sequence
Learning (SISL), we have previously found that implicit perceptual-motor
sequence learning rate was unaffected by available explicit knowledge when
sequential order was perceptually-guided. Here we test the hypothesis that
when perceptual information is interrupted during performance, explicit
knowledge can be flexibly applied during these ‘gaps’ to benefit performance. In the SISL task participants make precisely-timed motor responses
to cues scrolling down one of four columns. Thirty-one participants were
randomly assigned to naïve (incidental learning) or explicit training of a
12-item sequence. Explicit training featured sequence memorization prior
to SISL training and included explicit retrieval practice. After training,
participants performed a test containing perceptual information ‘gaps’ of
2 or 6 consecutive items. Gaps were created by masking the response cue
with a bar-shaped stimulus covering all four response locations, providing
no information about the correct response. Under normal conditions, both
groups exhibited similar sequence-specific performance benefits for the
trained sequence compared to untrained foils. However, during the perceptual-information gaps, explicitly-trained participants were able to apply
their additional explicit knowledge to perform at a significantly higher rate
than the naïve (implicit) group. These results suggest that while explicit
knowledge does not necessarily improve stimulus-guided performance, it
provides the flexibility needed for performance when external cues are not
available.

H102
INTERLEAVED PRACTICE OF MOTOR SEQUENCES RESULTS
IN GREATER TRANSFER TO NEW SEQUENCES Renee E. Shimizu1,
Allan D. Wu1, Barbara J. Knowlton1; 1UCLA — Effective training results in
the ability of the learner to transfer knowledge to novel circumstances.
A robust finding in the learning and memory literature is the contextual
interference effect, in which interleaved practice of different tasks results
in diminished performance during training but leads to better retention
and transfer of task knowledge as compared to blocked practice (e.g., Shea
& Morgan, 1979). The benefits of interleaved practice on retention were
recently demonstrated with motor sequence learning, such that after a
delay, performance was superior when the sequences had been practiced
in an interleaved fashion versus blocked (Lin et al., 2010). In the present
study, we examined whether interleaved practice of motor sequences led to
better transfer of knowledge to new motor sequences. Participants trained
on three sequences in a blocked or interleaved order. In the second phase
of the task, they either received the previously practiced sequences or three

Poster Session H
novel sequences (transfer) presented in an interleaved order. Practice performance was significantly faster for the groups that underwent a blocked
practice structure than an interleaved structure (p < .001). However, during
the test phase, blocked practice resulted in significantly more slowing on
novel sequences compared to old sequences in comparison to interleaved
practice (p = .032). These findings demonstrate that interleaved practice
of tasks during acquisition, despite leading to poorer performance during
training, enhances transfer of sequential fine motor skills. These results also
suggest that interleaved practice of motor sequences results in a more generalized memory representation compared to blocked practice.

H103
CONTINUOUS, MULTIDIMENSIONAL CONTROL OF A MOUSE
CURSOR USING A BRAIN-MUSCLE-COMPUTER INTERFACE.
Ida-Maria Skavhaug1, Rebecca Bobell1, Cindy Dao1, Ben Vernon1, Sanjay Joshi1;
1
Department of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, UC Davis — Fifty years
ago it was demonstrated that humans can learn to single out and control
the contractions of individual motor units (Basmasjian, 1963). We take
advantage of this ability in the development of a Brain-Muscle-Computer
Interface (BMCI), in which subjects control external machines by making
fine-tuned activations of a surface muscle (Perez-Maldonadi et al., 2010;
Vernon & Joshi, 2011). Multidimensional control is achieved by simultaneously manipulating the power in two separate frequency bands in the
surface Electromyogram (sEMG). In essence, subjects learn to use one
single sEMG recording site as an electrical signal generator by recruiting
necessary motor units. The BMCI device has important applications; it can
be used by the paralyzed population to control a cursor on a screen, or navigate a powered wheelchair. As only one recording site is required, the electrodes can be placed on a head muscle (e.g the Auricularis Superior) and
cause minimal intrusion. Furthermore, all signal processing is performed
on a smartphone or tablet, making the device both portable and affordable.
Here we present findings from a new training protocol. Subjects navigated
a mouse cursor in two dimensions to hit bullseye targets in different screen
locations, by contracting a muscle of the thumb. Subjects received points
contingent on how close they got to the center of each target. Performance
across sessions improved, and cursor trajectories indicated that subjects
moved the cursor with intent rather than at random. Our results demonstrate the effectiveness of a new generation of mobile, minimally-obtrusive
control devices for the disabled.

H104
INHIBITORY TMS OVER THE PRIMARY MOTOR CORTEX IMPAIRS
IMPLICIT MOTOR SEQUENCE LEARNING AND ITS NEURAL CORRELATES. A COMBINED FMRI TMS STUDY. Leonora Wilkinson1, Adam
Steel1, Kris Knutson1, Eric Wassermann1; 1NINDS, NIH — The basal ganglia
and their cortical connections, including the primary motor cortex (M1)
play an important role in implicit/unconscious motor sequence learning.
Continuous theta burst transcranial magnetic stimulation (cTBS) reduces
motor cortex excitability. Using a probabilistic serial reaction time paradigm, we examined the effect of cTBS over M1on implicit sequence learning
and on the learning related BOLD response. We conducted an fMRI study
of implicit sequence learning in two healthy groups after cTBS to M1 or following sham TMS. cTBS produced an impairment of learning and learning
related BOLD response in the primary motor cortex and inferior frontal
gyrus relative to sham. This is evidence of an active role for motor cortex
involvement in motor sequence learning.

H105
INTRAPARIETAL SULCAL DEPTH REDUCTIONS IN CHILDREN
WITH WILLIAMS SYNDROME Melanie Sottile1, J. Shane Kippenhan1,
Katherine Roe1, Carolyn B. Mervis2, Daniel Eisenberg1, Joseph Masdeu1, Jeffrey Bloch1, Nicholas Turner1, Philip Kohn1, Mbemba Jabbi1, Shau-Ming Wei1,
Karen Faith Berman1,3; 1Section on Integrative Neuroimaging, NIMH/IRP/
NIH, 2Neurodevelopmental Science Laboratory, Dept Psych and Brain Sci.,
U Lousiville, 3Clinical Brain Disorders Branch, NIMH/IRP/NIH — Individuals
with Williams syndrome (WS), the result of a hemizygous deletion of ~25
genes on 7q11.23, have significant visuospatial construction impairments
that are likely related to structural alterations in the dorsal visual processing system. Research in adults with WS has demonstrated reduced gray

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

259

Poster Session H
matter volume in the intraparietal sulcus (IPS)(Meyer-Lindenberg,2004), a
finding that has been associated with reduced sulcal depth in this same
brain region (Kippenhan,2005). We have also identified reduced IPS gray
matter volume in children with WS who have average-range IQs as compared to typically developing matched controls, and we hypothesize that
sulcal depth reductions would also exist in this population. We collected
structural MRIs from 25 controls (mean age=13.9, range=7-18, 16 males)
and 16 children with WS (mean age=10.8, range=5-17, 7 males). For each
participant, we acquired three sagittal, multi-echo MPRAGE (MEMPR)
(vanderKouwe,2008) structural images and analyzed sulcal depth based
on an average geometric cortical surface representation created using surface-based analysis (Freesurfer, Caret, and SUMA). We found that children
with WS show bilateral reductions in the depth of the IPS (right, p=1.5x108; left, p=9.3x10-9). We also found a strong correlation, specific to the WS
group (R2=.35, p=0.015), between IPS depth and gray matter volume determined with voxel-based morphometry. These results are consistent with
previous findings in adults and support the geometric interpretation that
gray matter volume is reduced in proportion to a concomitant reduction in
surface area. Further research is needed to explore the association of these
structural findings to the hallmark visuospatial construction deficits in WS.

H106
HOW ABOUT A BAYESIAN M/EEG IMAGING METHOD CORRECTING FOR INCOMPLETE SPATIO-TEMPORAL PRIORS? Carsten Stahlhut1, Hagai T. Attias2, David Wipf3, Lars K. Hansen1, Srikantan S. Nagarajan5;
Technical University of Denmark, 2Convex Imaging, 3Microsoft Research Asia,
4
University of California, San Francisco — In this contribution we present
a hierarchical Bayesian model, sAquavit, to tackle the highly ill-posed
problem that follows with MEG and EEG source imaging. Our model facilitates spatio-temporal patterns through the use of both spatial and temporal basis functions. While in contrast to most previous spatio-temporal
inverse M/EEG models, the proposed model benefits of consisting of two
source terms, namely, a spatio-temporal pattern term limiting the source
configuration to a spatio-temporal subspace and a source correcting term
to pick up source activity not covered by the spatio-temporal prior belief.
We have tested the model on both artificial data and real EEG data in order
to demonstrate the efficacy of the model. The model was tested at different
SNRs (-10.0,-5.2, -3.0, -1.0, 0, 0.8, 3.0 dB) using white noise. At all SNRs the
sAquavit performs best in AUC measure, e.g. at SNR=0dB AUC is, 0.985
(sAquavit) and 0.857 (Bolstad et al., 2009). Our results demonstrate that the
sAquavit model is capable in balancing spatio-temporal prior guidance and
source correction estimation to obtain superior estimates relative to current
inverse methods.
1

H107
MAPPING LANGUAGE AREAS WITH MOVIE-WATCHING FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING Yanmei Tie1, Laura Rigolo1,
Srinivasan Mukundan1, Alexandra Golby1; 1Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School — Task-based language functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) is a non-invasive technique for language mapping and has
been used in neurosurgical planning. However, the tasks can be difficult
for patients to perform, resulting in decreased detection power. To overcome this problem we propose a task-free movie-watching paradigm. Naturalistic stimuli have been used in studying brain functions with fMRI and
have demonstrated highly synchronized responses across subjects while
watching the same movie. We hypothesize that during watching a movie
containing linguistic content the language area response is similar across
subjects, and a temporal model could be derived for general linear model
(GLM) approach to map a new subject’s language areas. Twenty-two righthanded healthy subjects were shown a 7-min movie clip with dialogues.
An inter-subject-correlation (ISC) analysis was applied to identify the areas
showing highly synchronized responses. Then, the language components
derived from a group independent component analysis (ICA) was used
to functionally define regions of interest (ROIs). The voxels within both
functionally and structurally defined language ROIs that showed synchronized temporal profile were used to build a model for GLM. Subjects were
divided into two groups for cross-validation of the model in individual
subjects with exchangeable training and testing groups. Results showed
that putative language areas indicated synchronized activities, and GLM
map identified moderately overlapped activations with that from task-

260

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
based language fMRI (dice coefficients: 0.21±0.17, 0.15±017, and 0.27±0.21
for ROIs). This initial investigation suggests that movie-watching fMRI
could be used for language mapping, while model optimization and validation in patients are needed.

H108
READING ACCURACY MODULATES TASK-RELATED FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY AT MULTIPLE HIERARCHICAL SCALES Jane X
Wang1, Luis A N Amaral2,3, James R Booth2; 1Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, 2Northwestern University, Evanston, IL,
3
Howard Hughes Medical Institute — Reading requires the interaction of a
distributed set of cortical areas that gives rise to a wide range of individual
skill even in individuals without reading disability. However, the nature of
these neural interactions and their impact on reading performance are still
poorly understood. Functional connectivity studies, which aim to quantify interactions between brain areas, have in recent years provided much
insight into brain dynamics associated with task-free conditions. Here, we
investigate how whole-brain functional network patterns acquired during
a reading task change with individual variation in performance. We apply
data-driven graph theoretical methods to mathematically characterize the
constructed network of interactions. We find that connectivity patterns
of 39 children (aged 9-15) performing a visual rhyme judgment task can
be decomposed hierarchically into multiple sub-networks that partially
recover anatomical structure. Importantly, long-range interaction between
these sub-networks grows stronger with increasing task accuracy, and we
recover a network of hub regions known to be critical to reading which displays increased short-range synchronization as reading accuracy increases.
These individual differences in task-related functional connectivity reveal
that increased interaction between distant regions, coupled with increased
local integration within key cortical areas, promotes enhanced performance
of a reading task. Importantly, we demonstrate that task-related neuroimaging data contains far more information than is usually extracted via standard univariate analyses – information that can be meaningfully related to
cognition and task.

H109
RESTING STATE FUNCTIONAL NETWORK ORGANIZATION AND
TOPOLOGICAL PROPERTIES IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER Rachel M. Zamzow1, Jeffrey D. Johnson1, David Q. Beversdorf1, Shawn
E. Christ1; 1University of Missouri — Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a
neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by impairments in social communication and restricted, repetitive behaviors. It has previously been
suggested that functional connectivity, as measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), is altered in individuals with ASD. In the
present study, we used graph theory analysis of resting-state fMRI data to
examine how the topological properties of brain functional networks differ
based on factors such as diagnosis and age. Resting state fMRI data was
collected from 28 individuals with ASD (mean age = 14.9 years) and an ageand gender-matched comparison group of 35 typically developing individuals without ASD (mean age = 15.6 years). Partial correlation matrices
for 90 cortical and subcortical regions were generated for each participant
and then visualized as undirected mean networks. The ASD and non-ASD
group mean networks differed in node membership and organization. Both
group mean networks were characterized by numerous long-distance connections; however, the ASD network was characterized by a higher number
of local connections. Topological parameters were also calculated for each
participant and compared between groups. The two groups did not differ
significantly in global network efficiency, t(63) = 1.43, p = 0.16. Local efficiency, however, was greater for the ASD group as compared to the nonASD group, t(63) = 2.06, p = 0.04. The results of the present study indicate
potential alterations in functional network organization and topological
properties in ASD. Further analysis is needed to fully characterize these
differences within the contexts of both age and symptom severity.

H110
NEURORHETORIC: MAPPING THE SEMANTIC STRUCTURE OF
COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE Lawrence Appelbaum1, Elizabeth Beam1,
Jordynn Jack2, James Moody1, Scott Huettel1; 1Duke University, 2University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill — Cognitive neuroscience, as a discipline,
links biological systems studied by neuroscience to functions studied by

2013 Annual Meeting
psychology. To understand the knowledge structure of this emerging discipline, we applied network text analyses to a comprehensive corpus of
abstracts collected from five major journals over a 30-month period, including every study that used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
to study psychological processes. From this corpus, we constructed lists of
terms describing neuroanatomical structures and psychological concepts,
created sets of semantic networks evaluating how these terms were used
in proximity in the individual abstracts, and statistically evaluated whether
each term’s centrality position in the networks were greater or lesser than
predicted by its frequency. Our results demonstrate clear semantic structures in which high-frequency terms anchor onto branches of specialization
among domains within each network. In many cases these domains (e.g.,
decision neuroscience) are disconnected from the main networks, even at
high connectivity weights, indicating closed systems whose findings may
not be sufficiently integrated with the larger literature. Examination of
network statistics revealed terms that have disproportionate centrality relative to their frequency (e.g., insula, pre-SMA, and thalamus) indicating
desirable targets for future research that are underreported compared to
their importance. Finally, substitutability measures identified clusters of
terms that exhibit substantial redundancy, signaling the need for greater
conceptual discrimination among them. Collectively, our analyses map
the semantic structure of cognitive neuroscience and provide prescriptive
recommendations for future directions that will most efficiently build new
links between brain structure and function.

H111
CHANGES IN INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS FOLLOWING BLAST-INDUCED MILD TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY
Andrei Vakhtin1, Vince Calhoun1,2, Rex Jung1, Jillian Prestopnik1, Paul Taylor3,
Corey Ford1; 1University of New Mexico, 2The Mind Research Network, 3Sandia
National Laboratories — The incidence of blast-induced mild traumatic
injury (mTBI) has been rising in US veterans due to the widespread use
of improvised explosive devices. Blast-injured veterans report cognitive
impairments, which are collectively termed post-concussive syndrome,
that are similar to those that follow more severe forms of brain injury. These
are likely caused by diffuse axonal injury, which disrupts the neuronal
cytoskeleton on a microscopic level and is commonly undetected by computed tomography and conventional magnetic resonance imaging. Here,
we attempted to detect cortical function abnormalities in a group of blast
mTBI subjects by using independent component analysis of resting state
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data, which may be more
sensitive to small individual differences than conventional fMRI analyses.
Resting state networks of 13 mTBI veterans with moderate post-concussive
syndrome and 50 control subjects were compared across 3 fMRI domains:
blood oxygenation level-dependent spatial signal maps, time course spectra, and functional network connectivity. The mTBI group exhibited hyperactivity in the temporal-parietal junctions as well as hypoactivity in the left
inferior temporal gyrus. Abnormal frequencies in default-mode (DMN),
sensorimotor, attentional, and frontal networks were also detected. Additionally, functional connectivity was disrupted in 6 pairs of networks:
DMN-basal ganglia, attention-sensorimotor, frontal-DMN, attention-sensorimotor, attention-frontal, and sensorimotor-sensorimotor. The results
suggest white matter disruption across certain attentional networks and
that the temporal-parietal junctions may be compensating for damage in
other cortical regions, such as the left inferior temporal gyrus. Funded
through the U.S. Naval Health Research Center, Office of Naval Research.
James Mackiewicz, project funding manager.

H112
PERIPHERALLY AND CENTRALLY DRIVEN SEQUENTIAL EFFECTS
IN PAIN Marieke Jepma1, Luka Ruzic1, Matt Jones1, Tor D. Wager1; 1Univer-

sity of Colorado at Boulder — Repeated exposure to noxious stimuli can
change their painfulness. Such sequential effects have implications for pain
adaptation in the periphery and affective learning in the central nervous
system. In Experiment 1 (N = 100), we found evidence for two distinct
types of sequential effects. Repeated thermal stimulation on the same skin
site produced temperature-dependent habituation (reduced sensitivity),
and repeated stimulation on new skin sites produced sensitization. The
same-site habituation effects are incompatible with cognitive anchor-andadjust effects or other central brain adaptations, and are likely mediated
by peripheral adaptation. The across-site sensitization effects more likely

Poster Session H
reflect central mechanisms. An fMRI study of these phenomena (N = 29)
uncovered dissociable brain correlates of each effect. Repeated same-site
stimulation produced temperature-dependent widespread decreases in an
a priori pain-predictive brain network, consistent with habituation at a very
early (e.g., peripheral or spinal) level. However, we also found increases in
a region of the subgenual anterior cingulate cortex that has been related to
endogenous pain control, suggesting possible central involvement. In contrast, across-site repetition produced an increase in pain that did not modulate the pain-predictive brain network, but instead modulated activation
in sensorimotor cortex. Our results reveal complex, but systematic, sequential dynamics of pain, with at least two different underlying mechanisms.
These dynamics may provide new measures of normal and pathological
adaptation and learning processes, and suggest that they should be carefully controlled and measured in experimental pain protocols. The principles underlying adaptive sequential dynamics of pain may also generalize
to other affective events.

H113
REVISITING LIBET’S STUDIES: EFFECTS OF VOLITION ON TIME
PERCEPTION AND RESPONSE INTERFERENCE Lara C. Krisst1, Maria
M. Robinson1, Ezequiel Morsella1,2; 1San Francisco State University, 2University
of California, San Francisco — In his seminal psychophysiological experiments, Libet (2004) instructed participants to report when they felt the
intention to perform a “free-willed” action. Interestingly, neuroimaging
measures revealed unconscious neural activity that predicted when participants would have these conscious inclinations. Research has since revealed
that voluntary and non-voluntary actions may have distinct neural and
subjective correlates (Brass & Haggard, 2007). Building on this work,
we investigated how levels of volition (e.g., voluntary versus automatic
actions) influence temporal perception and response interference. In Study
1, we measured participants’ (n =15) time perception as they emitted an
automatic or non-automatic response to an audio cue. The mean discrepancy between actual tone onset and the average perceived tone onset was
112.84 milliseconds (SD = 30.11). To examine the long-term consequences of
having responded “freely” to a stimulus, Study 2 (n = 18) employed a variant of Ericksen’s flanker task, where participants must respond to a target
and disregard the influence of flanking ‘distractors.’ Psychophysiological
research has revealed that distractors can activate motor programs that lead
to response interference (DeSoto et al., 2001). We found interference from
targets that had been associated with a free-choice response during training, t (17) = 2.57, p < .02. We also examined participants’ subjective urges
on a trial-by-trial basis. Combined with neuroimaging technologies, these
paradigms can further reveal the unique properties of volitional processes
in the brain (Fleming et al., 2009).

H114
NEURAL RESPONSES TO PRESSURE PAIN CLASSIFY FIBROMYALGIA PATIENTS Marina Lopez-Sola1,2,3, Jesus Pujol2, Joan Deus2,4, Alba
Garcia-Fontanals2,4, Oren Contreras-Rodriguez2,3, Luke J. Chang1, Monica
Gimenez-Navarro2, Laura Blanco-Hinojo2,5, Carles Soriano-Mas3, Ben J. Harrison2,6, Hector Ortiz2, Tor D. Wager1; 1University of Colorado at Boulder, CO,
USA, 2CRC- Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain, 3Bellvitge University Hospital
IDIBELL- CIBERSAM, Barcelona, Spain, 4Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain, 5IMIM- Parc de Salut Mar, Barcelona, Spain, 6The University
of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia — Fibromyalgia (FM) syndrome is characterized by chronic hypersensitivity to mechanical pain, without evidence
of concurrent peripheral tissue damage. Increased pain sensitivity in FM
is paralleled by augmented brain responses to experimentally induced
painful stimulation. However, the sensitivity and specificity of these findings and their potential as a diagnostic tool for FM is unknown. In this
study, we examined fMRI responses to pressure pain (4.5kg/cm2) in 38
FM patients and 35 matched healthy controls. We used a standard support
vector machine with 5-fold, stratified cross-validation to develop a brain
‘weight map’ that is able to classify individual participants as FM patients
or controls. The largest weights (i.e., responses to pressure predicted FM)
were found in the bilateral insulae-operculae, lateral and medial frontal
cortices, brainstem, parahippocampal gyri, and cerebellar areas. This pattern discriminated patients from controls with 74% accuracy (+- 5.1%, SE),
P = 0.00005. The results suggest that machine-learning algorithms can shed
new light on the most distinctive central nervous system features charac-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

261

Poster Session H
terizing FM, and thus show promise for use as a complementary diagnostic
tool. These results may be of particular importance considering the lack of
objective measures of pain perception and the absence of peripheral signs
that are diagnostic of FM.

H115
WHEN SCHIZOPHRENIA IMPROVES TIME PERCEPTION Jose Isidro
Martinez-Cascales1, Juan Manuel de la Fuente1, Julio Santiago Sr.2, Julio Santiago Jr.1; 1University of Granada, 2General Hospital of Lanzarote — Schizophrenic patients are typically reported to exhibit deficits in time perception. Their ability to measure the passing of time has been evaluated in
several studies using bisection tasks. These basically consist on providing
two anchors that define the extremes of a temporal range and then presenting stimuli that vary in duration. Participants are asked to estimate to
which anchor each stimuli is closer. In the present work we used a classical
time bisection task together with a more ecological version, both visually
presented. Thirteen patients with schizophrenia and thirteen non-psychiatric control participants matched in age, gender, handedness and education
completed both tasks. In the classical version we used a blue square as a
target stimulus with duration range 1000 to 4000 milliseconds. The other
task consisted on watching four videos of aging faces, each of them lasting
about 30 seconds. After this we showed photograms belonging to the video
and participants had to guess if they were closer to the beginning or the
end. Controls and patients presented a similar bisection bias in both tasks.
However, schizophrenic patients exhibited a higher level of discriminability as shown by the JND (just noticeable difference) and the slope of the
cumulative response curve. Effects of medication, motivational and environmental factors could account for these findings.

H116
CONTEXT-DEPENDENT EXPECTATIONS INFLUENCE NEURAL
PROCESSING OF OBSERVED GOAL-DIRECTED ACTION Sasha
Ondobaka1, Marco Wittmann1, Floris de Lange1, Harold Bekkering1; 1Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour — The active inference account of
action observation proposes that context generates proprioceptive expectations of concrete movement outcomes and exteroceptive expectations of
physical action outcomes in the world. However, the role of context in the
neural processing of observed goal-directed action remains elusive. We
used fMRI to investigate the neural manifestations of these contextually
triggered expectations and to examine their role in subsequent neural processing of other’s grasping actions. Participants observed two objects that
were followed by an action that was likely or unlikely to occur, for example
a full or inverted grip of a bottle. The two objects were intended to create
either likely or unlikely action context, such as pouring wine or putting
wine away. They then judged whether the action matched the context-dependent expectation. Results indicated that the generation of exteroceptive
and proprioceptive expectations was confined to activations of the parahippocampal cortex and the superior parietal lobe, respectively. Unexpected
observed actions were processed in the inferior frontal cortex, a region
that integrates proprioceptive and exteroceptive outcomes. In contrast,
expected grips activated the primary sensorimotor cortex, which codes for
proprioceptive outcomes. The results show that action expectation and subsequent processing of action outcomes are manifested in distinct cortical
circuits. Collectively, the findings suggest that prior expectations provide a
scaffold that shapes perception of observed action and directly support the
hierarchical active inference account of action observation.

H117
ACUTE STRESS CONTRIBUTES TO INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN
PAIN-RELATED BRAIN ACTIVITY IN HEALTHY AND CHRONIC PAIN
PATIENTS. Etienne Vachon-Presseau1, Martel Marc-Olivier2, Roy Mathieu3,
Caron Etienne1, Albouy Geneviève1, Marin Marie-France1, Plante Isabelle4, Sullivan Michael5, Lupien Sonia1, Rainville Pierre1; 1University of Montreal, 2Harvard
Medical School, 3Boulder University, 4Université du Québec à Montreal, 5McGill
University — Individual differences in pain sensitivity and reactivity are
well recognized but the underlying mechanisms are likely to be diverse.
The phenomenon of stress-induced analgesia is well documented in animal
research and individual variability in the stress response in humans may
produce corresponding changes in pain. We assessed the magnitude of the
acute stress response of 16 chronic back pain (CBP) patients and 18 healthy

262

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
individuals exposed to noxious thermal stimulations administered in an
fMRI experiment and tested its possible contribution to individual differences in pain perception. The temperature of the noxious stimulations was
determined individually to control for differences in pain sensitivity. The
two groups showed similar significant increases in reactive cortisol across
the scanning session when compared to their basal levels collected over 7
consecutive days, suggesting normal hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis
reactivity to painful stressors in CBP patients. Critically, after controlling
for any effect of group and temperature, individuals with stronger cortisol responses reported less pain unpleasantness and showed a reduction
of BOLD activation in nucleus accumbens at the stimulus onset and in the
anterior mid-cingulate cortex (aMCC), the primary somatosensory cortex,
and the posterior insula during heat pain. Mediation analyses indicated
that pain-related activity in the aMCC mediated the relationship between
the reactive cortisol response and the pain unpleasantness reported by the
participants. These findings indicate that acute stress responses modulate
pain in humans and contribute to individual variability in pain affect and
pain-related brain activity.

H118
REDUCED ACTIVATION STRENGTH OF OBJECT USE ACTIONS:
EVIDENCE FROM LEFT HEMISPHERE STROKE Christine E. Watson1,
Alexis G. Kington1, Allison D. Shapiro1, Laurel J. Buxbaum; 1Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute — Humans know how to act on familiar objects in
two ways: we can grasp objects in order to move them, and we can use
objects for their intended purposes. For “low-conflict” objects, the hand
is shaped in the same way when we perform either of these actions (e.g.,
a mug). For “high-conflict” objects, different hand postures are required
to move or to use the object (e.g., a calculator). Recent research suggests
that both types of actions are activated by the intention to act on an object:
participants are slower to plan the hand postures for using high-conflict
relative to low-conflict objects. Based on evidence that “use” representations are left hemisphere-mediated, we tested the hypothesis that patients
with left hemisphere damage would have difficulty selecting “use” actions
for high-conflict objects. Thirty-two chronic left hemisphere stroke patients
and 15 age- and education-matched control participants pantomimed the
actions associated with using 20 high-conflict and 20 low-conflict objects.
Patients, but not control participants, were significantly less accurate at
producing hand postures for high-conflict relative to low-conflict objects.
We used voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping (VLSM) to identify areas of
the brain critical for successful object use. After controlling for accuracy on
low-conflict objects, difficulty producing “use” hand postures for high-conflict objects correlated with damage to left supramarginal gyrus (BA 40)
and underlying white matter. These data extend previous research from
our lab demonstrating that damage to left inferior parietal cortex reduces
activation strength of “use” representations, yielding increased selection of
erroneous actions.

H119
A BRAIN AREA FOR THE VISUAL RECOGNITION OF NUMERALS
Jennifer Shum1,2, Dora Hermes1,2, Brett L. Foster1,2, Mohammad Dastjerdi1,2,
Vinitha Rangarajan1,2, Jonathan Winawer1,3, Kai J. Miller1,2, Josef Parvizi1,2;
1
Stanford Human Intracranial Cognitive Electrophysiology Program (SHICEP),
Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA, 2Laboratory of Behavioral & Cognitive Neurology, Department of Neurology & Neurological Sciences, Stanford
University, Stanford, California, USA, 3Department of Psychology, Stanford
University, Stanford, California, USA — Is there an area within the human
visual system that has a preferential response to numerals? We addressed
this question using intracranial recordings from the human brain in seven
participants, observing a remarkably preferential electrophysiological
response to visually presented numerals, compared to orthographically
similar (letters and false fonts) or semantically similar (number-words)
stimuli. Anatomically, this preferential response was consistently located
on the inferior temporal gyrus (ITG) across subjects and anterior to the
temporo-occipital incisure. This area overlaps with the functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) signal dropout zone, which is produced by the
nearby auditory canal and venous sinus artifacts. In more posterior regions,
outside of this zone, we observed strong responses to both real numerals

2013 Annual Meeting
and false fonts. Our findings are relevant to understanding the principles
by which visual categorical response selectivity is formed for stimuli, such
as numerals, that are learned throughout development and education.

H120
TARGET FINDING WHILE THE SUN IS MOVING Austen Smith1, Izabela
Szelest1, Lorin Elias1; 1University of Saskatchewan — The perception of three
dimensions (3D) when viewing an object is a complex visual process in
the brain, made through assumptions about the object and using environmental cues. Lighting of the object (Sun & Perona, 1998) and the spatial
location of the object (Nicholls, Bradshaw, & Mattingley, 1999) have been
found to influence visual attention and perception of objects. Visual search
paradigms have largely focused on reaction time differences for finding
a target. Previously, spatial location of the target and illumination of the
array including the target have been dichotomously examined, with no
attempt to integrate the two. In the current study we employed a target find
task using arrays of shaded circles creating a 3D illusion of a single concave
sphere among a field of convex spheres, or vice-versa. In the current study
we not only compared 57 left to right reading participant reaction times
for target location and array illumination, but also visual inspection times
of the upper, lower, left, and right visual fields. Greater inequalities were
found between the upper and lower, rather than the left and right visual
fields. Eye tracking data interacted with reaction times for target location
and lighting, with the overall greatest amount of time spent inspecting the
upper half. Fastest reaction times occurred for targets in leftward-lit arrays
and targets located in the upper half. Implications for ventral stream processing, target finding and lighting direction paradigms are discussed.

H121
FUNCTIONAL SPECIFICITY AND CONNECTIVITY OF THE VISUAL
WORD FORM AREA W. Dale Stevens1, M. Henry Tessler1, Dwight J. Kravitz1,
Alex Martin1; 1National Institute of Mental Health — Human ventral occipitotemporal cortex (VOTC) shows a category-related organization that is
remarkably consistent across individuals. We recently demonstrated that
category-related functional dissociations in VOTC regions during task performance are associated with differential intrinsic functional connectivity
(FC) with other cortical regions that store and/or process category-relevant
properties. The visual word form area (VWFA) located in the left occipitotemporal sulcus is thought to be specialized for visual word recognition.
If the VWFA is specialized for processing words, then it should 1) show
preferential FC with the language system; 2) differentiate words from other
categories of visual stimuli; and 3) differentiate individual words from one
another. During 2 separate fMRI sessions, participants (n=34) were scanned
during a 1) multi-category functional localizer (10 runs); 2) “resting-state”
run (> 8 min); and 3) multi-category conceptual classification task (12 runs).
We used the functional localizer to define category-related regions of interest (ROIs), including the VWFA (words > nameable object pictures), in
individual participants. We used these individually defined ROIs as seeds
in FC analyses of the resting-state data and multi-voxel pattern analysis
(MVPA) to assess specificity of processing in the VWFA during the task
runs. Across participants, the VWFA showed preferential FC with language
regions, including Wernicke’s and Broca’s areas. MVPA demonstrated
that the VWFA differentiates words from other visual stimuli, including
pseudowords, and individual words from one another. These results are
consistent with the VWFA being specialized for visual word recognition
and interactive with a larger distributed language system.

H122
SUPPRESSING STIMULUS VISIBILITY WITH OCCIPITAL AND
PARIETAL TMS Evelina Tapia1, Dustin J. Martin1, Diane M. Beck1; 1University

of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — When transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) is applied over occipital cortex approximately 80-100 ms after the
onset of a stimulus its visibility is decreased. The location of the occipital
stimulation is typically selected by first determining where on teh scalp
TMS results in an experience of a phosphene. Recently it has been shown
that phosphene sensations can also be elicited with parietal TMS (Marzi,
Mancini, & Savazzi 2009). Our current study investigated whether TMS to
parietal regions that elicit sensations of phosphenes also produce visual
suppression, akin to that produced by occipital TMS, and if so, how the
effects of suppression compare across the two areas. Occipital and parietal
stimulation sites within the same hemisphere were selected according to

Poster Session H
whether they elicited phosphenes. Then, TMS was randomly applied at 0
to 130 ms after the onset of the stimulus (SOA) in steps of 10 ms to these
areas. Participants responded to the orientation of the line stimulus and
rated its visibility on every trial. Our occipital TMS data replicate previous
reports of visual suppression around the classical 80-100 ms window both
in the objective line orientation responses and subjective visibility ratings.
TMS to the parietal regions resulted in some suppression of visual information in a similar time frame, but the effects were less pronounced and
more intermittent than with occipital TMS. Together, these data suggest
that both the occipital and the parietal cortex may play an important role
in stimulus visibility.

H123
BODY WEIGHT INFLUENCES THE INTERPLAY OF BRAIN DYNAMICS TO THE VIEWING OF HIGH- AND LOW-ENERGY FOODS WITH
GASTRIC HORMONE SECRETION: AN INTERDISCIPLINARY
INVESTIGATION Marie-Laure Bielser1, Claudia Valentine Lietti2, Léonie Egli3,
Vanessa Campos3, Luc Tappy3,4, Micah M. Murray1,2,5, Ulrike Toepel1,2; 1Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and
University of Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Radiology Department, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of
Physiology, University of Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Service of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and University
of Lausanne, Switzerland, 5EEG Brain Mapping Core, Center for Biomedical
Imaging of Lausanne and Geneva, Switzerland — Endocrine factors convey
information about energy needs to brain regions involved in homeostatic
control of food intake, but there is mounting evidence for influences on
brain areas implicated in hedonic valuation, too. The extent to which endocrine factors interact with sensory and cognitive processes in differing
food motivation states and whether individuals’ body weight additionally
impacts those processes is so far undetermined. Our study investigated the
influence of weight on gut hormone secretion as well as associations with
the spatio-temporal brain dynamics to food viewing in women ranging in
BMI from 19-36 kg/m2 following an overnight fast and subsequent to food
intake. BMI differentially influenced the scalp-surface global power of the
electric field evoked by high-and low-energy food viewing from ~230ms
in pre-prandial nutrition state. On the other hand, the food type viewed
and BMI impacted the estimated neural source activity (by applying distributed linear inverse solutions and the LAURA regularization approach)
in occipital and frontal regions already from ~100ms after image presentation in post-prandial state, the most prominent interactions being between
responses to low-energy food viewing and BMI. Activity in these brain
regions modulated by food type viewed and BMI was further correlated
with peripheral blood measures of leptin and ghrelin, hormones known to
convey food motivation signals along the gut-brain-axis. That is, motivation and body weight substantially influence visual food perception, altering activity in brain regions mediating sensory processing, but also valuation and decision-making. Gut hormone secretion is particularly associated
with BMI- and motivation-dependent food valuation signals.

H124
DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF FEATURE OVERLAP IN LATERAL
OCCIPITAL CORTEX AND PERIRHINAL CORTEX DURING OBJECT
PERCEPTION Katja Umla-Runge1, Mark Postans1, Bronson Harry2, Paul E
Downing2, Kim S Graham1; 1Cardiff University, 2Bangor University — It has
been proposed that object representations within the visual ventral stream
become increasingly more complex and conjunctive as one moves from
posterior regions, such as the lateral occipital complex (LOC), towards
more anterior areas, including perirhinal cortex (PrC). In support of this,
Mundy et al. (2012) found evidence for differential effects of high versus
low feature overlap in these two regions (LOC: low > high; PrC: high >
low). Here, we extended these findings by investigating whether we could
find evidence of differential graded activation, by presenting participants
with stimuli in which we systematically manipulated feature overlap
between objects (low, medium and high), as well as including a condition
in which identical objects were presented. Similar to Mundy et al. (2012),
we employed a blocked design fMRI study during which participants
engaged in a temporal duration detection task. Orthogonal localiser tasks
were used to identify functional areas within LOC and PrC that responded

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

263

Poster Session H
to object stimuli. We then asked how activity in these regions was modulated by feature overlap. Bilateral LOC activity increased as the feature
overlap between objects reduced, while left PrC showed greater activation
for high compared to low feature overlap blocks. This finding is consistent
with representational accounts in which PrC stores more complex and conjunctive objects than LOC.

H125
THRESHOLD FOR VISUAL AWARENESS IS ASSOCIATED WITH
STRIATAL DOPAMINE D2 RECEPTOR BINDING Filip Van Opstal1,
Tom Verguts1, Nick Van Laecken1, Filip De Vos1, Ingeborg Goethals1, Wim
Fias1; 1Ghent University — Previous research suggested that striatal dopamine (DA) activity affects corticostriatal information processing either by
disrupting or enhancing the transmission of input signals. This process is
referred to as ‘sensory gating’ and is defined as a pre-attentive ability of
the brain to modulate its sensitivity to an incoming stimulus. This indicates
a strong relation between striatal DA and subjective visual awareness of
a stimulus. In the present study we further investigated this relation. We
hypothesized that individual differences in the threshold for subjective
visual awareness would relate to the uptake of DA in the striatum. The
threshold for awareness was measured in a behavioral masking experiment. In a separate session, the uptake of DA in the striatum was measured
with positron emission tomography (PET) and [11C]Raclopride as a radioactive D2 receptor antagonist. Similar to previous work demonstrating a
relation between striatal D2 binding potential and cognitive performance
(e.g., human working memory, Cools et al., 2008) or personality traits
(e.g., sensation seeking, Gjedde et al., 2010), preliminary results (n = 10)
revealed a significant quadratic (U-curve) relation between striatal binding
and the threshold for subjective awareness. The possibility that this result
was caused by a relation between striatal binding and response bias was
excluded by a similar analysis on the false alarm rate. In sum, the results
of this study show that striatal dopamine activity is related to subjective
visual awareness of visual stimuli and could explain the observed increase
in the subjective threshold for schizophrenic patients (Del Cul et al., 2006).

H126
IMAGINE THAT! COMPARING BRAIN RESPONSES TO IMAGINING
AND PERCEIVING NOVEL STIMULI Deana Vitrano1, Alaisa C. Emery1,
Sara S. Patterson1, Jonathan W. Page1; 1Dickinson College — Recent evidence
suggests that the visual system is activated similarly when perceiving a
stimulus and later remembering the stimulus. We wondered if the visual
system would be activated in the same way when imagining a stimulus
that had not been previously seen. Two novel gratings were described to
30 participants. Event-related potential (ERP) responses were recorded
at multiple locations with the eyes closed. A tone was used for timing
the imaginations and for averaging ERP signals. Participants were then
shown the gratings and asked to judge how similar their imagined gratings were to the actual gratings. ERP responses to the perceived gratings
were recorded. Responses to imagining and perceiving the gratings were
compared and found to be similar at the visual cortex and at many cortical locations. Additionally, response amplitudes were attenuated for those
that self-reported lower similarity between their imagined and perceived
patterns. The results suggest that the visual system is actively involved in
creating visual imaginations and that self-reported vividness may predict
response amplitude for mental imagery.

H127
PERCEPTUAL LEARNING OF REAL AND IMAGINARY ORIENTATIONS SHARE COMMON BUT DISSOCIABLE NEURAL SUBSTRATE Fang Wang1, Xiang Zhong1, Meirong Sun1, Jing Huang1, Yulong Ding2,
Yan Song1; 1State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China, 2Department of Psychology, Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China — When investigating perceptual learning (PL), most researchers use the real figure as stimuli, but little
is known about the neural mechanisms of PL in visual imaginary stimuli.
Here, we used electroencephalography (EEG) to directly compare neural
substrates underlying PL in real lines with those underlying PL in imaginary lines. High-density event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded
from human subjects when they were trained with a real line or an imaginary line discrimination task. After training, the orientation discrimina-

264

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting
tion performance was significantly improved and this learning effect could
transfer between real and imaginary lines. The ERP results showed that the
early learning effects over the parietal-occipital sites were similar and could
transfer between real and imaginary line learning, whereas the late ERP
learning effects over the frontal sites were quite different and specific to the
type of learning. Compared with real stimuli, the higher-level cortical processing and later processing stages were involved in the learning of imaginary stimuli. These results contribute to understanding the neural basis of
perceptual learning and the distinction between real and imaginary stimuli
learning. Moreover, our evidences indicate that the parietal-occipital and
frontal modulations are differentially related to the common and specific
neural substrates of visual PL.

H128
MEASURING COLOR IMAGERY USING A STROOP-TYPE TASK
Andrea L Wantz1, Fred W Mast1, Janek S Lobmaier1; 1Department of Psychology
and Center for Cognition, Learning and Memory, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland — Visual mental imagery refers to the ability to visualize objects
or scenes in the absence of the corresponding perceptual input. To date,
relatively few studies have examined mental imagery of color. Some studies aimed at determining brain areas involved in color imagery and used
paradigms that asked participants to compare hues of typical objects. A disadvantage of this paradigm might be that participants may solve this task
with semantic or episodic memory rather than mental imagery of colors
(e.g., one study using this paradigm found hippocampal activity during
this task). The main purpose of the present study was to develop and test
a paradigm in which color imagery can be reliably tested while at the same
time minimizing the influence of prior knowledge. Colored squares had to
be named as fast as possible after imagining colors cued by letters, words or
objects in a blank square whereas a control group performed the same task
without the instruction to imagine colors. Imagined colors either matched
the subsequent colors (congruent trials) or were incongruent. Consistent
with the hypothesis, the experimental group showed a larger imagery
interference effect (incongruent-congruent trials) than the control group
(p = .006). The experimental group was faster on congruent compared to
incongruent trials (p < .001). This effect disappeared when controlling for
individual imagery abilities (Vividness of Visual Imagery Questionnaire
(VVIQ), p = .378). Taken together, these results confirm that this Strooptype reaction time task is reliable to test color imagery effects.

H129
MASTERY OF ACTION SHAPES OUR VISUAL OBJECT RECOGNITION Kiyomi Yatabe1,2, Chihiro Hosoda1, Katsumi Watanabe2, Takashi
Hanakawa1; 1National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, 2The University of
Tokyo — Although current views of the perception-action coupling assume
that motor area activities are selectively enhanced during observation of
experienced action, the precise effect of prior experience on visual object
recognition remains unknown. To examine how motor experiences modulate neural responses during recognition of visual stimuli, we conducted a
neuroimaging study involving recognition of participants’ own and others’
handwriting. Contrary to our expectation that recognition of one’s own
handwriting, i.e., handwriting associated with familiar movements, would
elicit stronger motor area activation, recognition of others’ handwriting
induced stronger activation in dorsal parts of the motor-related regions.
In contrast, recognition of one’s own handwriting was accompanied by
elevated activation in the left-dominant ventral occipitotemporal cortex.
This discrepancy between recognition of one’s own handwriting and that
of others was not confounded with differences in attention or task difficulty
between the two conditions. These findings suggest that objects associated
with unmastered movements are recognized by object-directed action control in the dorsal region that automatically accompanies visual perception
of unfamiliar graphomotor images, whereas objects associated with mastered movements are recognized through retrieval of kinesthetic memory
stored in the ventral region closely connected to the middle temporal cortex
that is thought to be responsible for long-term memory.

2013 Annual Meeting

H130
AFFECTIVE REACTIONS AND FRAMING INERTIA IN AMBIGUOUS
RISK DECISION MAKING Paul Whitney1, Peter Rosen1, John Hinson1;
Washington State University — Framing choices in terms of gains or losses
has potent effects on risky decisions, but our understanding of framing
is based almost entirely on paradigms in which the precise probabilities
of options are explicitly provided. In contrast, many naturally occurring
risky decision scenarios have risks that are initially ambiguous. The present
study introduces a framed gambling task (FGT) that pits sure gains and
losses against a gamble option, in the form of a card chosen from one of
two decks containing gains and losses. One deck produces gains that on
average are superior to the sure gain, and the other produces losses that
are on average worse than the sure loss. From the earliest trials, choice data
showed the classic framing pattern: gambling when faced with a sure loss.
Participants also showed substantial framing inertia over trials, i.e., only a
modest ability to overcome framing and choose a sure loss instead of a card
from the bad deck. This inertia of frame-biased decision making occurred
even though knowledge probes revealed accurate estimation of average
outcomes of each deck. Finally, we used SCRs to assess affective reactions
during the task and obtained evidence for a specific SCR pattern associated with decisions to gamble on the bad deck once the risks are known.
The results indicate that framing-induced biases on risky choice are difficult to overcome with feedback, not because framing effects on information
accrual, but instead because of maladaptive weighting of options.
1

H131
BRAIN ACTIVITY MODULATIONS TRACK RATE OF EVIDENCE
DURING PROBABILISTIC REASONING Sarah Woo1,2, Scott Marek1,2,4,
Mark Wheeler1,2,3,4; 1University of Pittsburgh, 2Learning Research and Development Center, 3Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, 4Center for Neuroscience — The present study examined the timecourse of brain activity as
subjects integrated a sequence of probabilities informing a forced binary
choice. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to determine how evolving activity reflects the predictive sequences of probabilistic cues and how this pattern relates to choice. Subjects were first trained to
associate shapes with a preset probability favoring a colored target selection. Colored targets were counterbalanced between left and right hand
responses to eliminate motor effects. Following four training sessions,
subjects entered a scanned test phase in which they had to choose the colored target associated with the summed probabilities of a sequence of four
trained shapes. Sequences of probabilities were manipulated in three levels
of rate of evidence (ROE) -- rapid, gradual, or switch. ROE was defined
by stimulus sequences in which summed probabilities favoring one choice
would build rapidly, gradually, or switch after first favoring the other
choice. Based on previous studies, we predicted that activity in frontal and
parietal brain regions would track ROE, with effects occurring earlier for
rapid, later for gradual, and latest for switch trials. Inline with our predictions, we found that fMRI timecourses modulated with ROE such that
rapid trials showed the earliest onset, followed by gradual, then switch
trials, respectively. A hierarchical clustering analysis objectively grouped
ROE-modulated brain regions, including bilateral insula, bilateral primary
motor cortex, and temporal lobe regions. However, no parietal regions
demonstrated ROE-dependent activity. These findings suggest these brain
regions monitor evidence accrual during probabilistic decision-making.

H132
SPACE, TIME, AND CAUSALITY IN THE BRAIN: A TDCS STUDY
Adam J. Woods1, Anjan Chatterjee1, Alexander Kranjec2, Preet Minhaus3, Marom
Bikson3, Roy Hamilton1; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2Duquesne University, 3City
University of New York — The ability to infer causality is a central feature of
human cognition. Causal inferences are built upon elemental spatial and
temporal information. We previously reported that the parietal cortex contributes to spatial aspects of causal inference (Straube & Chatterjee, 2010)
while others report that the frontal cortices contribute to decision-making aspects of causal inference (Fonlupt, 2003). We tested the hypothesis
that the parietal cortex contributes to causal inference because of its role
in processing spatial relations, while frontal cortices contribute because of
their role in decision-making. Participants (n=16) underwent three transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) sessions, receiving 1.5 mA’s right
anode-left cathode stimulation for 20 minutes to frontal (F3/F4) or parietal

Poster Session H
cortices (CP3/CP4), or 30-second sham stimulation. Behaviorally, participants inferred causality before and during stimulation in billiard-ball style
launching events; a blue ball approaches and contacts a red ball. Spatial and
temporal inferences of causality were assessed separately by parametrically
varying the spatial trajectories and the temporal delays between objects.
Frontal and parietal stimulation significantly decreased the probability of
spatial causality judgments (Generalized Linear Model–Session x Location:
Χ2=6.4, p=.04; Frontal mean difference (MD)=6%, p=.003; Parietal MD=4%,
p=.02). Only frontal stimulation significantly decreased the probability
of temporal causality judgments (MD=4%, p=.04). Parietal stimulation
also significantly improved reaction time for spatial judgments (Χ2=15.7,
p<.001; MD=72ms, p<.001). Our results suggest that the parietal cortex contributes to causal inference because of its specific role in processing spatial
relations, while the role of the frontal cortices relates to their role in decision-making.

H133
BRAIN TO BANK: NEURAL PREDICTORS OF FINANCIAL RISK
TAKING Charlene Wu1, Brian Knutson1; 1Stanford University — Most people

will never win the lottery or contract a life-threatening illness, yet profits
of casinos and insurance companies indicate that individuals are willing to
pay a high premium for the potential to win big or cheat death. To explain
human financial risk taking, economics and finance focus on statistical
moments of mean and variance but typically ignore higher order moments
like skewness (i.e. large and asymmetric but unlikely outcomes). We used
neural activity not only to predict individuals’ skewed choices in the lab,
but also their real world financial outcomes. Subjects (n=16) chose between
risky gambles and certain options for real money while being scanned with
FMRI. Gambles were constructed such that all shared equal mean and variance, but differed only in terms of skewness (i.e., positive skew, negative
skew, symmetric). Localization analyses indicated that increased nucleus
accumbens (NAcc) and decreased anterior insula activation preceded risky
choices of all types. However, logistic regression indicated that the weight
of prediction from these regions varied by the type of risk: increased NAcc
activity most robustly predicted choice of positively skewed gambles,
whereas decreased anterior insula activity most robustly predicted choice
of negatively skewed gambles. Individuals who chose more risky gambles
and elicited more anticipatory NAcc activity also allocated less of their
total assets to their bank accounts. These predictive anticipatory patterns
of neural activation are consistent with an anticipatory affect account (Wu
et al., 2012) and may have real world consequences related to the allocation
of personal assets.

H134
THE PSYCHOLOGICAL AND NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF
SOCIAL NORMS IN MAKING A PURCHASE DECISION Ryoichi
Yokoyama1,2,4, Takayuki Nozawa1, Motoaki Sugiura1, Yukihito Yomogida3,4,
Hikaru Takeuchi1, Yoritaka Akimoto1, Ryuta Kawashima1; 1Tohoku University,
2
University of California, Berkeley, 3Tamagawa University, 4Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science — Social norms (SN) are important factors in decision
making. However, little research has been carried out on the mechanisms of
SN in purchase decision making. We conducted two experiments to reveal
the psychological and neural mechanisms of SN in purchase decision
making. In the first psychological study, 210 students rated 15 T-shirt stimuli with respect to 15 questions on purchase and SN using 8-point Likert
scale. A factor analysis and regression analysis were applied to elucidate
the relationship between “SN” and “buying impulse” in purchase decision
making. The results showed SN and buying impulse to be dissociable factors in which SN suppressed the effect of buying impulse in purchase decision making. In the second study, we investigated the neural bases of SN
in purchase decision making using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). 26 subjects were scanned while evaluating the extent to which
possession of a particular product violates SN. We used an event-related
design and conducted a parametric modulation analysis to find the regions
where activation correlates with the subjective rating of SN. 80 T-shirts
were used as stimuli. A significant positive correlation between activation
of the right temporal parietal junction (rTPJ) and subjective ratings of SN
was observed (p<0.001, corrected to p<0.05 at the cluster level). This result
suggests that normative thought activates the rTPJ when subjects consider

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

265

Poster Session H
buying a product that seems to be socially unacceptable. Combined with
our previous study of consumer neuroscience, these results will help in
constructing a comprehensive purchase decision making model.

H135
INTUITION- SOLELY A PHENOMENON OF IMPLICIT MEMORY
PROCESSING? Thea Zander1,2, Kirsten Volz1; 1Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, Tübingen, Germany, 2Graduate School of Neural and Behavioral Sciences, Tübingen, Germany — Starting from a conceptual level, definitions
of intuition and implicit memory appear in a very similar kind. For both
conceptions a non-conscious process having a positive influence on human
behavior is assumed. Thus, an important issue is whether intuitive decision-making is solely a phenomenon of implicit memory processing. More
precisely, this can be tested by comparing the neuronal correlates of intuitive decision-making and implicit memory processing. To that end, an fMRI
study is conducted that makes use of a semantic coherence task (Bowers et
al., 1990) and an additional priming procedure. Participants had to judge
the semantic coherence of presented word triads and were asked to find a
forth word, which might be a common concept of the three. By addressing
our research outline we derived three main hypotheses: a) Given that the
orbito-frontal cortex (OFC) is suggested as a candidate region involved in
intuitive processing (Volz and von Cramon, 2006), we expect this area to be
activated in the case of semantic intuition as well. b) An additional hypothesis is to find brain activation in the medial temporal gyrus for intuitive
decisions like a previous study suggests (Ilg et al., 2007). c) Concerning the
priming, a third hypothesis predicts an activity reduction in visual areas. In
order to allow for detecting activation within the OFC a spin echo sequence
is used. All our hypotheses were confirmed suggesting the OFC to play a
key role in intuitive processing. Intuition is thereby characterised by different neuronal mechanisms than implicit memory.

H136
DISSOCIABLE NEURAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING HONESTY
AND ALTRUISM Lusha Zhu1, Eric Set2, Donatella Scabini3, Robert T.
Knight3, Pearl H. Chiu1, Brooks King-Casas1,4, Ming Hsu3; 1Virginia Tech Carilion
Research Institute, 2University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, 3University of
California, Berkeley, 4Salem VA Medical Center — Both altruistic and honest
behaviors require individuals to consider factors beyond their self-interest.
How organisms are able to override their self-interest and undertake costly
altruistic or honest acts is of central importance to a number of disciplines
in the social and biological sciences, including evolutionary biology, moral
psychology, and economics. In humans, it is likely that such actions recruit
and rely upon the integrity of key neural systems involved in cognitive
control. It is therefore likely that core cognitive mechanisms are shared
between these types of behaviors. Here, using two sets of economic games,
we explored the causal role of key brain regions involved in cognitive control and value-based decision making in these behavior. Specifically, subjects made a series of choices that required tradeoffs between self-interest,
altruism, and honesty. We showed that patients with lesions to the DLPFC
made decisions that were consistent with altruism but showed little regard
for honesty. In contrast, patients with lesions to the OFC were sensitive to
concerns for both altruism and honesty, and were similar to healthy controls. These results provide causal evidence of dissociable cognitive mechanisms that underlie altruism and honesty.

266

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2013 Annual Meeting

Poster Topic Index
ATTENTION: Auditory

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Person perception

A1 – A6, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm
D1 – D6, Monday, April 15, 8:00 - 11:00 am

C32 – C40, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
D38 – D46, Monday, April 15, 8:00 - 11:00 am
E33 – E41, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
F36 – F45, Monday, April 15, 5:00 - 8:00 pm

ATTENTION: Development & aging
A7 – A13, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm
B1 – B6, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am
E1 – E5, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
F1 – F6, Monday, April 15, 5:00 - 8:00 pm

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Self perception
A34 – A40, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm
B36 – B42, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am

ATTENTION: Multisensory

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development & aging

C1 – C7, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

B43 – B51, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am
D47 – D54, Monday, April 15, 8:00 - 11:00 am
F46 – F53, Monday, April 15, 5:00 - 8:00 pm

ATTENTION: Nonspatial
C8 – C13, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
G1 – G6, Tuesday, April 16, 8:00 - 11:00 am

ATTENTION: Other
G7 – G14, Tuesday, April 16, 8:00 - 11:00 am
H1 – H11, Tuesday, April 16, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

ATTENTION: Spatial
B7 – B13, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am
D7 – D15, Monday, April 15, 8:00 - 11:00 am
E6 – E12, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
F7 – F14, Monday, April 15, 5:00 - 8:00 pm

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Development & aging
A14 – A20, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm
C14 – C20, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
E13 – E19, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition interactions
A21 – A33, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm
B14 – B27, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am
C21 – C31, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
D16 – D29, Monday, April 15, 8:00 - 11:00 am
E20 – E32, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
F15 – F28, Monday, April 15, 5:00 - 8:00 pm
G15 – G27, Tuesday, April 16, 8:00 - 11:00 am
H13 – H24, Tuesday, April 16, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional responding
B28 – B35, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am
D30 – D37, Monday, April 15, 8:00 - 11:00 am
F29 – F35, Monday, April 15, 5:00 - 8:00 pm
G28 – G35, Tuesday, April 16, 8:00 - 11:00 am
H25 – H30, Tuesday, April 16, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Other
C100, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
G36 – G45, Tuesday, April 16, 8:00 - 11:00 am
H31 – H40, Tuesday, April 16, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Goal maintenance &
switching
A41 – A50, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm
C42 – C49, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring & inhibitory
control
A51 – A56, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm
B52 – B58, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am
C50 – C56, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
D55 – D60, Monday, April 15, 8:00 - 11:00 am
E42 – E49, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
F54 – F60, Monday, April 15, 5:00 - 8:00 pm
G46 – G52, Tuesday, April 16, 8:00 - 11:00 am
H41 – H47, Tuesday, April 16, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Other
E50 – E55, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
G53 – G58, Tuesday, April 16, 8:00 - 11:00 am
H48 – H54, Tuesday, April 16, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working memory
A57– A62, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm
B59 – B65, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am
C57 – C62, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
D61 – D67, Monday, April 15, 8:00 - 11:00 am
E56 – E61, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
F61 – F67, Monday, April 15, 5:00 - 8:00 pm
G59 – G64, Tuesday, April 16, 8:00 - 11:00 am
H55 – H61, Tuesday, April 16, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
B72, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am
G65 – G72, Tuesday, April 16, 8:00 - 11:00 am
H62 – H70, Tuesday, April 16, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

LANGUAGE: Lexicon
A63 – A70, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm
C63 – C70, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
E62 – E69, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

267

Poster Topic Index

2013 Annual Meeting

LANGUAGE: Other

METHODS: Other

A71 – A78, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm
B66 – B71, B73 – B75, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am
C71 – C78, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
D68 – D77, Monday, April 15, 8:00 - 11:00 am
F68 – F77, Monday, April 15, 5:00 - 8:00 pm

E110 – E114, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

LANGUAGE: Semantic

A112 – A119, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm
C109 – C116, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
E115 – E121, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

A79 – A86, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm
B76 – B83, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am
D78 – D85, Monday, April 15, 8:00 - 11:00 am
E70 – E77, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
F78 – F85, Monday, April 15, 5:00 - 8:00 pm

LANGUAGE: Syntax
G73 – G79, Tuesday, April 16, 8:00 - 11:00 am
H71 – H78, Tuesday, April 16, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Development & aging
C79 – C84, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
D86 – D91, Monday, April 15, 8:00 - 11:00 am
E78 – E83, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
F86 – F91, Monday, April 15, 5:00 - 8:00 pm
G80 – G86, Tuesday, April 16, 8:00 - 11:00 am
H79 – H85, Tuesday, April 16, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
A87 – A98, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm
B84 – B97, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am
C85 – C99, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
D92 – D104, Monday, April 15, 8:00 - 11:00 am
E84 – E98, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
F92 – F104, Monday, April 15, 5:00 - 8:00 pm
G87 – G98, Tuesday, April 16, 8:00 - 11:00 am
H86 – H98, Tuesday, April 16, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Other
B98 – B104, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am
C101 – C108, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Priming
B105 – B109, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Semantic
A99 – A103, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm
E99 – E104, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Skill learning
G99 – G104, Tuesday, April 16, 8:00 - 11:00 am
H99 – H104, Tuesday, April 16, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

METHODS: Electrophysiology
D105 – D112, Monday, April 15, 8:00 - 11:00 am
E105 – E109, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

METHODS: Neuroimaging
F105 – F111, Monday, April 15, 5:00 - 8:00 pm
G105 – G111, Tuesday, April 16, 8:00 - 11:00 am
H12, H105 – H111, Tuesday, April 16, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

268

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

NEUROANATOMY
A104 – A111, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Development & aging
A120 – A127, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control
B110 – B120, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am
C117 – C123, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Multisensory
B121 – B128, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am
D113 – D120, Monday, April 15, 8:00 - 11:00 am
E122 – E130, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Other
F112 – F118, Monday, April 15, 5:00 - 8:00 pm
H112 – H118, Tuesday, April 16, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
D121 – D128, Monday, April 15, 8:00 - 11:00 am
F119 – F129, Monday, April 15, 5:00 - 8:00 pm
G112 – G123, Tuesday, April 16, 8:00 - 11:00 am
H119 – H129, Tuesday, April 16, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

THINKING: Decision making
A128 – A134, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm
B129 – B135, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am
C124 – C131, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
D129 – D135, Monday, April 15, 8:00 - 11:00 am
E131 – E137, Monday, April 15, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
F130 – F136, Monday, April 15, 5:00 - 8:00 pm
G124 – G130, Tuesday, April 16, 8:00 - 11:00 am
H130 – H136, Tuesday, April 16, 1:30 - 4:30 pm

THINKING: Development & aging
C132 – C137, Sunday, April 14, 1:30 - 4:30 pm
D136 – D140, Monday, April 15, 8:00 - 11:00 am

THINKING: Other
B136 – B142, Sunday, April 14, 8:00 - 11:00 am

THINKING: Problem solving
A135 – A141, Saturday, April 13, 3:30 - 6:30 pm

THINKING: Reasoning
G131 – G139, Tuesday, April 16, 8:00 - 11:00 am

Author Index
A
Abdi, H 57, 258
Abduljalil, A 249
Abellanoza, C 49
Abel, MK 115
Abigail, M 210
Abrahamse, E 102
Acheson, D 42
Adcock, A 257
Adcock, RA 79, 183, 227
Addante, RJ 50
Addis, D 197
Addis, DR 80, 110, 168
Adnan, A 201
Adolfsson, R 140
Agnew, Z 84
Ahlheim, C 203
Ahmad, F 108, 170
Ahn, HM 36, 125, 214
Ahn, S-H 69
Ahveninen, J 55
Aigeldinger, S 247
Aimola Davies, A 169
Ajilore, O 35
Akimoto, Y 265
Alain, C 32, 56, 57, 74, 132
Alawi, EM 36
Albert, M 255
Albert, N 229
Albright, T 78, 143
Alcalay, RN 116
Alcorn, J 36
Ales, J 146
Alexander, J 58
Alexander, R 58
Alexander, W 42, 132
Algaze-Beato, A 191
AlHashimi, O 93
Allen, AK 40, 88
Allen Pettigrew, C 255
Allison, J 131
Almas, R 43
Almasy, L 90
Aloysi, A 139
Alperin, B 33, 151
Al-rasheed, A 146
Alston, LL 67
Altman, M 146, 246
Alves, RdCS 184
Aly, M 51, 203
Amaral, LAN 260
Amsel, BD 48
Anderl, C 218
Anderson, A 184, 188
Anderson, AK 129
Anderson, S 106, 174, 175
Andersson, A 75
Andersson, M 114
Andics, A 98
Andoh, J 94
Andreas, M 186
Andreatta, M 172
Andrews, C 237
Andrews-Hanna, J 50, 68,
192
Andric, M 55

Anguera, J 33, 93, 238
Anjan, C 49
Ankeny, LD 161
Annoni, J-M 73
Antia, U 113
Anticevic, A 240
Antony, JW 113
Appelbaum, L 260
Appelbaum, LG 102, 208
Appelgren, A 39
Apple, A 228
Applegate, MC 79
Arbel, Y 32, 248
Arduino, LS 182
Arheart, K 202
Aristei, S 78
Ariza, A 107
Armbruster, DJN 40
Armony, J 230
Armstrong, C 108
Arnold, A 43, 245
Arteaga, DF 67
Art, K 162
Ashar, Y 68
Ashby, G 229
Asherson, P 210
Ashimi, S 237
Ashkenazi, S 135
Ashley, V 218
Ashwin, E 186
Aslan, S 70
Aslin, R 56
Asplund, C 240
Astle, D 180
Astle, DE 134
Atherton, K 108
Atkin, D 84
Atkins, SM 43
Atlas, LY 202
Attias, HT 260
Atzil, S 68
Auyeung, B 186
Avery, JA 40
Avery, T 87
Aydelott, J 47
Aziz-Zadeh, L 69, 213

B
Bach, D 216
Baciu, M 96, 169
Backer, KC 32
Bäckman, L 140, 255
Badcock, N 51
Badre, D 41, 53, 100, 161,
170, 200
Baena, E 108, 227
Baetens, K 188
Bagattini, C 234
Bahri, MA 50
Bai, H 160
Baijal, S 125
Bailey, H 109
Bajema, M 143
Baker, L 69
Baker, T 143
Baldassano, C 146

Baldo, MVC 38
Banich, M 50, 192, 214, 218
Banz, B 143
Baptista, N 48
Baran, B 37
Barbara, T 144
Bar-David, E 228
Bardolph, MD 48
Barense, MD 114
Barkovich, AJ 194
Barnes, G 143
Barnes, LN 145
Baron, CA 128
Baron-Cohen, S 186, 217
Baron, S 130
Barredo, J 53
Barrett, LF 40, 148
Bartlett, J 80
Bartolomeo, P 63
Bartolotti, J 44
Barton, B 55, 56, 175
Bartoshuk, L 243
Bastarrika, A 143
Basten, U 40, 161
Bastidas, S 98, 158
Bastin, C 50
Batterink, L 224
Bäuchl, C 82, 111
Bauer, P 111
Baumeister, J-C 37, 217
Bavelier, D 123, 232
Bayle, D 63
Bayliss, JD 232
Beach, SD 222, 223
Beadle, J 34
Beam, E 260
Beaton, D 57, 258
Beatty, EL 68
Beaucousin, V 182
Bechara, A 89
Beck, D 205
Beck, DM 146, 205, 263
Becker, E 125
Beckett, L 62
Beck, KD 213
Bedo, N 146
Beeman, M 211, 240
Beevers, CG 59, 126
Behmer Jr., LP 85
Behrmann, M 152
Beilock, SL 156
Bekkering, H 147, 262
Belfi, A 109, 154
Belleau, EL 162
Bellebaum, C 171, 207
Belletier, C 73
Belleville, S 122, 225
Belliveau, JW 55
Bell, MC 139
Bell, T 34
Bell, TA 121
Bellugi, U 154, 245
Bemis, D 196
Benasich, A 223
Benasich, AA 251
Bender, AR 139
Bender, HA 139

Bengson, J 63
Bengtsson, SL 39
Benjamin, C 50
Bennemann, J 93
Bennett, C 198
Bennion, K 37
Bentvelzen, A 51
Ben-Zeev, A 100, 157
Bercovitz, KE 139
Berends, SM 252
Berger, CC 87
Bergmann, C 252
Bergström, F 74
Berkman, E 97
Berkman, ET 160
Berlim, M 230
Berman, G 34
Berman, KF 259
Bernd, F 235
Bernhard, R 58
Berntsen, D 110
Berry, A 93
Berry, AS 92
Berryhill, M 82, 147, 238
Berryhill, ME 163
Berteau, S 203
Beversdorf, D 217
Beversdorf, DQ 97, 260
Bhanji, JP 66
Bharani, KL 190, 225
Bhat, J 87
Bhattacharjee, N 134
Bhavsar, S 36
Bidelman, G 57, 132
Bielser, M-L 263
Bigand, E 225
Bikson, M 265
Bilker, W 90
Binkofski, F 132, 247
Bird-Ritchie, T 110
Black, J 223, 237
Black, JM 154
Black, M 257
Blair, C 147
Blair, KS 17
Blaisdell, JA 162
Blakely, RD 93
Blakemore, S-J 153
Blalock, A 48
Blanco-Hinojo, L 261
Blankenship, S 139
Bliss, D 53
Bliss-Moreau, E 39
Bloch, J 259
Block, P 35
Blumenfeld, R 53
Blundon, E 175
Bobell, R 259
Bobilev, A 248
Boehler, CN 192
Boehm, SG 250
Boets, B 75
Boggio, P 48, 106
Bo, J 44, 86
Boksem, MAS 208
Boldt, A 58
Bolger, DJ 43

Bonnefond, M 106
Boon, P 207, 246
Booth, J 76
Booth, JR 260
Borders, A 51
Born, J 52
Borst, G 42, 43
Bossmann, J 112
Boster, A 96, 249
Boswell, RG 246
Botezatu, MR 75
Botros, A 205
Bott, N 40, 244
Bouazzaoui, B 112
Boucher, O 51
Boudewyn, M 48
Boudewyn, MA 48
Bougerol, T 96
Bourguignon, N 77
Bourne, S 179
Bourque, J 156
Bowen, K 33
Bowers, J 196
Bow, L 88
Bowles, AR 76
Bowles, B 51, 81
Bowman, CR 140
Boyd, R 54
Braams, BR 35
Bradley, B 243
Bradley, K 44, 137
Bradley, MM 257
Brady, N 51
Braem, S 37
Brandmeyer, A 55
Brandstatt, K 52
Brang, D 87
Brashier, N 37
Brass, M 126, 133
Bray, S 43
Brazil, I 65
Brazzarola, M 248
Brehmer, Y 140, 255
Breiner, K 38
Brekke, B 92
Brentano, L 103
Breska, A 93
Breton, A 165
Brewer, A 56, 175
Brewer, AA 55
Brickman, A 255
Bridge, DJ 52
Bridgman, K 62
Briggs-Gowan, M 34
Briggs, R 80
Bright, P 44
Brignani, D 234
Brignoni-Perez, E 215
Brinkman, T 220
Brinkman, TM 71
Brisson, RJ 236
Brizante, J 38
Brooks, GT 78
Brookshire, G 38
Brooks, J 35, 94
Brooks, T 45
Brosch, T 129

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

269

Author Index
Brouwer, S 252
Brown, C 107, 120
Browndyke, J 197
Brown, E 194
Brown, J 42, 132, 162
Brown, JW 89, 127
Brown, MRG 234
Brown-Schmidt, S 83
Brugger, P 73
Brumbaugh, M 240
Brunner, M 107
Bruno, J 216, 251
Bruyneel, S 178
Bryant, DC 203
Buchsbaum, B 56, 74, 193
Buchsbaum, BR 227
Buckert, M 59
Buckholtz, J 240
Buckholtz, JW 67
Buckley, T 227
Buhle, JT 241
Buis, B 107
Buitelaar, J 54
Bukshpun, P 194
Bullmore, E 186
Bullock, D 203
Bulten, B 65
Bunge, S 198
Bunge, SA 236, 255
Bunting, MF 43
Buratto, LG 79, 241
Burden, MJ 51
Burianova, H 85
Burke, DM 223
Burnett Heyes, S 35
Burns, R 231
Butler, A 86
Butler, C 108
Butler, CR 169
Butorina, A 196
Butterworth, B 134
Buxbaum, L 53, 220
Buxbaum, LJ 262
Buzzell, G 43, 209
Byrne, KA 59

C
Cabeza, R 35, 37, 62, 110,
112, 167
Cacciaglia, R 169
Cacciari, C 254
Cachia, A 43
Cadena, E 215
Caffarra, S 254
Caggiano, D 44
Cahill, L 67, 83, 232
Cai, Q 105
Çakır, MP 103
Calcott, R 97
Calhoun, V 209, 261
Calvo-Merino, B 215
CamCAN, 222
Campanella, C 38, 111
Campbell, A 143
Campbell, K 200
Campos, V 263
Cannon, G 56
Canseco-Gonzalez, E 76,
107
Cantlon, J 119
Cantlon, JF 61

270

2013 Annual Meeting
Cao, F 76
Capestany, BH 99
Caplan, J 147
Caplan, JB 79, 156
Caplovitz, GP 145
Cappa, S 171
Cappelletti, M 173
Caramazza, A 53
Carbonnell, L 73
Cardillo, E 49
Carlson, J 64
Carmichael, O 62
Carp, J 201
Carrasco, J 90, 91, 236
Carrasco, M 126, 159
Carrasco-Ortiz, H 45
Carreiras, M 45, 135, 165,
166, 189
Carroll, E 44
Carroll, KM 73
Carson, AM 159
Carson, N 166
Carter, C 199
Carter, O 176
Casado, P 78, 225, 252
Casado, P 224
Casaponsa, A 45
Casasanto, D 38
Case, L 87
Casey, BJ 29, 89, 235
Cashdollar, N 94
Cassotti, M 182
Castel, AD 80
Castellanos, FX 231
Caulfield, MD 68
Caywood, M 202, 249
Ceballos, N 211
Cepeda, NJ 257
Cervantez, M 172
Chabal, S 44
Chadick, J 250
Chaiyakam, P 174
Cha, J 64
Chakrabarti, B 158, 186
Chambers, C 63
Chancellor-Freeland, C 181
Chandregowda, A 32
Chanes, L 147, 182
Chang, C-T 224
Chang, E 88
Chang, L 65
Chang, LJ 96, 261
Chang, S 90
Chang, T-T 119
Chang, Y-C 224
Chang, Y-N 49
Chan, M 64
Chan, SCY 79
Chan, S-h 224
Chapman, C 151
Chapman, CS 70
Chapman, S 70, 149, 206,
237
Chapman, SB 236
Chaponis, J 58
Charlton, R 35
Charney, D 33, 185
Chatham, C 161
Chatterjee, A 79, 165, 265
Chauvin, A 206, 233
Chauvin, J 63
Chavez, R 39

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Cheetham, E 63
Chelazzi, L 92
Chelnokova, O 216
Chen, A 123, 237
Chen, H-C 137
Chen, J 64
Chen, J-C 167
Chen, P-H 68
Chen, P-w 88
Chen, S 95, 242
Chen, T 119
Chen, T-F 167
Chen, W-F 76
Chen, Y 43
Chen, Y-F 167
Chen, Y-P 59
Chen, YY 79
Cheung, B 231
Chevalier, N 154
Chew, S 234
Chiang, H-S 149
Chiao, JY 156
Chiarello, C 54
Chica, A 63
Chick, C 59
Chi, L 131
Chiong, W 206
Chiu, M-J 167
Chiu, PH 119, 266
Choles, J 72
Choles, JR 67
Cho, R 102
Cho, S 90
Chou, C-J 49, 224
Chou, D 112
Choudhury, N 223
Chou, I-C 127
Chow, T 74
Christakou, A 148, 207
Christie, G 64, 152
Christine, A 178
Christodoulou, J 231
Christoff, K 41, 103
Christoforidis, K 103
Christ, S 217
Christ, SE 97, 260
Chromik, L 251
Chrysikou, EG 59, 242
Chua, E 39
Chuang, B-A 127
Chun, C 88
Chun, Y 88
Chura, L 217
Chwilla, D 65, 78, 107
Cid de Garcia, D 45
Ciesielski, B 242
Cisler, D 132
Clanon, J 180
Clark, D 243
Clarke, A 52
Clarke, E 132, 190
Clark, R 109
Clasen, LS 153
Clement, N 79
Clepper, L 166
Cloutier, J 100, 129
Coch, D 218
Cochran, J 72
Coderre, E 77
Cohen Kadosh, K 120
Cohen Kadosh, R 90, 120,
173, 177

Cohen, M 239
Cohen, MS 80
Cohen, MX 122, 248
Cohen, R 103
Cohn, J 44
Cohn, N 77
Cojan, Y 117
Colbert, A 44
Colcombe, S 231
Cole, D 123
Cole, M 240
Coleman, T 143
Colflesh, G 44
Collard, P 39
Collette, F 50
Collignon, O 54
Collins, A 161
Collins, B 54, 221
Colombe, J 202, 249
Colquhoun, T 243
Connelly, J 130
Connolly, J 229
Conover, H 171
Constantinidis, C 26
Contreras, JM 53
Contreras-Rodriguez, O
261
Conway, CM 161
Cooke, G 109, 154
Cook, P 82
Cook, S 144
Cookson, S 41
Cools, R 11
Cooper, C 80
Cooper, E 197
Cooper, J 71
Cooper, JA 59
Cooper, K 251
Cooper, SR 64, 133
Coppin, G 184
Cordes, J 36
Corley, M 195
Cornwell, B 185
Corradi-Dell’Acqua, C 184
Correll, J 129
Coslett, HB 145
Costa, A 164, 165
Costa, R 72
Costa, RE 67
Cottereau, BR 146
Cotter, J 159
Coulson, S 49, 77, 144
Coulter, CM 222
Couperus, J 33
Coutinho, E 48
Cowell, RA 114
Coxon, J 102
Craddock, C 231
Craik, F 193
Creery, JC 113
Creery, JD 36
Cribben, I 202
Crocker, L 184
Crognale, M 204
Crone, E 191
Crone, EA 35, 189, 245
Cronin-Golomb, A 212
Cross, E 99
Cross, K 73
Crossley, M 229
Crosson, B 86
Cruikshank, L 147

Cullum, M 171
Cunningham, W 118
Curran, T 141, 169
Curtiss, K 78
Cyr, AB 222, 223
Czernochowski, D 71
Czisch, M 141

D
Dabit, S 65, 123, 152, 181
Daffner, K 33, 151
Dagher, A 212
Dahlben, B 34
Dahl, C 160
Daily, A 54
Daini, R 182
Dale, CL 64, 133
Dalla Barba, G 142, 248
Damasio, H 106, 174
Daniel, A 204
Dan, P 83
Danton, W 204
Dao, C 259
Dapretto, M 129
Das, A 234
Dastjerdi, M 262
Daugherty, AM 139
D’Aunno, K 190
Dauwe, I 246
Davachi, L 18, 81, 228
Davalos, D 143
D’Avanzo, T 190
Davenport, TS 49
Davey, C 44
David, IPA 184
Davidow, JY 167
Davidson, D 143
Davidson, P 200
Davidson, R 160, 243
Davidson, RJ 16, 127, 186
Davies, I 146
Davis, B 193, 202
Davis, C 131
Davis, J 77
Davis, M 136
Davis, S 35, 62, 110
Davis, SW 222
Davis, T 242
Davranche, K 73, 133
Daw, N 178
Dawson, ME 69
de Bruijn, E 65
de Bruijn, ERA 147
De Bruijn, ERA 215
Debruille, JB 39
DeCarli, C 62, 189
Decarlo, D 151
Decety, J 214
de Chastelaine, M 167, 258
De Chastelaine, M 50
Deckert, J 149, 158, 172
Dede, A 80
DeGutis, J 123
Dehaene-Lambertz, G 17
Dehmelt, V 45
de la Fuente, JM 262
Delaney-Busch, N 46, 65,
138
de Lange, F 99, 262
De Leon, A 94
DeLeone, CM 73

2013 Annual Meeting
Delgado, M 235
Delgado, MR 66, 96
Dellert, T 125
Deller, W 71
Dellwo, V 195
DeLong, KA 48
Delorme, A 230
Delplanque, S 184
Del Tufo, S 135
Del Tufo, SN 46
De Luca, M 182
Demanet, J 133, 192
Demeter, E 93
Demeyere, N 152
Demirakca, T 169
Demopoulos, C 251
Demos, K 103
Denburg, N 120
Denburg, NL 89
Deng, Z 252
Denison, R 176
Dennis, NA 140, 199
Dennison, S 82
Denny, K 202
Densmore, M 209
Denys, D 239
Deouell, LY 93
Derakhshan, N 66
Derrfuss, J 96
Desain, P 55
Desantis, A 204
De Schuymer, M 102
De Simone, L 58, 144
D’Esposito, M 53, 74
Desrochers, T 41
De Taeye, L 207, 246
Deus, J 261
Devaney, J 214
de Vega, M 224
Devereux, B 52
Devitt, A 80
De Vos, F 264
Dew, I 37, 167
DeYoung, CG 220
Diana, R 50
Diana, RA 112
Dias, N 36
Diaz, MT 222, 223
Dick, FK 114
Dickson, DS 46
Didebhani, N 171
Didehbani, N 70
Didino, D 134, 173
Dieguez, S 73
Diekelmann, S 52
Diener, C 82, 111
Dien, J 60, 76
Dierolf, A 73
diFilipo, D 95
Di Francesco, SA 152
Dikker, S 46
Dillon, D 66
Di Martino, A 231
Dimidjian, S 68
Dimigen, O 143
Ding, Y 264
Disner, S 126
Dixon, M 41
Dixon, ML 103
Dixon, P 84
Doane, S 160
Dobbins, I 66, 141

Author Index
Dobel, C 36, 45, 125
Dodwell, G 210
Doeller, C 155
Doherty, S 88
Doig, C 249
Dolan, B 159
Dolan, R 216
Dolcos, F 66, 124, 126, 127,
157, 213
Dolcos, S 66, 124, 126, 157
Dombovy, M 171
Domschke, K 158
Donaldson, D 168
Donaldson, DI 168, 170,
195
Donchin, E 32, 104, 215,
248
Donohue, SE 102
Donovan, C-L 229
Doss, MK 81
Doucerain, M 88
Dougherty, MR 43
Downer, J 56, 121
Downing, P 111
Downing, PE 263
Draghici, A 99
Dresler, M 141
Dresler, T 149, 172
Drew, AR 144
Dr. MacKinnon, SN 174
Drury, J 77, 197
Drury, JE 253
Dubal, S 216
Dube, A-A 204
DuBrow, S 81
Duff, M 81, 83, 172
Duff, MC 28
Duffy, K 227
Duke, D 81
Duñabeitia, JA 45, 135
Dunbar, K 237
Duncan, C 204
Duncan, K 81, 228
Dungan, J 188
Dupont, P 153
Duret, A-E 216
Duta, M 90
Duthoo, W 102
Du, Y 56
Duysens, J 102
Dwivedi, V 78
Dyck, M 36
Dye, C 229
Dyson, B 175, 190, 204

E
Ebner, N 67
Ebstein, R 234
Eckles, LM 117
Eddy, M 105, 144
Edelmann, M 220
Edelmann, MN 71
Eden, A 36, 125
Egli, L 263
Egner, T 37, 133, 209, 219
Ehrsson, HH 87
Eichenbaum, H 19
Eickhoff, SB 204
Eikemo, M 216
Eimer, M 239
Eisenberg, D 259

Ekanayake, J 205
Ekeh, B 213
Ekstrom, A 141, 201, 227
Eleopra, R 58
Elias, L 123, 137, 263
El Karoui, I 103
Elke, S 71
Ellen, L 83
Elliott, M 90
Ellis, JA 148
Ellis, L 72
Ellis, LK 67
Ellis, R 155
Ellmore, TM 137
Ell, SW 230
Elshiekh, A 130
Ely, T 243
Emberson, L 56
Emerson, R 119
Emery, AC 264
Emily, F 80
Emmorey, K 46, 196
Emrich, SM 134
Endris, L 225
Engels, RCMS 147
Enns, JT 70
Erickson, K 134, 162
Erickson, KI 70
Eriksen, R 73
Eriksson, J 74, 82, 114
Ernst, M 185
Eroh, J 149
Ertman, N 67
Escande, Y 216
Eskandar, E 179
Esopenko, C 74
Espy, KA 154
Essers, LPM 57
Essoe, JK-Y 33
Esterman, M 182
Etienne, C 262
Ettinger, A 135
Evans, J 63
Evans, L 82
Eva, S 135
Evelyn, G-S 186
Evenson, N 236

F
Fabiani, M 54
Fairey, J 85
Falcone, B 74
Fang, H 154
Fani, N 243
Fanning, JL 75
Fanucci, K 138
Fan, Y 252
Faragó, T 98
Farah, MJ 29
Fareri, DS 96
Farris, E 222
Fassbender, C 191
Favre, P 96
Fechtner, J 73
Federmeier, K 17, 53
Federmeier, KD 46, 106,
252
Fedota, J 41, 43, 209
Fegen, D 74
Feher, M 149
Fehr, E 154

Fei-Fei, L 146, 205
Feld, GB 52
Feldman Barrett, L 68, 243
Feldman, HG 34
Fellows, L 89
Fellows, LK 88, 219
Felton, A 54, 60
Fennelly, D 209
Ferber, S 241
Feredoes, E 74
Ferguson, B 217
Ferguson, BJ 97
Feria, C 181
Fernandes Jr, O 184
Fernandes, M 108
Fernandez Cruz, AL 39
Fernandez, T 238
Fias, W 188, 207, 235, 264
Fiebach, C 59, 75
Fiebach, CJ 40, 96, 121, 161
Fields, M 139
Fiez, JA 115
Fillmore, P 56
Filoteo, JV 230
Findlay, A 194
Findlay, AM 64, 133
Finger, I 103
Finn, A 229
Finnegan, M 204
Fischer-Baum, S 46
Fischer, C 43
Fischer, H 67
Fischer, L 148
Fisher, M 108
Fisher, S 17
Fitzgibbon, K 101
Fivush, R 111
Flaherty, A 179
Flanagan, JG 129
Flannery, J 95
Flax, S 107
Fletcher, M 54
Florczak, SM 36
Flores, R 91, 236
Flores, S 109
Flor, H 82, 111, 169
Floris, D 217
Flygare, O 127
Föcker, J 123
Foerde, K 167
Fogel, AR 46
Fogelson, S 221
Fogerty, D 56
Fondevila, S 78, 225, 252
Fondevila, S 224
Fonteneau, E 105
Fontes, AB 103
Ford, B 242
Ford, C 261
Ford, J 167, 197
Forgács, B 48
Forman-Alberti, A 149
Foroni, F 37, 217
Forster, B 215
Forster, S 210
Foster, BL 109, 262
Foster, C 197
Foundas, A 47
Fournier, LR 85
Fox, K 41
Fox, KCR 103
Frances, C 158

Franke, B 54
Frank, M 100, 161
Frankort, A 217
Frank, S 118, 233
Frantz, J 90, 91, 236
Fraser, D 229
Freeman, A 54
Freigang, C 93
Frewen, P 209
Fridriksson, J 56
Fried, I 141
Frisch, C 195
Frishkoff, G 78, 238
Frishkoff, GA 173
Frithsen, A 109
Fritz, N 159
Froud, K 87, 136, 225, 237
Fruchter, J 195
Fryer, K 212
Fuchs, L 60
Fugelsang, J 170
Fujiwara, E 67, 156
Fu, K 213
Fukunaga, R 89
Fukuyama, H 84
Fuller, J 237
Funes, MJ 219
Fung, R 78, 143
Furber, S 49

G
Gaab, N 222, 223
Gabard-Durnam, L 95
Gabay, S 152
Gabay, Y 114
Gabbitas-Cowell, RA 130
Gaber, T 36
Gabrieli, J 148
Gabrieli, JDE 131, 222, 223
Gácsi, M 98
Gage, FH 7
Gallagher, P 58
Gallagher, RS 90
Gallant, J 24
Gallegos, J 123, 152, 181
Galli, A 96
Galli, G 258
Galvan, A 38
Galván, A 153, 167
Gamble, KR 34
Gamble, ML 32
Gandy, S 139
Ganesh, S 99
Gansler, D 39
Ganushchak, LA 164
Garagnani, M 136
Garcea, FE 171
Garcia, AC 162
Garcia, AN 84
Garcia, F 225
Garcia-Fontanals, A 261
Garcia Gomar, ML 144
García-Milla, M 252
Garcia, P 136
Garcia, X 165
Garr, A 89
Garrett, A 216
Garrett, K 49
Gary, D 204
Gaspar, J 152
Gaudet, E 107

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

271

Author Index
Gazzaley, A 33, 93, 123,
180, 238, 250
Gebuis, T 233
Gee, D 95
Gee, DG 95
Geena, I 49
Geerts, H 75
Gehring, WJ 117, 126, 159
Geisler, MW 100, 157, 162,
193
Geneviève, A 262
Geng, J 62
Genon, S 50
Gentile, F 158
George, N 142
George, T 60
Gerlach, K 91
Geschwind, M 163
Gessaroli, E 173
Getov, S 205
Geyer, A 44
Ghesquière, P 75
Ghetti, S 171, 198, 255
Gibson, L 153
Gidwitz, B 96
Giedd, JN 153
Gigler, KL 36
Gilbertson, MW 213
Gilboa, A 81
Gilchrist, I 62
Gil da Costa, R 143
Gil-da-Costa, R 78
Gillebert, C 75
Gillebert, CR 153
Gill, N 123
Gimenez-Navarro, M 261
Giovanello, K 197, 254
Giovanna, M 83
Gisladottir, R 78
Gittleson, A 174
Giuliani, N 97
Giuliano, R 32
Giuseppe, V 144
Given, B 139
Glahn, D 240
Glasenberg, J 257
Glass, BD 230
Glatt, C 89
Glerean, E 97, 183
Glezer, LS 205
Glimcher, P 21
Glizer, D 104
Glover, E 243
Glynn, P 203
Goate, A 109
Göbel, SM 84
Goddings, A-L 153
Godwin, CA 162
Goebel, R 218
Goethals, I 264
Goff, B 95
Goharzad, A 67, 233
Gökçay, D 103
Goksun, T 79
Golarai, G 205
Golby, A 260
Goldin-Meadow, S 144
Goldman, R 215
Goldstein, M 139
Golkar, A 127, 155, 157,
158, 246
Golle, J 99

272

2013 Annual Meeting
Gollub, R 230
Golob, E 33, 47
Gomez, R 114
Gomez, RL 170
Gonsalves, B 111, 258
Gonzalez, A 109
Gonzalez, C 86, 177
Gonzalez, CLR 203
Goodrich, RI 100
Goodwin, C 215
Gordon, BA 197
Gordon, R 136
Gorlick, M 72
Gosavi, R 87
Gospic, K 158
Gotsopoulos, A 183
Gough, A 101
Govind, V 202
Gowland, PA 169
Gözenman, F 82, 103
Grabowecky, M 87, 93,
182, 211, 233
Grady, C 56
Grafton, S 220
Graham, AM 121
Graham, K 111, 113, 201
Graham, KS 263
Graham, M 151
Graham, R 156, 211
Grainger, J 45, 105, 144,
163, 164
Grammer, JK 126, 159
Gratton, G 54
Graulty, C 107
Graves, L 172
Gray, JR 220
Gray, T 203
Green, A 172
Green, AE 220
Greenberg, Z 123
Green, DJ 67
Greene, J 58
Greene, M 205
Greene, MR 205
Green, JL 257
Green, SR 127
Greenwald, H 202, 249
Greenwood, P 41, 132
Greenwood, PM 190, 221
Grey, S 136
Grillon, C 185
Grill-Spector, K 205
Grindstaff, T 58
Grose-Fifer, J 95, 119, 153
Gross, J 16
Grossman, M 257
Gruber, A 178
Grundy, JG 145
Grunewald, K 60
Grupe, DW 127
Grzybowski, S 242
Gu, C 136
Gudenkauf, J 89
Guerra, S 189
Gu, F 164
Gugel, M 238
Guhn, A 172
Guild, R 214
Guillaume, B 50
Guiney, H 159
Guitart Masip, M 216
Gulland, F 82

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Gullick, MM 236
Gunnar, MR 130
Gunter, T 121
Güntürkün, O 148
Guroglu, B 97
Güroğlu, B 35, 245
Gur, R 90, 91
Gutchess, AH 34
Gutierrez, E 136
Guyader, N 206, 233
Guzman-Martinez, E 233
Gyurovski, I 100

H
Haarmann, H 60
Haase, L 128
Haber, S 72
Habes, I 218
Habhab, SN 117
Hach, S 110
Hackett, G 186
Haese, A 71
Haesevoets, R 143
Hagoort, P 17, 18, 42
Hahn, T 218
Hajcak, G 64
Hajihosseini, A 186
HajiHosseini, A 173
Hakun, J 104
Halfmann, K 89
Hall, S 110, 251
Halper, N 72
Halwani, G 115
Hämäläinen, JA 251
Hamalainen, M 138
Hamann, S 38, 111, 125
Hambrook, DA 32
Hamilton, AC 137
Hamilton, G 174
Hamilton, R 265
Hamm, J 113
Hamoudi, A 219
Hanakawa, T 264
Hanayik, T 56
Han, C-C 104, 134
Handy, T 39, 151, 210
Handy, TC 70
Hannula, D 110, 199
Han, S 69, 70, 118, 128, 172,
201, 241
Hansen, LK 260
Hanson, GK 59
Han, SW 94
Hao, N 230
Harada, T 156
Harasawa, M 33
Hardee, JE 41
Hari, R 183
Harlow, IM 110
Harmon-Jones, E 64
Harmony, T 144
Harms, V 137
Harris, A 89
Harris, LT 99, 129
Harrison, A 206
Harrison, BJ 261
Harrison, N 155
Harry, B 263
Hart, J 70
Hart Jr., J 171
Hart, Jr., J 149

Hartley, A 92
Hartley, C 89
Hartstein, K 233
Hartzell, J 193
Harvey, A 60
Harvey, DY 137
Hasbroucq, T 73
Hasegawa, T 42, 221
Haselgrove, C 230
Hashimoto, R-i 62
Hassall, C 88
Hassall, CD 86, 117
Hassenstab, J 103
Hasson, U 46, 55, 94, 146,
193, 197, 202
Hathaway, A 211
Haushofer, J 154
Havermans, R 217
Hawco, C 230
Hawkins, CA 110
Hawkland, K 76
Hawthorne, G 40, 244
Haxby, J 19
Hayward, D 181
Hazeline, E 192
Hazeltine, E 41
Head, D 197
Healy, D 218
Heathcote, A 131
Heatherton, T 39, 68
Heatherton, TF 70, 246
Hebrank, A 225
Hechtman, LA 156
Hedden, T 148
Hedgcock, W 89, 120
Hedge, C 94
Heekeren, H 140, 255
Heekeren, HR 149
Hegarty II, JP 97
Heikkilä, H 183
Heilman, K 86
Heimler, B 239
Heim, S 121
Heinen, K 231
Heinks, T 34
Heiphetz, L 188
Heisz, J 130
He, L 152
Heldreth, A 108
Helie, S 230
Heller, W 184
Henderson, S 98
Henne, B 98, 124, 185
Hennig-Fast, K 141
Henry, M 121, 249
Herff, S 71
Herman, A 114
Hermes, D 262
Hernandez, A 137
Hernandez, AE 44, 101
Hernandez-Gutierrez, D
224
Hernández-Gutiérrez, D
225, 252
Hernández, JA 166
Herrmann, B 249
Herrmann, MJ 149, 172
He, Y 194
Hickey, C 181
Hickok, G 55, 56, 106, 145,
174, 175
Hicks, SL 113

Higgins, A 95
Hillebrandt, H 100
Hill-Kayser, C 108
Hill, L 98
Hillyard, S 78, 209
Hillyard, SA 87, 238
Hinkley, L 64, 194
Hinkley, LB 133
Hinson, J 132, 265
Hinton, EC 94
Hithersay, R 173
Hjort, O 157
Hochman, EY 219
Hockley, W 108
Hodgetts, C 111, 113, 201
Hoffmann, S 173
Hofman, JH 84
Hofstetter, C 111
Hoge, E 148
Holcomb, P 33, 45, 77, 105,
144, 151, 165
Holcomb, PJ 46, 163, 164
Holder, LB 85
Hollingworth, P 201
Holroyd, C 143
Holroyd, CB 101, 173
Holtgraves, T 60
Holt, LL 114, 115
Holt, R 217
Hong, X 92
Honma, SM 64, 133
Honzel, N 42, 218
Hood, B 62
Hoogman, M 54
Hopkins, R 80
Hopman, R 54
Hoppstädter, M 82, 111
Hoque, M 173
Horoufchin, H 132, 247
Horwitz, B 77
Hoscheidt, S 98
Hosoda, C 264
Houde, J 114, 164
Houde, JF 85, 116
Houdé, O 42, 43, 182
Houser, D 234
Hou, Y 128
Howard, D 149
Howard, DV 34
Howard, Jr., J 149
Howard, Jr., JH 34
Howard, M 18
Howe, B 115
Howett, D 50
Hrybouski, S 128
Hsiao, S 124
Hsieh, L 92
Hsieh, W-T 127
Hsu, M 59, 118, 234, 235,
266
Hsu, S-M 118
Hsu, Y-F 83
Hua, M 95, 242
Hu, AM 98
Hua, M-S 167
Huang, D 252
Huang, H-W 53, 106
Huang, J 137, 264
Huang, S 43, 55
Huang, S-tT 124, 155
Huang, S-TT 124
Huang, W 192

2013 Annual Meeting
Huang, Y-H 105
Hubbard, E 120, 149
Hubbard, J 220
Hubbard, R 111
Hubbell, S 108
Huber, S 90
Hudson Kam, CL 229
Hudson, M 220
Hudson, MM 71
Huepe, D 245
Huettel, S 260
Huettel, SA 208
Hughes, G 115, 117
Huguet, P 73
Huizenga, H 235
Hu, J 118, 194, 244
Hu, J-Y 247
Hu, L 244
Hull, J 99
Humphreys, G 63
Humphreys, GW 152
Humphreys, K 95
Humphreys, KL 95
Hung, A-Y 55
Hung, DL 105, 124
Hung, Y-h 105
Hunt, RH 130
Huotilainen, M 57, 175, 191
Hupe, J-M 88
Hurley, R 194, 225
Hurley, RS 190
Husain, M 74
Hutchinson, JB 109
Hu, X 185
Huxlin, KR 234
Hu, Y 66, 98, 124, 157, 185,
230
Hwang, I 88

I
Iacoboni, M 73, 129
Iacovella, V 202
Ian, L 204
Ianni, G 165
Iaria, G 43
Ibáñez, A 245
Idsardi, W 194
Ihne, JL 220
Iidaka, T 156
Ikeda, K 42, 221
Imai, T 118
Immordino-Yang, MH 112
Ingvar, M 158
Inman, C 111
Insel, C 207
Iordan, A 66
Iordan, AD 124, 157
Iordan, MC 205
Iragui, V 190
Irani, SR 169
Isaac, L 125
Isaacs, Y 93
Isabelle, P 262
Isbell, E 34
Ischebeck, A 242
Ishihara, M 151
Isingrini, M 112
Isla, P 245
Iuculano, T 60
Iwasaki, A 181
Iyengar, V 112

Author Index
Iyer, J 115

J
Jääskeläinen, IP 55, 183
Jabbar, T 238
Jabbi, M 259
Jack, A 130
Jackendoff, R 77, 165
Jack, J 260
Jackson, M 132
Jacobs, J 98
Jacobson, JL 51
Jacobson, SW 51
Jaeger, A 141
Jaeggi, SM 26
Jagust, WJ 226
Jahn, A 132, 162
Jalal, B 55, 195
James, GA 111
Janacseck, C 229
Jane, W 249
Jang, J-S 237
Jangraw, D 206
Jan, K 240
Jansen, A 217
Janssen, A 96, 249
Jantzen, K 115
Jantzen, M 115
Jantz, T 236
Jantz, TK 193
Japee, S 122
Jarvinen, A 245
Jennings, A 210
Jensen, A 214
Jensen, O 106
Jeon, H 88
Jepma, M 65, 261
Jeremy, R 194
Jerram, M 39
Jha, A 125
Jiang, C 128
Jiang, J 209
Jiang, X 194
Jia, S 137
Jih, Y-R 35
Jimenez-Ortega, L 252
Jimenez-Ortega, L 224
Jiménez-Ortega, L 78, 225
Jo, B 251
Johansson, M 200
Johns, AR 253
Johnson, A 220
Johnson, B 51
Johnson, C 100, 154
Johnson, CE 140, 199
Johnson, DC 128
Johnson, E 163
Johnson, EL 236
Johnson, J 121
Johnson, JD 142, 256, 260
Johnson, M 67
Johnson, MA 222, 223
Johnson, MR 169
Johnstone, T 48, 98, 124,
185, 207
Johnston, S 218
Jolles, D 60
Jolly, T 131
Jones, A 115
Jones, C 204
Jones, D 113

Jones, K 82
Jones, M 261
Jones, O 240
Jones, W 160
Jonkman, LM 57
Jonsson, B 82, 114
Jordan, M 112
Josephs, O 84
Joshi, A 54
Joshi, K 222
Joshi, S 259
Jost, LB 47, 195
Jovanovic, T 243
Jovicich, J 193, 202
Joyce, J 133
Juckel, G 212
Jung, EK 220
Junghoefer, M 158
Jung, R 90, 91, 236, 261
Jung, Y 232, 245
Justus, T 42
Jutta, K 190

K
Kable, J 89
Kachel, U 58
Kader, T 123
Kaganovich, N 251
Kahne, J 159
Kalénine, S 53
Kam, J 210
Kamowski-Shakibai, M 76
Kamp, S-M 104, 215, 248
Kanai, R 173
Kanayet, F 118
Kan, CC 54
Kanen, J 89
Kaneta, RK 250
Kang, HG 125, 214
Kang, Y 54
Kantner, J 198
Kanwisher, N 19
Kapasi, A 71
Kaplan, J 96
Karanian, JM 140
Karayanidis, F 131
Karbach, J 131
Karlsson, L 82, 114
Karns, C 32
Karr, J 58
Karst, JS 159
Karuzis, V 76
Kasai, T 47, 123, 181, 239
Kastner, S 21
Katayama, J 244
Katsumi, Y 126
Katzen, H 202
Katzman, PL 200
Kaufer, D 197
Kauffmann, L 206, 233
Kaufmann, JM 128, 187
Kauppi, K 140
Kaur, N 199
Kawagoe, T 104
Kawasaki, M 244
Kawashima, R 265
Kayser, A 100
Kayser, AS 160
Kazanina, N 180, 196
Keebler, M 70, 236
Kehm, K 62

Keil, A 189
Keisler, A 118
Keller, PE 116
Kelley, T 63, 210
Kelley, WM 70, 246
Kelly, R 85
Kennard, C 113, 169
Kennedy, D 230
Kennedy, K 113
Kennedy, S 123
Kensinger, E 37, 167, 183
Kensinger, EA 182, 250
Keppel, M-T 242
Kestemont, J 188
Ketz, N 141
Keuper, K 36, 45, 125
Khadilkar, M 138
Khamis-Dakwar, R 223,
225
Khanuja, R 231
Kharitonova, M 131
Khoei, M 71
Khurana, P 145
Kielar, A 138
Kiel, L 206
Kienitz, E 40, 244
Kiley, C 104
Kilpatrick, L 67
Kimberg, CI 71
Kim, EJ 60
Kim, H 125
Kim, HT 88
Kim, H-y 118
Kim, MH 126, 159
Kim, S 104, 126
Kim, SA 36, 125
Kim, SH 36, 125, 214
Kim, S-Y 62
Kimura, K 244
Kim, YY 220
King-Casas, B 119, 266
King, D 141
King, J 37
Kington, A 53
Kington, AG 262
Kippenhan, JS 259
Kiragu, J 36
Kiran, S 203
Kirchhoff, BA 197
Kirk, I 113
Kis, A 98
Kishida, K 60
Kissler, J 213, 247
Kissler, JM 187
Kitajo, K 244
Kitazaki, M 33
Kiyonaga, A 133
Klapwijk, E 97
Klasen, M 128
Klatt, M 94
Kleckner, IR 40
Kline, A 59, 126
Klingberg, T 26
Kluetsch, R 209
Kmiecik, MJ 236
Knight, D 249
Knight, E 141
Knight, R 206
Knight, RT 8, 266
Knoblauch, K 216
Knowlton, B 228
Knowlton, BJ 80, 160, 259

Knutson, B 231, 265
Knutson, K 259
Koban, L 126, 207
Kober, H 73
Koch, B 207
Koch, I 132, 247
Koen, J 198
Kohler, PJ 221
Köhler, S 51, 81, 168
Kohn, P 259
Kolarik, B 141
Komeda, H 156
Komes, J 35, 198
Konrad, BN 141
Kopald, B 251
Kopf, J 218
Korb, F 37
Korb, FM 219
Kornelsen, J 216
Kort, NS 85
Kosnik, R 241
Kostermans, E 147
Kostiuk, M 127
Kotzor, S 105
Kotz, SA 107
Kousaie, S 71
Koush, Y 36, 205, 231
Kovacevic, N 212
Krafft, C 131, 248
Krajniak, M 139
Krall, S 218
Kramer, A 109, 154
Kramer, J 163
Kramer, JH 142
Kranjec, A 265
Kranton, RE 129
Krause, B 120
Kraus, N 175
Kraut, M 171
Kravitz, DJ 263
Krawczyk, D 69, 237
Krawczyk, DC 236
Krebs, R 37, 133, 235
Krenzer, W 100
Krigolson, O 39, 88
Krigolson, OE 86, 117
Krimsky, M 185
Krishnan, K 237
Krisnabai-Gitanjali, K 76
Krisst, LC 261
Krull, K 220
Krull, KR 71
Krystal, J 240
Kubota, J 129
Kudielka, B 59
Kuhl, PK 5
Kühn, AB 133
Ku, L-c 224
Kumar, A 35
Kumar, P 74
Kundu, B 26, 27
Kuntsi, J 210
Kuo, B-C 134
Kuo, W-J 258
Kuperberg, G 28, 65, 77,
138, 165
Kurczek, J 81, 83
Kurth-Nelson, Z 100
Kusumoto, K 248
Kutas, M 48, 78, 190
Ku, Y 230
Kydd, R 72

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

273

Author Index
Kyle, C 201

L
Labar, K 24
LaBar, K 37, 98, 155, 183,
185
Lachmann, T 121
La Corte, V 142, 248
Laeger, I 36, 125
Laeng, B 216
Lago, M 83
Lahiri, A 105, 163
LaHue, SC 64, 133
Lai, M-C 186
Lai, P 154
Lake, J 155
Lakis, N 156
Lamar, M 35
Lambert, J 192
Lambon Ralph, M 49
Landerl, K 107
Lane, S 36
Lang, PJ 257
Lanius, R 209
Lao, Y 54
Lapate, R 16
Lapate, RC 186
Lapenta, O 48
LaRocque, JJ 134
Larsen, J 218
Larson, CL 162
Lauderdale, J 248
Lau, E 138
Laue, CS 121
Lauer, M 149
Lau, JY 35
Laura, P 144
Lavie, N 151, 210
Lavín, C 245
Lawrence, A 111, 113, 201
Le, A 237
Leal, F 49
Lebanoff, L 248
Lebas, J-F 169
Le Bas, J-F 206, 233
Lech, R 148
Leckie, R 134
Leclerc, CM 182
LeDoux, J 6
Lee, AK 142
Lee, C-l 53
Lee, C-L 224
Lee, C-M 86
Lee, C-N 243
Lee, C-Y 49, 76, 224
Lee, DH 129
Lee, HA 64, 133
Lee, H-J 258
Lee, J 198, 255
Lee, J-Y 69
Lee, L 124
Lee, M-C 124, 155
Lee, S 51
Lee, S-C 167
Lee, VK 129
Lee, W-L 243
Lee, Y 57, 132
Lehet, M 79
Leibundgut, K 34
Leiker, E 142
Leknes, S 216

274

2013 Annual Meeting
Leland, D 92
Lenartowicz, A 160
Leonard, C 54
Leonard, LB 251
Leonards, U 94
Leong, JK 142
Leon, I 224
Lepage, C 54
Lepage, M 230
Lepore, N 54
Lepore, F 54
Leshinskaya, A 53
Leunissen, I 102
Le Veque, J 199
LeVeque, J 110
Levi, A 234
Levi, C 131
Levi, DM 232
Levin, B 202
Levine, B 74, 83, 184, 200
Levinson, S 78
Levy, DA 142
Lewine, J 251
Lewis, J 44
Lewis, M 217
Liao, C-h 224
Liao, W-K 167
Liberman, A 205
Lidji, P 176
Lieberman, M 25, 187
Lietti, CV 263
Li, J 141, 142
Li, K 209
Lim, K 100
Limmer, W 155
Lim, S-J 115
Lim, S-L 89
Lin, C-Y 104, 134
Lindenberger, U 140, 255
Linden, D 218
Linden, DEJ 250
Lindquist, K 25
Lindquist, MA 202
Lindström, B 155, 246
Lin, E-J 76
Lines, J 195
Linghtbody, A 251
Lin, K-J 49
Lin, L 230
Lin, Z 92
Linzen, T 135, 195
Li, Q 231
Li, S 255
Lisanby, SH 206
List, A 182
Li, T 129, 186
Liu-Ambrose, T 151
Liu, H-L 124
Liu, L 76
Liu, S 165
Liu-Shuang, J 173
Liu, XH 174
Liu, Y 241
Liu, YH 148
Liu, Z 104, 247
Li, W 243
Li, X 92, 142
Lloyd-Jones, T 201
Loan, V 162
Lobmaier, J 99
Lobmaier, JS 264
Lockhart, S 189

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Lockhart, SN 62
Loehr, J 145
Lombardo, M 186
Long, DL 48
Longo, MR 145
Longstaffe, K 62
Looi, CY 90
Lopez, B 198
Lopez, R 221
Lopez-Sola, M 261
López-Valentín, CM 191
López Zunini, RA 54
Lorist, M 210
Løseth, G 216
Losin, ER 129
Loui, P 115, 155, 177
Lovelett, JT 252
Love, T 106, 108, 174
Low, K 54
Luber, B 206
Lucas, S 159
Luck, SJ 62
Luders, E 90
Lueschow, A 206
Lu, H 70
Luk, G 203, 231
Luks, TL 64, 133
Lumian, D 242
Lundström, J 176
Lundström, JN 176
Lupiáñez, J 219
Lurie, DJ 231
Lussier, C 61
Lustig, C 92, 93
Lustig, R 108
Lutz, A 160
Luu, P 44
Lynn, M 126, 133
Lynn, MT 193
Lynn, S 148
Lyon, R 223

M
Macaluso, E 152
MacDonald, A 100
Macedo, E 106
MacGregor, LJ 138
Machado, L 159
MacKenzie, G 168
MacKenzie, J 54, 221
Mackey, S 245
Mack, J 253
MacLean, S 86, 175
MacLeod, C 170
MacLeod, CA 168
MacPherson, M 210
MacQueen, G 43
MacSweeney, M 136
Madan, CR 128, 156
Madden, D 62
Madden, DJ 222, 223
Maddox, C 237
Maddox, T 229
Maddox, WT 59, 71, 72,
126, 230
Maess, B 249
Magee, K 94
Magnusdottir, S 56
Magnuson, JS 253
Mahon, BZ 171
Malaia, E 195

Malarkey, W 94
Malhotra, P 209
Malykhina, K 79
Malykhin, N 128
Ma, N 188
Mancini, S 165, 166
Mandel, DR 68
Mandel, N 225
Mangin, J-F 43
Mangun, G 210
Mangun, R 63
Mani, M 109, 154
Manini, T 86
Manly, JJ 255
Manning, J 148
Mano, Y 156
Mansinghani, S 171
Mantini, D 75, 153
Manuck, S 134
Ma, R 143
Marantz, A 45, 135, 195
Marathe, A 238
Maravita, A 92
March, D 156
Marcinek, BT 253
Marco, E 194
Marc-Olivier, M 262
Marco-Pallares, J 186
Marcuse, L 139
Marder, K 116
Marek, S 265
Marghetis, T 144
Margot, C 184
Marian, V 44
Marie-France, M 262
Marilena, A 144
Marini, C 123, 152, 181
Marini, F 92
Marinis, T 48
Marino, D 73
Marinsek, N 109
Markovic, J 103
Marois, R 94
Marois, RM 240
Marouchos, A 52
Marquez de la Plata, C 236
Marshall, PJ 144
Marslen-Wilson, W 105
Marstaller, L 85
Marta, A 186
Martelli, M 182
Martens, L 212
Martin, A 263
Martin, C 165, 168
Martin-Cook, K 149
Martin, DJ 263
Martinelli, P 169
Martin, EM 148
Martinez, A 209
Martinez-Cascales, JI 262
Martinez-Mesa, JA 238
Martin, J 240
Martin, LE 187
Martín-Loeches, M 78, 224,
225, 252
Martin, RE 131
Martins, B 96
Martin, V 168
Marulis, LM 126, 159
Marusic, N 58
Masdeu, J 259
Maslar, M 36

Mast, F 99
Mast, FW 264
Matchin, W 145
Mather, M 96, 212
Matheson, H 211
Mathiak, K 36, 128
Mathiak, KA 36, 128
Mathieu, R 262
Mattarella-Micke, A 156
Mattek, AM 186
Mattson, J 167
Maudsley, A 202
Maurer, D 153
Maurer, U 47, 195
Mauss, I 242
Ma, Y 69
Mayers, S 39
Mayfield, A 211
Mayr, U 178, 220
Mazaheri, A 239
Mazurek, MO 97
Mazzi, C 206
McAdams, C 69, 237
McAndrews, MP 201
McArthur, G 51
McAuley, E 109, 154
McAuley, JD 68
McCabe, C 108
McCaffery, J 103
McCandliss, B 120, 136,
149
McCarthy, JD 145
McCormick, C 201
McCortney, K 219
McCullough, A 169
McCullough, S 46, 196
McDevitt, E 232
McDonald, C 43, 209
McDonald, G 159
McDonald, J 64, 152
McDonough, I 57, 72, 225
McDowell, J 131, 248
McGarry, W 132
McGeary, JE 59, 126
McGettigan, C 84
McGregor, K 86
McIntosh, AR 130, 184, 212
McIntosh, R 74
McIver, TA 216
McKendrick, R 74
McKenna, M 89
McKinnon, MC 184
McLaughlin, PM 63
McLean, DA 168
McMullan, AR 116
McMullen, P 211
McNair, N 113
McPherson, E 41
McQueen, J 55
McQuire, M 49, 165
McRae, K 51, 81, 99, 166,
242
Mecklinger, A 200
Meck, W 155
Medina, J 145
Mednick, S 232
Mehravari, AS 105
Mejia, A 174
Mejia-Santana, H 116
Melcher, D 146, 193
Mele, S 234
Melis, C 245

2013 Annual Meeting
Meltzer-Asscher, A 253
Meltzer, JA 138
Mende-Siedlecki, P 130
Mendrek, A 156, 160
Mennes, M 231
Menon, V 60, 119, 135, 192
Merrick, C 40
Mervis, CB 259
Merzenich, M 123, 152, 181
Meshi, D 149
Mesite, L 46, 135
Mesulam, M 194
Mesulam, M-M 36, 190
Metcalfe, AWS 119, 135
Meteyard, L 47
Meulman, N 252
Meurs, A 246
Meyer, M 187
Meyer, P 82, 111, 169
Meyniel, F 178
Mhyre, TR 220
Mian, M 179
Miceli, G 193
Michael, S 262
Michie, P 131
Mickley Steinmetz, K 37
Midgley, KJ 45, 46, 163, 164
Migliaccio, R 95, 119, 153,
248
Mignault Goulet, G 116
Miklósi, Á 98
Miles, A 110
Miley-Akerstedt, A 139
Milham, MP 231
Miller, B 163
Miller, BL 142
Miller, EK 21
Miller, G 184
Miller, KJ 262
Miller, LE 145
Miller, LM 87
Miller, M 109, 141, 198
Miller, MB 229
Miller, TD 169
Mills, K 86, 153
Min, B-K 232, 245
Miner, M 100
Mingolla, E 203
Minhaus, P 265
Minoshima, S 220
Minturn, J 108
Mirza, R 129
Mishra, J 87
Misra, M 75
Mitchell, J 100
Mitchell, JP 53
Mitlina, Y 164
Mitolo, M 173
Mitra, P 105
Mizelle, C 85
Mizuiri, D 64, 133
Mlodnicka, A 139
Mlynarski, W 93
Moayedi, M 201
Mocaiber, I 184
Mock, J 47
Mo, D 137
Moeller, FG 36
Moghekar, A 255
Mohamed Ali, O 39
Mohammad Rezazadeh,
I 219

Author Index
Mohammad, S 64
Mohr, J 206
Mojdehbakhsh, R 129
Molapour, T 157
Molesworth, T 159
Molinaro, N 165, 166
Mollison, M 169
Monahan, P 47, 143, 194
Moneta-Koehler, L 120
Monk-Fromont, E 80
Montague, PR 60
Montchal, ME 256
Montemayor, C 88
Moody, J 260
Moore, M 157
Morales, P 178
Morawetz, C 149
Morck, RK 234
Moreno, G 120
Moreno, S 57, 132
Morgan, C 172
Morgan, M 85
Moriguchi, Y 188
Mormino, EC 226
Morris, J 130, 167
Morris, JA 182
Morrison, FJ 126, 159
Morrison, RG 190, 225, 236
Morsella, E 40, 88, 162,
193, 261
Morton, NW 79
Moscicka, AK 47, 195
Moscovitch, M 166, 200,
254
Mossbridge, J 93
Moss, J 160
Mostert, JC 54
Motes, MA 122
Mott, K 33, 151
Motzkin, J 243
Moulson, M 130
Moussard, A 57, 132, 225
Moutsopoulou, K 83
Muckle, G 51
Mudar, R 149
Mueller, LD 149
Mujica-Parodi, L 64
Mukai, I 122
Mukherjee, P 64, 133, 194
Mukundan, S 260
Muldoon, M 134
Mulenga-Woo, N 123
Muller-Gass, A 68
Mulligan, N 254
Mulrooney, DA 71
Munakata, Y 214, 218
Mundy, M 113, 258
Munoz-Cuevas, FJ 100
Murohashi, H 47, 239
Murooka, T 118
Murphy, C 57, 150, 172
Murphy, KJ 166
Murray, B 183
Murray, J 240
Murray, JG 170
Murray, MM 263
Murtha, SJE 63
Murty, V 183, 257
Musacchia, G 223
Musel, B 206, 233
Mu, Y 69
Myers, CE 213

Myers, E 46, 135
Myers, N 63, 162

N
Naccache, L 103
Nadel, L 98, 170
Nagamatsu, L 151
Nagarajan, S 114, 164, 194
Nagarajan, SS 64, 85, 116,
133, 260
Nahum, M 65, 232
Nakajima, Y 177
Nakamura, K 84, 177
Nako, R 239
Nambu, M 33
Namy, LL 166
Nardo, D 152
Natalie, C 210
Nath, T 193
Natu, V 232
Naumann, E 72, 73
Navarrete, C 157
Navarro-Cebrian, A 160
Nawabi, Y 102
Naylor, E 72
Naylor, ER 67
Nazar, SA 145
Neal, C 249
Near, J 120
Nee, D 132, 162
Neely, M 154
Negreira, A 39
Nelson, L 59
Nemeth, D 229
Nenert, R 151
Neta, M 211
Neuhoff, JG 174
Neville, H 32, 34, 224
Neville, HJ 121
Newman, A 211
Newman, S 195
Newman, SD 127
Newman-Smith, K 170
Newsome, RN 114
Newsome, W 5
Neyer, FJ 187
Ngamassi, L 102
Ng, R 245
Nguyen, E 157
Nguyen, MT 158
Niblett, SP 100, 157
Nielsen, S 83
Niemeier, M 64
Nienhuis, B 102
Nijeboer, S 103
Nikolaeva, A 196
Nikolaidis, A 162
Nilsonne, G 158
Nilsson, L-G 140
Nimgaonkar, V 91
Ning, L-H 106
Nitschke, JB 127
Niu, Y-Q 190
Niziolek, CA 116
Nobre, A 20
Nobre, AC 21, 108, 134,
162, 180
Nobre, K 63
Nocera, J 86
Nomi, JS 98, 158
Nomura, I 178

Nook, E 183
Noppeney, U 9
Norcia, AM 146, 173
Noriega, N 121
Norman, KA 79
Norris, C 98
Northrup, E 54
Norton, ES 222, 223
Norton-Ford, J 253
Notebaert, K 178, 218
Notebaert, W 37, 102, 192,
246
Novembre, G 116
Nowotny, P 109
Nozari, N 174
Nozawa, T 265
Nuerk, H-C 90
Nummenmaa, A 55
Nummenmaa, L 97, 183
Nuñez Castellar, E 234
Nuñez-Méndez, ÁA 191
Nusslock, R 185
Nyberg, L 82, 113, 114, 140
Nygaard, LC 166
Nyhus, E 170

O
Ober, BA 226
Oberg, S 178, 249
Obermayer, K 206
Obleser, J 121, 249
O’Brien, R 255
Obrig, H 251
O’Carroll, E 65
Ochsner, K 25, 183
O’Connell, G 158
O’Connor, K 56, 121
Odegard, T 80, 222
Oga, T 177
O’Hare, A 184
Oh, H 226
Ohla, K 176
Oh, S 232, 245
Ohyama, J 33
Ojala, P 57
Okada, H 178
Okumura, Y 47
Oleson, S 57
Olichney, J 190
Oliveira, D 106
Oliveira, L 184
Oliver, M 189
Olsen, F 128
Olsen, R 83
Olson, I 193, 196
Olson, IR 188
Olsson, A 127, 155, 157,
158, 246
Omori, T 178
Omura, K 248
Ondobaka, S 262
O’Neil, E 168
Onnink, AMH 54
Onoda, K 151
Onorati, F 107
Oosterwijk, S 245
Op de Beeck, H 75
Opfer, J 118
O’Reilly, R 141
Orenstein, EM 187
O’Rourke, P 60

Orr, SP 213
Ortiz, H 261
Ortiz-Mantilla, S 251
Osterhout, L 105
Ostovich, J 213
O’Toole, A 232
Otsu, A 248
Otten, LJ 256, 258
Otto, R 178
Oudiette, D 113
Overgaauw, S 245
Overman, AA 226
Owens, E 251
Owens, M 66
Owens, TE 187
Ozernov-Palchik, O 222,
223
Ozubko, J 170

P
Paap, K 191
Paczynski, M 125, 165
Padgett, A 211
Padilla, R 220
Padwal, J 209
Page, JW 264
Pak, H 232, 245
Paller, KA 36, 84, 113
Palmer, AL 186
Palmeri, H 56
Palombo, D 83
Palombo, DJ 184
Panamsky, L 138
Pang, KCH 213
Pan, RK 97
Papa, G 217
Papamichalis, P 121
Papa, VB 187
Paquette, S 214
Parasuraman, R 41, 74, 132,
190, 209, 221
Park, C 88
Park, D 57, 72, 225
Park, H 49
Parkinson, C 165
Park, JL 170
Park, L 200
Park, Y 90
Parrish, TB 156
Parsons, M 131
Partanen, E 175
Parvizi, J 20, 109, 262
Pascal, B 214
Pas, M 84
Passerieux, C 246
Patel, H 132, 247
Patel, S 179
Pathman, T 111, 171
Patten, C 86
Patterson, B 96
Patterson, SS 264
Patterson, TK 160
Patzelt, E 100
Pauli, P 189
Paul, P 186
Paulson, K 236
Paulus, MP 128, 245
Paul, V 238
Pavani, F 239
Payne, H 136
Payne, J 37, 199

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

275

Author Index
Paz-Alonso, PM 189
Pearlson, G 240
Peckler, H 100
Pecoraro, A 223
Pedersen, WS 162
Pedro, C 199
Peelen, M 181
Peeters, R 153
Peled, L 184
Pelletier, J 216
Pellicano, A 132, 247
Pena, L 119
Peper, JS 35
Pereira, M 184
Peretz, I 116, 122, 176, 214,
225
Perez, A 206
Perez-Edgar, K 41
Perez, F 53
Perfetti, C 76
Perlis, R 58
Perlman, D 160
Perrone-Bertolotti, M 169
Perry, A 184
Persson, J 199, 227
Persson, N 226
Pesciarelli, F 254
Pessiglione, M 178
Petasis, O 232
Petersen, S 211
Peters, M 232
Peterson, D 163
Peterson, E 231
Peterson, KM 140, 199
Peters, S 189
Petrich, J 196
Petrovic, P 158
Peyrin, C 206, 233
Phelan, S 103
Phelps, E 22, 89, 129, 178,
215, 228
Phillips, J 199
Phillips, P 108
Piai, V 106
Piazza, E 176
Pichat, C 96, 169, 206, 233
Pichon, A 111, 184
Picklesimer, M 254
Pierce, J 131, 248
Pierpont, EI 252
Pierre, R 204, 262
Pike, B 230
Pilling, AH 32
Pineau, A 42, 43, 182
Pirog Revill, K 166
Pitcher, D 20
Pitts, M 76, 107, 209
Pizana, M 174
Pizzagalli, D 66
Plass, J 233
Platt, M 21
Pletzer, B 232
Plewnia, C 185, 247
Pliatsikas, C 48
Plötner, J 187
Pluta, J 257
Poglitsch, C 242
Pogue-Geile, M 90
Pohlack, ST 169
Poirel, N 42, 182
Poissant, H 160
Polak, T 149, 172

276

2013 Annual Meeting
Poldrack, RA 160
Polizzotto, N 102
Pollack, C 231
Polosan, M 96
Polyn, SM 79
Ponzio, A 96
Poppa, T 106, 174
Porat, S 123
Porges, E 214
Pornpattananangkul, N
185
Porterfield, A 215
Portugal, LCL 184
Posner, MI 20
Pospisil, J 198, 255
Possin, K 163
Postans, M 111, 113, 263
Postle, B 193
Postle, BR 27, 134
Poston, K 192
Potocanac, Z 102
Pourtois, G 126, 207, 212
Powers, A 235
Powers, C 211
Powers, K 70
Pradat-Diehl, P 142
Prakash, R 94
Prakash, RS 96
Prasad, K 90
Pratt, J 188
Prelec, D 148
Prestopnik, J 261
Preuss, N 230
Price, CJ 47
Primativo, S 182
Prinssen, S 122
Pritchard, A 177
Pu, H 163
Pujol, J 261
Pullman, MY 252
Pulvermuller, F 164
Purdy, JD 251
Puri, K 215
Putkinen, V 57, 191
Puzzo, I 98, 124, 185
Pylkkänen, L 45, 196

Q
Qi, X-L 26
Quadflieg, S 158
Quandt, LC 144
Quentin, R 147, 182
Quigley, KS 40
Quiñones-Camacho, L 191
Quiñones, I 135, 165, 166
Quintin, E-M 40, 216, 244,
251
Quirk, C 33

R
Rabovsky, M 166
Rackley, A 149
Radke, S 65, 215
Raedt, R 207, 246
Raffaella, R 144
Ragland, JD 199, 256
Rahdar, A 153
Rahgoshai, R 39
Raij, T 55
Raio, C 178, 215

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Raith, M 47
Rakitin, BC 116
Raksit, MP 220
Ramachandran, V 55, 87,
195, 233
Ramachandran, VS 87
Raman, M 251
Ramanoël, S 206, 233
Ramos Nunez, AI 101
Ramos-Nunez, AI 101
Ramus, F 246
Ranganath, C 81, 169, 199,
203
Rangarajan, V 109, 262
Rangel, A 22, 89
Rao, NK 122
Raphel, K 106, 174
Rapin, L 160
Raskin, S 199
Rauschecker, JP 55
Ravid, M 101
Ravizza, S 104, 192
Ravizza, SM 222
Raz, N 139
Reavis, E 233
Rebeck, GW 220
Reber, PJ 36, 229, 259
Redcay, E 139, 159
Redwine, K 174
Reeck, C 185
Reed, C 92
Reed, R 153
Rees, G 205
Reeve, R 241
Reggente, N 102
Rehbein, MA 158
Reicherts, P 218
Reichmuth, C 82
Reif, A 149, 158, 218
Reiko, G 210
Reilly, J 154
Reinacher, U 143
Reineberg, A 50, 192
Reinen, J 207
Reinke, K 211
Reiss, A 40, 216, 244, 251
Reiss, AL 154
Remington, A 151
Remmel, R 159
Rendon, LC 110
Renoult, L 200
Rentz, D 33, 151
Repovs, G 240
Ressler, K 243
Reteig, L 122
Reutens, DC 50
Reuter-Lorenz, P 225
Reveles, A 159
Revill, KP 173
Reyna, V 59
Reynolds, E 185
Reynolds, G 212
Reynolds, JR 161
Reynvoet, B 84, 233
Reznicek, E 217
Reznik, K 229
Rice, K 159
Rich, A 85
Richardson, J 60
Richmond, L 193
Richter, M 251
Rich Zendel, B 116

Ridgway, G 205
Rieck, J 57, 225
Riegels, J 216
Ries, A 238
Riesenhuber, M 205
Riggall, A 193
Riggall, AC 134
Riggins, T 139, 159, 255,
257
Riggi, S 144
Rights, J 149
Rigolo, L 260
Rimmele, U 228
Ring, J 223
Rinkenauer, G 173
Rissman, J 80, 102
Ristic, J 181
Ritchey, M 37, 81, 169
Rivera, A 245
Rivera, SM 62
Roach, A 189
Roach, AE 62
Roalf, D 90
Robert, H 80
Roberto, E 144
Roberts, A 105, 163
Roberts, D 43, 202, 209, 249
Robertson, DJ 210
Roberts, P 75
Robey, A 255
Robineau, F 231
Robin, J 254
Robinson, MM 261
Robison, L 220
Robitaille, N 116
Roche, R 51
Rodrigue, A 131, 248
Rodríguez-Corcelles, LC
191
Rodríguez Fornells, A 45
Rodríguez-Fornells, A 186
Roebroeck, A 217
Roefs, A 217
Roe, K 259
Roelofs, A 106
Roelofs, K 215
Rogalski, E 190
Rogalsky, C 106, 174
Roger, C 234
Rogers, G 243
Rogers, J 143
Rogowsky, B 121
Rojas Frias, P 94
Rokeach, A 247
Rokers, B 186
Rolheiser, T 128
Rolle, C 33, 238
Rollins, L 255
Root, N 233
Rosado, L 116
Rosado-Santiago, C 191
Rosa, MJ 231
Rosburg, T 200
Rose, N 99, 193
Rosenbaum, RS 83, 166,
257
Rosenbaum, SR 81
Rosenberg-Lee, M 60, 119,
135
Rosenberg, M 182
Rosen, HJ 142
Rosen, P 265

Rosenthal, CR 113, 169
Roser, P 212
Rossetti, MA 202
Rossi, E 254
Rossion, B 158, 173
Rossi, S 42, 55, 251
Rossi, V 212
Ross, J 198, 255
Ross, L 151
Ross, TJ 257
Ros, T 209
Rothermich, K 107
Roussel, C 117
Roux, P 246
Rowe, G 114
Rowe, JB 86
Royal, I 176
Royalty, A 40, 244
Roy, M 241
Rubin, D 110
Rubinstein, O 184
Rübsamen, R 93
Rueda, MR 189
Ruether, N 171
Rugg, M 167, 256
Rugg, MD 50, 228, 256, 258
Rumiati, R 58
Rumiati, RI 37, 217
Ruparel, K 90
Ruprecht, KE 187
Rushworth, M 21
Russell, B 113
Russell, C 209
Russo, F 176
Rustemeier, M 207
Rutherford, B 163
Rutishauser, S 72
Ruzic, L 261
Ryals, A 200
Ryan, J 83
Ryan, JD 114
Ryan, L 98, 108, 227
Ryan-Nolla, NM 191
Ryman, S 90, 91, 236, 251
Rymut, I 225
Rypma, B 122
Ryu, M 232, 245

S
Saarikivi, K 57, 191
Saberi, K 55, 56, 175
Sabine, W 178
Sacchet, M 231
Sacher, M 112
Sachs, M 155
Sadakata, M 55
Sadato, N 156
Saddy, D 207
Sadeq, N 215
Saelzler, UG 226
Safar, A 136
Safra, L 178
Saggar, M 40, 244
Sahakian, B 155
Sajda, P 206
Sakaki, M 212
Sakamoto, A 248
Sakoglu, U 256
Saleh, Y 209
Salimpoor, VN 212
Salim, R 174

2013 Annual Meeting
Saling, MM 50
Salmeron, BJ 257
Salmon, D 190
Salmon, E 50
Salo, R 191
Samaha, J 33, 123, 193
Samanez-Larkin, GR 67
Samejima, K 178
Sams, M 97, 183
Sanada, M 221
Sanchez, DJ 229, 259
Sanchez, L 87
Sanchez-Lopez, J 238
Sander, D 184
Sanders, LD 75
Sandhu, R 175
Sanfey, AG 208
San Martín, R 208, 245
Santa Cruz, S 132
Santa Cruz, SA 190
Santander, T 198
Santangelo, V 152
Santiago Jr., J 262
Santiago Rodriguez, E 144
Santiago Sr., J 262
Sarbone, B 221
Sareini, M-A 117
Sargent, J 109
Sarkheil, P 128
Saron, C 219
Sarter, M 93
Sasanguie, D 84
Saße, J 71
Sastre III, M 255
Sastre, M 198
Sato, R 188
Satpute, A 24, 25, 68, 183
Satris, G 163
Satyshur, M 122
Savage, G 51, 85
Savazzi, S 206, 234
Savic, A 240
Sawamoto, N 84
Sawi, O 191
Saygin, AP 145, 157
Scabini, D 266
Scerif, G 134, 180, 239
Schacter, D 91
Schacter, DL 80, 226
Schaefer, A 79, 241
Schaeffer, D 131
Scharinger, M 121, 194
Scharnowski, F 205, 231
Schauer, GF 236
Scheldrup, M 41
Schell, AM 69
Schel, M 191
Schelonka, K 107
Scheper, I 65
Scherling, C 54, 221
Scheurich, R 115
Scheutz, M 163
Schiffer, A-M 83, 203
Schiffhauer, B 112
Schiller, NO 164
Schiltz, C 107
Schindler, S 247
Schlaug, G 115, 155, 177
Schlegel, A 221
Schmid, MS 252
Schmidt, T 212
Schmitz, E 200

Author Index
Schneider, D 122
Schneider-Garces, N 54
Schnur, TT 137
Schnyer, D 72, 141
Schoch, P 213
Schoffelen, J-M 106
Schohl, KA 159
Schoots, Vc 208
Schouppe, N 192
Schram, M 176
Schreiber, J 36
Schubert, M 141, 198
Schubotz, RI 133, 203
Schuchard, J 253
Schuetz, S 139
Schultz, R 239
Schulz, C 128, 187
Schumacher, E 41
Schütz-Bosbach, S 116, 204
Schutz, M 175
Schwarz, M 207
Schwarz, N 131
Schweinberger, SR 58, 128,
187, 198
Schwenzer, M 128
Schwieren, C 59
Scimeca, JM 200
Scott, K 223
Scott, S 75, 84
Seaman, K 149
Seaman, S 92
Sederberg, P 118
Seger, CA 231
Sekiyama, K 104
Sel, A 215
Selbing, I 127, 246
Selnes, O 255
Sengupta, S 44
Senhadji, N 160
Sensibaugh, T 58
Seppala, E 127
Serences, J 23
Seres, P 128
Serra, M 248
Serres, E 58
Servatius, RJ 68, 213
Set, E 234, 235, 266
Seton, B 252
Seubert, J 176
Seyfarth, J 206
Shackman, AJ 162
Shafer, AT 67, 127, 128, 213
Shafer, V 76
Shafer, VL 76
Shahin, AJ 87
Shah, J 120
Shaked, D 234
Shamay-Tsoory, S 184
Shannon, B 83
Shapiro, AD 262
Sharma, KR 202
Sha, S 163
Shaurya Prakash, R 249
Shears, C 107
Shedden, JM 145
Sheehan, A 34
Sheldon, S 200
Shelling, A 113
Shenaut, GK 226
Shen, F 29, 30
Sheng, T 213
Sheremata, S 232

Sheremata, SL 250
Sheridan, M 62, 219, 247
Sheridan, MA 131
Sherman, A 182
Sherman, S 227
Sherr, E 194
Sheth, S 179
Sheynin, J 213
Shibata, M 214
Shi, D 71, 192
Shi, J 54
Shikari, S 213
Shimi, A 180
Shimizu, RE 259
Shine, J 111, 201
Shing, YL 140, 255
Shin, HI 214
Shin, Y 118, 201
Shi, Z 70
Shohamy, D 81, 167, 207
Shokri Kojori, E 237
Shtyrov, Y 136, 138, 196
Shu, H 136
Shukhman, R 190, 225
Shukla, A 128
Shulkin, B 220
Shum, J 262
Sian, B 204
Siburian, R 58
Siebelmann, B 173
Siedlecki, K 255
Siegfried, D 178
Siep, N 217
Sikka, S 231
Silbert, L 46
Sills, J 68
Silva, P 106
Silva-Pereyra, JF 238
Silver, M 176, 232
Silver, MA 250
Silverstone, PH 234
Silvetti, M 234, 235
Simard, S 204
Simmons, AN 128
Simmons, WK 40
Simonds, J 67
Simone, PM 139
Simon, G 42, 182
Simon, J 50
Simon, N 148
Simon, TJ 62
Sims, R 201
Sims, TB 158
Sinanaj, I 117
Singer, T 154
Singhal, A 64, 67, 84, 127,
147, 213
Singh, NC 193
Skavhaug, I-M 259
Skipper, J 107
Skipper, L 196
Skipper, LM 188
Slagter, HA 122, 221, 248
Slavkova, E 152
Slotnick, SD 140
Small, S 197
Small, SL 138
Smelser, J 221
Smidts, A 208
Smith, A 221, 263
Smith, AM 54
Smith, CN 171

Smith, G 161
Smith, J 77, 110
Smith, K 214
Smith, SD 216
Smits-Engelsman, B 117
Smolker, H 192, 214
Smuda, D 201
Snyder, H 218
Sobhani, M 69
Söderlund, H 199, 227
So, K 232, 245
Soldan, A 255
Soleimani, L 139
Sollers, J 72
Somerville, L 235
Sommer, T 156
Sommer, W 78
Song, Y 264
Sonia, L 262
Sorger, B 218
Soriano-Mas, C 261
Soto, D 113, 209
Sottile, M 259
Speckens, A 125
Speer, ME 66
Spence, J 70, 206
Spencer, M 217
Spencer, RMC 37
Sperber, C 247
Spielberg, J 184
Spierer, L 73
Spijkerman, R 147
Spiros, A 75
Splan, ED 157
Spoormaker, V 141
Sprenger, S 252
Spreng, RN 91
Sprouse, J 253
Sprute, L 218
Spunt, R 187
Spyrou, L 55
Squire, L 80
Squire, LR 171
Stagg, C 120
Stahlhut, C 260
Stanley, EA 128
Stanley, J 176
Starkey, G 149
Stasenko, A 171
Steel, A 259
Steiger, A 141
Steinbeis, N 154
Steinbrink, C 121
Steiner, D 180
Steinhauer, K 77
Steinlin, M 34
Stening, E 199, 227
Stenson, A 238
Stephens, J 238
Stephens, JDW 226
Stergiopoulos, S 68
Stern, Y 255
Stevens, J 243
Stevens, S 159
Stevens, WD 263
Stichter, J 217
Stites, M 252
St. Jacques, PL 226
St-Laurent, M 227
Stockwell, T 143
Stodola, D 243
Stoehr, H 112

Stöhr, M 93
Stokes, J 201, 227
Stokes, MG 162
Stollstorff, M 214
Stone, K 177
Stothart, G 94, 180
Stout, DM 162
Stowe, LA 252
Strain, J 171
Strehlow, J 187
Strenziok, M 132, 190
Strijkers, K 164
Stroganova, T 196
Strohl, J 41
Strong, W 120
Strother, S 74
Suchan, B 148, 212
Suckling, J 217
Suen, V 234
Sugden, N 130
Sugiura, M 265
Sultan, Z 41
Summerfield, C 209
Sumner, E 227
Sunaert, S 75
Suna, K 178
Sundram, S 176
Sung, K 126
Sun, J 92
Sun, M 264
Supekar, K 60
Suthana, N 228
Sutherland, J 249
Sutherland, R 249
Sutterer, M 109, 154
Sutter, M 56, 121
Suzuki, S 87, 93, 182, 233
Suzuki, W 19
Swaab, T 48
Swaab, TY 27, 28, 48, 197
Sweet, L 103
Swettenham, J 151
Swick, D 42, 218
Swigart, A 60
Swinnen, S 102
Szajer, J 150
Szelest, I 123, 263

T
Taconnat, L 112
Taffou, M 216
Tagarelli, KM 136
Takarae, Y 219
Takeuchi, H 265
Takeya, R 123, 181
Taler, V 71
Tales, A 180
Tallal, P 121
Tallon-Baudry, C 63
Talsma, LJ 221
Tambini, A 228
Tamm, S 158
Tanaka, S 181
Tan, CH 54
Tanigawa, N 164
Tanner, D 254
Tannock, R 104, 247
Tao, R 76
Tapia, E 263
Tappy, L 263
Tarapore, P 164

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

277

Author Index
Tarapore, PE 64, 133
Tata, M 178, 249
Tata, MS 32, 116
Tayim, F 192
Taylor, J 68, 240
Taylor, K 186
Taylor, P 261
Telzer, E 95
Telzer, EH 95
Tenison, C 60
Tennison, C 60
Terasawa, Y 188, 214
Tervaniemi, M 57, 175, 191
Tessler, MH 263
Tettamanti, M 171
Teves, P 65
Teyler, T 113
Thakral, PP 228
Théberge, J 209
Themanson, J 219
Theriault, J 188
Thierry, G 165
Thoma, P 212
Thomas, KM 130
Thom, NJ 128
Thompson, C 113, 253
Thompson, EH 129
Thompson, J 132, 177
Thompson, JC 41, 190
Thompson-Schill, S 174
Thompson-Schill, SL 27
Thors, H 56
Tibon, R 142
Ticini, LF 116
Tie, Y 260
Tiitinen, H 55
Tim, H 178
Timmer, K 164
Tippett, LJ 110
Tirado-Santiago, G 191
Tochizawa, S 188
Tochner, Z 108
Todd Jones, J 196
Todd Jones, JEE 94
Todd, RM 241
Todorov, A 130
Toepel, U 263
Tomasino, B 58
Tompary, A 228
Tong, F 23
Tong, S 92
Toribio, I 236
Torres, JJ 117
Torres-Quesada, M 219
Tottenham, N 95
Touryan, J 238
Towns, S 139
Tranel, D 109, 120, 154, 172
Traulsen, S 139
Trauner, D 154
Traxler, MJ 197
Treadway, M 240
Treadway, MT 67
Tremblay, C-D 122
Trezise, K 241
Troiani, V 239
Tromp, J 65
Troup, LJ 98, 158
Trujillo, L 141
Truong, G 70
Tsai, J-L 76, 224
Tsai, P-S 124

278

2013 Annual Meeting
Tsao, D 20
Tseng, T-W 167
Tse, P 221, 233
Tsoi, L 188
Tubridy, S 228
Tu, H-W 112
Turk, D 39
Turkeltaub, PE 136, 252
Turner, A 50, 192
Turner, BO 229
Turner, N 259
Tuthill, S 236
Twomey, E 119
Tyler, LK 52, 222
Tzeng, OJ-L 105, 124
Tzeng, Y-L 76
Tzen, K-Y 167

U
Ueda, K 178
Ueki, K 106
Ueltzhoeffer, K 40
Ugen, S 107
Uitvlugt, MG 222
Uleman, J 129
Ullman, MT 136, 252, 253
Ulrike, B 75
Ulytska, B 121
Umeda, S 188, 214
Umemoto, A 101
Umla-Runge, K 263
Uncapher, MR 109
Unger, K 131, 190
Ungerleider, L 122
Unwalla, K 101
Ursu, S 191
Ustine, C 138

V
Vachon-Presseau, E 262
Vaidya, AR 219
Vakhtin, A 91, 236, 261
Valero-Cabre, A 63, 147,
182
Van Aken, K 117
Van Bochove, M 246
Vance, J 41
Vandekerckhove, M 188
van den Berg, B 210
Vandenberghe, R 153
van den Bosch, I 212
van den Brink, RL 248
Van den Brink, RL 122
van der Lely, HKJ 253
Vandermosten, M 75
van de Ville, D 231
van Diepen, R 239
Van Dongen, H 132
Van Duijvenvoorde, A 235
Van Hecke, AV 159
Van Hell, JG 254
van Heuven, W 77
Van Laecken, N 264
van Loosbroek, E 57
Van Opstal, F 264
Van Overwalle, F 188
van Reekum, CM 148
Van Rinsveld, A 107
Van Roost, D 207
Van Schie, H 99

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Van Vleet, T 65, 123, 152,
181
Van Vliet, KJ 127, 213
van Zoest, W 239
Vargas, IM 84
Varjacic, A 207
Varnum, M 128
Vartanian, O 68
Vas, A 236
Vassena, E 235
Vazquez, D 54, 60
Vedamurthy, I 232
Vegh, G 254
Velasco, R 96
Venezia, J 175
Venezia, JH 55, 56
Ventrella, C 54
Venza, E 149
Verguts, T 234, 235, 246,
264
Verhaeghen, P 44
Verhees, M 107
Verhein, J 56, 121
Vernon, A 123, 152, 181
Vernon, B 259
Vernon, EK 103
Verona, E 235
Verstynen, T 159, 246
Vestergren, P 113
Vettel, J 246
Vicky, D 146
Vidal, J 43
Vieira, F 219
Vignotto, M 251
Vilberg, K 256
Villa, L 121
Vincent, A 169
Vinogradov, S 114
Vinski, MT 101
Virag, K 229
Virtala, P 175
Viscomi, B 159
Visscher, K 151
Vissers, C 107, 125
Vissers, ME 248
Vitrano, D 264
v. Mohrenschildt, M 145
Vogelstein, JT 231
Vohra, S 127, 213
Volchan, E 184
Volz, K 266
Vonck, K 246
Von Der Heide, RJ 188
Voon, V 155
Voss, J 34, 52, 200, 256
Voss, JL 52, 84
Voss, M 109, 154, 162
Vo, V 119
Vo, VA 61
Voytek, B 123
Vrticka, P 154
Vuilleumier, P 111, 117,
184, 231
Vytal, K 185

W
Wager, T 65, 68
Wager, TD 10, 202, 207,
241, 261
Wagner, A 29
Wagner, AD 109

Wagner, DD 246
Wahlin, Å 226
Wais, P 180
Wakahiro, M 194
Wakschlag, L 34
Waldie, K 113
Walenski, M 108
Walker, C 102
Walker, D 41
Wallis, N 54
Walpola, I 39
Walsh, D 118, 235
Walsh, V 173
Walter, E 154
Wang, D 256
Wang, F 264
Wang, G 54
Wang, J 256
Wang, JX 260
Wang, L 127, 213
Wang, M-C 255
Wang, S 137, 252
Wang, T 167
Wang, TH 256
Wang, TY 235
Wang, W-c 256
Wang, X 194
Wang, Y 54
Wantz, AL 264
Ward, L 84, 146, 175
Warren, D 172
Warren, S 184
Wascher, E 122, 173, 180
Washida, Y 178
Wasisco, J 159
Wassermann, E 118, 259
Waszak, F 83, 115, 117, 204
Watanabe, K 264
Watanabe, M 118
Watrous, A 141
Watson, CE 262
Watson, H 111
Watson, P 249
Watter, S 101
Watts, S 241
Waytz, A 188
Weber, E 235
Weber-Fox, C 251
Weber, J 25
Weber, JE 206
Weber, K 138
Weber, R 128
Weeda, W 235
Weigl, M 200
Weiland, M 202, 249
Weinberg, D 257
Weinberger, A 131
Weintraub, S 36, 190
Weisberg, J 196
Weisend, M 236
Weiskopf, N 231
Wei, S-M 259
Weiss, C 204
Wei, T 137
Welbourne, S 49
Welsh-Bohmer, K 197
Wendelken, C 198, 236, 255
Weng, H 243
Weng, H-H 124
Weng, T 154
Werchan, D 114
Wesikopf, N 205

Westerberg, CE 110
Westerlund, M 195, 196
Weston, T 257
Westphal, AJ 102
Wetterlin, A 105, 163
Weymar, M 257
Whalen, P 68, 240
Whalen, PJ 186
Wheatley, T 165
Wheaton, L 85
Wheeler, M 265
Wheeler, ME 70, 115
White, N 188, 211
White-Schwoch, T 175
Whiting, CM 105
Whitney, KR 190
Whitney, P 132, 265
Whoo, S 66
Wichmann, FA 206
Wiebe, S 71, 154
Wiens, L 94
Wiese, H 58, 198
Wieser, M 189, 218
Wigboldus, D 99
Wiklund-Hörnqvist, C 82,
114
Wikström, J 199, 227
Wilbrecht, L 100
Wilckens, K 70
Wilding, E 82
Wilkins, K 40
Wilkinson, AJ 190
Wilkinson, L 259
Will, G-J 97
Williams, J 201
Williams, M 85
Williams, V 257
Willis, M 51
Wilsch, A 249
Wilson, J 257
Wilson, KE 241
Wilson-Mendenhall, C 243
Wilson, S 120
Winawer, J 262
Windmann, S 218
Wing, E 112
Wing, R 103
Wing yee, C 83
Win, K 257
Winkielman, P 77, 245
Winkler, A 240
Winter, W 247
Wipf, D 260
Wise, J 78
Wise, JR 173
Wise, R 201
Wisner, K 100
Wittmann, M 262
Wixted, J 80
Woldorff, M 210
Woldorff, MG 32, 102, 208
Wolford, G 236
Wolk, D 193, 257
Wolkenstein, L 185
Wolpe, N 86
Wolpert, DM 86
Woltering, S 104, 247
Womack, K 149, 171
Wong, C 109, 154
Wong, J 258
Wong, W 154, 228
Woo, C-W 241

2013 Annual Meeting
Wood, AG 50
Woodard, K 174
Woodcock, K 241
Wood, J 90
Woodruff Carr, K 175
Woods, AJ 265
Woollams, AM 47
Woolrich, MW 134
Woo, S 157, 265
Woroch, B 258
Worringer, B 132, 247
Worthy, D 71
Worthy, DA 59
Wouters, J 75
Wozny, T 102
Wright, WO 59, 242
Wu, AD 259
Wu, BCY 243, 250
Wu, C 265
Wu, DH 105, 124
Wu, H-C 49
Wu, P-Y 127
Wu, R 239
Wu, SW 148, 235
Wu, Y 230
Wyczesany, M 242
Wynn, J 254

X
Xia, J 258
Xiang, M 254
Xiao, P 174
Xu, L 54

Y
Yamada, Y 239
Yamaguchi, K 177
Yamaguchi, S 151
Yamaguchi, Y 244
Yanasak, N 131
Yan, C-G 231
Yang, F 237
Yang, F-p 224
Yang, F-P 167
Yang, H 44
Yang, J 138, 197
Yang, J-C 190
Yang, L 190
Yang, M 95, 242
Yang, Q 83
Yang, S 35
Yang, T-H 127
Yang, X-F 112
Yanilmaz, A 197
Yap, N 228
Yarkoni, T 65, 68
Yatabe, K 264
Yates, ME 101
Yeh, CI 148
Yeh, M-Y 124
Yen, N 104, 134
Yen, N-S 127, 243
Yeung, L-K 114
Yeung, N 58, 83
Yick, YY 79
Yi, D-J 69
Yi, S 172, 201
Yiu, L 76
Yokomukai, Y 176
Yokoyama, JS 142

Author Index
Yokoyama, R 265
Yomogida, Y 265
Yoncheva, Y 136
Yonelinas, A 51, 198
Yonelinas, AP 50, 110, 169,
203, 256
Yoon, HS 125, 214
YorkWilliams, S 192
Young, L 188
Young, R 92
Yousef, SM 250
You, Y 243
Yu, D 241
Yuen, K 218
Yu, H 244
Yu, L 252
Yu, LQ 219
Yum, YN 164
Yushkevich, P 257
Yu, W 236
Yu, YH 76

Zwiers, MP 54
Zwissler, B 185, 247
Zwitserlood, P 45

Z
Zabelina, D 240
Zacks, J 109
Zahodne, LB 255
Zald, DH 67
Zamm, A 177
Zamzow, R 217
Zamzow, RM 97, 260
Zander, T 266
Zannoni, I 248
Zanto, T 250
Zarolia, P 242
Zatorre, RJ 212
Zeiller, M 185
Zelinski, E 249
Zeller, JBM 149
Zendel, BR 122
Zepf, F 36
Zevin, J 46
Zhang, A 35
Zhang, C 164
Zhang, L 190
Zhang, W 43, 118, 192
Zhang, Y 118
Zhao, D 230
Zhao, W 124
Zhao, Y 230
Zhen, S 118, 192
Zhong, S 234
Zhong, X 264
Zhou, R 95, 242
Zhou, X 194, 244
Zhu, DC 68
Zhu, L 119, 234, 266
Zhuravleva, T 33, 151
Zhu, Z 43, 192
Ziegler, DA 180
Zimmerman, B 54
Zimmer, U 242
Zirnstein, M 197
Zobel, E 34
Zokaei, N 74
Zomet, A 123, 152, 181
Zottoli, T 119
Zucker, H 167
Zucker, HR 250
Zvyagintsev, M 36, 128
Zwanzger, P 36, 125, 158
Zweig, J 87
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

279

Hyatt Regency Floorplan
Street Level - CNS Registration, Grand Ballroom

Bay Level (2nd Floor) - Seacliff and Bayview Rooms

280

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

