Cognitive Neuroscience Society
2012 Annual Meeting Program

A Supplement of the Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Cognitive Neuroscience Society, c/o Center for Mind and Brain
University of California, Davis
267 Cousteau Place, Davis, CA 95616
ISSN 1096-8857 © CNS
www.cogneurosociety.org

Table of Contents
CNS Committees and Staff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Schedule Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Poster Schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Graduate Student Award . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Postdoctoral Fellows Award . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
George A. Miller Prize. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Distinguished Career Contributions Award . . . . . . . . 10
Young Investigator Award. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
General Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Exhibitors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Symposium Sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Slide Sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Poster Session A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Poster Session B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Poster Session C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
Poster Session D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
Poster Session E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
Poster Session F . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
Poster Session G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 180
Poster Session H. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 205
Poster Session I. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
Poster Topic Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 249
Author Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 251
Palmer House Floor Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 264
Advertisements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 265

Cover photo Park Millennium, Chicago, Illinois
Photo By S.Borisov/Shutterstock.com
© S. Borisov
The CNS Program Committee reserves the right to change the meeting program at any time without notice.
This program was correct at the time of print.

2012 Committees
and Staff

Governing Board
Roberto Cabeza, Ph.D., Duke University
Marta Kutas, Ph.D., University of California, San Diego
Helen Neville, Ph.D., University of Oregon
Michael I. Posner, Ph.D., University of Oregon
Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University
Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D.,
University of California, Santa Barbara (ex officio)
George R. Mangun, Ph.D.,
University of California, Davis (ex officio)
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D.,
University of Michigan (ex officio)

Program Committee
Chair: Lorraine K. Tyler, Ph.D., University of Cambridge
Marie Banich, Ph.D., University of Colorado
Randy L. Buckner, Ph.D., Harvard University
Alan Kingstone, Ph.D., University of British Columbia
Ken Paller, Ph.D., Northwestern University
Brad Postle, Ph.D., University of Wisconsin-Madison

Poster Committee
Chair: Stephanie Ortigue, Ph.D., Syracuse University
Xu Cui, Ph.D., Stanford University
Tobias Egner, Ph.D., Duke University
Nadine Gaab, Ph.D., Harvard Medical School
Brian Gonsalves, Ph.D.,
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Hauke Heekeren, Ph.D., Freie Universität Berlin
Fumiko Hoeft, Ph.D., Stanford University
Matthew Jerram, Ph.D., Suffolk University
Irene Kan, Ph.D., Villanova University
Dante Picchioni, Walter Reed Army Institute for Research
Jelena Ristic, Ph.D., McGill University
Rebecca Spencer, Ph.D., University of MassachusettsAmherst

CNS Staff
Kate Tretheway, Executive Director
Sangay Wangmo, Administrative Assistant

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Slide Session Committee
Chair: Roberto Cabeza, Ph.D., Duke University
David Badre, Ph.D., Brown University
Kalina Christoff, Ph.D., University of British Columbia
Clayton Curtis, Ph.D., New York University
Lila Davachi, Ph.D., New York University
Scott Huettel, Ph.D., Duke University
Alumit Ishai, Ph.D., University of Zurich
Elizabeth Kensinger, Ph.D., Boston College
Gina Kuperberg, Ph.D., Harvard University
Kia Nobre, Ph.D., University of Oxford
Kevin Oschner, Ph.D., Columbia University
Thad Polk, Ph.D., University of Michigan
Tamara Swaab, Ph.D., University of California, Davis
Marty Woldorff, Ph.D., Duke University

Young Investigator Awards Committee
Chair: Charan Ranganath, Ph.D.,
University of California, Davis
Sabine Kastner, Ph.D., Princeton University
Kevin LaBar, Ph.D., Duke University
Eleanor Maguire, Ph.D., University College, London
Cathy Price, Ph.D., University College, London

Founding Committee (1994)
Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D.,
University of California, Santa Barbara
George R. Mangun, Ph.D., University of California, Davis
Steve Pinker, Ph.D., MIT
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan
Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University
Art Shimamura, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley

TM Events, Inc. Meeting Staff
Tara Miller, Event Director
Kerry Bosch, Staff & Volunteer Manager
Joan Carole, Exhibits Manager
Luisa Conroy, Event Associate
Linda Hacker, Event Associate
Shawna Lampkin, Event Associate
Dustin Miller, Monitoring Manager
Renee Smith, Registration Manager
Shauney Wilson, Submissions Manager
Jeff Wilson, Website & Program Manager

1

Schedule Overview

Saturday, March 31, 2012
12:00 - 5:00 pm
12:00 - 7:00 pm
1:00 - 3:00 pm
3:00 - 4:15 pm
4:30 - 5:30 pm

Exhibitor Check-In, Exhibit Hall
Onsite & Pre-Paid Registration Check-In, Grand Ballroom Foyer
Slide Session 1, “Attention and Executive Functions,” Grand Ballroom
Slide Session 2, “Open Paper Session,” Grand Ballroom
18th Annual George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience, Grand Ballroom
Announcement of the Young Investigator Awards, Grand Ballroom
5:30 - 6:30 pm GAM and Welcome Reception, Exhibit Hall
5:30 - 7:30 pm Exhibit Hall Open, Exhibit Hall
5:30 - 7:30 pm Poster Session A, Exhibit Hall

Sunday, April 1, 2012
7:30 am - 6:00 pm
8:00 - 10:00 am
8:00 - 8:30 am
8:00 - 10:00 am
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
12:00 - 1:00 pm
1:00 - 3:00 pm
1:00 - 3:00 pm
2:30 - 3:00 pm
3:00 - 4:00 pm
4:00 - 5:00 pm
4:00 - 6:00 pm
4:00 - 6:00 pm

Onsite & Pre-Paid Registration Check-In, Grand Ballroom Foyer
Exhibit Hall Open, Exhibit Hall
Continental Breakfast, Exhibit Hall
Poster Session B, Exhibit Hall
Symposium Session 1, “Emotion’s Impact on Cognition – Dissociating Enhancing and
Impairing Effects,” Grand Ballroom
Slide Session 3, “Perception,” Red Lacquer Room
Lunch Break
Exhibit Hall Open, Exhibit Hall
Poster Session C, Exhibit Hall
Coffee Service, Exhibit Hall
Distinguished Career Contributions Award in Cognitive Neuroscience, Grand Ballroom
DCC Reception, Exhibit Hall
Exhibit Hall Open, Exhibit Hall
Poster Session D, Exhibit Hall

Monday, April 2, 2012
8:00 am - 7:00 pm
8:00 - 10:00 am
8:00 - 8:30 am
8:00 - 10:00 am
9:00 - 9:40 am
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
12:00 - 1:00 pm
1:00 - 3:00 pm
1:00 - 3:00 pm
2:30 - 3:00 pm

2

Onsite & Pre-Paid Registration Check-In, Grand Ballroom Foyer
Exhibit Hall Open, Exhibit Hall
Continental Breakfast, Exhibit Hall
Poster Session E, Exhibit Hall
YIA Special Lecture 1 - Adam Aron, Grand Ballroom
Symposium Session 2, “Using Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation to Enhance Cognitive and
Motor Abilities in the Typical, Atypical, and Aging Brain,” Grand Ballroom
Slide Session 4, “Thinking and Decision Making,” Red Lacquer Room
Lunch Break
Exhibit Hall Open, Exhibit Hall
Poster Session F, Exhibit Hall
Coffee Service, Exhibit Hall

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Schedule Overview

3:00 - 5:00 pm Symposium Session 3, “Music as a Medium for Perception and Action,” Grand Ballroom
Slide Session 5, “Language,” Red Lacquer Room
5:00 - 7:00 pm Exhibit Hall Open, Exhibit Hall
5:00 - 7:00 pm Poster Session G, Exhibit Hall

Tuesday, April 3, 2012
8:00 am - 5:00 pm
8:00 - 10:00 am
8:00 - 8:30 am
8:00 - 10:00 am
10:00 am - 12:00 pm
12:00 - 1:00 pm
1:00 - 3:00 pm
3:00 - 5:00 pm
3:00 - 3:30 pm
3:00 - 5:00 pm

Onsite & Pre-Paid Registration Check-In, Grand Ballroom Foyer
Exhibit Hall Open, Exhibit Hall
Continental Breakfast, Exhibit Hall
Poster Session H, Exhibit Hall
Symposium Session 4, “The Brain on Food: Investigations of motivation, dopamine and eating behaviors,” Grand Ballroom
Slide Session 6, “Long-Term Memory,” Red Lacquer Room
Lunch Break
Symposium Session 5, “Understanding events: New cross-disciplinary research,”
Grand Ballroom
Slide Session 7, “Emotion and Social,” Red Lacquer Room
Exhibit Hall Open, Exhibit Hall
Coffee Service, Exhibit Hall
Poster Session I, Exhibit Hall

Save the Date

Join us for the
20th Anniversary Meeting
CNS 2013
April 13 - 16, 2013
San Francisco
Submission Deadline: November 1, 2012

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

3

Poster Schedule

Poster sessions are scheduled for Saturday - Tuesday in
the 4th floor Exhibit hall of the Palmer House Hotel. All
attendees must present their CNS 2012 name badge to
enter the exhibit hall. Do not leave personal items in the
poster room.
The presenting author must be present during the
assigned session. You may post your materials on the
board assigned to you at any time after the "Set-up
Begins" time (listed below), but before the beginning of
the assigned poster session. You must remove your poster
promptly no later than the time listed above in "Takedown Complete." Any posters left up after the "Takedown Complete" time may be discarded.
Only badged poster presenters for the current session and
exhibitors will be allowed in the exhibit hall during set up
and take-down hours. All other attendees will be turned
away at the door.
No attendee or exhibitor will be allowed to enter the
exhibit hall after the Closed for the Day - No Entry hours.

Saturday

5:30 - 7:30 pm

Sunday

8:00 - 10:00 am
1:00 - 3:00 pm
4:00 - 6:00 pm

Monday

8:00 - 10:00 am
1:00 - 3:00 pm
5:00 - 7:00 pm

Tuesday

8:00 - 10:00 am
3:00 - 5:00 pm

Exhibit Hall Closed for the Day - No Entry
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday

7:45 pm
6:15 pm
7:15 pm
5:15 pm

Date &
Time

Set-up
Starts

Session
Begins

Session
Ends

Takedown
Ends

A

Saturday,
March 31

5:00 pm

5:30 pm

7:30 pm

7:45 pm

Attention, Emotion & Social, Executive P
rocesses, Language, Long-Term Memory,
Neuroanatomy, Other, Perception & Action,
Thinking

B

Sunday,
April 1

*7:30 am

8:00 am

10:00 am

10:30 am

Attention, Emotion & Social, Executive
Processes, Language, Long-Term Memory,
Perception & Action, Thinking

C

Sunday,
April 1

12:30 pm

1:00 pm

3:00 pm

3:30 pm

Attention, Emotion & Social, Executive Processes, Language, Long-Term Memory, Thinking

D

Sunday,
April 1

3:30 pm

4:00 pm

6:00 pm

6:15 pm

Attention, Emotion & Social, Executive
Processes, Language, Long-Term Memory,
Methods, Perception & Action, Thinking

E

Monday,
April 2

*7:30 am

8:00 am

10:00 am

10:30 am

Attention, Emotion & Social, Language, LongTerm Memory, Methods, Perception & Action,
Thinking

Poster
Session

4

Exhibit Hours - Open to all Attendees

Keywords Included

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Poster Schedule

Date &
Time

Set-up
Starts

Session
Begins

Session
Ends

Takedown
Ends

F

Monday,
April 2

12:30 pm

1:00 pm

3:00 pm

3:30 pm

Attention, Emotion & Social, Executive
Processes, Language, Long-Term Memory,
Perception & Action, Thinking

G

Monday,
April 2

4:30 pm

5:00 pm

7:00 pm

7:15 pm

Attention, Emotion & Social, Executive
Processes, Language, Long-Term Memory,
Perception & Action, Thinking

H

Tuesday,
April 3

* 7:30 am

8:00 am

10:00 am

10:30 am

Emotion & Social, Executive Processes,
Language, Long-Term Memory, Perception &
Action

I

Tuesday,
April 3

2:30 pm

3:00 pm

5:00 pm

5:15 pm

Emotion & Social, Executive Processes,
Language, Long-Term Memory, Methods, Perception & Action

Poster
Session

Keywords Included

* Please note that only scheduled poster presenters may enter the exhibit hall during the early morning set-up time.
All other attendees may only enter when the exhibit hall opens at 8:00 am.

Student Association Social Night
Monday, April 2, 7:00 pm, Palmer House Hilton Hotel Lounge and Cactus Bar & Grill
All students of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society are welcome. We will introduce everyone to each other and
get acquainted before we head out around 7:30 pm to Cactus Bar & Grill (404 South Wells St., at Wells and Van
Buren)
There is no cover charge at the bar. Attendees are responsible for purchasing their own food and drinks (sorry,
no funding :)) More information can be found on the Cognitive Neuroscience Society Student Association
Facebook page ( http://www.facebook.com/CNSStudentAssociation ).
We look forward to meeting you!

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

5

Graduate Student Award and
Postdoctoral Fellows Award

Graduate Student Award

2012 GSA Award Recipients

Six to ten abstracts are chosen each year to receive the
Graduate Student (GSA) award. Winners are awarded a
$500 travel award and identified as GSA winners in the
meeting program. GSA was previously named Graduate
Students Present (GSP).

Congratulations to the following winners of the 2012 GSA
Award.

GSA presentations are specially-recognized slide presentations that are scheduled and presented with the topically organized slide sessions. As with standard slide
presentations, each GSA student first author is given 15
minutes to present and discuss his or her research findings. GSA applications that were not chosen were automatically considered for a standard slide or poster
presentation.

Julian Keil, University of Konstanz
Single trial pre-stimulus beta-band phase influences
audiovisual integration
Category: Perception
Eva Telzer, UCLA
The Effects of Inadequate Sleep on Brain Function During
Risk Taking in Adolescence
Category: Thinking and Decision Making
Christopher T. Smith, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill
Interacting effects of genetic polymorphisms regulating
dopamine signaling in the frontal cortex on accurate target detection under high working memory load
Category: Attention and Executive Functions
Zhenghan Qi, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Neurocognitive plasticity in verb bias learning: An ERP
study
Category: Language
Vishnu Murty, Duke University
Reward Motivation Increases Hippocampal Sensitivity to
and Memory for Expectancy Violations
Category: Long-Term Memory
Helen Weng, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Multi-Voxel Pattern Analysis of Brain States After Compassion Training Predicts Charitable Donations
Category: Emotion and Social

6

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Graduate Student Award and Postdoctoral Fellows Award

Postdoctoral Fellows Award

2012 PFA Award Recipients

We are excited to announce the addition of the new Postdoctoral Fellows Awards (PFA) in 2012! The award will
recognize outstanding contributions by CNS members
during their postdoctoral careers. Up to seven awardees
will be selected from among eligible submissions for slide
presentations for the annual meeting. Awardees receive a
$500 travel award and are identified as recipients in the
meeting program.

Congratulations to the following winners of the 2012 PFA
Award.

The presentations by the Postdoctoral Fellows Award
recipients are specially-recognized slide presentations
that are scheduled and presented with the topically organized slide sessions. One winner presents in each of the
slide sessions. As with standard slide presentations, each
first author is given 15 minutes to present and discuss
their research findings.
Applicants who were not selected for an award were still
considered for a standard slide or poster presentation.

Leonardo Fernandino, Medical College of Wisconsin
Where is the action? Action sentence processing in Parkinson’s disease
Category: Language
Jascha Swisher, Vanderbilt University
Variability in simple reaction times correlates with BOLD
onset latency in motor cortex
Category: Perception
Jamil Zaki, Harvard University
Equitable decision-making is associated with neural
markers of value
Category: Emotion and Social
Ilana Dew, Duke University
Creating illusory memories with masked priming
Category: Long-Term Memory
Gregory Samanez-Larkin, Vanderbilt University
A thalamocorticostriatal dopamine circuit for psychostimulant-enhanced human cognitive flexibility
Category: Attention and Executive Functions

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

7

George A. Miller
Prize

18th Annual George A. Miller Prize
in Cognitive Neuroscience

society. The prize winner attends the annual meeting of
the Cognitive Neuroscience Society and delivers the
George A. Miller Lecture.

Saturday, March 31, 4:30 - 5:30 pm, Grand Ballroom
Reception to follow, 5:30- 6:30 pm, Exhibit Hall

Beyond the Mean to the Individual: Understanding
Neuronal and Network Activity

The Cognitive Neuroscience Society is pleased to
announce the recipient of the 2012 George A. Miller Prize
in Cognitive Neuroscience.

Dr. Eve Marder
Brandeis University
The George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience was
established in 1995 by the Cognitive Neuroscience Society
and the James S. McDonnell Foundation to honor the
career contributions of George A. Miller to cognitive neuroscience. The first 10 years of the prize were funded by
generous support from the James S. McDonnell Foundation.
The prize is awarded to the nominee whose career is characterized by distinguished and sustained scholarship and
research at the cutting-edge of cognitive neuroscience.
Extraordinary innovation and high impact on international scientific thinking should be a hallmark of the recipient's work.
Each year a call for nominations for the George A. Miller
Prize is made to the membership of the society. The recipient is selected by a committee with the approval of the
8

Ion channels, receptors, and other membrane proteins are
constantly being replaced on time scales from minutes to
hours to days. At the same time, circuit function must
remain stable over years and decades. Computational and
experimental studies suggest that a series of homeostatic
mechanisms preserve circuit stability despite the turnover
of circuit components. Additionally, recent theoretical
and experimental work shows that similar circuit outputs
can be produced with highly variable circuit parameters.
This suggests that the nervous system of each healthy
individual has found a set of different solutions that give
“good enough” circuit performance. Studies using the
rhythmic central pattern generating networks in the crustacean stomatogastric nervous system argue that synaptic
and intrinsic currents can vary far more than the output of
the circuit in which they are found. As a corollary, to
understand circuit performance, merely collecting mean
data from many individuals can lead to errors. Instead, it
becomes important to measure as many individual network parameters in each individual as possible. These
data have implications for the kinds of changes that allow
the nervous system to recover function after injury.

About Eve Marder
Eve Marder is the Victor and Gwendolyn Beinfield Professor of Neuroscience in the Biology Department of Brandeis University and is the Head of the Division of Science
at Brandeis. Marder received her Ph.D. in 1974 from
UCSD, and subsequently conducted a one-year postdoc at
the University of Oregon and then a 3 year postdoc at the
Ecole Normale Superieure in Paris, France. She became
an assistant professor in the Biology Department at Brandeis University in 1978, received tenure in 1984, and was
promoted to professor in 1990. During her time at Brandeis University Professor Marder was instrumental in the
establishment of the undergraduate and Ph.D. programs
in Neuroscience.
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

George A. Miller Prize

Marder was Chief Editor of the Journal of Neurophysiology from 2002-2008. She has served on the editorial
boards of Physiological Reviews, Journal of Neurobiology, Journal of Neuroscience, Journal of Comparative
Neurology, Current Biology, Current Opinion in Neurobiology, Journal of Experimental Biology, Journal of Comparative Physiology, and PNAS. Marder has served on
numerous study sections and review panels for the NIH,
NSF, and other funding agencies, as well as on advisory
boards of numerous institutions, including Janelia Farms,
NCBS (Bangalore), and the McGovern Institute at MIT.
Marder was President of the Society for Neuroscience in
2008. Prior to this she served on the Council for the Society for Neuroscience, Council of the Biophysical Society
and several APS committees. She is now a member of the
NINDS Council.
Marder is a member of the National Academy of Sciences,
a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences,
a Fellow of the Biophysical Society and a Fellow of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science.
She received the Miriam Salpeter Memorial Award for
Women in Neuroscience, and the W.F. Gerard Prize from
the Society for Neuroscience, and an Honorary Doctor of
Science from Bowdoin College. She has received two
NINDS Javits Awards and a Merit Award from NIMH.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Marder studies the dynamics of small neuronal networks
using the crustacean stomatogastric nervous system. Her
work was instrumental in demonstrating that neuronal
circuits are not “hard-wired” but can be reconfigured by
neuromodulatory neurons and substances to produce a
variety of outputs. Together with Larry Abbott, her laboratory pioneered the “dynamic clamp”. Marder was one
of the first experimentalists to forge long-standing collaborations with theorists and has for more than 20 years
combined experimental work with insights from modeling and theoretical studies. Starting in the early 1990’s,
her lab pioneered studies of homeostatic regulation of
intrinsic membrane properties, which was instrumental in
stimulating work on the mechanisms by which brains
remain stable while allowing for change during development and learning. This work addressed issues relevant
to understanding how stability in networks arises despite
ongoing channel and receptor turnover and modulation.
Most recently, she is studying the extent to which similar
network performance can arise from different sets of
underlying network parameters. In this way it opens a
detailed study of the variation in individual brains in normal healthy animals.

9

Distinguished Career
Contributions Award

Distinguished Career Contributions Award
Sunday, April 1, 3:00 - 4:00 pm, Grand Ballroom
Reception to follow, 4:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
The Cognitive Neuroscience Society is pleased to
announce the recipient of the inaugural Distinguished
Career Contributions Award.

Dr. Morris Moscovitch
University of Toronto and the Rotman Research
Institute of Baycrest Centre for Geriatric Care
The Distinguished Career Contributions (DCC) award
honors senior cognitive neuroscientists for their distinguished career, leadership and mentoring in the field of
cognitive neuroscience. This year’s recipient was selected
by a subcommittee of the CNS Governing Board from
among the nominations received in response to the
George A. Miller Prize call.

Episodic memory and hippocampal-neocortical
interactions:

and neocortex in memory, and opened new fields of
investigation on the influence of episodic memory in
other domains including perception, language, imagination, problem solving, and decision making.

About Morris Moscovitch
Morris Moscovitch, is Professor of Psychology at the University of Toronto and staff scientist at the Rotman
Research Institute, and holds the Glassman Chair in Neuropsychology and Aging. Born in Bucharest, Roumania in
1945, he moved to Israel at four and to Canada at seven.
He received his B.Sc. at McGill in 1966 with Peter Milner,
and his MA and PhD from the University of Pennsylvania
in 1972 with Paul Rozin, followed by a post-doctoral fellowship at the Montreal Neurological Institute with
Brenda Milner (1973-74). He has been a visiting professor
at the Hebrew University with Shlomo Bentin (1978-79,
and 2000), at The Institute of Advanced Studies in Jerusalem, with Israel Nachshon (1985-86), and at The University of Arizona, with Lynn Nadel (1996, 1999-2000). He
was elected a Fellow of Divisions 3 and 6 of APA, of
AAAS, of The Royal Society of Canada, and the Society
for Experimental Psychology, and was the recipient, in
2008, of the Hebb Award from CSCBBCS (Canada). Dr.
Moscovitch also received the William James Award, from
APS, and in 2012, the Distinguished Career Contribution
Award from CNS. He was Co-Editor-in-Chief and Section
Editor of Neuropsychologia and serves on the editorial
board of many other journals. His research interests
include memory, face-recognition, attention, and hemispheric specialization in young and old adults and in people with focal lesions and degenerative disorders. He is
married to Jill Ornstein and they have two children, and
three grandchildren.

How are memory and knowledge acquired, retained and
applied? In the last 20 years, long-held views about the
neural substrates mediating recent and remote episodic
and semantic memory have been modified by some surprising, yet converging, evidence from psychology and
from cognitive and behavioural neuroscience. These findings shed a new light on the function of the hippocampus
10

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Young Investigator
Award

The Young Investigator Award in Cognitive Neuroscience
recognizes outstanding contributions by scientists early in
their careers. Two awardees, one male and one female, are
named each year and are honored at the annual meeting
(immediately before the George A. Miller Award). Each
winner received a $500 award and gives a 30-minute talk
at the meeting.
The Cognitive Neuroscience Society is pleased to present
this year’s recipients of the Young Investigator Award.

Brain circuits for controlling response
tendencies
Adam Aron, Ph.D., Associate Professor, Dept of
Psychology, University of California San Diego
Monday, April 2, 9:00 - 9:40 am, Grand Ballroom
The ability to control inappropriate response tendencies is
a key feature of human self-control. Such control requires
integrating goals about what tendencies to stop with
inhibitory control mechanisms that target the motor system. I will present evidence about the neural correlates in
humans using several neuroscience methods including
imaging, stimulation and electrophysiology. I will argue
that the control of inappropriate response tendencies is
implemented via prefrontal cortex in concert with the
basal ganglia and I will outline several theoretical and
clinical implications.
Adam R. Aron is an Associate
Professor in the Department of
Psychology at the University of
California, San Diego. He
received his PhD in cognitive
neuroscience from the University of Cambridge in 2003, and
was subsequently a postdoc at
UCLA. His overarching concern
is to better understand how people control themselves, especially
how they stop, or prepare to stop,
inappropriate response tendencies. To understand the brain architecture underlying such cognitive control he performs studies with electrophysiology,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

magnetic resonance imaging, Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
and patient groups. His research has been supported by the
National Institutes of Health (NIDA), the National Science Foundation, NARSAD, CHDI and the Alfred P. Sloan foundation.

Roshan Cools, Ph.D., Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Centre for Cognitive
Neuroimaging, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical
Centre, Department of Psychiatry
Roshan Cools is currently on maternity leave and is
unable to attend CNS 2012. She will present her YIA lecture at CNS 2013 in San Francisco.
Roshan Cools is Full Professor of
Cognitive Neuropsychiatry at the
Radboud University Nijmegen
Medical Centre and the Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, where she directs the
Cognitive Control group. She
received her MPhil (1999) and
PhD (2003) in Experimental Psychology at the University of Cambridge, UK. After her PhD she
received a Royal Society Dorothy
Hodgkin (2002) and a Royal Society University Research Fellowship (2006). From 2003 until 2005,
she conducted postdoctoral work at the Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute at UC Berkeley, California. Her group combines
psychopharmacology with experimental psychology, functional
and chemical neuroimaging, patient work, genetics and transcranial magnetic stimulation to address mechanistic questions
about neural, neurochemical and psychological processes of the
cognitive and motivational control of decision making. In particular her group aims to advance our understanding of the system-level mechanisms by which the ascending neuromodulators
dopamine and serotonin affect behavioural control in humans,
with the ultimate aim to contribute to both basic cognitive neuroscience and cognitive neuropsychiatry.

11

General Information

Abstracts
The poster and slide abstracts can be found in the printed
program and in the PDF version which is downloadable
from the cnsmeeting.org website.

ATM

Exhibit Hall. It is included in the registration fee. Please
refer to the table below for the catering times.

Receptions

Three permanent ATMs are located in the Palmer House
Hilton Hotel, two on street level and one in the lobby.

Audiovisual Equipment for Talks
LCD projectors (e.g., for PowerPoint presentations) will
be provided in all rooms where spoken sessions are
scheduled; both PC and Mac computers will be available
for use. Presenters may bring their own computers and set
them up BEFORE the start of the session in which they are
presenting. A switchbox will be provided to allow several
computers to be connected to the LCD projector in a room.
Presenters are strongly encouraged to arrive in their
scheduled session room a minimum of 30 minutes before
their talks so that they know how to set up their equipment. Overhead projectors will NOT be provided.

Baggage Check
Baggage Check with the Palmer House Hilton Hotel Bellman for attendees who are registered guests is available in
the lobby.

Business Center
The Palmer House Hilton Hotel has a Self Service Business center located on the 7th Floor with complimentary
Internet Access and Printer available 24-Hours. There is a
Full service UPS Business Center located near the Main
Entrance.

Catering
Complimentary food and beverage service is available to
all registered attendees at the following times in the

12

Saturday,
March 31

Sunday,
April 1

GAM and
Welcome
Reception

DCC
Reception

Exhibit Hall
5:30 - 6:30
pm

Monday,
April 2

Tuesday,
April 3

Exhibit Hall
4:00 - 5:00
pm

Continental
Breakfasts

Exhibit Hall Exhibit Hall Exhibit Hall

Coffee
Breaks

Exhibit Hall Exhibit Hall Exhibit Hall

8:00 am 8:30 am
2:30 pm 3:00 pm

8:00 am 8:30 am
2:30 pm 3:00 pm

8:00 am 8:30 am
3:00 - 3:30
pm

Certificate of Attendance
To receive a Certificate of Attendance please visit the registration desk. If you require any amendments, we will be
happy to email/mail a copy after the meeting. See also
Receipts.

Chair People
Please ensure that you and your symposium speakers are
available in your presentation room at least thirty minutes
before the start of the session. Persons chairing sessions
will be asked to keep the talks on time.

Coat, Baggage & Poster Check
We do not provide this service; if anyone wishes to leave
something under a table for safekeeping they should do
so at their own risk. It is not our responsibility if things are
lost or stolen.

Contact Us
To contact us onsite, visit the Registration Desk in the
Ballroom Foyer of the Palmer House Hilton Hotel, or send
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

General Information

an email to meeting@cnsmeeting.org We will respond to
your email at our soonest opportunity.

Drink Tickets
Each Attendee will receive two drink tickets, they can be
redeemed for alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverages at the
GAM and Welcome Reception on Saturday or at the Distinguished Career Contributions Award in Cognitive
Neuroscience (DCC) Reception on Sunday. Lost drink
tickets may not be replaced.

Exhibit Hall

Hotel Lobby
Neatly tucked away just off the picturesque lobby is an
enclave of comfort and elegance. Following in a tradition
of perfectly poured martinis and warm, inviting conversation, the lobby bar is the ideal setting to reconnect with
colleagues or reminisce with friends. Take a break and
enjoy a cup of tea. Afternoon Tea is offered in the Lobby
of the Palmer House from 2 pm - 4 pm daily. Reservations
are required. Make your reservations today by calling
Lockwood Restaurant at 312.917.3404. Hours: Opens
Daily at 11am.

Lockwood Restaurant

The conference exhibit is located in the Exhibit Hall of the
Palmer House Hilton Hotel. Located in this room are the
posters, exhibit booths, and catering. The Exhibit Hall is
open at the following times:
Saturday, April 2

5:30 - 7:30 pm*

Sunday, April 3

8:00 - 10:00 am
1:00 - 3:00 pm
4:00 - 6:00 pm*

Monday, April 4

8:00 - 10:00 am
1:00 - 3:00 pm
5:00 - 7:00 pm*

Tuesday, April 5

8:00 - 10:00 am
3:00 - 5:00 pm*

*Please note the room will close and lock sharply; there is
no admittance until the following day.

Facebook
Find us on Facebook search for "CNS Annual Meeting"
and like us!

Future Meetings
Please join us for the annual CNS meeting in San Francisco on April 13 - 16, 2013, celebrating our 20th Anniversary.

Hotel
The Palmer House Hilton Hotel is our exclusive Hotel for
the CNS 2012 Annual Meeting. It is located at 17 East
Monroe Street, Chicago, Illinois, United States 606031.

Hotel Restaurants
The Palmer House Hilton Hotel offers several meal
options for all tastes and budgets. A variety of delicious
dining options are available for you to choose from.

With its sophisticated new style and chef's signature
dishes like Foie Gras and Pan Roasted Georges Bank Codfish, Lockwood has earned a place as one of Chicago's hottest new restaurants. For a dining experience that's as
artistic as it is elegant, a meal at Lockwood's is an experience not to be missed.
Lockwood Restaurant and Bar is open for:
Breakfast: 6:30am - 11am
Ala Carte Brunch: Sat & Sun 11am - 2pm
Lunch: Mon thru Fri 11am - 2pm, Sat & Sun 11am - 3pm
Dinner Prix Fixe: 5pm - 7pm
Dinner: Sun thru Thu 5pm - 10pm, Fri & Sat 5pm - 11pm

Potters Lounge
This posh new split-level bar offers a sumptuous setting
to see and be seen in downtown Chicago. Sink into one of
the plush leather sofas and enjoy the scene as you mingle
with friends over your favorite cocktail. Potter's Lounge
offers the finest libations along with a top-shelf experience
befitting Chicago's most famous hotel. Potter's Lounge is
open Wednesday thru Saturday at 4pm.

Internet Access
Free Internet terminals are located in Foyer near the CNS
Registration Desk. Internet terminals are available during
meeting registration hours on Saturday, Sunday, Monday
and Tuesday when not needed for onsite registration. See
Onsite Meeting Registration. There is complimentary
Wireless Internet Access in the Lobby of the Palmer
House Hilton Hotel, see hotel personnel for info.

Lost & Found
Please check with the CNS Registration Desk for any
items lost and found.

Meeting Rooms
All meeting rooms for symposia and Slide/GSA/PFA sessions are located in the Palmer House Hilton Hotel.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

13

General Information

Member Services

Poster Sessions

The member services desk is located in Foyer Area of the
Palmer House Hilton Hotel. The member services desk
will be open at the following times:

Poster sessions are scheduled on Saturday, March 31, Sunday, April 1, Monday April 2 and Tuesday, April 3. The
presenting author must be present during the assigned
session and the other authors may be present during the
remaining time to be available to answer any questions.
The poster sessions are in the Exhibit Hall in the Palmer
House Hilton Hotel. Badges are required at all times. Do
not leave personal items in the poster room.

Saturday, March 31 7:30 am - 4:00 pm
Sunday, April 1
7:30 am - 4:00 pm
Monday, April 2
7:30 am - 4:00 pm
Tuesday, April 3
8:00 am - 2:00 pm

Messages
A bulletin board will be available for messages and job
postings near the CNS Registration Desk in the Ballroom
Foyer.

Mobile Phones
Attendees are asked to silence their mobile phones when
in sessions. See also phone charging station.

Name Badges
The Palmer House Hilton Hotel is open to public access.
For security purposes, attendees, speakers and exhibitors
are asked to wear their name badges to all sessions and
social functions. Entrance into sessions and Exhibit Hall is
restricted to registered attendees wearing the official CNS
2012 badges. If you misplace your name badge, please go
to the Registration Desk for a replacement; there will be a
replacement fee.

Onsite Meeting Registration
The CNS Registration Desk is located in the Ballroom
Foyer Area of the Palmer House Hilton Hotel. The registration desk will be open at the following times:
Saturday, March 31, 12:00 - 7:30 pm
Sunday, April 1, 7:30 am - 6:00 pm
Monday, April 2, 8:00 am - 7:00 pm
Tuesday, April 3, 8:00am - 5:00 pm

Parking
Parking for the Palmer House Hilton Hotel is available
across the street from the Hotel for $42.00 a day.

Phone Charging Station
There will be a small phone charging station located at the
Registration desk in the Ballroom Foyer.

Photography and Videotaping

Printed Program
Attendees were given the option to opt-out of getting a
program during registration. Attendees who opted out
will not receive a program; however they may come back
Tuesday afternoon to see if any extra programs are available. One copy of the printed program is available to each
attendee who requested one. If you would like a second
copy please check in at the Registration desk located in
the Ballroom Foyer on the last day of the event.
Every effort has been made to produce an accurate program. If you are presenting at the conference, please confirm your presentation times as listed in this program.
Attendees have two options for viewing the program:
either downloading it from our website or downloading
the CNS Smartphone Application.

Receipts
You will receive two receipts online, one from CNS for
registration and one from PayPal for payment. See also
Certificate of Attendance.

Receptions
The GAM and Welcome Reception will be held in the
Exhibit Hall of the Palmer House Hilton Hotel, from 5:306:30 pm on Saturday, March 31. The Distinguished Career
Contributions Award in Cognitive Neuroscience (DCC)
Reception will be held Sunday, April 1 at 4:00-5:00 pm in
the Exhibit Hall.

Registration Hours
The Registration Counter is located in the Ballroom Foyer
of the Palmer House Hilton Hotel. The Registration
Counter will be open at the following times:
Saturday, March 31
Sunday, April 1
Monday, April 2
Tuesday, April 3

12:00 - 7:00 pm
7:30 am - 6:00 pm
8:00 am - 7:00 pm
8:00 am - 5:00 pm

Photography, audio taping, video recording, digital taping or any other form of duplication is strictly prohibited
in the sessions and poster areas.
14

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

General Information

Registration Rates

Transportation

2012 Meeting Registration Rates:

Airport Shuttle - O'Hare or Midway- Need a ride to the
airport? No problem! Book your shuttle transfer bus from
Chicago's airports to the city and return, for your next trip
to Chicago. Whether you will be arriving or departing
from O'Hare International Airport or Chicago's Midway
Airport, you can book your round-trip transportation by
calling one of the listed Shuttle Companies below:

Regular Post-Doc Student
NonMember
Member
Discounted Early
Registration through
Feb. 1, 2012

$290

$210

$100

$400

Regular Registration
February 2 - March
12, 2012

$345

$225

$125

$445

$420

$300

$170

$495

Onsite Registration
After March 12, 2012

See Onsite Meeting Registration for any questions.

Restaurant & Concierge Services
Restaurant information is located at the Concierge Desk
in the Hotel Lobby with knowledgeable staff providing
up-to-date Chicago dining and tourism information.

Smoking
Smoking is not permitted in or outside any of the meeting
rooms. The Palmer House Hilton is a non-smoking facility. There are designated areas outside the building where
smoking is permitted.

Smartphone App
CNS has created a Smartphone application that makes
attending CNS 2012 a lot more convenient and fun! It provides easy access to event information, schedules, maps,
speaker information and a whole lot more to all attendees.
Download the FREE GRUPIO App today and look for
CNS 2012 under featured events.
iPhone/iPad - Search for "Grupio" in the App Store.
Android - Search for "Grupio" in the Android Market.
Blackberry (Storm and Torch only) - Search for "Grupio"
in App World.

Go Airport Express: 888-284-3826
Omega Airport Shuttle, Inc.: 773-483-6634
Aries Charter Transportation: 773-826-200
Hotel Shuttle Service - Go Airport Express stops at The
Palmer House Hilton every day from 6am to 4pm. These
shuttles run on approximately 15 minute intervals
throughout the day to O'Hare International with a fee of
$30 and approximately 30 minute intervals to Midway
International with a fee of $26
How far is the Airport from the Palmer House Hilton
Hotel?
Chicago-O'Hare International Airport: About 18 miles from
the Hotel. Drive time: 35-60 min.
Chicago Midway Airport: About 12 miles from the Hotel.
Drive time: 30-45 min.
Rental Car - The official rental car of Cognitive Neuroscience Meeting is Avis Rent-A-Car. Call 1-800-852-4617
to make a reservation or Book Online. The discount code
for CNS is D256962.
Chicago Water Taxi - Take a convenient Chicago Water
Taxi to see some of Chicago's top attractions in a whole
new way! The Chicago Water Taxi offers a fun, fast and
friendly direct link from the Metra and Amtrak commuter
train stations at Madison Street to Michigan Avenue, the
Magnificent Mile, River North Arts District at LaSalle
Street and Chinatown. One-way fares start at $2; for
schedule and complete fare details, visit
http://www.chicagowatertaxi.com or call 312.337.1446.

No Smartphone? No problem - you can use the mobile
application website at www.grupio.com/cns

Taxi Cabs - There are no flat rates because all taxicabs run
on meters. Expect to spend approximately $35 to $40 for a
taxicab ride to the Airport. For wheelchair accessible vehicles, please call United Dispatch at 1-800-281-4466.

Speakers

Taxi Companies

All speakers must register and wear name badge to
present. Please ensure that you are available in your presentation room at least thirty minutes before the start of
the session. See also Audiovisual Equipment for Talks.

American United Cab Association
Blue Ribbon Association, Inc.
Checker Taxi Association, Inc.
Chicago Carriage Cab
Choice Taxi Association
Yellow Cab Affiliation, Inc

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

773-327-6161
773-508-9100
312-733-4790
312-326-2221
773-338-9503
773-907-0020

15

General Information

Twitter
Follow CNS Annual Meeting (@CNSmtg). Our Hashtag
this year is #CNS2012.

Website (CNS Annual Meeting)
http://www.cnsmeeting.org

Wireless
There is complimentary Wireless Internet Access in the
Lobby of the Palmer House Hilton Hotel. See hotel personnel for info.

16

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Exhibitors

CNS 2012 Exhibitors

Exhibit Hall Hours

Visit our exhibitors in the Exhibit Hall.

Saturday, April 2

5:30 - 7:30 pm

3Scan
ANT Neuro
BIOPAC Systems, Inc.
Brain Vision LLC
Cedrus Corporation
Compumedics USA
Electrical Geodesics, Inc.
Elsevier
Eminent Spine
Hitachi Medical Corporation
Lafayette Instrument
Magventure, Inc.
Neuronetrix, Inc
NITRC: Neuroimaging Informatics Tools and Resources
Clearinghouse
Oxford University Press
Perception Research Systems Inc.
Prometheus Research, LLC
Psychology Press
Psychology Software Tools, Inc.
Rogue Resolutions
Society for Neuroscience
The MIT Press
Triangle BioSystems
VPixx Technologies
W.W. Norton
Worth Publishers

Sunday, April 3

8:00 - 10:00 am
1:00 - 3:00 pm
4:00 - 6:00 pm

Monday, April 4

8:00 - 10:00 am
1:00 - 3:00 pm
5:00 - 7:00 pm

Tuesday, April 5

8:00 - 10:00 am
3:00 - 5:00 pm

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

17

Symposium Sessions

Symposium Session 1
EMOTION’S IMPACT ON COGNITION – DISSOCIATING
ENHANCING AND IMPAIRING EFFECTS
Sunday, April 1, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom
Chair: Florin Dolcos, Unversity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Co-Chair: Mara Mather, University of Southern California
Speakers: Mara Mather, Elizabeth A. Kensinger, Florin Dolcos, Guillen
Fernandez
Emotion is a “double-edged sword” that can either enhance or hinder
various aspects of our cognition and behavior. Sometimes, even the same
type of emotionally arousing event can lead to opposite effects in different contexts. Current models of the brain mechanisms of emotion and
memory can account for enhanced memory for emotionally arousing
stimuli via the modulating effects of the amygdala, but they do not
explain impairments as clearly. For instance, what neural mechanisms
lead to the memory trade-offs in which scenes are remembered less well
when shown behind emotionally arousing images? How can we account
for the fact that sometimes arousal enhances and sometimes it impairs
memory for neutral stimuli seen just beforehand? Why would arousal
and stress enhance long-term memory but impair working memory? The
present symposium provides new evidence to help resolve these issues.
First, Mara Mather will introduce evidence for the arousal-biased competition (ABC) theory, which accounts for both impairing and enhancing
effects of arousal on memory. Next, Elizabeth Kensinger will discuss evidence concerning the neural correlates of trade-offs produced by emotion on memory for central vs. peripheral details. Then, Florin Dolcos
will present evidence from studies investigating the neural correlates of
opposing immediate vs. long-term effects of emotional distraction on
perception & working memory vs. episodic memory. Finally, Gillen
Fernandez will discuss findings from studies investigating the impact of
stress on attention and memory. These talks each help address the basic
mechanisms of when emotion enhances and when it impairs attention,
perception, and memory.
ABSTRACTS

Mara Mather1, Matthew
Marisa Knight1; 1University of

AROUSAL-BIASED COMPETITION IN MEMORY

Sutherland1,

Lee1,

Foertsch1,

Tae-Ho
Allison
Southern California — The standard cognitive neuroscience account of

how arousal affects memory is that the amygdala facilitates memory
operations in other brain regions, such as the hippocampus. This account
explains enhanced memory for emotionally arousing stimuli. However,
it does not explain why sometimes memory is enhanced and sometimes
impaired for neutral information processed before, during or after the
arousing stimulus. Arousal-biased competition (ABC) theory accounts
for both the impairing and the enhancing effects of arousal by positing
that arousal biases competition to enhance high priority information and
suppress low priority information. Priority is determined by both bottom-up salience and top-down goal relevance. In this talk, I present evidence of ABC effects in both initial learning and in memory

18

consolidation. In initial encoding, arousal enhances short-term memory
for high-contrast letters while impairing memory for low-contrast letters, revealing that arousal affects the encoding of high and low salience
stimuli in opposite ways. Furthermore, during learning, neural tuning
curves representing perceptually salient stimuli are sharpened whereas
those representing non-salient stimuli are widened by concurrent
arousal. Such effects lead visual search for a salient target to be more
effective under arousing than under non-arousing conditions whereas
visual search for a non-salient target is less effective under arousing conditions. The effects of arousal extend to long-term memory consolidation, as well. Manipulating the top-down or bottom-up priority of
neutral stimuli seen before an arousing stimulus determines whether
long-term memory consolidation for those stimuli will be enhanced or
impaired.

A. Kensinger1,
Jessica D. Payne , Jill Waring , Katherine Mickley Steinmetz ; Boston College,
2University of Notre Dame — After studying scenes that contain an emo-

EMOTION-INDUCED MEMORY TRADE-OFFS Elizabeth
2

1

1 1

tional or a neutral item placed on a non-emotional background, participants often show better memory for the emotional (vs. neutral) item and
worse memory for the background on which an emotional (vs. neutral)
item was placed. This pattern has been referred to as a memory trade-off,
because memory for the scene background is traded off in favor of memory for the emotional item. This talk will describe two series of studies
that we have conducted to examine the role of encoding processes, and
of affective state during encoding, on the magnitude of the trade-off. The
first set of studies used fMRI to clarify how neural processes engaged
during encoding could yield this trade-off. The results of these studies
have revealed that activity in the amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex corresponded with good memory for items, but not for backgrounds, and
that activity in regions associated with visual processing and visual
attention led to forgetting of the accompanying background. The second
set of studies examined the effect of anxiety on the trade-off, both by
examining variation in anxiety levels among healthy individuals and by
examining the trade-off in individuals with PTSD. The results emphasize
that anxiety during encoding can exacerbate the trade-off, but that strategies can also be implemented to reduce the pervasiveness of the effect.
The implications of these findings for understanding the effects of
arousal on memory will be discussed.

NEURAL CORRELATES OF OPPOSING MODULATION OF EMOTION ON
PERCEPTION & WORKING MEMORY VS. EPISODIC MEMORY Florin

Dolcos1, Andrea T. Shafer2, Gregory McCarthy3, Roberto Cabeza4; 1University
of Illinios at Urbana-Champaign, 2University of Alberta, 3Yale University, 4Duke
University — An important question in the emotion literature concerns the
link between immediate (impairing) effects of emotional distraction (ED)
on perception & working memory (WM) and long-term (enhancing)
effects of emotion on episodic memory (EM) for the distracters. Most
previous studies investigated these opposing effects in isolation, and
hence it is not clear to what extent some of the brain regions identified
contribute to one or both of these effects. Concomitant investigation of
these effects is critical, as they typically co-occur in both normal and clin-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Symposium Sessions
ical conditions. For instance, increased distraction by the scene of a tragic
accident while driving may also initiate the mechanisms that lead to better memory for the incident. Similarly, enhanced memory for and rumination on distressing events may contribute to increased ED and
impaired cognition in affective disorders. Our studies simultaneously
investigating these issues in healthy participants identified common
amygdala engagement in both immediate and long-term effects, but its
involvement was linked to opposite effects in brain regions associated
with impaired WM (reduced dorsolateral prefrontal cortical activity) vs.
enhanced EM performance (increased hippocampal activity). Moreover,
the link between the immediate and long-term effects was dependent on
the availability of processing resources at encoding, with ED being greatest when processing resources were most available while EM being highest when processing resources were least available. These results suggest
common and dissociable mechanisms underlying opposing immediate
vs. long-term effects of emotion on perception & WM vs. EM, respectively, which will be discussed in conjunction with evidence from clinical studies.

EQUIPPED TO SURVIVE: LARGE-SCALE FUNCTIONAL REORGANIZATION
IN RESPONSE TO THREAT ENABLES OPTIMAL BEHAVIOR Guillen

Fernandez1, Hein J.F. van Marle1, Marloes J.A.G. Henckens1, Shaozheng Qin1,
Erno J. Hermans1; 1Radboud University Nijmegen — In response to acute

environmental adversity, organisms rapidly shift into a state that is optimal to detect and react to imminent threat. To identify underlying neural
network dynamics and neuromodulatory mechanisms we combined in a
series of studies fMRI with thread based stress induction procedures and
pharmacological manipulation. Our data show that acute psychological
stress increases responsiveness and interconnectivity within a salience
related network as a function of stress response magnitudes. Beta-adrenergic receptor blockade, but not cortisol synthesis inhibition, diminished
this increase. These findings reveal that noradrenergic activation during
acute stress results in coupling within a distributed network that integrates information exchange between regions involved in autonomicneuroendocrine control and vigilant attentional reorienting. This reorientation causes tonic amygdala activity and phasic responses to biologically salient stimuli while the functional connectivity to the locus
coeruleus, the medial prefrontal cortex and the anterior insula is
enhanced. This response goes along with higher amygdala sensitivity to
threatening stimuli, but lower specificity. This heightened sensitivity is
critical for survival when an individual is threatened, but cognitive elaboration would slow down appropriate reactions. Accordingly, further
experiments show that acute stress leads to working memory impairments and prefrontal cortex down regulation. This instantaneously
occurring reorganization affecting the amygdala and the prefrontal cortex is normalized by dynamically changing corticosteroid-related mechanisms. This pattern of results reveals basic principles of how we
respond when our survival is at stake. It provides a mechanistic account
for an acute central nervous stress response and its normalization.

Symposium Session 2
USING NON-INVASIVE BRAIN STIMULATION TO ENHANCE
COGNITIVE AND MOTOR ABILITIES IN THE TYPICAL,
ATYPICAL, AND AGING BRAIN
Monday, April 2, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom
Chair: Roi Cohen Kadosh, University of Oxford
Speakers: Roi Cohen Kadosh, Jenny Crinion, Paulo S. Boggio, Leonardo G.
Cohen
There is perennial interest in the neuroscience community in using our
expanding understanding of the brain to devise ways of enhancing brain
functions, and consequently, human abilities. Most existing efforts to
improve human abilities have focused on pharmacological interventions. However, recently there has been a burst of research exploring

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

whether non-invasive brain stimulation (NIBS) might be beneficial. This
symposium will capture the new advances in the use of NIBS with relevance for scientists working in a variety of areas. The talks will reflect the
breadth and depth of current progress and highlight research demonstrating the applicability of NIBS in the enhancement of a variety of abilities ranging from basic functions to high-level cognition in healthy
adults, adults with congenital or acquired brain dysfunction, and elderly
patients. Cohen Kadosh will present data showing enhancement in basic
and advanced mathematical abilities in adults with and without dyscalculia and the neural mechanism underlying this enhancement. Crinion
will provide behavioural and neuroimaging evidence of speech enhancement, and the potential use of NIBS in patients with anomia. Boggio will
show evidence for memory enhancement following NIBS in elderly
patients with degenerative illnesses such as Parkinson’s or Alzheimer’s
disease. Finally, Cohen will describe the latest experimental interventions being developed to manipulate neuroplasticity and enhance motor
rehabilitation. Together, these presentations mark future directions in
behavioural enhancement in different domains and populations, and
expand our understanding of basic research findings in these fields with
clear translational benefits for the field of applied research.
ABSTRACTS

USING NON-INVASIVE BRAIN STIMULATION TO ENHANCE NUMERICAL
ABILITIES Roi Cohen Kadosh1; 1University of Oxford — Numbers are the
lingua franca in science, economics, sports, education, and everyday life.
In this study we examined: 1) whether we can improve numerical abilities in healthy adults as well as people with numerical learning disabilities (dyscalculia); and 2) what the underlying neurocognitive
mechanisms that involved in such enhancement are. In a series of experiments with healthy adults we found that it is possible to enhance basic
numerical abilities as well as more advanced numerical abilities, such as
complex calculation, using transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)
to the parietal lobes or the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). The
observed improvement lasted up to 6 months after tDCS, and was specific to the trained material. At the neural level, using concurrent tDCS
and near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS), we found that tDCS to the
DLPFC during numerical training enhanced performance by increasing
the level of oxygenated hemoglobin in the DLPFC specifically, but not in
nearby regions. Last, our research on participants with dyscalculia indicated that they benefit from receiving tDCS during numerical training.
However, tDCS to people with dyscalculia was effective only when we
targeted different brain regions than those associated with enhanced
performance in the typical population. This suggests that people with
dyscalculia recruit different brain areas for numerical processing, probably due to brain reorganization. Cumulatively, these experiments
advance our understanding of how numerical abilities are subserved in
the typical and atypical brain, and provide a possible means to improve
numerical cognition, thus having important implications for education,
intervention, and rehabilitation.

EXAMINING THE POTENTIAL OF TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT
STIMULATION FOR ENHANCING SPEECH PRODUCTION IN HEALTHY
SUBJECTS AND NEUROLOGICAL PATIENTS Jenny Crinion1; 1University
College London — Application of transcranial direct current stimulation
(tDCS) in humans can have significant and selective behavioral consequences that are associated with the cortical location of the stimulation
electrodes and the task engaged during stimulation. However, the mechanism by which tDCS affects human behavior is unclear. Recently, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has been used to determine
the spatial topography of tDCS effects, but no behavioral data were collected during stimulation. I will report findings from fMRI studies in
which we recorded both neural and behavioral responses using a novel
combination of left frontal Anodal-TDCS (A-TDCS) and an overt picturenaming task. In particular, I will focus on results from healthy subjects
and chronic aphasic stroke patients who suffer from word finding problems (anomia). In the healthy subjects I will show that on-line A-tDCS

19

Symposium Sessions
had significant behavioral and regionally specific neural facilitation
effects. Furthermore, faster naming responses correlated with decreased
blood oxygen level-dependent signal in Broca’s area. In the patients
whose lesions spared Broca’s area I will discuss the application of ATDCS to this region as an adjuvant method to computer delivered
speech rehabilitation techniques. Together, these data support the
importance of Broca’s area within the naming network and offer a better
understanding of the neural facilitation effects of A-tDCS and its interaction with specific cognitive tasks. This represents a significant advancement for basic and applied research in the field.

MEMORY ENHANCEMENT VIA TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT
STIMULATION IN ELDERLY WITH DEGENERATIVE ILLNESSES Paulo S.

Boggio1; 1Mackenzie Presbyterian University, São Paulo, Brazil — Several
studies have shown that memory can be modulated and enhanced by
non-invasive brain stimulation. In this talk I will present the suitability
of using transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) to enhance working memory in Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients or to improve visual
recognition memory in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) patients. In PD
patients we investigated the effects of stimulating the left DLPFC using
tDCS. We found an improvement in their working memory abilities as
indicated by an increase of 20% in their performance in a 3-back task. In
AD patients we investigated the effects of left temporal cortex and left
DLPFC cortex tDCS as compared to sham stimulation in a visual recognition memory task. We found an increase of 18% and 13% in visual recognition memory after left temporal cortex tDCS and left DLPFC tDCS,
respectively, as compared to sham. In both experiments, patients performed the tasks while receiving anodal stimulation (to induce facilitatory effects). Therefore, the observed effects might be due to an
enhancement of the local cortical excitability at the stimulated brain area.
Importantly, the effects of tDCS are task-dependent, as tDCS is only
responsible for priming the area to receive additional behavioural intervention. These studies demonstrate the potential of tDCS for memory
improvement in elderly with PD or AD, and open a venue for future
studies to examine the potential long-term effect of this behavioral
improvement.

USING REPETITIVE TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION TO STUDY
THE UNDERLYING NEURAL MECHANISMS OF HUMAN MOTOR LEARNING
AND MEMORY IN NEUROREHABILITATION Leonardo
G.
Cohen1;
1

National Institutes of Health (NIH) — In the last two decades, there has
been a rapid development in the research of the physiological brain
mechanisms underlying human motor learning and memory. While conventional memory research performed on animal models uses intracellular recordings, microfusion of protein inhibitors to specific brain areas
and direct induction of focal brain lesions, human research has so far utilized predominantly behavioral paradigms and indirect measurements
of neural activity. We examined the mechanisms of learning and memory in the lesioned brain using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), a safe non-invasive brain stimulation technique. We used
rTMS to study the functional role of specific cortical areas by evaluating
the behavioral consequences of selective modulation of activity (excitation/inhibition) on memory generation and consolidation, contributing
to the understanding of the neural substrates of motor learning. Depending on the parameters of stimulation, rTMS can also facilitate learning
processes, presumably through purposeful modulation of excitability in
specific brain regions. rTMS has also been used to gain valuable knowledge on the timeline of motor memory formation, from initial encoding
to stabilization and long-term retention. Here, we summarize insights
gained using rTMS on the physiological and neural mechanisms of
human motor learning and memory. In particular, rTMS has contributed
to start dissociating the mechanisms of consolidation and reconsolidation in stroke patients. Understanding of these mechanisms, due in part
to the use of rTMS is allowing us to start facilitating excitability in brain
regions specifically involved in memory formation and modification in
patients with brain lesions as well as healthy subjects.

20

Symposium Session 3
MUSIC AS A MEDIUM FOR PERCEPTION AND ACTION
Monday, April 2, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Grand Ballroom
Chair: Psyche Loui, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical
School
Speakers: Peter Pfordresher, Psyche Loui, Caroline Palmer, Peter Keller
Recent years have seen a surge of interest, both in the public and among
researchers, in the study of music and the brain. While some view music
as the only art form that can showcase talent, stimulate movement, and
mobilize crowds through auditory stimulation alone, to the CNS community music may be viewed as an organizing principle through which
we can investigate multiple behavioral and neural functions. In this symposium we explore the question of how music can inform us about the
coupling between perception and action in the brain. In addition to localizing and modeling the computations of the perception-action network,
we document its impairments and implications for interpersonal interactions in the auditory environment. The topic of pitch production is introduced by Pfordresher, who describes studies on vocal psychophysics of
poor pitch singing. Loui follows up on the topic of pitch by presenting
behavioral and neuroimaging results that converge towards an auditorymotor network for pitch, which is disrupted in tone-deafness. As a parallel, Palmer defines an auditory-motor network for rhythm, and describes
a computational model based on synchronicity and its implications on
beat-deafness. This notion of synchronicity will be followed up by
Keller, who will describe behavioral and fMRI studies on skills required
for interpersonal aspects of musical performance. Due to its interdisciplinary nature, its broad general appeal, and its overlap with perception,
attention, memory, neuroplasticity, higher cognition, language, development, and social neuroscience, we believe that the proposed symposium
will be of great interest to the CNS community.
ABSTRACTS

POOR-PITCH SINGING AS A DEFICIT OF INVERSE MODELING?
BEHAVIORAL EVIDENCE AND NEURAL PREDICTIONS Peter Pfordresher1;
1University at Buffalo, State University of New York — Although

recent evidence suggests that most humans can vocally imitate pitch patterns
while singing, a significant minority of individuals consistently mistune
while singing, or while imitating spoken pitch. We report three experiments based on the hypothesis that poor-pitch singing is a deficit involving the ability to plan vocal motor gestures based on anticipated target
pitches: a variant of the inverse modeling problem in motor control. If so,
vocal imitation deficits among poor pitch singers should be reduced (or
even absent) when poor-pitch singers imitate their own vocalizations as
opposed to those of other individuals, based on the fact that self-imitation can be performed based on Hebbian learning rather than inverse
modeling. In each experiment, participants vocally imitated recordings
of themselves (from an earlier session) or of other singers (from previous
data sets). Analyses were based on how accurately participants imitated
the target F0 pattern in both relative and absolute pitch. All participants
were more accurate at imitating their own recordings than those of others. However, this advantage was larger for poor-pitch singers than for
accurate singers. Furthermore, this advantage does not seem to be contingent on self-recognition or timbral similarity (Experiment 2), and
remains if the recording is transposed in pitch (Experiment 3). Such
effects imply that poor-pitch singers may have a deficit in the use of the
cerebellum for inverse modeling, in addition to deficits of sensorimotor
associations documented previously.

PERCEPTION AND ACTION OF MUSICAL PITCH: BEHAVIORAL, DTI AND
FCMRI STUDIES IN CHILDREN AND TONE-DEAF ADULTS Psyche Loui1;
1

Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School —

Although musical ability is celebrated in all cultures and generations, a
subset of the normal population shows a lack of musical ability, with
deficits in pitch perception and production. These individuals provide a

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Symposium Sessions
window into the perception and action coupling that is required for
music. I will present results from four experiments on the role of the
auditory-motor network in linking perception and action for pitch: 1) A
psychophysical study on pitch perception and production, showing that
tone-deaf individuals cannot consciously perceive what they can produce, suggesting a functional dissociation between perception and production pathways in the brain. 2) A DTI study on tone-deafness,
showing that the arcuate fasciculus, a white matter tract that connects
perception regions (superior and middle temporal gyri) and production
regions (inferior temporal gyrus), is smaller in tone-deaf individuals
than controls. 3) A behavioral study showing that the degree of perception-production congruence predicts phonemic awareness scores in 7-9year-old children. 4) Preliminary results from resting state functional
connectivity MRI in children, showing that individuals with more congruity between perception and production have higher functional connectivity between frontal and temporal regions. Taken together, results
show that an auditory-motor network supports congruence between
perception and action: this network includes IFG, STG, MTG, and arcuate fasciculus. The perception-action network increases in efficiency
throughout development and is crucial for music and for speech-andlanguage. Importantly, the congruence between perception and production may hold more explanatory power for DTI and rsfMRI data than
perception or production alone.

TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF AUDITORY-MOTOR INTEGRATION IN MUSIC
PERFORMANCE Caroline Palmer1; 1McGill University — Musicians demonstrate exquisite auditory-motor integration, sometimes attributed to
expertise acquired with years of training. However, humans with and
without training exhibit fine synchronization as they clap to a song, hum
with a tune, or sway to a beat. The fact that even untrained individuals
can respond to a beat is remarkable because these perceived periodicities
arise in music performances that are not periodic. We examine this ability in one line of research on how musicians entrain to a temporally
changing beat, a strong case of perceptual invariance in the face of
changing temporal variation. A dynamical systems model accurately
predicted the temporal performance of pianists who synchronized with
a changing auditory signal, based on period and phase coupling. A second line of research demonstrated that pianists who shared preferred
rates in solo performance, modeled with natural (resonant) frequencies
that reflect the neural response of an oscillation when exposed to a periodic stimulus, displayed better temporal adaptation to their partner in
duet performance. A final experiment compared individuals’ abilities to
synchronize with phase and period (tempo) perturbations with those of
a previously reported beat-deaf individual. The dynamical systems
model applied to the beat-deaf case indicated deficits in an intrinsic tapping frequency that adapts in response to temporal perturbations, compared with the control subjects. These findings with expert musicians,
non-experts and disordered individuals support models of temporal
adaptation based on an entrainment of internal neural oscillations with
exogenous drivers that transcends specific training.

NEURAL UNDERPINNINGS OF MUSICAL ENSEMBLE SKILLS Peter
Keller1,2, Merle Fairhurst1, Nadine Pecenke1, Marie Uhlig1, Annerose Engel1,3;
1
Music Cognition & Action Group, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2MARCS Auditory Laboratories,
University of Western Sydney, Australia, 3The Netherlands Institute for
Neuroscience, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW),
Amsterdam, The Netherlands — Musical ensemble performance is a form of
interpersonal behavior wherein the actions of multiple individuals are
typically coordinated precisely in time. Such coordination is facilitated
by links between perception and action to the extent that each musician’s
movements must be controlled so as to produce sounds that are synchronized with sounds produced by co-performers. Perception-action coupling may serve to scaffold the cognitive/motor skills that underlie this
process. A series of experiments employed functional magnetic resonance imaging to test for overlap in the brain regions subserving three

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

basic ensemble skills related to anticipation, adaptation, and attention. In
one experiment, musicians synchronized finger taps with tempo-varying
auditory sequences while their ability to anticipate the tempo changes
was taxed by a concurrent task. A second experiment investigated adaptive timing by requiring musicians to tap in synchrony with auditory
pacing sequences that adapted to the participants’ tap timing by varying
degrees. A third experiment varied attentional demands in a task that
required musicians to judge leader/follower relations in a piano duet.
The main loci of overlap in activations associated with modulations of
the three ensemble skills were in the cerebellum (which may house internal models that guide action control) and the inferior frontal cortex
(which plays a role in perception-action coupling, sensorimotor simulation, and cognitive control). This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that the cognitive/motor processes that support ensemble
coordination may interact via the joint operation of internal models
related to one’s own actions and another class of models that simulate
co-performers’ actions.

Symposium Session 4
THE BRAIN ON FOOD: INVESTIGATIONS OF MOTIVATION,
DOPAMINE AND EATING BEHAVIORS
Tuesday, April 3, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Grand Ballroom
Chair: Laura Martin, University of Kansas Medical Center
Speakers: W. Kyle Simmons, Susan Carnell, Dana M Small, Laura M Holsen
Food is a highly motivating stimulus in our environment. We eat for
many non-homeostatic reasons, such as celebration, comfort, and
hedonic pleasure. Novel investigations of the neural basis of healthy and
disordered eating reveal that throughout the multisensory process of
food consumption, sensory, reward processing and cognitive control
brain regions work together to keep track of how rewarding the experience is and help us decide whether or not to continue eating. A complete
cognitive neuroscience model of food motivation requires understanding the sensory, reward, and cognitive mechanisms associated with
healthy eating, and how those mechanisms can run amok. The first talk
will review recent fMRI studies in lean individuals which identify how
neural systems involved in retrieving food taste and reward information
contribute to food motivation and food-related decision making. The
second talk describes a study that uses multi-modal (visual and auditory) food cues to examine a dynamic, distributed reward-related network specifically associated with subjective ratings of cue-induced
desire to eat in lean and obese women. The third talk provides evidence
suggesting that overweight individuals show deficits in dopaminedependent learning, as indicated by reduced error signal generation in
the OFC and ventral striatum, and impaired insula-mediated flavornutrient conditioning. The final talk will bring together evidence across
the spectrum from healthy to disordered eating behaviors by examining
the neural circuitry underlying differences in food motivation between
anorexia, healthy weight, obese, and Prader-Willi syndrome populations. Together, the talks will provide a stimulating introduction to the
networks involved in food motivation.
ABSTRACTS

MAPPING THE NEURAL SYSTEMS UNDERLYING CONCEPTUAL
REPRESENTATIONS OF FOOD W. Kyle Simmons1; 1Laureate Institute for
Brain Research — Simply perceiving a food-related stimulus results in the
obligatory, automatic retrieval of that food’s salient properties, namely
how it tastes, and how rewarding it would be to eat. The retrieval of this
information likely plays an important role in food-related decision-making and food abstinence. In my talk I will present recent findings from
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) studies examining activity within the neural systems that underlie the retrieval of food taste and
food reward information. Particular attention will be paid to the insular
cortex’s role in the retrieval of food taste properties, and the roles played

21

Symposium Sessions
by orbitofrontal cortex and the midbrain striatal-pallidal neurocircuit in
food reward.

THE NEURAL BASIS OF APPETITE: FMRI ACTIVATION AND FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY IN RELATION TO DESIRE TO EAT FOLLOWING HIGHCALORIE FOOD STIMULI Susan Carnell1,2,3, Leora Benson1,2,3, Spiro

Pantazatos1,2,3, Moe Sharafi1,2,3, Talya Ladell1,2,3, Joy Hirsch1,2,3, Allan
Geliebter1,2,3; 1New York Obesity Nutrition Center, 2St. Luke's-Roosevelt
Hospital, 3Columbia University — Obesity is associated with heightened
neural responses to high-calorie food stimuli, which may correspond to
increased subjective appetite and externally-cued eating. Eighteen
women (BMI 20-41) were presented with auditory (spoken word) and
visual (picture) cues representing high-calorie foods and non-foods, and
verbally rated desire to eat (DTE) following each block. We then
regressed appetite differences following foods vs. non-foods on differences in activation and functional connectivity averaged across visual
and auditory conditions. ROI analyses revealed that greater DTE was
associated with greater activation in the midbrain and orbitofrontal cortex, and lesser activation in the anterior cingulate. Whole-brain analyses
revealed that greater DTE (following foods vs. non-foods) was associated with relatively greater activation in the insula, post-central gyrus,
cingulate, and medial frontal gyrus, and relatively lesser activation in the
cerebellum, posterior cingulate, middle and superior frontal gyri, thalamus, middle occipital gyrus and lingual gyrus. Psychophysiological
interaction analyses using the midbrain as a seed revealed associations
between greater DTE and heightened connectivity with the caudate,
fusiform/parahippocampal gyrus, hypothalamus, cerebellum and inferior frontal gyrus, along with lesser connectivity with the lingual gyrus
and precuneus. Our results suggest externally-cued drive to eat is associated with greater responsivity/crosstalk within regions associated with
reward, memory, sensory processing and motor planning, and less
responsivity/crosstalk within areas associated with conflict detection,
visual/object processing, and motor learning. Our findings represent a
step towards describing the functional networks underlying individual
differences in appetitive responses to food cues, and support a more
nuanced approach to phenotyping in neuroimaging and obesity
research.

ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN ADIPOSITY AND DOPAMINE-DEPENDENT
LEARNING PROCESSES Dana M Small1,2, Maria G Veldhuizen1,2; 1Yale

University, 2The John B Pierce Laboratory — Increased body weight has been

associated with reduced dopamine signaling. We investigated the influence of body mass index and percent body fat on response to dopaminedependent processes; error signal generation and flavor-nutrient conditioning. Error signals are generated when expectation is breached and
outcomes are either greater or less than expected. Dopamine neuron firing patterns reflect error signaling and dopamine antagonists disrupt
BOLD signals that resemble error signals in the ventral striatum and orbitofrontal cortex in humans. Flavor–nutrient conditioning is a form of
classical conditioning in which the flavors of food/drink are associated
with post-ingestive effects. Through this learning process human and
nonhuman animals learn to prefer flavors associated with calories. Infusion of dopamine antagonists into dopamine source and target regions in
rodents disrupts this effect. The neural correlates in humans remain
unexplored. We have found evidence of impaired error signal generation and flavor nutrient conditioning in overweight and obese individuals compared to healthy weight individuals. First, we observed a
negative association between error-signal generation and body weight in
the ventral striatum and orbitofrontal cortex. Second, we found that
healthy weight but not overweight or obese individuals learn to prefer
flavored drinks associated with 112 vs 0 calories and changes in pleasantness are associated with responses in insular cortex, which are
inversely related to percent body fat and BMI. Taken together these data
are consistent with prior work showing impaired dopamine signaling in
obesity and extend this work by showing that obesity is associated with
impaired dopamine dependent learning processes.

22

FOOD MOTIVATION CIRCUITRY DYSFUNCTION DURING HUNGER AND
SATIETY: FROM ANOREXIA NERVOSA TO EXTREME OBESITY Laura M

Holsen1,2, Elizabeth A Lawson3, Cary R Savage4, Laura E Martin4, Amanda S
Bruce5, N Makris, Anne Klibanski3, Jill M Goldstein1,2,3; 1Harvard Medical
School, 2Brigham and Women's Hospital, 3Massachusetts General Hospital,
4University of Kansas Medical Center, 5University of Missouri Kansas City —
Disordered eating is a significant public health issue associated with conditions ranging from self-imposed starvation to obesity. Anorexia nervosa is characterized by severe weight loss; conversely, Prader-Willi
syndrome (PWS) is associated with hyperphagia and morbid obesity.
However, neuroimaging studies on food reward and motivation have
not examined the full spectrum of disordered eating. We describe a
series of fMRI studies which investigate brain activity deficits in food
reward circuitry regions in response to food images during hunger and
satiation in anorexia, healthy-weight controls, simple (non-PWS) obesity,
and PWS. During a hunger state, limbic (hypothalamus, amygdala, hippocampus) activation varied significantly between groups (healthyweight controls as reference group), with significant hypoactivation in
anorexia and hyperactivation in simple obesity and PWS. These deficits
in subcortical food reward regions persisted following food intake, with
additional evidence of hypoactivation in prefrontal inhibitory regions
[dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC)] in PWS compared to simple
obesity. Findings suggest dysfunction in regions associated with hunger,
satiation, and food processing in disorders involving abnormal food
intake. Reduced activity in anorexia, a disorder of self-starvation, and on
the other end of the spectrum, elevated activation in these same regions
in PWS, a condition associated with disinhibition around food, provide
evidence of a continuum relating food intake behavior/outcomes and
food reward circuitry activity. Moreover, inability to recruit the DLPFC
after eating may represent what distinguishes PWS, a putative model of
extreme obesity, from simple obesity. Taken together, these findings
highlight novel neurobiological circuits to target in treatment of anorexia
and obesity.

Symposium Session 5
UNDERSTANDING EVENTS: NEW CROSS-DISCIPLINARY
RESEARCH
Tuesday, April 3, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Grand Ballroom
Chair: Timothy Rogers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Co-Chair: Matt Botvinick, Princeton University
Speakers: Dare Baldwin, Jeffrey M. Zacks, Matt Botvinick, Laurel Buxbaum
Experiments in cognitive neuroscience often involve viewing and
responding to individual stimuli, but everyday human behavior has a
quite different character: it involves perceiving and understanding the
relationships among agents and objects as they interact over time, knowing one’s own goals and inferring the goals of others, and interpreting or
planning complex sequences of actions. In short, our ability to understand and act in the world depends upon our knowledge about events.
Who is doing what to whom, and when, and why? Event knowledge
touches on essentially every aspect of cognition, from perception and
attention, to language and conceptual knowledge, to planning and decision making, to sequential knowledge and working memory, to theory
of mind and social cognition. The advent of cognitive neuroscience has
promoted a renaissance of interest in understanding how children and
adults learn about events, how events are represented in the mind and
brain, and how knowledge about events is used to make predictions,
guide action, and shape conceptual representations. Thanks jointly to
methodological advances in experimental psychology, functional and
structural brain imaging, and computational theory, it is now possible to
bring a broad cross-disciplinary approach to the study of this most
essential aspect of human cognition. This symposium surveys state-ofthe-art empirical and theoretical advances in research on event knowl-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Symposium Sessions
edge from cognitive development, functional brain imaging, neuropsychology and computational modeling.
ABSTRACTS

DEVELOPMENT AND EXPERTISE IN ACTION AND EVENT PROCESSING
Dare Baldwin1; 1University of Oregon — In the midst of idle conversation on

a lazy sunset evening, your neighbor suddenly reaches out and slaps
you. Instead of letting loose with invective, you infer an unseen mosquito and smile your gratitude. Such everyday triumphs of action processing showcase the degree to which knowledge (e.g., of mosquitoes
and alternative intentional descriptions, in this instance) guides ongoing
interpretation of others’ actions. I will report on recent research with
infants, preschoolers, and adults investigating specific ways in which
knowledge shapes action processing. Among other things, we find that
acquired expertise plays a role in such basic action-processing skills as
identifying action, discovering where one action ends and the next
begins, inferring which portions of an event stream are causally efficacious, and monitoring the predictions of goal-directed activity. In current research we are developing a new technique – the dwell-time
paradigm – to index changes in attentional allocation as action unfolds.
This self-paced slide-show technique is amenable for working with
infants and preschoolers as well as adults. New findings reveal that a)
observers dwell longer at junctures within unfolding action that are
especially informative vis à vis segmental, causal, and goal structure,
and b) dwell-time patterns display reorganization as knowledge is
acquired. Dwell-times also appear to shed light on subtle but important
changes in action processing as expertise grows and development proceeds. For this reason, the dwell-time paradigm also has valuable potential as a behavioral index to facilitate investigation of the
neurophysiological concomitants of action and event processing across
development.

A ROLE FOR EVENT REPRESENTATIONS IN PERCEPTION, PREDICTION,
AND MEMORY-UPDATING Jeffrey M. Zacks1; 1Washington University in St.
Louis — Predicting the near future is important for survival; it allows an
organism to take advantage of impending opportunity and to avoid
impending threat. Prediction plays a central role in current theories of
perception, language processing and learning. Event representations—
representations of “what is happening now”—may be critical for guiding predictions of what will happen next. I will present a computational
and neurophysiological theory of how event representations can
improve predictions. The theory states that working memory maintains
stable representations of the current event that bias the prediction of
some future events over others. Event representations are robust against
transient disruptions such as occlusion and distraction, and so can be
used to resolve ambiguity and to fill in missing information. Event representations are updated when prediction error suddenly increases; this
error-based updating provides a mechanism for adaptively choosing
when new information should be loaded into event representations,
without any external supervision or teaching signal. Studies of behavioral segmentation and neuroimaging studies of brain activity during
event comprehension support the proposal that event segmentation is
ongoing and ubiquitous. Evidence for the prediction-based updating
mechanism comes from behavioral studies of online prediction during
movies of everyday events, and from neuroimaging of activation in midbrain systems associated with broadcasting prediction error. Studies of
working memory and episodic memory in healthy adults and clinical
populations support the proposal that event segmentation helps determine the structure of later memory.

with regard to the percepts and actions that precede and follow them.
We hypothesize that this overlap leads the elements of an event to be
represented similarly, just as objects with overlapping perceptual and
functional properties are represented similarly, giving rise to object categories in semantic cognition. To assess this hypothesis, we describe
experiments in which participants were exposed to a sequence of novel
stimuli ordered according to a stochastic finite-state grammar. The
grammar was constructed so that (a) raw transition probabilities provided no cue to sequence boundaries but (b) subgroups of stimuli were
preceded and followed by similar sets of items. We show that participants reliably use transitions between subgroups as cues for sequence
parsing. Simple computational models suggest that this behavior can
arise when items within subgroups are represented as similar to one
another and as distinct from other subgroups. Consistent with this view,
repetition-suppression and multi-voxel pattern analyses of fMRI data
reveal that brain regions typically associated with sequence representation and semantic processing are sensitive to the subgroup structure
governing the sequence in these studies. The results thus suggest that
events are like categories in that their elements form clusters in a representational similarity space.

COGNITIVE AND NEUROANATOMICAL SUBSTRATES OF ACTION
EVENTS Laurel Buxbaum1; 1Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute —
Recent neuroimaging, eyetracking, and behavioral evidence from our
laboratory has improved our understanding of three major aspects of
action event processing. First, these data reveal that the representational
structure of action events includes a number of related but separable
components. For instance, neuropsychological and lesion-overlap studies suggest that representations of the sensorimotor aspects of action
events (ie, movements of the body) in a left posterior temporal-parietal
network may be dissociated both behaviorally and neuroanatomically
from representations of overarching action goals, mediated primarily by
bilateral prefrontal systems. Second, although living things appear to be
represented at least in part with reference to taxomomic features computed by left middle and anterior temporal regions, manipulable objects
may be preferentially represented within a left posterior temporal and
inferior parietal system that captures their thematic relationships to
other objects—specifically, to objects that fill complementary sensorimotor and/or spatial roles in events. Finally, the data indicate that semantic
representations of manipulable objects are dynamic entities in which the
salience of different semantic features varies according to an object’s thematic role in a given event. This sensitivity to event context substantially
impacts an object’s perceived similarity to other objects, as assessed by
the degree to which the objects compete for control of attention and
behavior. Together, these data suggest that representations of objects are
intimately intertwined with knowledge about the events in which they
participate, with important consequences for both healthy behavior and
disorders of action in brain-lesioned patients.

Matt Botvinick1, Anna Schapiro1, Natalia
Cordova1, Nicholas Turk-Browne1, Timothy Rogers2; 1Princeton University,
2
University of Wisconsin-Madison — Recent research into the neural basis of

EVENTS AS CATEGORIES

event representation has largely focused on how the brain detects the
boundaries that divide events. We pose a related but different question:
What binds the elements of an event together? We start by observing
that the percepts or actions that constitute an event typically overlap

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

23

Slide Sessions

Slide Session 1
ATTENTION AND EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS
Saturday, March 31, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Grand Ballroom
Chair: Clayton Curtis
Speakers: Christopher T. Smith, Gregory Samanez-Larkin, Heleen Slagter, Sara
Langworthy, Bo-Cheng Kuo, Lawrence Appelbaum, Michael Cole, Angus
MacDonald III
ABSTRACTS

INTERACTING EFFECTS OF GENETIC POLYMORPHISMS REGULATING
DOPAMINE SIGNALING IN THE FRONTAL CORTEX ON ACCURATE TARGET
DETECTION UNDER HIGH WORKING MEMORY LOAD (GSA WINNER)
Christopher T. Smith1, Charlotte A. Boettiger1; 1University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill — Frontal-dependent task performance is typically modulated

by dopamine (DA) according to an inverted-U pattern, whereby intermediate levels of DA signaling optimizes performance. Numerous studies implicate trait differences in DA signaling based on differences in the
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene in executive function task
performance. However, little work has investigated genetic variations in
DA signaling downstream from COMT. One candidate is the Dopamineand cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein of molecular weight 32 kDa
(DARPP-32), which mediates signaling through the DA D1 receptor, the
dominant DA receptor in the frontal cortex. Using an n-back task, we
used signal detection theory to measure performance in a healthy adult
population (n=92) genotyped for single nucleotide polymorphisms in
the COMT (rs 4680) and DARPP-32 (rs 907094) genes. Correct target
detection (hits), and false alarms were used to calculate d' measures for
each working memory load. At the highest load (3-back) only we
observed a significant COMT×DARPP-32 interaction (F(1, 88)=5.792,
p=0.018) such that the DARPP-32 AA genotype enhanced target detection in COMT ValVal individuals (d'=1.17±0.19 versus 0.72±0.11 in
DARPP-32 G carriers) but impaired target detection in COMT Met carriers (d'=0.73±0.19 versus 1.06±0.13 in DARPP-32 G carriers). These findings suggest that enhanced dopaminergic signaling via the DARPP-32 A
allele aids target detection in individuals with presumed low frontal DA
(COMTVal/Val) but impairs target detection in those with putatively
higher frontal DA levels (COMT Met-carriers). Moreover, they support
an inverted-U model with intermediate levels of DA signaling optimizing performance on tasks requiring updating and maintenance of mental
representations in working memory.

A
THALAMOCORTICOSTRIATAL
DOPAMINE
CIRCUIT
FOR
PSYCHOSTIMULANT-ENHANCED HUMAN COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY (PFA
WINNER) Gregory Samanez-Larkin1, Joshua Buckholtz2, Robert Kessler1,

life
David Zald1; 1Vanderbilt University, 2Harvard University — Everyday
demands continuous flexibility in thought and behavior. Here we examined whether individual differences in dopamine function are related to
variability in the effects of amphetamine on one aspect of flexibility –
task switching. Forty healthy subjects performed a task-switching para-

24

digm following placebo and oral amphetamine administration. [18F]fallypride was used to measure D2/D3 baseline receptor availability and
amphetamine-stimulated dopamine release. The majority of the subjects
showed amphetamine-induced benefits through reductions in switch
costs. However, such benefits were variable. Individuals with higher
baseline thalamocortical receptor availability and striatal dopamine
release showed greater reductions in switch costs following amphetamine than individuals with lower levels. The relationship between
thalamocortical receptors and stimulant-enhanced flexibility is partially
mediated by striatal dopamine release. These data indicate that the
impact of the psychostimulant on cognitive flexibility is influenced by
the status of dopamine within a thalamocorticostriatal network. Given
that the effects of amphetamine on task switching are variable across
subjects, there may be utility in being able to predict which individuals
are most likely to benefit from psychostimulants. Beyond demonstrating
a link between this dopaminergic network and the enhancement in task
switching, these neural measures accounted for unique variance in predicting the psychostimulant-induced cognitive enhancement. This raises
the possibility of using these neural measures to predict stimulant treatment effectiveness. The present results also suggest that there may be
measurable aspects of variability in the dopamine system that predispose certain individuals to benefit from and hence use (or even abuse)
psychostimulants for cognitive enhancement.

A ROLE FOR STRIATAL DOPAMINE IN MEDIATING THE ATTENTIONAL
BLINK: FUNCTIONAL IMPLICATIONS Heleen Slagter1, Rachel Tomer2,

Brad Christian3, Andrew Fox3, Lorenza Colzato4, Carlye King3, Dhanabalan
Murali3, Richard Davidson3; 1University of Amsterdam, 2University of Haifa,
3
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 4Leiden University — The attentional blink

(AB) reflects a deficit in perceiving the second of two meaningful events
presented in close temporal succession in a rapid stream of distracter
events. Given the known role of striatal dopamine in regulating the contents of working memory and hence, conscious perception, this study
tested the hypothesis that striatal dopamine plays a mediating role in the
AB. Subjects performed an AB task and their basal level of D2-like receptor binding was measured using positron emission tomography (PET)
and the radioligand [F- 18]fallypride. As predicted, individual differences analyses showed that greater D2-like receptor binding in the dorsal striatum was associated with a larger AB. This finding provides
critical support for the idea that striatal dopaminergic neurotransmission, and hence, mechanisms important for dynamically regulating the
contents of working memory, play an important role in mediating the
AB. Specifically, given the known role of the striatal D2 pathway in preventing gating of irrelevant information into working memory, this finding provides neural evidence for the idea that the AB is – at least in part –
determined by mechanisms involved in suppressing irrelevant information. A challenge for current computational and theoretical accounts of
the AB lies in connecting more directly with these and other neurobiological data.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Slide Sessions

THE IMPACT OF EXECUTIVE FUNCTION ABILITY ON NEURAL
PROCESSING OF REWARD INFORMATION: AN FMRI STUDY. Sara

Langworthy1, Kathleen Thomas1; 1University of Minnesota — Previous
research has not extensively explored the intersection of executive function (EF) and reward processing across development in order to discern
how these processes might be linked in underlying dopamine-rich neural fronto-striatal circuits in the brain. Functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) and Positron Emission Tomography (PET) scans show
differences in activation patterns in between individuals with ADHD
and typically developing controls including lower levels of activation in
fronto-striatal areas that are usually highly activated for high magnitude
rewards. In this study, we examined the differences in fronto-striatal
activation in response to rewarding stimuli for children grouped by Low
and High levels of EF ability. Twenty-four children completed the Monetary Incentive Delay task during an fMRI scan. The High and Low EF
groups showed different patterns of activation for large versus small
rewards in the orbitofrontal cortex, putamen, and caudate. The High EF
group showed greater activation for large over small gain trials in the
right orbitofrontal cortex, left putamen, and the posterior caudate. The
Low EF group showed greater activation for small over large gain trials
in left orbitofrontal cortex, and left posterior caudate. Previous research
has found less activation for reward conditions in fronto-stratial regions
in individuals with ADHD. The Low EF group may be exhibiting altered
activation similar to individuals with ADHD perhaps indicative of
reward insensitivity.

ATTENTION BIASES VISUAL ACTIVITY IN WORKING MEMORY Bo-Cheng
Kuo1,2, Mark Stokes1, Alexandra M. Murray1, Anna Christina Nobre1;
1University of Oxford, 2National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan — Recent
studies have shown that directing attention to relevant items maintained
in working memory can improve performance. However, the neural
mechanisms mediating this behavioral effect are still unclear. In this
fMRI study, we investigated whether attention modulates visual activity
during working memory maintenance. Participants (N = 12) performed a
delayed-response task in which attention was manipulated during the
retention interval. In each trial, a memory array of four peripheral items
was initially presented for 200 msec, followed by a single centrally presented cue (retro-cue, 200 msec) after a 2-sec interval. Participants were
instructed to direct attention to the item in working memory indicted by
the retro-cue. After an 8-sec interval, a probe array of four peripherally
located items was presented for 200 msec. All items in the probe array
were the same as those in the memory array; however, two items always
swapped location. On 50% of trials, this swap included the cued item.
Participants responded “match” or “no-match”, according to whether
the item at the cued location was the same, or different, as the corresponding item from the previous memory array. We analysed maintenance-related activity in retinotopically defined regions of interest in
posterior visual cortex. Our results demonstrate that orienting attention
to the location of the cued item modulates maintenance-related activity.
The response in a given retinotopic region was significantly increased
when that location was cued relative to when it was uncued. We suggest
that modulation of visual activity contributes to the mechanisms of
attentional control over working-memory maintenance.

PROACTIVE AND REACTIVE COGNITIVE CONTROL MECHANISMS IN THE
HUMAN BRAIN Lawrence Appelbaum1, Carsten Boehler2, Marty Woldorff1;
1

Duke University, 2Gent University — In the present research we exploit the
high-temporal resolution of EEG to examine the neural mechanisms
underlying the flexible regulation of cognitive control that unfolds over
different timescales. We measured behavioral and neural effects of colorword incongruency as different groups of participants (n=84) performed
four different versions of the Stroop and Reverse Stroop tasks in which
the relative timing (SOA) of the color and word features were varied
from trial-to-trial and thereby varied the need for reactive control processes. Across these tasks, we also altered the proportion of congruentto-incongruent trials (50/50% versus 80/20%) and the temporal predict-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

ability of the SOAs (random versus constant) to determine how these
contexts ramified into differing levels of proactive/strategic control.
Across tasks, when the SOA arrangement was random we observed the
greatest incongruency effects when the task-irrelevant stimulus preceded the target, whereas with predictable SOAs the incongruency
effects were largest with simultaneous occurrence. In line with automaticity theories of word reading, incongruency effects were reduced
nearly 50% for word-identification, but these completely recovered
when incongruent trials appeared only infrequently. Across all conditions the amplitude of the negative-polarity, incongruency-related ERP
wave (NINC) closely paralleled the RT incongruency effects, indicating
this component is sensitive to the overall level of stimulus conflict,
whereas the amplitude of the late positive ERP component (LPC)
inversely tracked the overall level of top-down control, suggesting a possible compensatory role due to reduced proactive control. The present
findings demonstrate distinct control mechanisms that unfold over time
in response to conflict in differing contexts.

IDENTIFYING FLEXIBLE HUBS: A NOVEL MECHANISM FOR FLEXIBLE
COGNITIVE CONTROL Michael Cole1, Joset Etzel1, Todd Braver1;
1

Washington University in St. Louis — The rapid flexibility of the human
brain is impressive. For instance, we recently demonstrated that humans
are able to learn novel tasks in seconds. The common proficiency of
healthy adults at using complex new technologies (e.g., computers,
‘smart’ phones) further demonstrates the brain’s ability to reconfigure to
a variety of possible arbitrary states. We postulate that such flexible cognitive control arises in part from what we term ‘flexible hubs’ – highly
connected regions that can flexibly change their connectivity patterns
depending on task demands. We present a novel graph theoretic method
for identifying putative flexible hubs – globally reconfigured connectivity (GRC). GRC uses functional connectivity MRI to identify regions with
the most brain-wide connectivity changes among tasks. We used GRC to
identify regions showing high connectivity variation across 64 unique
tasks. One such putative flexible hub was a recently identified portion of
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) whose global connectivity at rest
predicts general fluid intelligence. This finding suggests high DLPFC
global connectivity at rest may allow for a large number of potential connectivity patterns to be used during tasks – increasing the flexibility of
this region’s connectivity and of the ability to implement cognitive control according to a variety of potential task demands.

COMPARISON OF TASK- AND REST-RELATED INTRINSIC CONNECTIVITY
NETWORKS FOR THE STUDY OF INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN COGNITIVE
CONTROL Angus MacDonald III1,2, Krista Wisner1, Andrew Poppe1, Edward

Patzelt1; 1University of Minnesota, Department of Psychology, 2University of
Minnesota, Department of Psychiatry — Functional connectivity analyses
are increasingly used for understanding fundamental aspects of brain
network dynamics. Recently, data-driven techniques such as independent components analysis have been used to extract a number of intrinsic connectivity networks (ICNs) associated with cognitive control while
the brain is at rest. The current analyses compared the neurometric properties of cognitive control networks extracted from resting state data to
those same networks extracted when performing a cognitive control
task. Study 1 evaluated 27 participants twice 9 months apart during 6
minutes of resting data. Study 2 evaluated 36 participants twice 3 weeks
apart while performing a goal maintenance task. Multiple subject entry
orders were used with FSL’s MELODIC and a meta-level independent
component analyses (ICA) resulted in a robust ICN structure independently for each group at each time point. Dual-regression and resampling was used to test the statistical significance of 5 ICNs identified
through BrainMap meta-analyses (Laird, et al., JCN, 2011): a cognitive
control network (bilateral BAs 6, 8/9), left and right executive networks
(44/45 and 22/39/40), a visuospatial processing and reasoning network
(bilateral BAs 46, 7), and a cognition and emotion/interoception network
(bilateral BAs 13/16, 24). Brainwise correlations, overlap coefficients and
intraclass correlations provided converging metrics of the ICNs retest
reliability. Both resting state and task data overlapped with a priori

25

Slide Sessions
ICNs; Although reliability coefficients varied across networks, the
greater length of scanning and the shorter retest interval for the taskrelated data resulted in only marginally different neurometrics for evaluating individual differences in cognitive control network connectivity.

Slide Session 2
OPEN PAPER SESSION
Saturday, March 31, 3:00 - 4:15 pm, Grand Ballroom
Chair: R. Alison Adcock
Speakers: Elisabetta Ladavas, Brian Haas, Michael Grubb, Megan Boudewyn,
Alan Anticevic
ABSTRACTS

EMOTIONAL MODULATION OF VISUAL REMAPPING OF TOUCH
Elisabetta Ladavas1, Cardini Flavia1, Bertini Caterina1, Serino Andrea1;
1
University of Bologna — The perception of tactile stimuli on the face is

modulated if subjects concurrently observe a face being touched; this
effect is termed “Visual Remapping of Touch”, or the VRT effect. Given
the high social value of this mechanism, we investigated whether it
might be modulated by specific key information processed in face-toface interactions: facial emotional expression. In two separate experiments participants received tactile stimuli, near the perceptual threshold, either on their right, left or both cheeks. Concurrently, they watched
several blocks of movies depicting a face with a neutral, happy or fearful
expression that was touched or just approached by human fingers
(Experiment 1). Participants were asked to distinguish between felt, unilateral and bilateral, tactile stimulation. Tactile perception was enhanced
when viewing touch towards a fearful face compared to viewing touch
towards the other two expressions. In order to test whether this result
can be generalized to other negative emotions or whether it is a fear-specific effect, we ran a second experiment where participants watched
movies of faces - touched or approached by fingers - with either a fearful
or an angry expression (Experiment 2). In line with the first experiment,
tactile perception was enhanced when subjects viewed touch towards a
fearful face and not towards an angry face. Results of the present experiments are interpreted in light of different mechanisms underlying different emotions recognition, with a specific involvement of the
somatosensory system when viewing a fearful expression and a resulting fear-specific modulation of the VRT effect.

GENETIC EFFECTS ON THE MICRO-STRUCTURE OF THE AMYGDALA,
FUSIFORM, HIPPOCAMPUS IN HUMANS Brian Haas1,2, Naama BarneaGoraly1, Kristen Sheau1, Bun Yamagata1, Shruti Ullas3, Reiss Allan1; 1Center
for Interdisciplinary Brain Sciences Research (CIBSR), Stanford University
School of Medicine, 2Department of Psychology, University of Georgia,
3
Department of Psychology, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) — Wil-

liams syndrome (WS) is caused by a contiguous deletion of approximately 26 genes on chromosome 7q11.23. This condition is associated
with a compelling social-cognitive profile characterized by deficits in
emotion and face recognition and with an abnormally heightened drive
toward social engagement. Investigating WS provides an excellent
opportunity to elucidate the pathway between genes, the brain and
social cognitive function in humans. This study was designed to investigate the influence of the WS genetic deletion on the microstructure
within the social-cognitive brain network including the amygdala, fusiform gyrus and hippocampus and related white matter pathways by collecting Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) data from children with WS and
typically developing (TD) children. We performed two complimentary
analyses. Specifically, Atlas Based region of interest analysis was performed to investigate microstructure integrity within the amygdala, fusiform gyrus and hippocampus. Tract Based Spatial Statistics (TBSS) was
performed to investigate white matter integrity within the inferior frontal occipital (IFO) and uncinate fasciculus (UF) white-matter tracts.

26

Results indicated that the WS group relative to TD controls exhibited
greater fractional anisotropy (FA) within the bilateral amygdala and
fusiform gyrus, left hippocampus and the right IFO and UF. These data
provide evidence that genetic deletion in WS is associated with microstructural changes within a network of brain regions and white-matter
pathways important for social cognition. Additionally, this study provides support for the use DTI as a tool to elucidate microstructural alterations within the social-cognitive brain.

A NEURAL SIGNATURE OF COVERT DISENGAGEMENT DURING MOVIE
VIEWING Michael Grubb1, Pascal Wallisch1, Uri Hasson2, David J. Heeger1;
1

New York University, 2Princeton University — Engaging with an external
stimulus is associated with decreased activity in a network of brain areas
called the default network, or intrinsic system. Conversely, increased
activity in the intrinsic system has been found to coincide with moments
of “inattention” to experimental tasks. This study tested the hypothesis
that activity in the intrinsic system can be used as a marker for covert
disengagement from a highly naturalistic task: movie-viewing. Brain
activity was measured with functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) while participants watched a commercially produced film. The
degree of engagement with the film, as indexed by post-viewing behavioral appraisals, was predicted to vary between participants. Fluctuations in intrinsic–system activity during movie-viewing might reflect
such individual differences, with greater response modulation being
predictive of a less favorable appraisal of the film. Despite no evidence
for differences in eye movements during movie-viewing, individual differences in intrinsic–system activity were indeed predictive of movie
appraisal ratings: lower ratings were associated with larger amplitude
modulations in intrinsic-system activity and with larger covariance in
activity between intrinsic-system brain areas.

CONTEXT, CONTROL AND COMPREHENSION IN SCHIZOPHRENIA:
GETTING THE GLOBAL MESSAGE DEPENDS ON LOCAL SEMANTIC
PRIMING Megan Boudewyn1, Tamara Swaab1, Cameron Carter1; 1University
of California, Davis — Individuals with schizophrenia have clear language
impairments, but the relationship between these deficits and impaired
cognition is unknown. Previous studies of language processing in
schizophrenia have reported increased effects of lexical priming ("hyperpriming") as well as difficulties processing linguistic context. Studies of
cognitive deficits in schizophrenia have shown impairments in the controlled maintenance of contextual information and the ability to overcome conflict. This has been related to dysfunctions of the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex and the anterior cingulate, areas of the brain that may
also be important for establishing a coherent discourse representation. In
our study, participants listened to three-sentence passages in which we
manipulated global discourse coherence and local priming. The critical
final word in the last sentence of each story was globally coherent or
incoherent and locally primed or unprimed; e.g., "Luckily Ben had
picked up some salt and pepper/basil", preceded either by a context in
which Ben was preparing marinara sauce, or dealing with an icy walkway. In contrast to controls, schizophrenia patients: 1) only showed
N400 effects of discourse coherence when a locally associated word preceded the critical final word, indicating that patients constructed globally coherent discourse representations only when there was support
from the local context; 2) only showed N400 effects of local priming in
globally coherent contexts, indicating that patients had difficulties overcoming conflict between the activated meaning of the critical word and
the meaning representation of the overall discourse. These results suggest that deficits in cognitive control affect language comprehension in
schizophrenia.

UNDERSTANDING WORKING MEMORY FUNCTION THROUGH
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY:
FOCUS
ON
SCHIZOPHRENIA
AND
COMPUTATIONAL MODELING Alan Anticevic1, John Murray1, Philip
Corlett1, Xiao-Jing Wang1, Deanna Barch2, John Krystal1; 1Yale University,

2Washington University in St. Louis — Although

basic cognitive neuroscience has made major strides, understanding of working memory

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Slide Sessions
(WM) remains incomplete. One way towards this goal involves examining clinical populations with breakdowns in these very functions. This is
crucial, not only from a basic science perspective, but also for developing
targeted treatments of WM deficits present in clinical conditions–namely
schizophrenia (SCZ). Optimal WM function critically depends on resisting interference; however, neural mechanisms of WM filtering and its
breakdowns are have not been elucidated. We present a clinical study,
which informs upon our basic understanding of WM filtering mechanisms. First, we tested the hypothesis that SCZ is associated with a general inability to filter distraction versus a more specific deficit in the
ability to filter affectively salient distraction. 28 patients and 24 matched
controls underwent fMRI at 3T. Subjects performed a delayed-response
WM task faced with affectively negative, neutral or task-related interference. Results suggest that, unlike healthy individuals, patients fail to
deploy dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activity, irrespective of distracter
type, pointing to a general filtering deficit and the critical role of this
region in resisting interference. Next, we focus on mechanistically
understanding WM filtering. To this end, we employ a biophysically
grounded computational model. Within this model we implement a
leading hypothesis of SCZ neuropathology–namely cortical dysinhibition–and examine model performance under distraction. Lastly, we discuss aligning computational models, grounded in animal physiology,
with cognitive probes of WM, which confers the exciting possibility for
understanding of WM function from cells, to circuits, to behavior.

Slide Session 3
PERCEPTION
Sunday, April 1, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Red Lacquer Room
Chair: Alumit Ishai
Speakers: Alexander Clarke, Andrew Connolly, Karin James, Toralf Neuling,
Julian Keil, David Brang, Jascha Swisher, Joshua Carp
ABSTRACTS

PREDICTING THE TIME-VARYING NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF
MEANINGFUL OBJECTS USING SEMANTIC FEATURE-BASED
STATISTICS Alexander Clarke1, Barry Devereux1, Billi Randall1, Lorraine K.

Tyler1; 1University of Cambridge — The neural representation of meaningful

objects emerges over time with visual effects before 100 ms in visual cortex and semantics after 150 ms along the ventral stream. Feature-based
semantic accounts argue that statistical measures derived from semantic
features capture meaningful object processing, yet it’s unclear: 1)
whether feature-based models account for neural activity, 2) at what
time-point this information emerges, and 3) whether this information is
behaviourally relevant. Here we test whether perceptual or featurebased measures shape time-varying neural activity recorded with MEG.
Subjects named pictures at a basic-level during MEG recording. Multivariate multiple linear regression models were trained using perceptual
and semantic measures to predict MEG data across time for novel concepts, before assessing classification accuracy with leave-two-out crossvalidation. Source localisation of training weights determined the
regions underpinning classification. For behaviour, multiple linear
regression was performed between naming latencies and perceptual and
semantic variables, while linear regression was applied between MEG
signals and naming latencies. We find a model trained on perceptual
measures classified novel concepts significantly above chance beginning
80 ms after picture onset that was driven by the visual cortex. A model
trained with feature-based measures successfully classified concepts
after 160 ms that localised to anterior temporal and posterior fusiform.
Further, MEG data correlated with naming latencies after 160 ms showing this activity is behaviourally relevant. In conclusion, time-varying
neural representations of meaningful objects are initially shaped by perceptual parameters before fine-grained conceptual processes after 150

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

ms in the anterior temporal and posterior fusiform that support behaviour.

ANIMACY CONTINUUM EVIDENT IN VISUAL REPRESENTATIONS OF
BIOLOGICAL CLASSES Andrew Connolly1, James Haxby1,2; 1Dartmouth

College, 2University of Trento — Neuroimaging of the human visual cortex

has revealed highly reproducible findings in the ventral pathway for animate versus inanimate objects. Far less is known about representational
structure within the domain of animate categories, for example how different animals are represented. Using fMRI we recorded brain activity
associated with viewing 17 different animal species across two experiments. In experiment 1 (N=12), there were six species with 2 each from
the superordinate categories primates, birds, and bugs, and in experiment 2 (N=10) there were 12 species with 4 each from mammals, reptiles,
and bugs. Using multi-variate similarity structure analysis, we found
that representational structure in lateral occipital complex (LOC) was
highly reproducible across subjects with average pairwise correlation
between subjects of r = .94 (experiment 1) and r = .86 (experiment 2).
Multidimensional scaling revealed primary dimensions of representation spanning primates to bugs (experiment 1) and mammals to bugs
(experiment 2). Activation maps reveal greater activity for mammals
than for bugs in lateral fusiform and pSTS, and greater activity for bugs
than for mammals in medial fusiform and lateral inferior temporal cortex. The mammals, which are both subjectively and biologically closer to
humans, produced patterns of activity in object vision cortex that is typical of animate objects, while bugs, which are subjectively and biologically distant from humans produced patterns similar to those for
inanimate objects. These findings suggest that animal species fall along a
continuum in representational space that is predictable by the degree of
perceived animacy.

THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF OBJECT EXPERTISE IN THE YOUNG
CHILD Karin James1, Thomas James1, Shelley Swain1; 1Indiana Univeristy —
During development, some children develop extreme interests with a
particular category of objects. It is likely that this experience plays a role
in the organization and development of children’s brains. In children
and adults, expertise-related influences on brain organization has mostly
been studied with respect to human faces; adult-like face expertise
develops around 7 or 8 years old. However, the influence of non-face
object expertise on brain development has not been investigated systematically, even though some children develop expertise with other categories before faces. Here, we address this issue by recruiting and assessing
expertise in a group of 8-10 year old children who professed an unusually intense interest in Pokemon cards and games. BOLD fMRI was measured in these children, a control group of children, and a group of adult
Pokemon experts. Subjects were shown intact and scrambled versions of
human faces and Pokemon. Results demonstrated that expert children
showed significantly greater activation in the fusiform gyrus, bilaterally,
with Pokemon than with faces or with scrambled stimuli. In contrast,
control children showed differences between intact and scrambled stimuli, but greater activation for human faces than Pokemon. Adult experts
showed a similar pattern to child experts. The results suggest that the
putative face-selective brain network in adults develops based on experience with multiple categories of objects (both faces and non-faces). Such
findings suggest that these brain regions are part of a domain-general
system for processing objects of expertise that is not specific to human
faces.

OSCILLATORY PHASE SHAPES AUDITORY PERCEPTION Toralf Neuling1,
Stefan Rach1, Christoph Herrmann1; 1Carl von Ossietzky University Oldenburg,
Germany — In the current study we provide compelling evidence to
answer the long-standing question whether perception is continuous or
periodic. Spontaneous brain oscillations are assumed to be the underlying mechanism of periodic perception. Depending on the phase angle of
the oscillations, an identical stimulus results in different perceptual outcomes. Past results, however, can only account for a correlation of perception with the phase of the ongoing EEG oscillations. Therefore, it is

27

Slide Sessions
desirable to demonstrate a causal relation between phase and perception. One way to address this question is to entrain spontaneous brain
oscillation by applying an external oscillation and then demonstrate
behavioral consequences of this oscillation. Therefore, we conducted an
auditory detection experiment with concurrent electroecephalography
(EEG) and simultaneously applied oscillating transcranial direct current
stimulation at 10 Hz (alpha-tDCS). Our approach revealed that detection
thresholds were dependent on the phase of the oscillation that was elicited by alpha-tDCS. This behavioral effect was accompanied by an electrophysiological effect: alpha-power was enhanced after alpha-tDCS as
compared to a pre-stimulation period. By showing a causal relation
between phase and perception, our results extend findings of previous
studies that were only able to demonstrate a correlation. We found that
manipulation of the phase resulted in different detection thresholds,
which supports the notion that perception can be periodically modulated by oscillatory processes. This demonstrates that tDCS can serve as
a tool in neuroscience to extend the knowledge of the functional significance of brain oscillations.

SINGLE TRIAL PRE-STIMULUS BETA-BAND PHASE INFLUENCES
AUDIOVISUAL INTEGRATION (GSA WINNER) Julian
Keil1,
Nadia
Müller1,2, Thomas Hartmann1, Nathan Weisz1,2; 1University of Konstanz,
2
Zukunftskolleg University of Konstanz — The question whether multisen-

sory information integration requires specific pre-stimulus brain states
has recently come into focus. The sound induced flash illusion is an
example for the influence of auditory information on visual perception.
It consists of the perception of two visual stimuli upon the presentation
of only a single visual stimulus accompanied by two auditory stimuli.
We used magnetoencephalography (MEG) to assess the influence of
ongoing pre-stimulus oscillatory phase and power on varying perception of invariant stimuli. We compared cortical activity for trials in which
subjects perceived two visual stimuli (i.e. an illusion) with trials in which
subjects perceived only one visual stimulus (i.e. no illusion), thus keeping the stimulation fixed. Subjects perceived the illusion in ~50% of trials. In trials containing an illusion, we found stronger pre-stimulus (-.5 to
-. 1 s) beta band (13-21 Hz) power in a left temporal sensor cluster and
localized it to left middle temporal gyrus (BA39). In illusion trials, this
area was stronger phase locked to the left auditory area BA21 and phase
difference between these areas predicted subsequent illusory perception
on single trial level. In a second study, single-pulse pre-stimulus TMS to
left BA39 could modulate the occurrence of the illusion. Our results support recent reports on the influence of brain states prior to stimulation on
subsequent perception. We suggest that ongoing pre-stimulus fluctuations of oscillatory activity in multimodal brain regions as well as its
varying connection to primary sensory areas form predispositions
whether different sensory streams will be integrated or not.

ENHANCED MULTISENSORY INTEGRATION RELATES TO INCREASED
PARIETAL WHITE MATTER CONNECTIVITY David Brang1, Zack Taich1,

Steven A Hillyard1, Vilayanur S Ramachandran1; 1University of California, San
Diego — Our senses interact in daily life through multisensory integration, facilitating perceptual processes and behavioral responses. Multisensory processing varies greatly between healthy individuals and in
particular across the lifespan. Indeed, research suggests that multisensory integration may increase from adolescence through late-adulthood
regardless of the well-documented decline in connectivity that is associated with aging, making any model of multisensory processing particularly complex. Several potential mechanisms exist to explain how
information from distinct sensory modalities integrates into a unified
percept, including multisensory regions in the parietal lobe, direct communication between the individual senses, multisensory areas in subcortical structures including the superior colliculus, or even through
multisensory responses within the primary sensory systems (e.g. neurons in visual cortex that respond to auditory stimuli). Each of these
models of multisensory integration, however, predicts distinct patterns
of anatomical connectivity in the brain. Here we provide the first test of
these models using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), by examining indi-

28

vidual difference measures of anatomical connectivity and multisensory
integration (using a simple speeded reaction time paradigm). Results
reveal that a faster response to a bimodal (as compared with a unimodal)
stimulus positively correlates with anatomical connectivity in the intraparietal sulcus highlighting the importance of connections in this region.
This finding suggests that multisensory information is related to multisensory regions in the parietal lobe through indirect anatomical connections, as opposed to being integrated directly between associated
modalities.

VARIABILITY IN SIMPLE REACTION TIMES CORRELATES WITH BOLD
ONSET LATENCY IN MOTOR CORTEX (PFA WINNER) Jascha Swisher1,

Allen Newton1, Robert Barry1, John Gore1, Frank Tong1; 1Vanderbilt
University — Reaction time (RT) measurements lie at the core of many
classic findings in cognitive psychology. The ability to observe similar
changes in the timing of the BOLD response may help in associating
such effects with activity in particular regions of the brain. Using timeresolved (176ms) whole-brain fMRI at 7 Tesla, here we show that trial-totrial variability in response times in a simple reaction time paradigm is
reflected in the latency of motor cortex activation. Participants pressed a
button as quickly as possible upon presentation of a checkerboard pattern, which occurred at random exponentially-distributed intervals. Trials were binned into quartiles by RT, and separate estimates of the time
to onset of the hemodynamic response (HDR) were obtained for each
quartile. A highly significant increase in onset latencies with longer RTs
was observed in motor cortex, while visual cortex latency also increased
significantly with RT. A difference in the slope of the relationship
between HDR latency and RT across areas approached significance; a
linear model fit to the data predicts that a 10ms increase in RT would be
reflected in a 10ms delay in the onset of motor cortex activity, but only a
5ms delay in visual activity. Under the assumption that cortical areas
represent serial processing stages with non-independent delays, this difference in slopes suggests that processing in visual cortex occurred
before that in motor areas. These results show promise for fMRI's utility
in similar studies of mental chronometry.

ESTIMATING THE ANALYTIC FLEXIBILITY OF FUNCTIONAL
NEUROIMAGING: IMPLICATIONS FOR UNCERTAINTY AND BIAS IN
COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE Joshua Carp1; 1University of Michigan —
How vulnerable is the field of cognitive neuroscience to bias? According
to a recent mathematical model, the potential for scientific bias increases
with the flexibility of analytic modes. In other words, the greater the
range of acceptable analysis strategies, the greater the likelihood that
published research findings are false. Thus, the present study sought to
empirically estimate the analytic flexibility of fMRI research. We identified five pre-processing decisions and five modeling decisions for which
two or more analysis strategies are commonly used in the research literature. By crossing each of these strategies and decisions, we identified
4,608 unique analysis pipelines. Next, we applied each of these pipelines
to a previously published fMRI study of novelty detection in an auditory
oddball task. We found that activation estimates were highly dependent
on methodological decisions: contrasts that yielded significant positive
activation under one pipeline were associated with non-significant positive activation or even with negative activation under other pipelines.
Some analysis decisions contributed more to this variability more than
others, and each decision exerted a unique pattern of variability across
the brain. The effects of a given decision also varied across contrasts,
subjects, and other analysis parameters. In sum, we found considerable
quantitative and qualitative variability across analysis pipelines, suggesting that the results of cognitive neuroimaging experiments may be
more uncertain than they seem. Indeed, given a supercomputer, a sufficiently motivated analyst might observe almost any imaginable pattern
of results.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Slide Sessions

Slide Session 4
THINKING AND DECISION MAKING
Monday, April 2, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Red Lacquer Room
Chair: Kalinia Christoff
Speakers: Aysha Keisler, Daniel Hawes, Joseph Kim, G Elliott Wimmer, Robert
Emerson, Perrine Ruby, Mathieu d'Acremont, Eva Telzer
ABSTRACTS

COST AND REWARD MODULATION OF CORTICAL INHIBITION Aysha
Keisler1, Eric Mooshagian1, Reza Shadmehr2, Eric Wassermann1; 1National
Institutes of Health, 2Johns Hopkins University — The cortico-striatal system
is known to be involved in reward response. While considerable work
has elucidated midbrain reward mechanisms, we know little about the
cortical component of this loop. Previous work shows that cortical inhibition, as assessed by transcranial magnetic stimulation, can be modulated by reward state. Thus, cortical inhibition may provide a window
into the state of the reward system. Here, we assess how reward is discounted by costs in humans, as measured by changes in cortical inhibition. Monetary reward was given for correct responses on a visual
discrimination task. Participants responded by making either a loweffort or a high-effort motor movement with the left hand. In this way,
we could vary cost and reward independently to manipulate ‘discounted reward’, or the difference between the monetary value given on
the trial (reward) and the effort exerted to obtain the reward (cost). TMS
was applied to M1of the left hemisphere after reward onset and motor
evoked potentials were recorded from the right hand to measure cortical
inhibition as a function of discounted reward. As in previous studies, we
found a main effect of (undiscounted) reward on cortical inhibition. Further, we found that reward is indeed discounted by cost, as inhibition is
greater in the low-effort condition than the high-effort condition, for a
given reward. The results suggest that reward value is not absolute;
rather, rewarding feedback is appraised relative to the cost of obtaining
it.

THE CORRELATION OF NEURAL ACTIVITY AND PERSONALITY TRAITS IN
RESPONSE TO MONETARY GAINS AND LOSSES Daniel Hawes1, Colin

DeYoung1, Jeremy Gray2, Aldo Rustichini1; 1University of Minnesota, 2Yale
University — To integrate decision theory with personality theory, we
investigate the relation between personality traits and neural responses
to anticipated and realized gains and losses after choice. In a fMRI experiment (N=114), subjects are asked to guess whether a computer-generated number between 1 and 6 falls into the lower or upper range of the
interval. Correct guesses are rewarded, while incorrect guesses are
penalized. We modify a similar design used by Delgado et al. in Journal
of Neurophysiology, 2000, by informing subjects whether a trial is going
to be consequential (guesses are rewarded/penalized) or neutral (no
payment). In addition to fMRI data, we gather information on personality traits, cognitive skills (IQ), demographic variables and social indicators. We identify several cortical and subcortical regions with strong
differential activation to consequential versus neutral trials. These
include Striatum, Thalamus, Anterior Cingulate, medial Prefrontal Cortex, and Insula. In these regions neural responses to revelation of a consequential trial correlate significantly with individual difference
measures: For example, thalamic response correlates positively with
Sensation Seeking and negatively with Impulsive Urgency. A matching
pattern is found bilaterally for Caudate regions. In cortical regions, consequential trials are followed by neural responses that correlate with
traits of Premeditation and IQ. Focusing on the Striatum, we replicate
the neural response pattern to gains and losses, previously identified in
Delgado et al. We find that components of the gain/loss response correlate with subject’s scores on the behavioral avoidance (or inhibition)
scale (BIS), and the Big 5 traits of Neuroticism and Openness.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX LESIONS DISRUPT ADAPTATION OF CHOICEBEHAVIOR TO VARYING AFFECTIVE CONTEXT IN ECONOMIC DECISIONMAKING Joseph Kim1, Eunice Yang1, Lindsey Overhalser1, Lucas
Wonderley1, Maureen McHugo1, Mildred Dukic1, Rebecca Ray2, David Zald1;
1
Vanderbilt University, 2University of Wisconsin - Madison — In the current

study, we sought to examine the effect of orbitofrontal cortex (OFC)
lesions on framing biases associated with economic decision-making.
Previous neuroimaging studies have identified the OFC as a region
involved in decision-making. Still unclear is however, to what extent
OFC lesions in humans influence economic heuristics understood to
vary according to the context in which the alternatives are framed. Here,
we investigated economic choice-behavior of twelve OFC lesion patients
using a financial decision-making task. Specifically, we examined (i)
whether OFC lesions alter choice-behavior by disrupting normative processes that bias choice-preference in contrasting affective contexts (i.e.,
monetary reward framed as gain or loss); and (ii) whether the putative
alteration in economic choice patterns reflect generalized disinhibition of
choice-behavior or more specific deficits associated with sensitivity to
reward magnitudes. Results indicated that patients with OFC lesions
show reduction in the extent of bias against choosing financial options
framed as loss (versus gain) compared to that exhibited by demographically matched controls. However in trials overall, lesion patients were no
more or less likely than controls to choose the gamble option, discrediting the hypothesis that OFC lesions cause a generalized disinhibition in
choice-behavior. Critically, OFC lesion patients’ choice-pattern in
response to offers varied in the amount of monetary reward revealed
diminished sensitivity to varying reward magnitudes. By assessing the
effect of OFC lesions on economic choice-behavior under contrasting
affective context and varying reward magnitudes, the present study provides a more detailed examination of the OFC’s contribution to rewardbased decision-making.

NEURAL AND BEHAVIORAL PREDICTORS OF SUBSEQUENT MEMORY
DURING REWARD LEARNING G Elliott Wimmer1, Erin Kendall Braun1,

Daphna Shohamy1; 1Columbia University — Decision making and memory
are tightly related. Much recent work has investigated how people learn
value based on repeated feedback. However, it is largely unknown
whether ongoing reward learning influences other forms of memory,
such episodic memory. Further, episodic memories formed during learning may bias later choices, yet relatively little is known about the mechanisms by which this form of memory contributes to choice. Our goal was
to explore these two questions in a modified reward learning game. Participants made choices between two options (colored squares), each
associated with drifting reward probabilities. Additionally, we overlaid
trial-unique object pictures on each option. Participants were instructed
that these objects were not part of the game. After learning, participants
were given a surprise memory test for the objects. Participants exhibited
significant subsequent memory for the pictures. Moreover, we found
that memory formation was significantly predicted by variables associated with learning: choice, exploration, and reward. Intriguingly, overnight consolidation reversed the sign of several predictors; for example,
reward shifted from a positive to a negative predictor. During reward
learning, activation in the hippocampus predicted subsequent memory
overall, and the beneficial effects of choice on memory were reflected in
activation in object-selective cortical regions and medial PFC. Building
on these memory findings, we tested whether objects incidentally presented during learning can bias subsequent choice. Results suggest that
participants are biased to choose previously rewarded stimuli. This
work provides initial insight into how choice may influence episodic
memory and how memory may influence later choice.

EARLY MATH ACHIEVEMENT AND FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN THE
FRONTO-PARIETAL NETWORK Robert Emerson1, Jessica Cantlon1;
1

University of Rochester — Here we show that functional connectivity of
the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) and prefrontal cortex (PFC), measured
while children view Sesame Street, predicts their performance on a

29

Slide Sessions
mathematics achievement test (TEMA-3; Ginsburg, 2003). Specifically,
we tested 4- to 11-year-old children on a matching task during fMRI to
localize a fronto-parietal network that responds more strongly during
numerical matching than matching faces, words, or shapes. We then
tested the functional connectivity between those regions during an independent task: free viewing of an educational video that included math
topics. We found that the connectivity between frontal and parietal
regions during task-independent free-viewing of educational material is
predictive of children's basic number matching ability, as well as their
scores on the standardized test of mathematical ability (the TEMA). The
correlation between children's mathematics scores and fronto- parietal
connectivity is math-specific in the sense that it is independent of children's verbal IQ scores. Moreover, a control network, selective for faces,
showed no correlation with mathematics performance. We suggest that
the functional intersection of these frontal and parietal regions is mathspecific.

WHICH CEREBRAL ACTIVITY DIFFERENTIATES DREAMERS FROM NONRuby1,2,
Olivier
DREAMERS ? ERPS AND PET STUDIES Perrine

Bertrand1,2, Jerome Daltrozzo1,2, Jerome Redoute4, Nicolas Costes4, Alain
Nicolas3, Dominique Morlet1,2, Jean-Baptiste Eichenlaub1,2; 1Lyon
Neuroscience Research Center, INSERM U1028 - CNRS UMR5292, Brain
Dynamics and Cognition Team, Lyon, France, 2University Claude Bernard Lyon
1, Lyon, France, 3Unité d'Exploration Hypnologique, CH le Vinatier, Lyon,
France, 4CERMEP-Imagerie du Vivant, Lyon, France — Dreaming is still a
mystery of human cognition. In the fifties, dreaming was associated with
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep (Dement & Kleitman 1957; Sastre &
Jouvet 1979) but this hypothesis which cannot explain all the characteristics of dream reports has been challenged (Solms 1997; Nir & Tononi
2010). We used event-related potentials (ERPs) and positron emission
tomography (PET) during wakefulness and sleep, to measure brain
activity in subjects who report dreams frequently (Dreamers, D) versus
rarely (Non-Dreamers, ND). During EPRs data acquisition, participants
(18 D and 18 ND) passively listened to sounds while they were either
watching a silent movie or sleeping at night. PET data were acquired in
the afternoon while participants (21 D and 20 ND) were resting (wakefulness) or sleeping (N2, N3 and REM sleep). ERPs results revealed that
the primary steps of auditory processing (N1 and MMN) match in
Dreamers and Non-Dreamers. However, latter responses, reflecting
higher cognitive processing, dramatically differ in the two groups during pre-sleep wakefulness and during sleep. In the PET study, D vs ND
contrast showed rCBF increases in TPJ during REM sleep, N3, and wakefulness, and in MPFC during REM sleep and wakefulness. This study
reveals for the first time functional neuroanatomical correlates of the
ability to recall dreams in healthy subjects and argue in favor of the forebrain "dream-on" hypothesis (Solms 2000). Results of the two studies
support the hypothesis that high/low dream recall frequency is associated with particular cerebral functional organisation independent of the
state of vigilance.

FREQUENTIST AND BAYESIAN PROBABILITIES ARE ENCODED
SEPARATELY IN THE BRAIN Mathieu d'Acremont1, Wolfram Schultz2,

Peter Bossaerts1; 1California Institute of Technology, 2University of
Cambridge — When predicting uncertain events, people need to combine
two sources of information. The first one comes from prior knowledge,
e.g. the probability that it will rain during the weekend reported in a
weather forecast. The second source comes from experience, e.g. day
after day we can observe if it is raining or not and update our prediction
for the weekend. We conducted two fMRI studies to explore how the
brain encoded probabilities based on these two sources of information.
In the first study, young adults learned the probabilities of stochastic
events by observing their repeated occurrences (sampling) and then
used these probabilities to make decisions. Results showed that BOLD
response in bilateral angular gyrus and medial prefrontal cortex
increased with event probabilities in the sampling period. Further analyses revealed that activities in these regions and the posterior cingulate

30

cortex were interconnected and decreased during the task, pointing to
the engagement of the default mode network. In the second study, we
manipulated prior information about stochastic events as an additional
factor. Results showed that frequentist probabilities were encoded in the
same network. Bayesian probabilities – which combine prior knowledge
with new evidence – were encoded in the bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Here brain activation increased when a rare event occurred,
thus reflecting a response of “surprise”. It can be concluded that frequentist and Bayesian probabilities are encoded in separate networks in
the brain. The role of the default network, memory, and prediction errors
in probability learning is discussed.

THE EFFECTS OF INADEQUATE SLEEP ON BRAIN FUNCTION DURING RISK
TAKING IN ADOLESCENCE (GSA WINNER) Eva Telzer1, Andrew Fuligni1,

Adriana Galvan1; 1UCLA — Inadequate sleep is endemic among adoles-

cents. Sleep deprivation relates to a host of cognitive and emotional deficits including diminished attentional control, greater arousal, and poorer
emotion regulation. This raises important concerns about the health consequences of sleep during adolescence. Adolescence is a time of heightened risk taking behavior, and sleep problems may underlie some
aspects of risk taking. In the current study, we examined the effects of
sleep on brain function during risk-taking among adolescents. During a
functional brain scan, 46 adolescents completed The Balloon Analogue
Risk Task (BART), which measures risk taking behavior and cognitive
control. Participants also completed the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index,
which measures sleep quality and sleep problems in the past month.
Results suggest that adolescents with poorer sleep quality and greater
sleep problems have higher mean pumps on the BART, an index of riskier behavior. At the neural level, adolescents who reported more sleep
problems and poorer sleep quality showed decreased activation in the
insula when making increasing pumps, a brain region involved in risk
monitoring. Thus, poor sleep may lead to a compromised neural risk
monitor, resulting in riskier behavior during adolescence. Moreover,
when cashing out, poorer sleep quality was related to increased insula as
well as increased dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) activation, a
brain region involved in cognitive control. Thus, adolescents with poorer
sleep may need to recruit more cognitive control and risk monitoring in
order to make the decision to stop pumping and cash out.

Slide Session 5
LANGUAGE
Monday, April 2, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Red Lacquer Room
Chair: Gina Kuperberg
Speakers: Nora Raschle, Simon W. Davis, Zhenghan Qi, Yi Guo, Leonardo
Fernandino, Tristan Davenport, Giovanna Egidi, Neil Cohn
ABSTRACTS

THE DEVELOPMENT OF PHONOLOGICAL PROCESSING SKILLS IN POOR
AND GOOD READERS: A STUDY FROM PRESCHOOL TO
KINDERGARTEN Nora Raschle1, Jennifer Zuk1, Nadine Gaab1; 1Children's
Hospital & Harvard Medical School, Boston — Phonological processing (PP)
skills have been shown to be critical for the development of reading
skills. The ability to map sounds to their written counterparts precedes
and predicts later reading ability (e.g.; Mann & Dittuno, 1990). Previous
studies suggest that those with reading disability show hypoactivation
during phonological processing in occipitotemporal/temporoparietal
brain regions (e.g.; Richlan et al., 2011). However, it remains unclear how
PP develops from the pre-reading to emerging reader stage and whether
the developmental trajectories differ between future good and poor
readers. Using whole brain fMRI, we investigated the development of PP
with a first sound matching compared to a voice matching task in
twenty-eight English speaking children prior to and after one year of
kindergarten. Children were grouped into poor and good readers

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Slide Sessions
depending on their timed reading scores (TOWRE) after one year of
reading instruction. ROI analyses in year1 and year2 were performed in
order to investigate PP development within left-hemispheric occipitotemporal/temporoparietal cortex. Prior to kindergarten onset, children
who were one year later classified as poor readers already show reduced
activation during PP within left-hemispheric occipitotemporal/temporoparietal brain areas when compared to good readers. This neural
disruption in occipitotemporal/temporoparietal areas during PP in poor
readers persists after one year of reading instruction. Our longitudinal
study will investigate whether these neural differences may be utilized
as early predictors of later reading (dis-)abilities. An early identification
of poor readers or children at risk for reading disability may help prevent negative clinical, psychological and social consequences of reading
failure.

TASK-RELATED EFFECTS ON THE NEURAL NETWORKS INVOLVED IN
COGNITION: IMPLICATIONS FOR AGING STUDIES Simon W. Davis1, Jie

Zhuang1, Paul Wright1, Meredith A. Shafto1, Lorraine K. Tyler1; 1Centre for
Speech, Language and the Brain, University of Cambridge — It is widely
assumed that cognitive functions decline with age and that these decrements are associated with age-related changes in patterns of functional
activity. However, these studies typically use tasks which may not be
orthogonal to the cognitive function being investigated, raising the possibility that the observed age-related functional changes may be due to
increased responsiveness to task demands and not to core cognitive
functions themselves. To test this hypothesis we scanned healthy subjects [aged 19-76] in 2 studies. In one, subjects passively listened to spoken sentences [no-task condition] while in the other they performed an
acceptability judgment task [task condition]. We observed consistent
activation of the language network (MTG, LIFG) in both task and no-task
studies, and was similarly sensitive to syntactic ambiguity in both studies, suggesting that it persists regardless of additional task demands.
Furthermore, this network showed an age-related reduction only during
the task, but not in the no-task variant. In contrast, the remaining 3 networks were only present during the task study. Furthermore, increases
in functional connectivity between task-related networks dissociated
correct and incorrect responses in older but not younger adults, suggesting an age-related shift in processing to regions outside the language
network when a task is involved. Our findings suggest that the language
network remains consistently activated regardless of cognitive demands.
Furthermore, age-related differences only emerged when a task not
essential to core language function was introduced, suggesting that we
may be under-estimating the extent to which cognitive functions remain
stable across the adult life-span.

NEUROCOGNITIVE PLASTICITY IN VERB BIAS LEARNING: AN ERP STUDY
(GSA WINNER) Zhenghan Qi1, Susan Garnsey1; 1University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign — The likelihood of structural alternatives for verbs
(verb bias) guides sentence comprehension [MacDonald et al., 1994;
Trueswell & Kim, 1998; Garnsey et al., 1997] Verb-bias learning was
investigated by monitoring EEG during training on sentences containing
novel verbs. A post-training picture-matching task probed learning. Sentences contained prepositional phrases that could be verb instruments or
direct-object modifiers, and were disambiguated by critical noun meaning. (1) Instrument Ambiguous / Unambiguous: The suntanned farmer
dakked the corn {with/using} the big tractor... (2) Modifier Ambiguous /
Unambiguous: The suntanned farmer dakked the corn {with/that has}
the high stalks... Novel verbs were trained in ambiguous (with) sentences or unambiguous (using/that has) sentences. Picture-matching
and EEG responses suggest instrument-bias learning only in ambiguous
sentences. Early in training, N400 was smaller for instruments (tractor)
than modifiers (stalks), suggesting greater ease in processing nouns consistent with instrument predictions. Later in training, the effect changed
to a reduced P600 for instruments, suggesting that instrument attachment structures became easier to process as novel verbs’ instrument
biases increased. The transition from N400 to P600 (consistent with previous results in second language and artificial language learning [OsterCognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

hout et al., 2006; 2008; Friederici et al., 2002]) was observed mainly in
ambiguous conditions containing with-phrases, suggesting that resolving ambiguity might be a crucial component of verb bias learning.

NEURAL BASIS OF SEMANTIC AND SYNTACTIC INTERFERENCE
RESOLUTION IN SENTENCE COMPREHENSION Yi Guo1, Randi Martin1,

Cris Hamilton1, Julie Van Dyke2, Yingying Tan1; 1Rice University, 2Haskins
Laboratories — During sentence comprehension, it is often necessary to

retrieve earlier information (e.g., the sentential subject) to link with later
information (e.g., the main verb) across some intervening material (e.g.,
a relative clause). Interference in retrieving the subject of a verb has been
observed when the intervening material contains a noun having features
matching the semantic or syntactic retrieval cues generated by the verb.
The purpose of the present study was to determine the brain regions
involved in resolving such semantic and syntactic interference during
sentence comprehension. In a 2 (low semantic vs. high semantic interference) × 2 (low syntactic vs. high syntactic interference) design, brain
activity was measured using fMRI while subjects read sentences and
answered comprehension questions following the sentence. Two regions
in the LIFG (BA 45 & 44) showed greater activation for the high than the
low SYNTACTIC interference conditions during sentence reading. Two
regions in the LIFG (BA 45 & 47) showed greater activation for the high
than the low SEMANTIC interference conditions, but during question
answering. In a conjunction analysis, regions in BA 45 & 44 showed a
large degree of overlap during the resolution of semantic and syntactic
interference. The semantic interference region in BA 47, however, did
not overlap with any region involved in resolving syntactic interference.
The results implicate the LIFG in resolving semantic and syntactic interference during sentence comprehension, but with a different time course
and somewhat different brain regions involved in resolving the two
types of interference.

WHERE IS THE ACTION? ACTION SENTENCE PROCESSING IN
PARKINSON’S DISEASE (PFA WINNER) Leonardo Fernandino1, Lisa

Conant1, Jeffrey Binder1, Karen Blindauer1, Bradley Hiner1, Katie Spangler1,
Rutvik Desai1; 1Medical College of Wisconsin — According to an influential

view of conceptual representation, action concepts are understood
through motor simulations, involving cortical motor regions of the brain.
A stronger version of this embodied account suggests that even figurative uses of action words (e.g., "grasping the concept") are understood
through motoric simulations. The necessity of motor systems in language comprehension can be established if patients with motor impairments show selective deficits for action language. We compared the
performance of 20 patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) with that of 21
age-matched controls on a sentence meaningfulness judgment task,
where the sentences belonged to one of four conditions: literal action,
non-idiomatic metaphoric action, idiomatic action, and abstract. The
same verbs (referring to hand/arm actions) were used in the three
action-related conditions. Patients were slower to respond to literal
action than to abstract sentences (p = .006), but not controls (p = .46),
with a significant interaction (p = .03). A similar interaction was found
for idiomatic sentences (p = .047), but not for the metaphoric ones. For
metaphoric sentences, however, a marginal effect was seen in accuracy,
whereby lower accuracy for metaphoric relative to abstract sentences
was seen for the patient group relative to controls (interaction p = 0.07).
These results support a view in which sensory-motor systems are causally involved in language comprehension, even extending to figurative
language. The pattern of impairment suggests context-sensitivity in
embodiment, whereby sensory-motor involvement is gradually reduced
as language becomes more figurative and formulaic. Acknowledgment:
Supported by NIH R01 DC010783 (RD).

ONE LEG, AN ARM, AND A SHARK: ERP EFFECTS OF LEXICAL
ASSOCIATION AND CAUSAL INFERENCE IN DISCOURSE Tristan

Davenport1, Seana Coulson1; 1University of California, San Diego — We used

event-related potentials to compare the impact of discourse context on
visually presented probe words that were either lexical associates of the

31

Slide Sessions
final word in the discourse (lexically related), related to a causal inference prompted by the discourse (causally related), or were unrelated to
the preceding discourse. In experiment 1, participants heard short stories
containing causal coherence gaps, necessitating a causal bridging inference (e.g., "The surfer took his board out into the waves. He started
screaming and emerged with one leg."). At the end of each story, one of
four visual probe words was presented: causally related to the coherence
gap (SHARK), lexically related to the story's final word (ARM), or one of
two unrelated conditions drawn from the lists of causal and lexical
words to serve as controls (PUNCH, SLEEP). N400s elicited by causally
related probes were slightly smaller than those elicited by lexically
related probes; unrelated probes did not differ. In Experiment 2, discourse primes comprised only the story's second sentence. Neither
related nor unrelated probes differed from each other. In Experiment 3,
the length of the discourse prime was varied within-subjects, and only
causally related and lexically related probes were included. Words following long contexts elicited smaller N400s than after short contexts.
Following long contexts only, causally related probes elicited marginally
smaller N400s than lexically related probes. In sum, manipulation of
context length affected causal and lexical processing, consistent with a
dynamic parser in which discourse context can affect lexical associative
processing.

INTEGRATION PROCESSES COMPARED: CORTICAL DIFFERENCES FOR
LISTENING AND EVALUATION IN DISCOURSE COMPREHENSION

Giovanna Egidi1, Alfonso Caramazza1,2; 1University of Trento, 2Harvard
University — This research investigates the neural bases of two integration

processes involved in discourse comprehension: natural comprehension
(i.e., ordinary listening) and evaluation (i.e., performing a consistency
judgment). In an fMRI experiment, fourteen participants listened to stories and their endings and fourteen different participants evaluated the
fit of these endings with prior context. Two variables were manipulated
within stories: 1. endings were either consistent or inconsistent with the
immediately preceding (local) context, and 2. distal (global) context was
either relevant or irrelevant for the integration of the ending: when global context was irrelevant, the consistency of the ending was determined
only by local context, but when global context was relevant, the consistency of the ending depended on both local and global context. Behavioral research shows that access to distal portions of the discourse is not
always necessary during natural comprehension, but is prominent during consistency evaluation. This process, in fact, prompts more global
consideration of prior context. Consistently, in our experiment, a network including temporal areas (STG, STS) and medial areas (precuneus,
PHG) showed greater sensitivity to global context during evaluation
than during listening. By contrast, parietal cortex (AG, postCG, preCG),
medial areas (CingG, CingS), and insular cortex showed sensitivity to
local context during listening but not during evaluation. Finally, regions
often associated with semantic processing (IFG, SFG, STG, STS, AG)
showed greater activation during evaluation than during listening.
These results show that natural comprehension and evaluation involve
processing different amounts of contextual information and are performed by different cortical regions.

CONSTITUENCY STRUCTURE IN VISUAL NARRATIVE: EVIDENCE FROM
READING TIMES AND EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Neil Cohn1, Ray

Jackendoff2, Phillip Holcomb1, Gina Kuperberg1,3; 1Psychology Department,
Tufts University, 2Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, 3Department of
Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital — Recent research has suggested that the visual narratives found in comics are organized with a
hierarchic narrative “grammar.” We conducted experiments inspired by
Fodor and Bever’s classic “click” studies of syntax, which examined constituency by introducing disruptions at or after clause boundaries in sentences. We inserted blank “disruption” panels Before, At, or After the
constituency boundary in comic strips designed using Cohn’s model of
visual narrative. In Experiment 1, participants viewed sequences panelby-panel at their own pace. Blanks were viewed for longer After the

32

boundary than Before or At the boundary. Spill-over effects appeared
two panels after the disruption, with shorter viewing times in the At condition than in either the After or the Before conditions. These findings
suggest the presence of constituency structure because disruptions
within constituents had greater impact on viewing times than disruptions between, constituents. Experiment 2 measured ERPs to panels in
the same sequences. A larger anterior negativity was seen to blanks
within constituents (Before/After) than between constituents (At). This
indicates that disruptions of constituency are recognized even before the
subsequent panel appears. A P600 effect was also seen to blanks After
the boundary (within the second constituent) relative to those in the first
constituent (Before/At). This may reflect a continued analysis as participants attempted to integrate the second constituent with the first. Altogether, these results suggest that a narrative structure, organized into
constituents, is used during the comprehension of sequential images.

Slide Session 6
LONG-TERM MEMORY
Tuesday, April 3, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Red Lacquer Room
Chair: Lila Davachi
Speakers: Chien-Ho Janice Lin, Thomas Reber, Tyler Davis, Vishnu Murty, Sean
M. Polyn, Brice Kuhl, Ilana Dew, Pamela LaMontagne
ABSTRACTS

LESIONS OF THE STRIATUM ABOLISH THE BENEFIT OF INTERLEAVED
PRACTICE ON MOTOR SEQUENCE LEARNING AND CORTICOMOTOR BOLD
SIGNAL Chien-Ho Janice Lin1, Ming-Chang Chiang2, Allan D Wu1, Parima

Udompholkul1, Omid Yazdanshenas1, Renee E Shimizu1, Barbara Knowlton1;
1University of California, Los Angeles, USA, 2National Yang-Ming University,
Taiwan — Practice of different tasks in an interleaved order generally

induces superior retention compared to practicing in a repetitive order, a
phenomenon known as the contextual-interference (CI) effect. We used
fMRI to investigate whether the CI benefit in behavioral performance is
associated with changes in blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signal
for patients with subcortical stroke. 14 patients with striatal (ST) or
extrastriatal (ExST) stroke and 16 control subjects practiced serial reaction time tasks with the less-affected hand where a set of three 4-element
sequences were arranged in a repetitive or an interleaved order on 2 successive days. Retention tests took place on Day 5. Subjects practiced
sequences in both Repetitive and Interleaved conditions in separate sessions 2-4 weeks apart. BOLD signal was measured throughout the
course of practice. In controls and ExST patients, we identified a CI effect
in that while reaction times (RT) in the Interleaved condition were
slower than the Repetitive condition during practice (p< .05) the reverse
was true during retention on Day 5, with faster RT for sequences practiced in the Interleaved condition (p< .05). This pattern was not identified in ST patients. During practice, control subjects and ExST patients
demonstrated increased BOLD in the corticomotor network during
Interleaved training but the ST patients showed increased BOLD during
Repetitive training (p<.05, FDR corrected). We demonstrated that the CI
effect is present in stroke patients if the striatum is spared. Our data provide behavioral and neurophysiological support for striatal function in
the CI benefits to motor learning.

UNCONSCIOUS
HIPPOCAMPUS

RELATIONAL

INFERENCE

RECRUITS

THE

Thomas Reber1,2, Roger Luechinger3, Peter Boesiger3,
1,2
Katharina Henke ; 1University of Bern, 2Center for Cognition, Learning, and
Memory, Bern, 3Institute for Biomedical Engineering, University and ETH
Zurich — Relational inference denotes the capacity to encode and flexibly
retrieve multiple memories to combine knowledge from several episodes to improve decision-making. Although relational inference is
thought to depend on the hippocampus and consciousness, we now
show that it also occurs outside consciousness but still recruits the hip-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Slide Sessions
pocampus. In temporally distinct and unique subliminal episodes, we
presented word pairs that either overlapped (‘winter-red’, ‘red-computer’) or not. Effects of unconscious inference emerged in reaction times
recorded during encoding and in the outcome of decisions made one
minute later at test, when participants judged the semantic relatedness of
two supraliminal words. These test words were either episodically
related through a common word (‘winter-computer’), or were unrelated.
Hippocampal activity increased during unconscious encoding of overlapping versus non-overlapping word pairs and during the retrieval of
episodically related versus unrelated words. Hippocampal activity at
encoding predicted the outcome of decisions at test. Together, unconscious inference may influence decision-making in new situations.

PATTERN SIMILARITY IN PARAHIPPOCAMPAL CORTEX PREDICTS
PERCEPTIONS OF GRADED STRUCTURE Tyler Davis1, Russell Poldrack1;
1University of Texas at Austin — How

categories are represented continues
to be a hotly debated topic across neuroscience and psychology. One
topic that is central to cognitive research on category representation surrounds the determinants of graded structure- the quantitative manner in
which typicality or goodness-of-membership differs between members
of a category. Graded structure has proven difficult to fully explain at
the psychological level, as sometimes objects that are average or share a
family resemblance with other category members are viewed as most
typical, whereas in other cases objects that are ideal or physical caricatures of their category are viewed as the most typical. Here we investigate the internal structure of category representations by exploring how
graded structure is coded in multivariate patterns of activation in the
brain as subjects categorize novel line-drawn birds. We introduce a
novel measure of neural typicality that is based on the pattern similarity
between activation elicited for an object and other members of its category, to determine whether the brain organizes categories around physically average or ideal category members. We find that, as objects become
more physically ideal members of their category, their neural pattern
similarity to other category members increases, suggesting that the parahippocampal cortex organizes category representations so as to favor
unambiguous, idealized stimuli. These results are exciting because they
provide direct evidence about how graded structure is manifest in the
brain, and because they suggest that critical information about cognitive
structure may be present in the relationships between multivariate patterns of activation in the brain.

REWARD MOTIVATION INCREASES HIPPOCAMPAL SENSITIVITY TO AND
MEMORY FOR EXPECTANCY VIOLATIONS (GSA WINNER) Vishnu Murty1,

R. Alison Adcock1; 1Duke University — Reward motivation has been demonstrated to enhance declarative memory formation, however, identifying
mechanisms of this enhancement is an area of active research. Previous
research suggests that activation of reward systems promotes the exploration of novel, changing environments. Because the hippocampus has
been demonstrated to preferentially encode novel, changing features (i.e.
expectancy violations), we hypothesize that reward motivation could
enhance memory by increasing hippocampal sensitivity to expectancy
violations. To test this hypothesis, we collected fMRI data while participants performed a rewarded target detection task that included expectancy violations among repeated object stimuli. During high and low
reward motivation conditions, participants saw (1) 9 to 11 serial repetitions of the same trial-unique object or (2) 8 to 10 repetitions of the same
trial-unique object, interrupted by an unexpected presentation of a
novel, highly similar, object that constituted an expectancy violation.
Reward motivation during encoding increased participants’ later recognition of objects that constituted expectancy violations, even though
memory was not incentivized. FMRI analyses revealed that reward motivation enhanced activations throughout the mesolimbic dopamine system. The presence of expectancy violations enhanced activations
throughout the fronto-parietal network, ventral visual stream, and hippocampus. Critically, in the hippocampus, fMRI responses to expectancy
violations were greater following high versus low reward cues. These
results demonstrate that reward motivation increases hippocampal sen-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

sitivity to expectancy violations and promotes the encoding of surprising
stimuli. The findings thus provide a mechanism by which reward motivation may enhance the encoding of salient features within an individual’s environment, even when memory is not incentivized.

CATEGORY-SPECIFIC NEURAL OSCILLATIONS PREDICT RECALL
ORGANIZATION DURING MEMORY SEARCH Sean M. Polyn1, Neal W

Morton1, Michael J. Kahana2; 1Vanderbilt University, 2University of
Pennsylvania — The human memory system behaves like an internet

search engine: retrieval cues are constructed that serve as search terms,
and these cues allow us to target particular aspects of past experience.
The Context Maintenance and Retrieval (CMR) model describes how an
internally maintained context representation, sensitive to the temporal,
semantic, and source characteristics of studied material, is constructed,
and is then used as a retrieval cue to guide memory search. By this
model, the order in which participants retrieve studied material during a
free-recall period reflects the structure and dynamics of this representation. In two free-recall studies using scalp EEG and intracranial ECoG,
we find patterns of oscillatory neural activity whose dynamics support
this context-based view of memory search. During study, stronger category-specific patterns are seen for items that will later be remembered
alongside items from the same category, than for items that will be
remembered alongside items from the other categories (the subsequent
clustering effect). Furthermore, the rate at which these category estimates rise as the participant studies a series of items from the same category predicts the degree of category organization that will be observed,
which is consistent with the integrative mechanisms of the CMR model.
Finally, these patterns show rich dynamics during search itself, rising in
strength when participants cluster studied material along a particular
dimension. These results will be discussed in terms of potential explanatory mechanisms suggested by context-based modeling frameworks.

INCIDENTAL MEMORY REACTIVATION DURING RETRIEVAL PROMOTES
FUTURE REMEMBERING Brice Kuhl1, Marcia Johnson1, Marvin Chun1;

1
Yale University, Department of Psychology — Testing memory for an event
promotes future remembering of that event. But how does testing one
feature of an event affect memory for other features of that event? Here,
we applied pattern classification analyses to fMRI data to assess whether
retrieving one feature of an event elicits ‘incidental’ neural reactivation
of other event features, and, whether such reactivation is related to
future remembering. During fMRI scanning, participants engaged in
alternating study-test rounds. In study rounds, words were paired with
images of faces or scenes that appeared on the left- or right- hand side of
the screen. During test rounds, words were presented and subjects were
either instructed to recall the location (left/right; 1/3 of study items) or
category (face/scene; 1/3 of study items) of the corresponding image;
for the remaining 1/3 of study items, neither feature was tested. After
scanning, participants completed a post-test that tested memory for both
features (location and category) for each studied word. Pattern classification analyses revealed robust neural reactivation of feature information
during the test rounds, including reactivation of non-target features (e.g.,
reactivation of face/scene information during location retrieval). Moreover, non-target features were much better remembered at post-test than
features of items that were not tested at all--an effect that was related to
the degree of incidental neural reactivation during test rounds. These
results indicate that retrieving one feature of an event can elicit incidental neural reactivation of other event features, thereby shaping future
remembering.

CREATING ILLUSORY MEMORIES WITH MASKED PRIMING (PFA
WINNER) Ilana Dew1, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke University — Fluency can
create illusory memories, whereby more fluently processed items are
more likely to be endorsed as familiar. Fluency can be experimentally
manipulated, but can also occur incidentally, particularly during standard recognition tests in which studied items may be processed more
fluently than new items. Familiarity memory has been linked with
retrieval-related deactivations in the perirhinal cortex (PrC). PrC has also

33

Slide Sessions
been linked with conceptual implicit memory, suggesting that semantic
fluency may at least partly account for the contribution of this region to
familiarity. An event-related fMRI study of recognition memory presented old and new targets, and perceived oldness was measured using
a scale from 1 (definitely new) to 6 (definitely old). Each target was preceded by a 40-ms prime that was either semantically related or unrelated
to the target. Relative to unrelated-prime trials, semantically-primed trials increased behavioral “oldness” rating. During unstudied trials, the
fMRI data showed an interaction between priming condition and
response in right PrC, with deactivations during false alarms relative to
correct rejections, unique to the semantic prime condition. We then modeled individual trials by a separate covariate, yielding beta estimates in
the PrC ROI for each trial in each subject. On this within-subjects, trialto-trial basis, PrC deactivations predicted mean oldness rating during
semantically primed trials (both new and old). The results indicate a role
of the PrC in fluency-derived feelings of oldness, independently from
the encoded memory trace, suggesting that fluency may partially underlie the common role of PrC in familiarity memory and conceptual
implicit memory.

PROSPECTIVE MEMORY: A NEURAL INVESTIGATION OF THE
MULTIPROCESS MODEL Pamela LaMontagne1, Bruna Martins1, Michael

Scullin1, Todd Braver1, Mark McDaniel1; 1Washington University in St. Louis —

Prospective memory (PM) is the process of retrieving an intention after a
delay, such as delivering a message. The Multiprocess Model (McDaniel
& Einstein, 2007) posits that the retrieval of these intentions can occur by
two different processes: strategic monitoring or spontaneous retrieval.
Tasks that rely on nonfocal cues, targets outside the focus of an ongoing
task, typically demonstrate both behavioral and brain-based markers of
strategic monitoring, such as PM task blocks showing increased RTs and
sustained aPFC activity. Prior behavioral studies have demonstrated PM
tasks involving focal cues, targets within the focus of an ongoing task,
fail to demonstrate markers of strategic monitoring, thereby suggesting a
reliance on spontaneous retrieval processing. We conducted the first
fMRI study directly comparing focal and nonfocal PM to test whether
these two PM tasks differ in sustained vs. transient (event-related) brain
activity dynamics. Task-related analysis showed significant sustained
activity for the nonfocal task, including the aPFC, but an absence of sustained activity in the focal condition. Both focal and nonfocal tasks were
associated with transient activity for PM targets compared to ongoing
items in bilateral prefrontal, hippocampal, temporal, and parietal cortices. A psychophysiological interaction (PPI) revealed significantly
greater functional connectivity in the focal condition between hippocampal seeds and bilateral aPFC. This double dissociation supports differential processing for strategic monitoring, via sustained aPFC activity, and
spontaneous retrieval, via connectivity between the hippocampus and
aPFC, in line with the Multiprocess Model of PM.

Slide Session 7
EMOTION AND SOCIAL
Tuesday, April 3, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Red Lacquer Room
Chair: Kevin Oschner
Speakers: Helen Weng, Jamil Zaki, Lauren A. Leotti, Eliza Bliss-Moreau, Robert
Spunt, Jennifer Silvers, Carien van Reekum, Jason Buhle
ABSTRACTS

MULTI-VOXEL PATTERN ANALYSIS OF BRAIN STATES AFTER
COMPASSION TRAINING PREDICTS CHARITABLE DONATIONS (GSA
WINNER) Helen Weng1, Jarrod Lewis-Peacock2, Diane Stodola1, Richard
Davidson1;

1

University of Wisconsin-Madison,

2

Princeton University —

Although compassion is an important emotional determinant of altruistic behavior, little is known about whether compassion can be cultivated
through training. Here, we investigated the neural bases and behavioral

34

outcomes of compassion training; specifically, we tested whether shortterm compassion training could alter brain functioning and subsequently impact altruistic behavior. Participants (N=28) practiced two
weeks (30 minutes daily) of compassion meditation via the Internet.
Brain activity was measured with fMRI both pre and post-training, and
multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) was used to assess the stability of
compassion-related brain activity patterns in each session. To assess
altruistic behavior after training, participants were given the opportunity to donate their earned money to charity. In each session, participants were instructed to voluntarily generate compassion for
(Compassion) or simply attend to (Attend) pictures depicting human
suffering (Suffering) or non-suffering (Neutral). After training, the pattern classifier decoded brain states more accurately in Compassion-Suffering trials (Pre: 28.5% [chance: 25%]; Post: 33.5%; t167=3.7, P<0.001).
This result indicates that brain patterns elicited while generating compassion towards images of suffering became more reliable after compassion training. Critically, the post-training reliability of an individual’s
Compassion-Suffering brain patterns was predictive of the amount of
money the individual donated to charity (rho27=0.51, P=0.005). This pattern was not found in the other conditions, and the analogous condition
in a reappraisal training control group did not predict donations
(rho27=0.04, P=0.82). These data suggest that compassionate brain states
can be trained and, in turn, these post-training states can lead to
increased altruistic behavior.

EQUITABLE DECISION-MAKING IS ASSOCIATED WITH NEURAL
MARKERS OF VALUE (PFA WINNER) Jamil Zaki1, Jason Mitchell1;
1

Harvard University — Standard economic and evolutionary models
assume that humans are fundamentally selfish. On these views, prosocial acts?such as cooperation or altruistic giving?result from covert
attempts to avoid external social pressures against selfishness. However,
even in the absence of such pressure, individuals routinely forego personal gain to share resources with others. Such anomalous giving cannot
be accounted for by standard models of social behavior, and implies
additional sources of prosociality. One possibility is that individuals
imbue social ideals—such as equity or charity—with irreducible value.
However, the role of such value in prosocial decision-making remains
unexplored. Here we addressed this gap in knowledge by examining
brain activity during equitable and inequitable choices. In this study,
individuals made iterated choices between allocating varying amounts
of money either to themselves or to another participant. Critically, this
other participant did not know of these choices and could not punish
unfair decisions, reducing external pressures to act fairly. Nonetheless,
individuals made prosocial choices on a nontrivial proportion (~36%) of
trials. Further, making equitable choices (i.e., fairly distributing money
on a given trial) engaged the orbitofrontal cortex—a structure involved
in computing subjective value—even when doing so required participants to forego personal profit. By contrast, making inequitable decisions engaged anterior insula, a region linked to the experience of
disutility. Moreover, insula response predicted individuals’ unwillingness to make inequitable choices. Together, these data suggest that,
instead of mere responses to external pressure, prosocial acts may also
reflect a reward signal associated with prosociality that is not reducible
to personal gain.

INFLUENCES OF OUTCOME VALENCE ON THE AFFECTIVE EXPERIENCE OF
CHOICE Lauren A. Leotti1, Michael A. Niznikiewicz2, Victoria K. Lee3,

Mauricio R. Delgado1; 1Rutgers University - Newark, 2University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, 3Duke University — Converging evidence suggests the
perception of control is integral for an individual's general wellbeing.
Research has demonstrated that the presence or absence of perceived
control can have a significant impact on the regulation of emotion,
behavior, and physiology. The present study uses fMRI to examine (a)
how the affective experience of choice, the means by which individuals
exercise control, differs from that of non-choice, and (b) how the affective experience of choice is modulated by the valence of potential outcomes. We characterize the affective experience of choice by examining

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Slide Sessions
brain activity during the anticipation of choice (vs. non-choice). On each
trial, participants were presented with a selection of two keys which
could lead to a potential monetary gain (Experiment 1) or a potential
monetary gain or loss (Experiment 2). On some trials, participants would
have the opportunity to choose between the two keys (choice condition).
On other trials, however, they were forced to accept the computerselected key (no choice condition). In the context of potential monetary
gains, subjects reported a preference for choice trials, and we found that
anticipation of choice recruited activity in corticostriatal regions (e.g.
ventral striatum) involved in affective and motivational processes. For
potential losses, however, there were no areas with significantly greater
activity for the choice condition, unless participant's subjective preferences for control were taken into account. Future analyses will address
individual differences in the preference for choice in the context of losses
and how they modulate activity in affective and motivational brain circuitry.

REDUCED SOCIALITY FOLLOWING DAMAGE TO THE MACAQUE ANTERIOR
CINGULATE CORTEX Eliza Bliss-Moreau1, David Amaral1; 1University of
California, Davis — The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) has been broadly
implicated in socioemotional processing. In humans, ACC activity has
been observed during diverse tasks ranging from the experience of pain
to social interactions in virtual environments, and during error detection
and action monitoring, two processes that likely subserve normal socioemotional behavior. Despite the robust human literature, the extent to
which normal ACC function is required to execute appropriate social
behavior is not clear. Previous reports of social behavior following ACC
damage in nonhuman primates are largely inconclusive as result of the
lesion technique, the social behavior testing conditions, and/or the
method used to collect behavioral data. In the present experiment, we
tested the social functioning of a cohort of adult male rhesus macaque
monkeys that received either neurotoxic lesions to the ACC (sparing
fibers of passage) or sham operations. Experimental animals freely interacted with four neurologically intact partner monkeys (two males and
two females) in a large test cage on repeated occasions. Spontaneous
social behaviors were recorded using a robust behavioral ethogram.
ACC lesioned animals, as compared to controls, spent less time engaged
in social interactions, initiated social interactions less frequently and
actively avoided partner monkeys’ attempts to socially engage them.
Further, in the presence of the partner animal that generated the most
complex social context, ACC lesioned animals generated higher rates of
submission-related behaviors while control animal generated higher
rates of dominance related behaviors. Implications for the role of the
ACC in the neural system that subserves social behavior are discussed.

THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF COGNITIVE CONFLICT: THE DORSAL
ANTERIOR CINGULATE RESPONSE TO STOP-SIGNAL ERRORS TRACKS
REPORTS OF NEGATIVE AFFECT Robert Spunt1, Matthew Lieberman1,
Jessica Cohen2, Naomi Eisenberger1; 1University of California, Los Angeles,

2University of California, Berkeley — One

of the most reliable observations
in cognitive neuroscience is the response of dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) to events that demand increased cognitive control (e.g.,
errors). While this observation suggests the dACC plays an important
role in executive function, a comparably reliable observation is an association of dACC activity with the experience of negative affective states
such as pain, fear and anxiety. Importantly, the phenomenology of the
tasks used to investigate executive function has so far been ignored, and
hence it remains unknown to what extent the dACC response to these
tasks is explained by fluctuations in task-induced negative affect. In an
fMRI study, participants performed a stop-signal task while regularly
reporting on their affective experience. We observed that within-subject
variability in the dACC response to errors tracked changes in negative
affect throughout task performance. This association remained even
when controlling for changes in attention, effort, and error frequency.
This demonstrates that the dACC is associated with the experience of
negative affect even during performance of tasks designed to isolate cognitive processes. While this ‘affective’ description of dACC function may

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

appear to be at odds with its known role in ‘cognitive’ function, an alarm
model of the dACC simultaneously accounts for both by assuming that
the dACC is involved in detecting goal discrepancies and generating a
motivational signal. More generally, the results illustrate the utility of
measuring aspects of phenomenology for understanding the neural correlates of cognitive performance.

RECRUITMENT OF VENTROMEDIAL PFC IS ASSOCIATED WITH THE
SPONTANEOUS REGULATION OF NEGATIVE EMOTION Jennifer Silvers1,

Tor Wager2, Jochen Weber1, Kevin Ochsner1; 1Columbia University, 2University
of Colorado, Boulder — While numerous neuroimaging studies have
examined what happens when individuals are given an explicit goal to
regulate, in our everyday lives, it is likely that spontaneous tendencies,
rather than explicit goals, underlie many instances of emotion regulation. However, no prior studies have directly investigated what neural
systems modulate negative affect during uninstructed viewing of emotional stimuli. The present study sought to investigate this issue by asking participants to respond naturally to aversive and neutral stimuli.
Using participants' self-reported negative affect, we then examined what
patterns of neural activity predicted 1) less negative affect on a trial-bytrial basis within participants (phasic effects), and 2) stable differences in
negative affect between individuals (tonic effects). Activation in left dorsolateral PFC, an area that is commonly recruited by paradigms with
explicit regulatory goals, predicted less negative affect on a trial-by-trial
basis within individuals. However, only activity in ventromedial PFC, a
brain region known to support regulatory processes that are not driven
by explicit regulatory goals (such as fear extinction and reversal learning), predicted less negative affect both within and between individuals.
Taken together, these results provide novel insight into how prefrontal
control systems modulate negative affect in the absence of experimental
instruction and suggest that VMPFC may be conceptualized as a unique
biomarker for both phasic and tonic levels of negative affect.

A LATERAL-MEDIAL SHIFT IN PREFRONTAL CORTICAL ENGAGEMENT
UNDERLIES INTACT EMOTIONAL PROCESSING IN AGING Carien
van

Reekum1, Stacey Schaefer2, Regina Lapate2, Tom Johnstone1, Aaron Heller2,
Catherine Norris3, Patricia Tun4, Margie Lachman4, Carol Ryff2, Richard
Davidson2; 1University of Reading, 2University of Wisconsin-Madison,
3Dartmouth College, 4Brandeis University — The capacity to adaptively
respond to negative emotion is in part dependent upon lateral areas of
the prefrontal cortex (PFC) that are subject to age-related atrophy and
associated loss in executive function, and in part upon ventromedial PFC
areas (VMPFC). We used structural and functional MRI to test the
hypothesis that increasing age is associated with a prefrontal lateralmedial shift in processing of negative information, and that this shift is
dependent upon grey matter probability (GMP) in lateral PFC. We further tested whether such a shift is associated with cognitive decline and
impacts psychological well-being (PWB). Participants (N=64, 38 – 79
years) viewed negative and neutral pictures for 4 s each while in the
scanner. They also completed a battery of cognitive tests and provided
self-reports of PWB. The FMRI data demonstrate reduced recruitment of
left ventrolateral PFC (VLPFC) and increased VMPFC response with
increasing age when watching negative pictures, while age did not correlate with amygdalar responding. GMP in VLPFC was associated with
VMPFC activation, but did not mediate the age-VMPFC relationship.
VMPFC activation was further associated with performance in a switch
task and with PWB. We conclude that a shift from lateral to medial PFC
underlies emotional processing with advancing age. While this shift is
associated with atrophy in lateral PFC and a relative loss of inhibitory
control, compensation for atrophy does not mediate this shift. Our
results suggest increased engagement of VMPFC as people age may promote greater PWB in later life.

35

Slide Sessions

DIFFERENT EFFECTS OF DISTRACTION AND PLACEBO ON PAIN
PROCESSING Jason Buhle1, Bradford L. Lawson1, Chris Stevens2, Cait M.

Williamson1, Tor D. Wager3; 1Columbia University, 2University of Connecticut,
3University of Colorado, Boulder — Distraction and placebo analgesia are
two effective psychological manipulations for alleviating pain. Recently,
we showed that distraction and placebo do not appear to rely on overlapping cognitive resources, and thus they can be combined to maximize
pain relief (Buhle et al., in press). In the present study, we crossed an
executive working memory task with an expectancy-based placebo treatment in two separate fMRI sessions in order to directly compare the neural effects of each method of pain relief (n=21). Both distraction and
placebo significantly reduced behavioral pain reports. Because pain processing involves a complex network of brain regions, we tested for neural reductions in two independently-derived, whole-brain, painpredictive pattern maps. The first pattern was generated using machine
learning analyses on heat pain data from participants run previously in
our lab. The second pattern was generated using 'reverse-inference'
meta-analysis on 224 pain imaging studies (neurosynth.org; Yarkoni et
al., 2011). Pattern-expression analysis with both maps yielded nearly
identical results: While distraction reduced the neural signature of pain
in nearly all participants (95% and 90%, respectively, P < .001 in both),
placebo reductions were not different from chance (38% and 48% of participants). These results call into question whether expectancy-driven
placebo effects exert widespread effects on pain processing, and provide
a way to distinguish different brain effects of different types of pain
modulatory techniques in a principled, a priori fashion.

36

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Poster Session A

Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall

ATTENTION: Auditory
A1
EFFECTS OF AUDITORY CUES ON VISUAL ATTENTION: COST/BENEFITS
OF CUE TYPE AND VALIDITY EXPECTANCY Ashley F. Curtis1, Janna K.
Comrie1, Anthony Colange1, Susan J. E. Murtha1; 1York University — OBJEC-

TIVE: Auditory cues have been shown to focus attention and facilitate
response time (RT) in visual target detection tasks. It is important to
determine whether the type or expectancy of auditory cues impacts performance differently on tasks that require different cognitive abilities.
Therefore, we examined whether cue type (alerting vs. orienting; Experiment 1) or cue expectancy (60% valid, 70% valid, 80% valid; Experiment
2) were beneficial (RT of valid minus no cue condition) and/or costly
(RT of invalid minus no cue condition) to performance on a visual target
elevation discrimination task. METHODS: In Experiment 1, the alerting
cue was presented simultaneously to the left or right of the target and
this was contrasted with an orienting cue presented to either the left or
right of the target (50% of the time valid or predictive of target location).
In Experiment 2, participants were presented with 3 possible orienting
cueing conditions that varied in cue expectancy. RESULTS: As predicted
Experiment 1 found that orienting cues provided approximately 2.5
times the cue benefit over alerting cues. Surprisingly, invalid orienting
cues exerted no cost on performance. In Experiment 2 we found that
both 60% and 80% validity provides the greatest cue benefit. Invalid
cues, however, exerted no cost. CONCLUSION: Our findings show that
when discriminating stimuli, auditory cues that provide spatial information are more beneficial than alerting cues, despite the non-informative
nature of the cue. In addition, the expectation of cue validity affects the
extent of auditory cue benefit.

A2
THE N1-SUPPRESSION EFFECT FOR SELF-INITIATED SOUNDS IS NOT
INFLUENCED BY ATTENTION Jana Timm1, Iria SanMiguel1, Katja Saupe1,

Erich Schröger1; 1University of Leipzig — Self-initiated sounds elicit an attenuated N1 component of the auditory event-related potential compared to
externally initiated sounds. It has been suggested that this N1-modulation is mediated by an internal predictive mechanism that would allow
discriminating the sensory consequences of one’s own actions from
those of others. As this particular paradigm is becoming a popular
method to investigate predictive processing, it is important to ensure its
validity. However, in previous studies, the effect could have been confounded by a differential allocation of attention to self- and externally
initiated sounds. The present study investigates to which extent the N1suppression effect to self-initiated sounds can be explained by attention.
We used a mixed design presenting self- and externally initiated sounds
in the same block and manipulated the allocation of attention blockwise. Participants had to count either all sounds they could hear, all button presses they made or all extended fixation crosses they saw on a
screen, respectively. Thus, attention to the sounds was decreased gradually across these three attention conditions. If attention influences the
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

self-initiation effects, we expected increasing N1-suppression with
decreasing attention to the sounds. The results indicate clear N1-suppression for self- compared to externally initiated sounds for all three
attention conditions. Interestingly, no interaction between attention and
self-initiation effects was found, suggesting that self-initiation effects
were not influenced by attention. In conclusion, the present results support the assumption that the N1-suppression effect for self-initiated
sounds reflects a genuine effect based on an internal forward mechanism.

A3
RETRO-CUEING LISTENERS' ATTENTION TO SOUND OBJECT
C.
REPRESENTATIONS ATTENUATES CHANGE DEAFNESS Kristina

Backer1,2, Claude Alain1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest Centre,
Toronto, Canada, 2University of Toronto — According to the object-based
account of auditory attention, we can selectively orient our attention to
one of several co-existing sound objects within short-term memory
(STM). The present study tested this model using complex auditory
scenes. We used a delayed match-to-sample change identification task,
in which pairs of auditory scenes were either different or identical. Auditory scenes were composed of three concurrent, realistic sounds (e.g.,
dog bark, piano tone, etc.) that could be easily segregated from one
another. In Experiment 1, a 2-second retention interval separated the two
scenes presented on each trial. On some trials, participants were cued
(100% valid) to a particular sound either at the beginning of the trial
before Scene 1 (Pre-Stimulus Cue) or at various times during the retention interval (Retro-Cue). On other trials, no cues were presented.
Change identification performance was superior (i.e., increased accuracy
and decreased RT) on both Pre-stimulus Cue and Retro-Cue trials compared to No Cue trials. Experiment 2 was similar to Experiment 1, except
that the retention interval was increased to 4 seconds. Similar to Experiment 1, retro-cues presented at various time points within this 4-second
retention interval improved performance relative to No Cue trials. Thus,
listeners were able to orient their attention to a particular sound object in
STM via retro-cues, for up to 4 seconds of memory retention, thereby
supporting the object-based account of auditory attention and replicating analogous retro-cue studies in vision.

A4
NEURAL CORRELATES OF DISTRACTION IN AUDITORY SCENE
ANALYSIS Sebastian Pavlovic1, Karla D. Ponjavic-Conte1, Matthew S. Tata1;
1University of Lethbridge — Selective

attention is often described as the
exclusion of irrelevant information in order to optimize perception of a
single source of sensory input. Failure to maintain selective attention
results in the familiar phenomenon of distraction. We sought to investigate the electrophysiological correlates of distraction in the auditory
modality. We used an “information masking” paradigm in which participants performed an auditory discrimination task in the presence of
varying levels of distraction: in a high-distraction condition, task irrelevant speech was added to the auditory scene, whereas in the low-distraction condition, the speech signal was replaced by energy-matched
broad-band noise. The presence of task-irrelevant speech impaired sensi-

37

Poster Session A — Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall
tivity to differentiate targets from non-targets (d’). The auditory EventRelated Potential (ERP) revealed an attenuated N1 component in the
high-distraction condition. Also, at the N1 latency we found reduced
inter-trial phase locking in the theta EEG band. These results suggest
that distraction may act not only to attenuate a sensory-gain mechanism,
but also to disrupt the temporal fidelity of responses to auditory events
over a sequence of trials.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working memory
A5
DISTURBING WORKING MEMORY: REHEARSAL, IMAGERY, AND
Tomory1,
LATENCY EFFECTS FROM EXTERNAL DISTRACTORS Jessica

Tiffany Jantz1, Ezequiel Morsella1,2; 1San Francisco State University, 2University
of California, San Francisco — Working memory (WM) is a temporary storage system that can be perturbed systematically by external stimuli. To
examine the interaction between WM processing and external stimuli,
we developed two paradigms amenable to neuroimaging technologies.
Study 1 (n=6) examined the effects of environmental distractors on selfproduced mental imagery. Participants indicated how often they experienced mental imagery of targets (two or six digits) while distractors (digits or letters) were displayed. Preliminary results indicate imagery was a
discrete event more frequently employed when participants were holding six digits in mind (M = 9.73, SE = 7.15) than when holding two digits
(M = 8.00, SE = 6.74). However, due to the small sample size, results
were nonsignificant, p >.05. Study 2 (n=27) explored the effects of external distractors on speech plans held in WM. Participants were cued to
say a non-word that they were holding in WM. The cue to say the word
was either identical (congruent condition) or was different (interference
condition) from the non-word held in mind. Naming latencies were
faster in the congruent condition than the incongruent condition, t(26) =
3.14, p < .01. Cue-induced interference arose despite the response certainty and instructions to ignore the cue identity. Systematic interference
was also evident in participants' trial-by-trial self-reported 'urges to err,'
F(2,26) = 3.02, p = .057. These paradigms further illuminate how WM is
susceptible to external stimuli and begin to reveal the subjective aspects
of WM performance. The aim of this research is to integrate these paradigms with neuroimaging technologies.

ATTENTION: Auditory
A6
EFFECTS OF EMOTIONAL VALENCE ON THE ‘WHAT’ AND ‘WHERE’
PATHWAYS OF AUDITION. James Kryklywy1, Ewan A. Macpherson1, Steven

G. Greening1, Derek G.V. Mitchell1; 1University of Western Ontario — In
a
crowded sensory environment, organisms must be able to prioritize
information to efficiently maintain focus and interact with critical stimuli
in the environment. One characteristic known to modulate attention is
the emotional nature, or valence, of the stimuli. In the visual domain, we
often orient our attention toward emotional stimuli. This bias is accompanied by enhanced activity in ventral visual processing areas. In our
study, we investigated whether similar effects are observed in the auditory domain. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to
identify the neural processes involved in localizing emotional sounds.
We created a virtual auditory environment in the scanner by generating
sounds based on each individual’s unique head-related transfer functions. While undergoing fMRI, participants indicated the position of a
sound as quickly and accurately as possible from four potential locations
spanning the front horizontal plane. Enhanced activity to emotional relative to neutral sounds was observed in an area of cortex along the superior temporal gyrus, anterior to primary auditory cortex. In addition, an
area posterior to primary auditory cortex, was modulated as a function
of location. Conjunction analyses confirmed the spatial dissociation of
these effects. These patterns of activation are consistent with the putative
'what' and 'where' auditory processing stream, and imply that the

38

valence of auditory cues augments neural activity in the 'what' but not
'where' pathway for auditory processing.

A7
EFFECTS OF TINNITUS AND HEARING LOSS ON FUNCTIONAL BRAIN
NETWORKS INVOLVED IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY Kwaku Akrofi1, Jake

Carpenter-Thompson1, Fatima Husain1; 1University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign — Brain imaging data were acquired from two subject groups

- persons with hearing loss and tinnitus (TIN) and those with normal
hearing without tinnitus (NH) - to test the hypothesis that TIN and NH
subjects use different functional brain networks for short-term memory.
Previous studies have provided evidence of a link between hearing disorders such as tinnitus and the reorganization of functional networks
including those outside of the classical auditory pathway. A deeper
understanding this reorganization could lead to the development of
more effective therapies and treatments for tinnitus. Data analysis was
conducted on functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data
obtained while subjects performed auditory short-term memory tasks
with low (LO) or high (HI) attentional loads. Stimuli were pure tones
with frequencies between 500 and 1000 Hz. In LO tasks, subjects determined whether two such tones which were 0.5 s apart in time were identical or not. In HI tasks, the objective was to determine whether any two
of three tones, with the first two 0.5 s apart and the third one 1 s after the
second one, were identical or not. Preliminary statistical analyses
showed that the NH group exhibited more extensive fMRI response relative to TIN for a HI>LO t-contrast at p?0.001 (uncorrected), with notable
differences in their respective patterns. The reaction times and accuracies
with which subject performed the tasks did not differ significantly across
the groups.

A8
IMPACTS OF SELECTIVE AUDITORY ATTENTION AND MUSICAL TRAINING
ON CORTICAL RESPONSE VARIABILITY IN CHILDREN AND ADULTS

Dana Strait1, Nina Kraus1; 1Northwestern University — Variability in cortical
auditory-evoked responses provides a neural index of auditory attention
performance in children and adults. Given that musical training exercises auditory attention, it is not surprising that adult and elementary
school-aged musicians demonstrate more of an impact of attention on
response variability than nonmusicians. The developmental time course
for this neural index of auditory attention and how it unfolds with musical training, however, remains undetermined. Here, we compared cortical auditory-evoked variability with auditory attention in musicians and
nonmusicians across three age groups: young adults, 8-12 year olds and
3-5 year olds. We aimed to determine how childhood musical training
impacts this cortical index of auditory attention performance across the
child lifespan and into adulthood. Results reveal decreased auditoryevoked response variability with attention in adults and older children
with musical training, with more general cortical enhancements in 3-5
year old musicians. Outcomes may be considered in the context of training-dependent plasticity with musical training and are consistent with
increased specialization of neural function over development.

A9
SELECTIVE ATTENTION AND THE NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF SPEECH
ENVELOPES Cort Horton1, Michael D'Zmura1, Ramesh Srinivasan1;
1

University of California, Irvine — Recent studies report activity in auditory
cortex that is phase-locked to the envelope of speech, but the function of
this activity remains unclear. It may result from successful attention to
and comprehension of speech. Alternatively, the activity may simply
reflect responses to stimulus acoustics. We recorded high-density EEG
while adults selectively attended to speech coming from one speaker,
while ignoring speech from others. Detailed timing and topographic
information about phase-locked responses were extracted by cross-correlating the time-series of both attended and unattended stimulus envelopes with the time-series of EEG channels and ICA components derived
from the data. We found very low-latency phase-locked responses that
encode the envelopes of both attended and unattended speech equally
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session A
well, suggesting that sub-cortical representations of speech envelopes do
not depend on attention. The longer-latency, cortical responses differed
considerably between attended and unattended speech. By examining
the ICA components that contribute to these responses, we found two
general patterns of activity. Some ICA components that phase-locked to
attended speech showed attenuated or entirely absent phase-locking to
unattended speech. Another class of components phase-locked to both
attended and unattended speech, but the attended and unattended
responses were 180 degrees out of phase. Our data suggests that mechanisms for selective attention to one of multiple speakers likely involves
traditional enhancement and suppression mechanisms, as well as a modulation of the phase of endogenous activity in auditory cortex to align
high-excitability periods with attended speech syllables.

A10
NEUROMAGNETIC CORRELATES OF DYNAMIC ALLOCATION OF
ATTENTION TO METRICAL AND GROUPING ACCENTS IN RHYTHMIC
SEQUENCES ARE MODULATED BY MUSICAL EXPERTISE Shu-Jen Kung1,

Ovid Tzeng1,2, Daisy Hung1,3, Chiashin Shih1,3,4, Denise Wu1,3; 1National Yang
Ming University, 2Academia Sinica, 3National Central University, 4National
Chengchi University — When listening to music, we move in synchrony
with the beat, which is inferred from accents. In our previous work
(Kung et al., in press), although both musicians and non-musicians allocated attention dynamically according to metrical and grouping accents
when performing a task that no explicit attention to the rhythmic pattern
was required, only musicians demonstrated extraordinary sensitivity to
the grouping accents when they coincided with metrical accents, suggesting that the automaticity of auditory entrainment to temporal regularity is modulated by musical training. The present study examined the
neuromagnetic correlates of such dynamic allocation of attention to further verify the effect of musical expertise. Specifically, musically trained
and not-trained participants listened to monotonic and isochronous
sequences and were required to detect whether the occurrence of the last
tone was temporally expected. The mismatch field (MMF) elicited by a
deviant click, appeared in 40% of the sequences, that coincided with a
metrically strong or weak beat and with or without a grouping accent
within a perceptual group was recorded. The results replicated our previous findings in showing that the magnitude of MMF was modulated
by metrical and grouping accents in musicians, while these effects were
reduced in non-musicians. The results further suggest that auditory
entrainment to temporal regularity induced by metrical and grouping
accents is automatic in musicians but less so in non-musicians when participants’ attention was only directed to the inter-tone interval but not to
the metrical structure of a rhythm.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Self perception
A11
ERP STUDY OF SELF-REFERENCED MOOD ADJECTIVES Szczepan

Grzybowski1, Miroslaw Wyczesany1; 1Psychophysiology Lab, Jagiellonian
University, Krakow, Poland — The main goal of the study was to explore the
ERP differences during reading of emotional words related to the self
(feelings of one’s internal state). We speculated that the adjectives
described as congruent with the participants’ mood will be processed
differently than the incongruent ones. The differences should be visible
even at the early stage of word processing (pre-lexical stage) as well as at
the later stages (semantic analysis). 60 adjectives were presented separately for 1 second each. They were shown during the two consecutive
sessions with simultaneous mood induction by 20 highly positive or 20
highly negative pictures from the International Affective Picture System
database. After each adjective presentation participants had to evaluate
on a 4 point scale to what extent the word described their current mood.
The results showed that the adjectives congruent with the participants’
actual mood are differently processed by the brain as opposed to the
incongruent ones. This was evidenced as early as 150ms (N170 component) after the stimulus offset with higher negative wave evoked to the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

congruent words. Later components (P3 and LPP - Late Positive Potential) were significantly more positive when evoked by the congruent
adjectives. There were no noticeable effects of arousal and valence ratings of the words. The self-reference seems to be the most important factor in the processing of emotional adjectives. Since its impact is
evidenced even at the early stages of word analysis it is suggested that
the word processing involves synchronous lexical and semantic analyses.

A12
NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF GUILT IN EPISODIC MEMORY: AN FMRI
STUDY. Carlos Makoto Miyauchi1,3, Motoaki Sugiura3, Yukihito Yomogida2,

Yoritaka Akimoto3, Ryuta Kawashima3,4; 1Department of Functional Brain
Imaging, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.,
2Tamagawa University Brain Science Institute, Tokyo, Japan., 3Department of
Functional Brain Imaging, IDAC, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan., 4Smart
Ageing International Research Center, IDAC, Tohoku University, Sendai,
Japan. — Memory retrieval of guilty self-actions is responsible for promoting prosocial behavior yet provoking some psychopathological manifestations such as anthropophobia and depression. In this functional
magnetic resonance imaging study, we used a two-by-two factorial
design including emotion (emotional, non-emotional) and agent (selfaction, other-action). We identified the neural representation of guilt in
episodic memory by dissociating it from the neural representation of
self-action in episodic memory. In the encoding task before the fMRI
task, subjects experienced four conditions: stabbing a pushpin through
the eye of a face picture (emotional self-action condition: ES); observing a
picture with a pushpin stabbed through the eye (emotional other-action
condition: EO); stabbing a pushpin through the margin (non-emotional
self-action condition: NS); observing a face picture with a pushpin
stabbed through the margin (non-emotional other-action condition: NO).
In the fMRI task, subjects made a recognition judgment for the faces.
Activation specific to guilty memory retrieval was observed in the right
insular cortex as a result of the interaction of the emotion and agent [(ESNS)-(EO-NO)]. Self-action memory retrieval activated the right putamen, posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS), subgenual cingulated
cortex (SCC), and rostral anteriror cingulated cortex (rostral ACC) in the
results from the main effect of the agent [(ES-EO)+(NS-NO)]. We suggest
that the representation of guilt in episodic memory is associated with
activation in the right insular cortex and that brain regions previously
indicated to be the neural representation of guilt, such as the pSTS, the
SCC, and the rostral ACC, might actually be self-action memory retrieval
processing areas.

A13
OWNERSHIP AND ATTENTION: P300 MODULATION TO SELF-OWNED
ITEMS AND OWNERSHIP CUES Philip Collard1, David J. Turk1;
1

Psychology, University of Aberdeen — Information encoded in relation to
self through temporary ownership benefits from an elevated memorial
status. Previously we have shown that cognitive processes associated
with the allocation of attention are engaged at the moment that ownership is established, and that there is a narrowing in spatial attention to
the object (P300 effect to the object and reduced P1 to peripheral grating
stimuli following ownership; Turk et al., 2011). In the current study we
sought to determine whether these effects might also impact on perceptual processing of owned items. We recorded electrophysiological
responses to the initial presentation of temporary ownership cues (self/
other) and to the later presentation of objects assigned to each condition.
As with previous research, self-ownership cues elicited differences in
event-related brain potentials (ERPs) associated with attentional biases
(P300 effect). A smaller but significant P300 effect was also observed to
self-owned objects. These findings demonstrate the importance of attentional resources in the encoding of self-item associations through temporary ownership. The replication of the P300 effects and the absences of
electrophysiologically measureable differences in early perceptual pro-

39

Poster Session A — Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall
cessing will be discussed in relation to neural models of self and object
ownership.

A14
NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF SELF AND OTHER: BEYOND THE
DEFAULT MODE NETWORK Jonathan H. Drucker1, Christine D. Wilson-

Mendenhall2, Lisa F. Barrett2, Lawrence W. Barsalou1; 1Emory University,
2
Northeastern University — Self-referential processing has been shown to

recruit the default mode network (DMN), so-called due to its activation
during the absence of effortful cognition (Northoff et al., 2006). To further specify the roles of the DMN and other brain regions in self-related
processing, we considered two forms of self: the minimal self (the subject
of momentary experience, independent of conceptual knowledge about
oneself), and the extended self (the aggregate of self-related knowledge,
providing a stable identity through time; Damasio, 1999; Gallagher,
2000). Using fMRI, we distinguished these two forms of self in the
human brain, and explored the possibility that representations of other
people and objects obey this distinction as well. In each trial, participants
received the name of an individual (the self, a non-self human, or a nonhuman object) followed by a property, and then rated how well the
property applied to the individual. Four principal findings emerged: 1)
A conjunction of the three individual conditions revealed an “identity
network” (IDN) that excluded the DMN. We propose that the IDN
instantiates minimal representations of individuals in general, not just of
the self. 2) Regions immediately adjacent to the IDN differentiated
between individuals along a gradient of self-relatedness. 3) A conjunction of the property conditions revealed activations of the IDN and the
DMN, with the latter only occurring for human individuals, perhaps
binding representations of people with their traits. 4) Activation in the
DMN correlated strongly with self-relatedness, implying a graded distinction between self, other, and object in this neural circuit.

A15
P300 AMPLITUDE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN HETEROSEXUAL AND
HOMOSEXUAL FEMALES DURING A SELF-AWARENESS TASK Joel

Alexander1, Ronald Alexander2; 1Western Oregon University, 2Wartburg
College — Studies (Alexander et. al 2005; Alexander et. al 2011) have indi-

cated that P300 amplitude is higher during a self awareness task in
which the subject assesses whether or not she is surprised by the occurrence of a target tone in sequence of tones presented. It has been suggested that this increase in P300 amplitude during a self awareness task
represents an increase in utilization of cognitive resources compared to
other cognitive tasks. To examine if this finding is robust to varying personal factors we utilized a population of females who differed in sexual
orientation (heterosexual, homosexual). The P300 event-related potential
(ERP) was recorded in 30 (15 heterosexual 15 homosexual) female subjects during routine auditory sensory discrimination task, a matched
cognitive, and a matched self-awareness task. Similar to previous studies
the P300 amplitude was found to be higher during the self-awareness
task compared to the standard discrimination task across all electrode
locations. Homosexual females were found to have consistently higher
P300 amplitude compared to heterosexual females across all three tasks.
No significant interactions were found in analysis between task and sexual orientation. These findings indicate that the self-awareness task is
robust to the variation of sexual orientation between subjects and that
homosexual females have higher P300 amplitude across tasks.

A16
THE NEUROSCIENCE OF ACTING Lauren
1

Kutcher1,

Steven

Brown1;

McMaster University — The current study represents a first attempt to
look at the neural basis of acting. Every person plays multiple roles in
daily life – for example “friend”, “student” or “employee” – where these
roles are all facets of the “self” or first-person (1P) perspective. Compared to such everyday role-playing, actors are required to portray other
characters and to adopt the thoughts and emotions of these people. Consequently, actors must think and feel not as themselves but as the characters they are portraying, thereby assuming a “fictional first-person” (fic-

40

1P) perspective. Utilizing functional magnetic resonance imaging, we
sought to identify brain regions preferentially activated when actors
adopt a fic-1P perspective during role playing (pretense). In the scanner,
trained actors responded to a series of conditional questions from either
their own 1P perspective or from that of Romeo (male subjects) or Juliet
(female subjects) from Shakespeare’s drama. Compared with the 1P condition, fic-1P elicited changes in the cortical midline network, including
the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, precuneus, and posterior cingulate
cortex. Thus, role playing during acting seems to be a departure from
standard self-processing. This study represents a first step towards elucidating the neural basis of acting.

A17
ERP CORRELATES OF THE SELF-POSITIVITY BIAS Esther

Fujiwara1,2,
Nick
Anthony
of
Melanie
Psychiatry, University of Alberta, 2Centre for Neuroscience, University of
Alberta, 3Department of Psychology, University of Alberta — One of the most
Alpaugh2,3,

Brownoff3,

Singhal2,3; 1Department

robust findings in social psychology is the self-positivity bias, a tendency
of individuals to attribute more positive than negative traits to themselves. Previous fMRI and ERP studies have investigated this phenomenon by contrasting brain activity associated with favourable selfjudgements (negative-not-self-relevant NNSR, positive-self-relevant
PSR) versus non-favourable self-judgements (negative-self-relevant
NSR, positive-not-self-relevant PNSR). However, this contrast consists of
vastly different numbers of items (non-favourable< favourable). Furthermore, although both NSR and PNSR can both be considered unfavourable, endorsing negative traits as self-characteristic likely involves quite
distinct mechanisms (e.g., avoid-approach tendencies) compared to
rejecting positive traits. In our EEG/ERP experiment, we set out to test if
previously reported (Watkins, et al., 2007) larger fronto-central N400
ERPs to one or both types of unfavourable self-related information could
be replicated by randomly selecting identical trial numbers from each of
four conditions (NSR, PNSR, NNSR, PSR). High density EEG/ERP data
were recorded while 28 participants judged positive and negative trait
adjectives. We found a robust self-positivity bias behaviourally. In EEG/
ERP, the N400 was larger only for negative self-relevant (NSR) words,
compared to all three other conditions. This result was most pronounced
over temporo-parietal electrodes (T7, TP9). The lateral temporal rather
than fronto-central topography of the larger N400 in NSR judgements
more strongly resembles semantic than affective incongruency detection
in our task. Selectively finding larger N400 ERPs to NSR, but not PNSR,
implies a functional difference between these two types of unfavourable
self-judgements.

A18
STRUCTURAL CONNECTIVITY OF MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND
NUCLEUS ACCUMBENS PREDICTS TRAIT SELF-ESTEEM. Robert
S.

Chavez1, Katherine E. Powers1, Todd F. Heatherton1; 1Dartmouth College —
Though several brain areas have been shown to be involved in the neural
representation of self and others, the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) is
the region most consistently implicated in these processes. In particular,
there is evidence that ventral MPFC is more often implicated in coding of
self-referential thought, whereas dorsal MPFC seems to code for the representation of others. Self-esteem is an evaluative attitude based on the
extent to which a person views themself as favorable and leads them
respond to their social world. By definition, individuals with high selfesteem tend to think of themselves with elevated regard, but little work
has been to investigate the underlying neural networks that give rise to
these attitudes. In the current study, we used diffusion tensor imaging
and probabilistic tractography to investigate whether individual differences in the structural connectivity of MPCF and nucleus accumbens
(NAcc; a putative reward area) would be related to a trait-level measure
of self-esteem. Because of the self-relevant nature of self-esteem, we
hypothesized self-esteem would be related to greater connectivity of
NAcc to ventral MPFC, but not dorsal MPFC. In a sample of 75 normal
subjects, we found a positive relationship between left-NAcc /ventralMPFC connectivity and self-esteem. As hypothesized, there were no sig-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session A
nificant results for the dorsal portion of MPFC. These results provide
evidence that connectivity of brain regions involved in processing selfrelevant cognition to reward-related areas contribute to individual differences in trait self-esteem.

in processing both self and non-self biographic information. In addition,
its involvement in processing non-self biographic information seems to
depend on features of the subjects’ personality and on aspects of the relationship between the subjects and their acquaintances.

A19
NEURAL BASIS OF SELF-CONTINGENCY DETECTION IN 5-MONTH-OLD
BABIES Gecia Hermsdorff1,2,4, Iris Trinkler3,4, Luca Filippin1, Michel Dutat1,

A21
FMRI STUDY OF SELF VS. OTHERS’ ATTRIBUTIONS OF TRAITS
CONSISTENT WITH EVOLUTIONARY UNDERSTANDING OF THE SELF

Emmanuel Dupoux1,3; 1Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et
Psycholinguistiques, Département d'Etudes Cognitives, ENS, Paris, France,
2Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute, Human Neuroimaging Laboratory,
Virginia Tech, 3Inserm U955 E01, Département d'Etudes Cognitives, ENS,
Paris, France, 4Both authors contributed equally to this work. — Self-knowledge is ipso facto the essential piece for the phenomenological existence
of the individual. Self-knowledge is grounded on a basic embodied sense
of self that, in turn, relies on “self-contingency” detection, which is the
ability to match sensory feedback received during a movement with
internal motor and sensory representations. In order to understand the
cognitive and neural mechanisms that are essential to self-knowledge,
we seek to identify the cognitive and neural mechanism involved in selfcontingency detection in 5-month-old babies using functional Nearinfrared spectroscopy (NIRS). We measured babies’ neural activations in
a contingent condition, in which babies watched an online video of their
own legs and in a non-contingent condition in which they watched the
video of another baby’s legs. We further presented a sound at a volume
that was proportional to the quantity of legs’ movement at the screen
and measured babies’ legs movement. Moreover, we measured baby’s
looking preferences when these two videos were presented at the same
time. Our behavioral results replicate the previous findings that infants
can discriminate between the contingent and non-contingent situation.
They spent significantly more time looking to the non-contingent videos.
Preliminary analyses suggest that self-contingency detection is not an
automatic process: it involves a learning mechanism and babies’ emotional expressions correlate with self-contingency detection. The neural
results indicate that somatosensory cortices are recruited both when
babies watched their own legs and another baby’s legs. Moreover, as
would be expected from the adult neuroimaging literature, the parietal
cortex is specifically involved in self-contingency detection.

A20
INSULA CORTEX ACTIVITY DURING TWO SELF-RELATED CONDITIONS

Helder F. Araujo1,2,3, Jonas Kaplan1, Hanna Damasio1, Antonio Damasio;
1Brain and Creativity Institute, University of Southern California, 2Neuroscience
Graduate Program, University of Southern California, 3Graduate Program in
Areas Basic and Applied Biology, University of Oporto, Portugal — It has been
established that insular cortex maps represent aspects of the body and
participate in bodily and emotional feelings processes. On the assumption that the self is grounded in body representations, we hypothesize
that the insula is involved in self-related processes. Using fMRI, we
investigated insular involvement in two domains of autobiographical
self: personal traits and biographical facts. Nineteen participants
answered questions about (a) their own traits; (b) their factual biographies; (c) the traits of an acquaintance; and (d) the factual biography of
an acquaintance (4 conditions). The subjects completed three functional
scans. Each scan included three 24-second blocks of each condition and
blocks of one-back-task as an active baseline. After scanning, participants answered additional questionnaires. Image analysis was performed with FSL. Insula activity during “self” conditions was not
different from that observed during “other” conditions, but was greater
during “traits” than during “facts”. The difference between “self” and
“other” in insula activity correlated negatively with time of acquaintanceship (T) and with perspective taking scores; the difference between
“traits” and “facts” in insula activity correlated positively with bodyawareness scores; and insula activity related to traits of others correlated
negatively with subjects’ ratings on how well those traits described their
acquaintances, but positively with T. The insula appears to be involved

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Gonzalo Munevar1, Matthew Cole1, Yongquan Ye2, Jie Yang2, Mark Haacke2;
1
Psychology Program, Lawrence Technological University, 2MR Research
Facility, Wayne State University — Our fMRI study on self-attribution aims

to test an evolutionary explanation concerning the neural substrates of
the self. From an evolutionary perspective a complex brain should: (1)
coordinate new sensory information in light of the organisms’ internal
states and in the context of its personal history and genetic inheritance—
so it can use previous experience and learn; (2) it would thus constitute a
distributed self. We compared three general conditions of self vs. other
trait attributions: Self, Best Friend, and Bill Gates. Each of these conditions were comprised of two additional conditions: Personality Traits
and Non-Personality Traits. Thirteen participants (6 females, age: 18-57)
rated a series of 90 personality and non-personality trait adjectives as to
whether they applied to themselves or others, in a block-design paradigm. Data were acquired using a 3 Tesla Siemens Verio scanner at
Wayne State University, and analyzed using SPM8. We hypothesized
that in comparing Self vs. other conditions we should find differential
activation suggestive of (a) preparedness for action/motion and reward
(basal ganglia), (b) overlap of Self-Best Friend condition with structures
that permit allometric (non-geocentric) orientation and perspective
(basic to an animal), (c) and similarity of contrast between Self- Bill Gates
and Best Friend-Bill Gates, with greater activation in the former, which
would account for the finding by others of involvement of MPFC in attributions to self and close others. We found significant activation as follows: (a) substantia nigra and the caudate nucleus (right), (b) rBA31, and
(c) lBA24.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Goal
maintenance & switching
A22
SWITCHING STRATEGY UNDERLIES VERBAL FLUENCY IMPAIRMENT IN
OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER Ye Seul Shin1, Na Young Shin1,

Joon Hwan Jang2, Geumsook Shim2, Hye Yoon Park2, Min-Sup Shin2, Jun Soo
Kwon1,2; 1Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, 2Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea — Previous studies have reported verbal
fluency impairment in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), but no
study has evaluated the cognitive processes underlying verbal fluency in
OCD. In the present study, we sought to test the hypothesis that verbal
fluency impairment in OCD resulted from switching problems rather
than lack of verbal ability per se. In addition, we examined the relationship between the symptom dimensions of OCD and verbal fluency to
better understand OCD heterogeneity. The study included 85 patients
with OCD (45 drug-naïve and 40 drug-free) and 71 healthy controls
matched for gender, age, education, and intelligence. The Controlled
Oral Word Association (COWA) test was administered to assess verbal
fluency and switching performance. Patients with OCD generated a
smaller number of words and displayed fewer switches than did healthy
control subjects. Furthermore, switching was found to mediate impaired
verbal fluency in OCD. Impairment in switching and verbal fluency was
related to the symmetry dimension in patients with OCD. Our findings
suggest that verbal fluency impairment in OCD is mediated by a switching deficit that may originate from abnormal processing in the frontalstriatal circuitry involving the orbitofrontal cortex. Moreover, impaired
verbal fluency in OCD may be modulated by distinct obsessive-compulsive dimensions.

41

Poster Session A — Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall

A23
BLINK PREDICTS ENHANCED COGNITIVE CONTROL Marlies

E. van
Bochove1, Lise Van der Haegen1, Wim Notebaert1, Tom Verguts1; 1Ghent
University — Although much of our behavior is driven by routines, when
the situation changes we are able to overcome our routines in favor of a
more appropriate response. This is referred to as cognitive control. One
classical index of cognitive control is the Gratton effect (Gratton et al.,
1992) which is identified as an interaction between congruency on the
current trial and congruency on the previous trial. Recently, it was suggested that cognitive control is implemented by successful binding
between stimuli and actions (Verguts & Notebaert, 2009). Several neuromodulators are suggested to enhance binding, among which dopamine
(DA; Silvetti, Seurinck & Verguts, 2011) and norepinephrine (NE; Verguts & Notebaert, 2008, 2009). The current study investigated measures
related to both neuromodulators in cognitive control. We asked 48 participants to complete a flanker task, during which their pupil dilation
(related to NE; Nieuwenhuis & Jepma, 2011) and eye blinks (related to
DA; Blin et al., 1990; Taylor et al., 1999) were recorded. We applied hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) and found a significant three-way interaction between congruency on the current trial, congruency on the
previous trial, and blink on the previous trial, which indicates a larger
Gratton effect after blink trials compared to no blink trials. This shows
that cognitive control is enhanced following blink trials, suggesting a
role for DA in binding and in cognitive control.

A24
FRONTO-PARIETAL REPRESENTATION OF SEQUENTIAL TASKS ausaf

farooqui1, John Duncan1; 1MRC-Cognition & Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge,
UK — Fronto-Parietal regions have been shown to represent all kinds of
task relevant events. However, in real behaviour task relevant events
occur in the context of temporally extended, multistep, sequential task
episodes. It is not known whether the representation of task elements is
affected by their ordinal position in the sequence. In an FMRI experiment, we looked at the representational profile of two kinds of trial
blocks. In the organised blocks, subjects executed a list of sequential
tasks, such that the consecutive trials of such blocks were sequential
steps towards a common goal. Further, this list of tasks was to be kept in
working memory (WM) and its elements were sequentially discarded as
the corresponding task was executed, causing a stepwise decrease in this
load. In the unorganised blocks, component trials were independent of
each other and there was no list to be executed; subjects were informed
before every trial about the task to be done. However, in terms of the
actual task done, the two blocks were identical. Activity in many frontoparietal regions and the information content of the elicited pattern of
activity increased sequentially across the trials of the organised blocks, in
spite of a concomitant decrease in WM load. Interestingly, this pattern of
increasing activity was seen in regions from both cognitive control and
default mode networks. Fronto-parietal results were weaker in the unorganised blocks. Our results thus show that the context of the task episode strongly determines the neural representation of the task elements.

A25
THE EFFECT OF RESOURCE-LIMITED AND DATA-LIMITED TASKS ON
SUSTAINED BOLD ACTIVITY Joseph Dubis1, Joshua Siegel1, Steven

Petersen1; 1Washington University in St. Louis — The human brain is capable
of performing numerous tasks, including novel and difficult tasks of
many forms, with relative ease. In 1975, Norman and Bobrow proposed
a dichotomy of task types, depending on whether performance is limited
by demands on the organization on attentional resources, or is limited by
the data provided by the stimulus. Research by Dosenbach et al. (2006)
identified brain regions showing task control signals—task initiation,
error-related feedback, and task maintenance—across tasks. It appeared,
based on post-hoc analyses, that task maintenance signals were weaker
when the difficulty of the task was driven by data limitations. Here, we
test whether task maintenance regions respond differently to data-limited and resource-limited tasks using a mixed block/event-related fMRI

42

design. We compared three tasks—resource-limited noun:verb and mental rotation judgments and a data-limited dot pattern coherence judgment. Behaviorally, the noun:verb task was easier than the other two
tasks, both objectively (accuracy and reaction time) and subjectively
(post-test questionnaire). On the other hand, task maintenance signals in
cingulate and insula regions were greater for the resource-limited
noun:verb and mental rotation tasks than the data-limited task. This
finding indicates the putative task maintenance signals reflect the organization of attentional resources. This is true for orgainzing perceptual
and imagery processes in the rotation task and verbal processes in the
noun:verb task. This finding also shows the sustained BOLD signal is not
related to task difficulty or arousal, as has been proposed.

A26
PUPILLOMETRY REVEALS CHANGES IN COGNITIVE CONTROL DYNAMICS
AS A FUNCTION OF MOTIVATIONAL INCENTIVES Kimberly S. Chiew1,

Renaldo Gacad1, Todd S. Braver1; 1Washington University in St. Louis —
Behavioural and neural evidence suggests that motivational incentives
can influence cognitive performance through enhancement of proactive
control processes. The present study examines the influence of reward
on cognitive control dynamics in the AX-Continuous Performance Task
(AX-CPT), a cue-probe task permitting relative characterization of proactive and reactive control processes, using task performance and high-resolution pupillometry (as a performance-independent measure of mental
effort). Changes in task performance were consistent with the idea that
incentive is associated with a shift to relatively more proactive control.
This shift was also reflected in pupil dilation, which increased in incentive relative to non-incentive trials. Importantly, this increase in dilation
occurred during active maintenance of cue information, where it may be
interpreted as reflecting enhancement of proactive control processing.
We also observed incentive-related changes in pupil constriction when
perceptual factors were controlled, suggesting that constriction may be a
novel marker of affective influences on cognition as well as reflexively
indexing changes in luminosity. Although incentive trials and faster RTs
were both associated with greater pupil dilation, the two effects could be
dissociated: incentive effects on pupil dilation were present even when
comparing RT-matched trials. Pupillometry may thus provide a useful,
performance-independent measure by which to examine dynamic shifts
in cognitive control as well as indexing changes in motivation separate
from cognitive demands.

A27
CROSS-CORRELATION DYNAMICS OF FRONTO-PARIETAL NETWORKS
DURING RESPONSE MODE SWITCHING: AN EVENT-RELATED OPTICAL
SIGNAL (EROS) STUDY Pauline L. Baniqued1, Kathy A. Low1, Monica

Fabiani1, Gabriele Gratton1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign —

Coordination between networks of brain regions is important for optimal cognitive performance, especially in attention demanding tasks.
Functional connectivity is widely studied by assessing the temporal correlation of the fMRI BOLD signal in distinct regions over time. With the
event-related optical signal (EROS), we can better characterize the rapidly evolving network processes that occur. EROS measures changes in
optical scattering due to neuronal activity and offers good spatial and
temporal resolution. With EROS, we investigated network dynamics
during the preparatory period of a response-mode switching task. We
used lagged cross-correlations to study the interactions between switchrelated attentional control and response preparation processes. On each
trial, participants received an auditory-visual precue indicating whether
to respond vocally or manually. Participants then saw or heard the letter
“L” or “R”, indicating a “left” or “right” response to be implemented
with the appropriate response modality. We observed accuracy switch
costs, but no reliable reaction time switch costs. We found common
switching activity in fronto-parietal regions beginning around 200 ms
post-precue, and modality-specific modulation of motor cortex during
switch trials. Seeded cross-correlations revealed coupling of right frontal
cortex to motor cortex for manual-switch trials, and right frontal coupling to left-lateralized regions for vocal-switch trials, with modality-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session A
specific activations peaking at 50-150 ms lags from right frontal activity.
These results provide a more comprehensive picture of millisecond-scale
network interactions that flexibly adapt to task demands. Monitoring
these online processes can inform applications to augment cognition
such as by providing feedback to prevent errors in complex tasks.

A28
USING TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION TO ASSESS CERTAINTY
AND REWARD MODULATION OF THE PRIMARY MOTOR CORTEX Eric
Mooshagian1,2,3, Aysha Keisler1,2, Trelawny Zimmermann1,2, Eric
Wassermann1; 1National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, NIH,
2Henry Jackson Foundation, 3Washington University — Primary motor cortex

(M1) is critical for motor learning and response selection, processes
which depend, in part, on feedback and reward signals. It is also established that primate M1 receives a robust, direct dopaminergic projection,
which produces cortical inhibition. Though human reward circuits are
integral to learning, their influence on M1 activity is still poorly understood. Recent transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) studies demonstrated reward-related changes in motor evoked potentials (MEPs)
across varying reward conditions and attributed the modulation to differences in reward expectation. There are multiple components of
reward signals, however, including the expected reward value or the
degree of uncertainty, i.e., the extent to which an outcome is known.
Uncertainty is related to expected reward value: It is maximal when the
probability is 0.5 (i.e., chance), and minimal when it is 0 or 1 (i.e., certain
outcome). These outcomes often covaried in previous studies. Here, we
sought to determine whether reward-related MEP changes in M1 reflect
reward probability or uncertainty. We applied paired-pulse TMS and
measured intracortical inhibition in subjects while they made choices in
order to find or avoid a hidden cue. The probability of success was 0, 0.5,
or 1. Successful trials were rewarded with 25 cents. TMS occurred 250 ms
after stimulus onset, and before the choice was made or feedback given.
Results suggest that the psychological context modulates the magnitude
of inhibitory reward signals in M1 and that, at our early stimulation
time, the MEP is sensitive to expected reward value.

A29
CORTICAL ACTIVATION CHANGES WITH PERFORMANCE FLUCTUATIONS
ON A SUSTAINED ATTENTION TASK Jayde Nail1, Hillary Schwarb1, Zain
Sultan1, Andy McKinley2, Lloyd Tripp2, Shella Kielholz1, Eric Schumacher1;

1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2Air Force Research Laboratory — Research

of the neural mechanisms underlying sustained attention is critical if we
are to understand and avoid situations where failures to sustain attention can be devastating. Recent research using the psychomotor vigilance task (PVT) as a measure of sustained attention has implicated
prefrontal and parietal brain regions (Drummond, et al, 2005). Activity
patterns in the default mode network have also been shown to predict
successful target detection in the PVT (Drummond, et al., 2005). Neither
of these studies have investigated how the neural mechanisms underlying performance in the PVT change over an extended period of time. The
goal of the current study was to identify the neural correlates of sustained attention across a longer period of time than has been investigated previously. Participants performed a PVT while undergoing fMRI
without a break for 30 minutes. Participant performance decreased over
the session. This decrease in activity was associated with changes in
activity in dorsolateral prefrontal, inferior parietal, primary and secondary occipital cortices, and the basal ganglia. These results identify the
neural correlates with failures of sustained attention over performance
timescales associated with real world attention tasks (e.g., air traffic control, radar operators, image analysis, etc.).

A30
PREDICTING THE RESPONSE OF PATIENTS WITH BRAIN INJURY TO
COGNITIVE REHABILITATION: EVIDENCE FROM ANALYSES OF
FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS Katelyn L Begany1,2, Emi M Nomura2,

Mark D'Esposito1,2; 1Veteran's Administration Northern California Health Care
System, Martinez, 2University of California, Berkeley, 3Veteran's
Administration Medical Center, San Francisco, 4University of California, San
Francisco, 5California Pacific Medical Center, San Francisco — Anatomical
brain structure does not fully predict the susceptibility of patients with
brain injuries to long-term executive dysfunction or individual variability in response to rehabilitation interventions. Understanding the neural
mechanisms of recovery of function is not only of clinical importance,
but critical for cognitive neuroscience studies which traditionally use the
lesion method as a tool for understanding brain-behavior relationships.
Reorganization of functional networks after brain injury is likely an
important mechanism of recovery, particularly for high-level cognitive
processes supported by interactions between brain regions. We investigated the neural bases of individual differences in plasticity after brain
injury by examining the relation of modularity, a measure of functional
network organization, to improvement after an experimental rehabilitation intervention. Patients (n=11) were trained in a 5-week protocol for
improving goal-oriented attention self-regulation. Before and after training 5 minutes of resting fMRI data was collected where patients were
instructed to focus on relaxed breathing. A thresholded connectivity
matrix of time-series correlations amongst 90 AAL atlas regions was
used to generate a graph that was parcellated in separate functional networks by optimizing Newman’s Modularity (a measure of the strength
of within- compared to between-network connections). Baseline measurements of modularity predicted degree of recovery of executive function after clinical intervention (r=0.775, p=0.005). This suggests that more
modular functional network organization predicts a patient’s response
to attention and executive control training. Graph theoretical analyses
may provide critical tools for understanding individual variability in
plasticity and may yield clinically-relevant biomarkers to guide rehabilitation efforts.

A31
STATE SWITCHING IN PSYCHOPATHOLOGY USING A HIDDEN MARKOV
MODEL Edward Patzelt1, Zeb Kurth-Nelson1, Nancy Raymond1, Sheila

Specker1, Kelvin Lim1, Angus MacDonald1; 1University of Minnesota — Cognitive learning tasks, such as reversal learning, provide mechanistic insight
into the dysfunction underlying addiction and other disorders of impulsivity. Here we administered a probabilistic reversal learning task to 49
cocaine addicted participants, 40 cocaine controls, 27 binge eating disordered participants, 22 overweight controls, and 21 normal weight controls. Recently, computational modeling techniques such as temporal
difference learning (TD) have been used to explore the mechanisms of
cognitive processing in these tasks. TD represents causal beliefs as stable
structures over which a value estimate will converge with repeated
experience. However, a central feature of reversal learning is rapidly
changing reward contingencies. Human subjects are able to adroitly
respond to these changes, suggesting that TD is not an adequate description of the decision process on this task. We therefore used a two-state
Hidden Markov Model (HMM) to model subjects’ behavior on our task.
The model was fit to each subject’s choice sequence by varying one free
parameter, the symmetric transition probability of the HMM. The model
improved prediction of choice compared to chance for 88% of participants. Cocaine users showed a significantly higher transition probability
(p = .024; Mann-Whitney Wilcoxon) than cocaine controls. Binge eating
disordered participants did not show any difference from overweight or
normal weight controls. These results suggest that excessive switching,
rather than perseveration, is the fundamental deficit in cocaine users on
reversal learning tasks. This approach allows us to explain the variation
between cocaine users and controls as a difference in cognitive inference
processes.

Caterina Gratton2, Anthony J.-W. Chen1,2,3,4, Tatjana Novakovic-Agopian1,3,4,5,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

43

Poster Session A — Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall

A32
NEURAL NETWORKS INVOLVED IN TASK SWITCHING PERFORMANCE
Paul Metzak1,2, Susan Kuo1,2, Todd Woodward1,2; 1University of British
Columbia, 2BC Mental Health and Addictions Research Institute — In
the

present study, we sought to investigate the neural networks that underlie cognitive control using a task switching paradigm that involved making judgments about the colour of symbols, parity of numbers, and case
of letters. In order to assess how performance is related to brain activity,
performance on each trial was coded as fast, medium, or slow based on
response time. Using fMRI-CPCA (http://www.nitrc.org/projects/
fmricpca/), this performance information was entered into the design
matrix and two components were extracted. These two components
revealed patterns of brain activity that overlapped substantially with the
task positive and task negative (default mode) networks. The ‘task positive’ component included activations in dorsal anterior cingulate cortex,
primary motor regions, and inferior parietal cortex. The task negative
component included deactivations in medial prefrontal cortices, and precuneus. Furthermore, it was found that these networks appear to be
playing differential roles in performance such that the component
reflecting the task positive network showed increased activity during
slow trials, whereas the component reflecting the task negative (default
mode) network was most strongly deactivated during fast/medium trials. These results suggest these two networks play different roles in optimizing performance during cognitive control.

A33
THE BIVALENCY EFFECT IN TASK SWITCHING: EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS AND THE INFLUENCE OF UNEXPECTED STIMULUS
FEATURES John Grundy1, Miriam Benarroch1, Sandra Monteiro1, Judith

Shedden1; 1McMaster University — During task-switching, if we occasionally encounter stimuli that cue more than one task (i.e. bivalent stimuli),
response slowing is observed on all univalent trials within that block.
This observation is known as the bivalency effect. Here, we explore the
bivalency effect by examining both event-related potentials (ERPs) and
task stimulus features involved in producing the effect. In the first experiment, participants alternated between three simple tasks in six experimental blocks, with bivalent stimuli appearing occasionally in bivalent
blocks (blocks 2, 4, and 6). Frontal electrode sites captured significant
amplitude differences associated with the bivalency effect within time
windows 100-120 ms, 375-450ms, and 500-550ms, which may reflect
additional extraction of visual features present in bivalent stimuli (100120 ms) and suppression of processing carried over from irrelevant cues
(375-450 ms and 500-550 ms). Our results support previous fMRI findings (Woodward et al., 2008) and provide additional behavioural and
electrophysiological evidence for the dissipation of the bivalency effect
with extended practice. Another series of experiments examined the
influence of unexpected stimulus features in producing the bivalency
effect. Results indicate that both bivalence and unexpectedness contribute to the block-wise response slowing. These findings are discussed in
relation to the differential processing involved in a controlled response
style.

A34
VARIATIONS IN EARLY EXPERIENCE ARE ASSOCIATED WITH
PREFRONTAL COGNITIVE CONTROL Raquel Gabbitas1, Ruskin Hunt1,

Megan Gunnar1, Kathleen Thomas1; 1Institute of Child Development, University
of Minnesota — Children in institutional care experience mild to severe
deprivation as a result of inadequate care and cognitive stimulation
(Rutter, 1981). Cognitive delays persist to varying degrees after removal
from institutional conditions (Johnson, 2001). Age at adoption may moderate the relationship between early adversity and later cognitive outcomes. The current study examined the role of duration of institutional
care in behavioral and brain measures of cognitive control in post-institutionalized (PI) adolescents and an SES-matched control group. Eightyfive PI youth (42 Early Adopted (EA) and 43 Later Adopted (LA)) and
seventeen controls between 12-14 years of age were included. A motor

44

remapping task was administered during fMRI scanning (Casey et al.,
2002). Compatible (easy) trials matched numbers to fingers in an intuitive pairing. Incompatible (difficult) trials matched numbers to fingers in
a less intuitive pairing. Images were collected on a Siemens 3T Trio scanner (34 slices, 4mm thick). BrainVoyager software and GLM models
were employed in analyzing functional data. In the difficult condition,
controls and EA youth performed similarly to each other, and LA youth
showed lower accuracy. For difficult trials, greater activity in the left
middle frontal gyrus (BA 46) was observed in PI youth compared to controls; EA youth also recruited the left superior frontal gyrus (BA 6) and
the left superior temporal gyrus (BA 22) compared to controls. More
time in an institution lead to greater performance decrements. Behaviorally, EA youth were not different from controls. However, additional
neural regions were recruited by EA youth compared to controls.

A35
TOP-DOWN CONTROL OF EXTERNAL ATTENTION AND INTERNALLYDIRECTED THOUGHT Jessica Andrews-Hanna1, Jeremy Reynolds2, Joseph
Orr1, Marie Banich1,3; 1University of Colorado at Boulder, 2University of Denver,
University of Colorado at Denver — A wealth of neuroimaging and neurop-

3

sychological research suggests distinct large-scale brain systems support
externally- and internally-oriented modes of cognition. The “dorsal
attention system” (DAS) becomes engaged when individuals attend to
visual stimuli and spatial locations, whereas the “default network” (DN)
activates when individuals reflect on their past, their future, and the
minds of other people. Though growing progress has been made
towards understanding the functions of these brain systems, little is
known about whether they are regulated by similar or disparate topdown control mechanisms. The present study explored these questions
using fMRI and behavioral approaches in the context of a task-switching
paradigm. Holding stimuli constant, participants switched between two
externally-oriented tasks (color, position), between two internally-oriented tasks (memory, self-descriptiveness), and between externally- and
internally-oriented tasks. To isolate areas involved in task switching,
switch blocks were compared to “repeat” blocks in which participants
performed a single task. Importantly, the DAS was engaged to a greater
degree when participants made externally-oriented judgments, whereas
the DN was more engaged when participants made internally-oriented
judgments. When switch blocks were compared to repeat blocks separately for external and internal tasks, a common set of frontoparietal
regions was observed. However, the left anterior and inferior prefrontal
cortex was activated to a greater degree when switching between two
internal tasks than between two external tasks. Minimal additional differences were observed when participants switched between external
and internal tasks. These results further clarify the role of the prefrontal
cortex in regulation of externally- and internally-oriented modes of cognition.

A36
INTRINSIC CONNECTIVITY NETWORKS UNDERLYING CONTEXT
PROCESSING DEFICITS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Andrew Poppe1, Deanna

Barch2, Cameron Carter3, James Gold4, Daniel Ragland3, Steve Silverstein5,
Angus MacDonald1; 1University of Minnesota, 2Washington University,
3
University of California - Davis, 4University of Maryland, 5University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey — Context processing (CP) refers to
the ability to represent and maintain goal-relevant information during
the execution of a task. It has been shown that schizophrenia patients
demonstrate deficits in their ability to perform tasks which require CP.
Impaired functional connectivity has been hypothesized as a potential
source of the cognitive deficits routinely observed in patients with
schizophrenia. The goal of the current study was to determine what
functional connectivity networks emerge as differentially active between
schizophrenia patients and healthy controls. We employed group independent component analysis (ICA) to test the hypothesis that functional
connectivity differences would emerge that are associated with CP.
Twelve subjects with schizophrenia and twelve healthy controls were

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session A
recruited and scanned as part of a larger, multisite study using fMRI
while performing a CP task, the dot probe expectancy task (DPX).
Patients performed significantly worse on the DPX task compared with
controls. Additionally, the group ICA analysis revealed multiple functional networks whose time courses were correlated with the DPX task
goal maintenance demands and two networks that correlated with good
task performance in patients. One such network involves bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC). The networks extracted from these data
correlated highly with networks resulting from a meta-analysis of fMRI
studies. These results show that functional connectivity differences
underlie CP deficits in schizophrenia and point to dlPFC as an important
brain region involved in these connectivity networks.

A37
EFFECTS OF TASK DEMANDS ON TASK-RELEVANT CODING IN MD
REGIONS Apoorva Bhandari1, John Duncan1; 1Medical Research Council,
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge — It has been
proposed that neurons in discrete regions in fronto-parietal cortex adaptively code information relevant to the task at hand. These 'multiple
demand' (MD) regions are reliabily activated in a variety of demanding
tasks, irrespective of the specific cognitive operations involved, suggesting their role as a general purpose resource. We examined how coding of
task information in MD regions changes in the face of different task
demands. In a control condition, subjects classified pictures of birds into
one of two categories based on their physical features. In our first manipulation, pictures were degraded by adding noise, thus introducing perceptual uncertainty. To solve the task, subjects had to devote more
attentional resources for detecting relevant features. In a second manipulation, subjects switched between two tasks, using two orthogonal but
conflicting boundaries to classify the pictures, thus introducing uncertainty about which rule to apply on a given trial. Here subjects had to
devote more attentional resources towards detecting the relevant rule
(signalled by a colour cue). We examined coding of category information
in MD regions with multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) using support
vector machines and leave-one-out cross-generalisation. We found that
introducing perceptual uncertainty led to voxel activity patterns in MD
regions reflecting more information about stimulus category compared
to the control condition. Introducing rule uncertainty, however, failed to
modulate category information. Instead, the voxel activity patterns
reflected information about the relevant rule on the trial. Our results provide evidence for adaptive coding in MD regions with changing task
demands.

A38
MEDIAL FRONTAL CORTEX-BASAL GANGLIA LOOPS REGULATE TASK AND
RESPONSE SELECTION Franziska M. Korb1, Tobias Egner1; 1Duke
University — Adaptive behavior requires the ability to flexibly select tasksets and responses in line with changing demands. Much work has
focused on investigating the implementation of 1st-order task-switches,
but recent behavioral data suggest these switch processes are conditioned on higher-order task and response transitions (Brown et al., 2007,
Cogn. Psychol.). Here, we paired functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) with a cued task-switching protocol to assess the neural mechanisms giving rise to these effects. Behaviorally, we found that both taskand response-switch costs were dependent on the previous trial transition, whereby consecutive repetitions and consecutive switches facilitated performance relative to switch-repeat and repeat-switch
transitions. These data suggest that task-set and response configurations
are, by default, adapted to reflect the most recent transition demands
(rather than the most recent task demands); when these demands are not
replicated, control has to be engaged to overcome these settings, resulting in a behavioral cost. The fMRI data showed that this control cost
maps onto activity in the preSMA for task-level transitions and the
SMA/M1 for response-level transitions. However, the behavioral transition effects were also interactive, in that a violation of consecutive repetitions/switches at one level (task or response) removed the benefit of
consecutive repetitions/switches at the other level, suggesting a com-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

mon final pathway of controlled response selection. The fMRI data
revealed this shared pathway to be located in the basal ganglia. In sum,
we present novel evidence for two interactive medial frontal cortex-basal
ganglia circuits that regulate the flexible implementation of task and
response selection.

LANGUAGE: Syntax
A39
NEURAL CORRELATES OF UNACCUSATIVE AND UNERGATIVE VERB
PROCESSING Julia Schuchard1, Aneta Kielar2, Elena Barbieri3, Cynthia K.

Thompson1; 1Northwestern University, 2Rotman Research Institute, 3University
of Milano-Bicocca — Unaccusative and unergative verbs both require a
single argument but differ with respect to the argument structure
entailed within their lexical entries. Unaccusatives select for a theme
argument, which in sentences undergoes syntactic movement from the
object to the subject position. Unergatives only select for an agent, which
is base generated in the subject position; hence no object movement is
required. The present study investigated the neural correlates of processing unaccusative and unergative verbs in sentence context using fMRI,
with the hypothesis that the greater syntactic complexity of unaccusatives relative to unergatives would activate bilateral inferior frontal and
posterior perisylvian regions. Stimuli included forty sentences with
unergative verbs and forty with non-alternating unaccusative verbs.
Half the sentences were semantically plausible and half implausible.
Thirteen monolingual English speakers performed a semantic anomaly
detection task while listening to blocks of sentences with unaccusative or
unergative verbs. Participants also performed blocks of a pitch discrimination control task. Compared to pitch discrimination, processing of
both sentence types elicited bilateral activation in anterior and posterior
language regions, i.e., superior and middle temporal and inferior frontal
gyri. As predicted, participants exhibited enhanced activations for sentences with unaccusatives relative to sentences with unergatives. Significant clusters of activation differentiating the two sentence/verb types
were located in the right hemisphere. These results suggest that right
hemisphere regions may be required for computing complex verb argument structure. The findings of the present study contribute to a growing body of work implicating right hemisphere regions in linguistic
processes.

A40
THE PROCESSING OF MOVEMENT: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS
INVESTIGATION OF PREPOSED ADJECTIVES Laura Bartlett1, Kay-E.

González-Vilbazo1, Kara Morgan-Short1; 1University of Illinois at Chicago —

The P600 in linguistic event-related potentials (ERP) research has often
been associated with reanalysis that occurs in response to grammatical
errors or anomalous constructions (e.g. Osterhout & Holcomb, 1992).
However, more recent work has found P600s in non-anomalous grammatical constructions that involve filler gap dependencies, such as those
associated with wh-movement (e.g. Gouvea et al. 2010). The present
project expands this research by examining processing in a different
movement construction. We compare two types of adjectival modification: one involving prenominal Spanish adjectives that raise from their
base position, the other involving prenominal adjectives that are basegenerated as such. If movement resolution elicits a P600, we predict that
the moved adjectives will show a P600 relative to the non-moved ones.
In order to test this, we recorded EEG from native speakers of Mexican
Spanish as they read determiner-adjective-noun phrases. ERPs were
time-locked to the critical noun (where movement is resolved) and averaged across participants. Preliminary analysis shows no evidence of a
P600 for either type of adjective; however, the moved adjectives show a
localized, bilateral LAN in comparison to the non-moved type. We
explore two possible interpretations for the data: 1) P600s are not elicited
to movement, and the P600 seen in wh-movement is related to some
other factor, such as thematic role integration at the point of movement

45

Poster Session A — Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall
resolution; and 2) the adjectives we consider as moved do not actually
move and this theory is in need of revision.

A41
BROCA’S AREA SHOWS A DISTANCE EFFECT FOR BOTH SYNTACTIC
MOVEMENT AND BACKWARDS ANAPHORA IN FMRI William Matchin1,
Jon Sprouse1, Gregory Hickok1; 1University of California, Irvine — The process-

ing of sentences sometimes requires the computation of long-distance
dependencies, or relationships between non-adjacent elements of a sentence. One example is syntactic movement, whereby a moved element,
the filler, must be linked with its original position in the sentence, the
gap. Another example is referential binding, whereby a pronoun is
linked with its antecedent. Santi & Grodzinsky, (2007) documented
increased activation in the anterior portion of Broca’s area in fMRI for
sentences with a longer distance between filler and gap, but not for sentences with longer distance between antecedent and pronoun. The
authors suggest that this region responds selectively to syntactic movement. However, the dependency resolution processes involved for syntactic movement are online and active (Stowe, 1986), given that the
presence of a filler predicts a gap, whereas the dependency resolution
processes for standard binding generates no such prediction (Kazanina,
2007). Therefore, the lack of a distance effect for the binding condition in
Broca’s area does not rule out the possibility that the activation for
movement reflects other dependency resolution processes. The current
study corrects for this by using backwards anaphora, wherein the pronoun precedes the antecedent, creating an online prediction for the antecedent. Our results show that backwards anaphoric sentences produce
larger activation for sentences with a longer distance between pronoun
and antecedent in the anterior portion of Broca’s area, suggesting that
the distance effects found for movement in this region do not reflect syntactic movement per se, but another dependency resolution process.

A42
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
MEASURES
REVEAL
INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES IN BILINGUAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING Darren Tanner1,

Lee Osterhout2; 1The Pennsylvania State University, 2University of
Washington — Research on native language (L1) processing using event-

related potentials (ERPs) has shown that sentence-embedded semantic
and morphosyntactic anomalies elicit qualitatively different brain
responses (the N400 and P600, respectively). ERP studies of second-language (L2) processing have reported mixed results, with findings ranging from null results to similar processing profiles as L1. However, L2
learning and processing are particularly subject to significant individual
variation, and grand-mean analyses typically used in ERP research
obscure these differences. Here we show that individual differences in
L2 ERP responses can be systematic, and that multivariate approaches to
ERP measures can reveal important information about the nature of
bilingual processing. Twenty high proficiency L1 Spanish-L2 English
bilinguals read sentences containing morphosyntactic violations (e.g.,
“The key to the cabinet was/*were very rusty”). Grand-mean results
showed both reliable N400 and P600 effects to the morphosyntactic
anomalies. However, analyses of individuals’ brain responses showed
that most individuals showed either an N400 or P600, but not both, and
that the magnitude of the two brain responses was negatively correlated
within and across individuals. Multivariate analyses showed that over
60% of variance in individuals’ relative response dominance (N400 or
P600) was predicted by five factors: age of L2 acquisition, length of
immersion, L2 proficiency, frequency of L2 use, and motivation to learn
English. Overall, our results show that spurious theoretical interpretations can result when ERPs are averaged over individuals showing qualitatively different responses, but that simple analytical techniques can be
applied to ERP data to reveal factors related to individual processing
profiles.

46

A43
WHEN THE SPEAKER IS PRESENT: PROCESSING DIFFERENT PERSON
SPECIFICATIONS IN BASQUE SUBJECT-VERB AGREEMENT Simona

Mancini1, Nicola Molinaro1, Jon A. Duñabeitia1, Stephanie Massol1, Manuel
Carreiras1,2; 1BCBL, Basque Center on Cognition Brain and Language,
2
Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science — The
electrophysiological
correlates of agreement processing are normally identified in P600
effects, often preceded by negative effects. In this ERP study we explore
agreement comprehension and its interaction with discourse focusing on
the alleged asymmetry between 1st and 3rd person plural forms, according to which the composite makeup of the former, a group including a
participant (speaker) and non-participants (e.g. we=I+they), contrasts
with the homogeneous non-participant composition of the latter
(they=he+he). To investigate the sensitivity of comprehension mechanisms to this asymmetry, we used a distinctive phenomenon of Basque:
the proximity plural suffix –ok. Unlike the fixed 3rd person plural interpretation of –ek suffixes (japonarri-ek, the Japanese), -ok shifts the interpretation to 1st person plural (japonarri-ok, we japanese). In an ERP
experiment (N=20), person violations were created with –ok and -ek
manipulating the inclusion/exclusion of the speaker in verbal inflection:
(1) Ikastaroan japoniarr-ek3.pl euskara ikasi dute3.pl gustora; (2)
Ikastaroan japoniarr-ek3.pl euskara ikasi *dugu1.pl gustora; (3)
Ikastaroan japoniarr-ok1.pl euskara ikasi dugu1.pl gustora; (4)
Ikastaroan japoniarr-ok1.pl euskara ikasi *dute3.pl gustora (In class,
the/we Japanese learned Basque with pleasure). Both violations elicited
an N400 effect, suggesting discourse involvement in person processing,
but only –ok violations generated a P600, arguably reflecting integration
operations to accommodate the non-participant representation invoked
by the verb with the speaker-related one underlying the subject. Results
show that the presence of an agreement violation does not necessarily
correlate with P600 effects, whose emergence appears to be sensitive to
fine-grained discourse information such as the type and role of speech
participants involved.

A44
MORPHO-SYNTACTIC PROCESSING IN LATE BILINGUALS: COMBINED
EVIDENCE FROM ERPS AND FMRI Eleonora Rossi1, Judith Kroll1, Paola

Dussias1; 1Pennsylvania State University — The successful processing of
morpho-syntactic parameters in adult second language (L2) learners can
be influenced by several factors, including age of acquisition and proficiency. Still under debate is how grammatical similarity between the
native (L1) and the L2 impacts the neurophysiological bases and the
amount of cortical activation in the L2. Recent neuroimaging studies
report that native-like processing is possible only when the two languages share similar grammatical structures, while others suggest that
L2 learners are sensitive to structures that are unique to the L2 (Jeong et
al., 2007; Sabourin & Stowe, 2008). In two experiments we address this
issue, attempting to combine high-temporal and high-spatial resolution
data utilizing Event Related Potentials (ERPs) and functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI). In Experiment 1, we recorded ERPs in native
Spanish (n=16) and high-proficient English-Spanish bilinguals (n=15),
utilizing clitic pronouns which differ between English and Spanish (in
Spanish: marked for gender and number). Results reveal that native
speakers showed a larger positivity in the 500-700 ms window for violations of gender and number, while L2 speakers show a larger positivity
for number violations. In Experiment 2 (in progress) we utilize the same
grammatical structure utilizing fMRI to measure cortical activation in a
similar population, with the goal of testing a subset of the participants
from Experiment 1. We hypothesize that if L2 speakers are not sensitive
to grammatical gender (as observed in Experiment 1) the location and/
or the amount of cortical activation should likewise also differ between
native and L2 speakers.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session A

A45
DOUBLY QUANTIFIED SENTENCES: SHALLOW VS. DEEP PROCESSING

Veena Dwivedi1, Raechelle Gibson1, Leanne Angus2; 1Brock University,
2
University at Buffalo — Language comprehension requires integration of
information derived from world-experience and grammar. Nevertheless,
how these different sources of information interact is debated. The
present work suggests that language processing requires both heuristic
(shallow) and algorithmic (deep) processing streams, where the heuristic
processing strategy precedes the algorithmic phase. This claim contrasts
with recent accounts in the ERP language literature, which propose that
these two streams operate in parallel. However, I suggest that evidence
supporting the parallel processing model could be artefacts of Event
Related Potential (ERP) language methodology. The proposal is based
on three self-paced reading experiments in which the processing of twosentence discourses was investigated, where context sentences exhibited
quantifier scope ambiguity. Experiment 1 demonstrates that such sentences are processed in a shallow manner. Experiment 2 uses the same
stimuli as Experiment 1 but adds questions to ensure deeper processing.
Results indicate that reading times are consistent with the lexical-pragmatic interpretation of number associated with context sentences,
whereas responses to questions are consistent with the algorithmic computation of scope. Experiment 3 shows the same pattern of results using
stimuli exhibiting a different lexical-pragmatic bias. These results suggest that for certain constructions, language processing is superficial and
deeper processing sensitive to structure only occurs if required. Implications for recent studies of scope ambiguity are discussed.

facilitation can result from rapid response learning, a binding of stimuli
to particular categorizations or responses made. Rapid response learning
is revealed as reduced facilitation when the categorization/response
between study and test phases is reversed in comparison to keeping the
categorization/response identical. The neural underpinnings of rapid
response learning are not fully clear yet. Here, we used event-related
brain potentials (ERPs) to investigate the time course of processing associated rapid response learning. Participants performed nationality
judgements on faces of German and American celebrities. Two study
phases were followed by a single test phase, in which both faces from the
study phases and faces not shown before were presented. The categorization in one of study phases was identical to the categorization in the
test phase and reversed in the other study phase. Response times were
faster when faces were tested with the identical categorization in comparison to reversing the categorization, indicating rapid response learning. ERP to repeated faces were more positive than ERPs to new faces at
middle centro-parietal electrodes around 450-750ms and more negative
at left frontal electrodes around 550-1000ms. These ERP repetition effects
were similar for identical and reversed categorizations. Rapid response
learning was associated with an early fronto-central negativity around
300-350ms. These results suggest that rapid response learning results
from processes that are dissociable and occur earlier than other memory
processes resulting from stimulus repetition.

A48
THE ROLE OF PERCEPTUAL AND CONCEPTUAL PRIMING IN OBJECT
IDENTIFICATION IN ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE. Erin P. Hussey1, Philip C.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Priming

Ko1, Bryant Duda1, Nicholas R. Simmons-Stern2, Rebecca G. Deason2,
Brandon A. Ally1; 1Vanderbilt University, 2VA Boston Healthcare System —

A46
CONSCIOUS INTENTIONS MODULATE THE WAY SUBLIMINAL WORDS
ARE PROCESSED Simone B. Duss1,2, Thomas P. Reber1,2, Katharina

Object identification can be problematic for patients with Alzheimer’s
disease (AD). However, it is unclear as to whether this problem is based
in degraded perceptual processing or disrupted semantic networks.
Recent work suggests a common neural representation supports object
identification and implicit memory, making priming an excellent candidate to understand the type of information that mediates object identification in patients. Implicit memory research shows intact perceptual
priming in AD, while conceptual priming results are discrepant. To
understand whether perceptual and conceptual priming can facilitate
object identification in AD patients, patients and healthy controls completed an incidental learning size judgment task using line drawings of
common objects. Participants later performed a picture fragment completion test in which 10% of the visual object was revealed every 500 ms.
Participants made a button press as soon as they could identify the
object. Test pictures were studied, unstudied, or unstudied exemplars
drawn from the same basic-level categories as the studied objects. Thus
far, both AD patients and controls show faster reaction times for the
studied items compared to the exemplar and unstudied items, indicating
a benefit of perceptual priming on object identification. However, only
controls showed faster reaction times for exemplar items compared to
unstudied items, indicating a benefit of conceptual priming. These preliminary results suggest that AD patients can utilize perceptual information available from implicit memory to facilitate object identification.
However, likely due to disrupted semantic networks, patients are unable
to utilize conceptual information to support object identification.

Henke1,2; 1Division of Experimental Psychology and Neuropsychology,
Department of Psychology, University of Bern, Switzerland, 2Center for
Cognition, Learning, and Memory, University of Bern, Switzerland — Prime

stimuli that are presented too briefly to be consciously perceived can
nevertheless affect responses to subsequent target stimuli. Such effects
are evidence of unconscious cognition. Here, we investigated whether
the meaning of subliminal words is processed automatically, or whether
the focus of ongoing conscious cognition affects the way we process subliminal words. We manipulated the participants’ focus of conscious cognition by using two different task instructions. Half of participants
judged the target words’ meaning according to pleasantness (yes, no)
and the other half according to comprehensibility to a child (yes, no).
Prime-target pairs were either semantically related (desk-table) or not
(desk-car). Following the main experiment, all participants also judged
the prime words (that were invisible) according to this (focused) instruction. Then, participants viewed all words (primes and targets) again to
evaluate them according to the instruction given to the other half of participants in the main experiment (non-focused instruction). This procedure allowed to sort trials into congruently and incongruently evaluated
prime-target pairs according to the focused and non-focused instruction.
An effect of congruency manifested only for the focused but not for the
non-focused instruction. This effect emerged if primes and targets were
semantically related. This is evidence that subliminal words underwent
genuine semantic analyses, and that these analyses were affected by the
focus of ongoing conscious cognition. Hence, even unconscious processing of information can be intention-driven, which restricts the possibility
of automatic, unintended manipulation by subliminal stimuli.

A47
EARLY PROCESSING DIFFERENCES FOR RAPID RESPONSE LEARNING
FOR FACES Christian Valt1, Werner Sommer2, Christoph Klein1, Stephan G.

Boehm1; 1Bangor University, 2Humboldt University at Berlin — Information

processing, for example recognizing a face, becomes faster and more
accurate when the same information has been processed before. This

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

A49
NEURAL CORRELATES OF ITEM AND CATEGORY-LEVEL PRIMING IN
OBJECT IDENTIFICATION Brandon Ally1, Philip Ko1, Bryant Duda1, Erin

Hussey1, Emily Mason1; 1Vanderbilt University — Implicit memory can facilitate subsequent object identification. But at what level of representation
does implicit memory benefit object identification? Implicit memory can
benefit the item-specific or the category-wide features of an object during identification. To examine this question, young adult participants
completed an incidental learning size judgment task using line drawings
of common objects. Participants later completed a picture fragment completion test in which 10% of the visual object was revealed every 500 ms.
Participants made a button press as soon as they could identify the

47

Poster Session A — Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall
object. The test pictures were studied, unstudied, or unstudied exemplars drawn from the same basic-level categories as the studied objects.
Behavioral results showed faster reaction times for the studied items
compared to the exemplar and unstudied items, indicating item-specific
priming. Additionally, responses to exemplar items were faster than
those to unstudied items, indicating category-wide priming. Eventrelated potentials (ERP) recorded during the identification task showed
repetition suppression effects related to the behavioral priming. Importantly, scalp topographies showed distinct repetition suppression effects.
Central posterior regions showed repetition suppression activity for
both studied and exemplar items relative to unstudied items, indicating
category-wide priming. In contrast, right posterior regions showed repetition suppression activity for studied items compared to exemplar and
unstudied items, indicating item-specific priming. Moreover, these
effects were temporally similar, suggesting that category-wide priming
and item-specific priming likely occur in parallel. These results are consistent with previous theories proposing that parallel systems in distinct
neural regions mediate the identification of an item and its category.

A50
IMAGING CROSS-MODAL REPETITION SUPPRESSION EFFECTS IN THE
HUMAN TEMPORAL LOBE Andrew Heusser1, Tari Awipi1, Lila Davachi1;

1New York University — Representing information in a conceptual and flexi-

ble way is fundamental to our ability to understand and manipulate
information about our environment. However, it is unclear how we
obtain and store these conceptual representations. One prominent view
is that while multiple brain areas may be involved in the encoding of
information from different sensory modalities, specific brain regions in
the temporal cortex involved in cross-modal integration might serve as a
conceptual hub (Patterson et al., 2007). To identify putative regions supporting conceptual representations, we employed a cross-modal repetition suppression (RS) paradigm. On each trial, subjects were presented
with one of three different modality stimuli: visual words, auditory
words or visual pictures. On each trial, subjects made a size judgment.
Each ‘concept’ was repeated (within 1 – 4 trials) either within-modality
(for e.g. a visual word followed by a visual word repeat) or acrossmodality (e.g. an auditory word followed by a visual word repeat).
Behavioral analyses revealed both within and across modality priming
effects, where response times for repeated trials were significantly faster
in all within-modal and cross-modal conditions. As expected, fMRI analyses suggested modality specific RS effects in cortical sensory areas. Furthermore, preliminary conjunction analyses reveal modality
independent RS effects in anterior and posterior regions of temporal cortex. Further analyses will be performed to explore brain regions whose
neural suppression effects correlate with behavioral priming effects.
These results suggest that regions in the temporal lobe may serve as a
conceptual hub, representing information irrespective of modality.

NEUROANATOMY
A51
EFFECTS OF AGE AND PHYSICAL FITNESS ON BRAIN ANATOMY AND
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL TEST SCORES IN HEALTHY AGING ADULTS

Mark Fletcher1, Kathy Low1, Nils Schneider-Garces1, Timothy Weng1, Rachel
Boyd1, Anthony Majewski1, Benjamin Zimmerman1, Chin Hong Tan1, Brian
Gordon2, Gabriele Gratton1, Monica Fabiani1; 1University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, 2Washington University in St. Louis — Healthy aging adults
experience differing degrees of anatomical and neuropsychological
changes. Evidence indicates that some of these effects may be mediated
by Cardio-Respiratory Fitness (CRF). To investigate the relationships
between these factors, structural Magnetic Resonance Imaging (sMRI)
was recorded in a group of healthy older adults (N=55, age range 55-87),
who were also administered a battery of neuropsychological tests. Anatomical volumes of interest, normalized for Intracranial Volume (ICV),
were obtained through automated reconstruction by FreeSurfer©. CRF
estimates were obtained using a regression model proposed by Jurca and

48

colleagues (2005). A multivariate analysis was performed to investigate
the effects of age, CRF, and education on brain anatomy and neuropsychological performance. Our analysis demonstrated significant correlations between increasing age and volumetric decline in total gray/white
matter, specific regions including the hippocampus and parts of the inferior frontal gyrus, as well as with a number of neuropsychological variables. Importantly, after the effects of age were partialed out, CRF was
associated with total hippocampal and entorhinal cortex volumes, and
with scores on the Modified Mini-mental Status examination. Our data
are consistent with the proposal that CRF might be a mediating factor in
the cognitive advantages and anatomical preservation experienced by
higher-fit, compared to lower-fit older adults.

A52
NEUROMORPHONAUT: NEUROANATOMY FOR FMRI Andrew

Worth1,
Gregory Millington1, Jason Tourville2; 1Neuromorphometrics, Inc., 2Boston
University — Accurate anatomical localization is essential in fMRI. Human
brain atlases are evolving from a 2D, physical, single-brain set of pictures
and drawings (a book), through a CDROM of pdf files, into software
that: has stereotaxic coordinates, contains multiple brains, explicitly represents regions, is searchable and has interactive processing and visualization capabilities. “NeuroMorphoNaut” (NMN) is a platform for
neuroanatomical analysis that is based on a database of a large number
of manually labeled MRI brain scans. We present initial results from an
ongoing project to comprehensively label on the order of 1000 scans. In
the context of the user’s individual scan, NMN provides neuroanatomical information using a probabilistic atlas that was created from the manually labeled scans. The user can view and interact with this information
along with information from traditional atlases. Scans were labeled
using a protocol that precisely defines the landmarks, borders and methods for delineating more than 150 regions covering the entire brain. So
far, 40 structural scans have been labeled (20 subjects scanned at two different times). The probabilistic atlas was created from these scans and is
used to understand the anatomy of an individual scan by warping the
atlas into the native space of that scan. The atlas displays a list of ROIs in
order of their probability for any point in the scan. NeuroMorphoNaut is
a dynamic interactive probabilistic brain atlas that will enable a deep
understanding of normal structure and its variation and will help
address the localization problem in functional neuroimaging.

A53
THE EFFECTS OF HIPPOCAMPAL LESIONS ON RETRIEVAL ORIENTATION
UNDER SHORT- AND LONG-DELAY CONDITIONS Alex Konkel1, David E.

Warren2, Melissa Duff2, Daniel Tranel2, Neal J. Cohen3; 1Washington University
in St. Louis, 2University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, 3University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign — There has been considerable interest in
recent years in the idea that the functional role of the hippocampus may
be more extensive that previously held. The current experiment
addressed this issue, examining the hippocampus’ possible involvement
in novelty processing and on the timescale not only of long-term but also
working memory. We tested patients with hippocampal amnesia on
delayed-match-to-sample and delayed-non-match-to-sample tasks, thus
manipulating novelty processing via retrieval orientation, under both
short- and long-delay conditions. Both behavioral and eye movement
measures were collected. Amnesic patients performed similarly to intact
comparison participants after a short delay but were impaired after a
long delay, with no effect of hippocampal damage on retrieval orientation, i.e., amnesia affected both tasks equally. The eye movement data
revealed familiarity effects for all participants, and suggested that participants used familiar items to guide their task performance even under
novelty conditions. Taken together, there is no evidence in these results
of impairment in novelty processing following damage to the hippocampus, and thus of any special role of the hippocampus in novelty processing beyond what would derive from its contribution to declarative or
relational memory.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session A

A54
PREFRONTAL CORTEX DEVELOPMENT IN POST-INSTITUTIONALIZED
ADOLESCENTS Amanda Hodel1, Ruskin Hunt1, Megan Gunnar1, Kathleen

Thomas1; 1University of Minnesota — For children reared internationally in
institutions, multiple aspects of the early environment deviate from biological expectations, leading to potential alterations in brain development. Given that the prefrontal cortex shows protracted development
across adolescence, the purpose of this project was to investigate prefrontal cortex development in 12-14 year old children who were internationally adopted from institutions before 72 months of age. To date,
eighty-two post-institutionalized children (PI group) and a comparison
group of 38 children raised with their biological families (control group)
have participated. Children completed a T1-weighted high-resolution
anatomical scan on a Siemens 3T Trio scanner. Cortical reconstruction
and volumetric segmentation was performed with the Freesurfer image
analysis suite. Statistical analyses of volume and cortical thickness
included age, gender, and a measure of total intracranial volume or average cortical thickness as covariates. Results indicated that control children had significantly larger bilateral prefrontal volumes than PI
children, driven by volumetric reductions in PI children in left lateral
orbitofrontal cortex and in bilateral portions of the superior and inferior
frontal gyri. Group differences in cortical thickness were detected in
bilateral caudal anterior cingulate, left medial orbitofrontal cortex, and
left frontal pole, where control children had thinner cortices than PI
youth, potentially representing developmental differences in pruning.
These data suggest there are persisting effects of early deprivation on
prefrontal cortex development in PI children. As part of a larger study,
this project will investigate if alterations in prefrontal cortex morphology
underlie difficulties experienced by many PI children in cognitive and
socioemotional domains.

A55
AMYGDALA MORPHOLOGIC DIFFERENCES IN WILLIAMS SYNDROME

Kristen E. Sheau1, Brian W. Haas1, Ryan G. Kelley1, Paul Thompson2, Allan L.
Reiss1; 1Stanford University, 2UCLA — Williams syndrome is a genetic disorder often characterized by increased socially appetitive behavior,
increased non-social anxieties, and developmental delays. Some of these
unique behavioral traits may be explained by volumetric and morphologic differences in the amygdala, a structure involved in processing
social and emotional stimuli. In this study, 44 individuals with Williams
syndrome and a control group of 41 typically developing individuals
underwent structural Magnetic Resonance Imaging on a GE 3 Tesla magnet. Total brain volumes were calculated and amygdalae were automatically delineated using FreeSurfer. Individual images were normalized to
standard space. Spatial locations of amygdala structural differences
between the two groups were determined using a mesh-based surface
modeling approach. The Williams syndrome group showed multiple
regions in both the left and right amygdalae that were significantly
enlarged as compared to the control group. The finding of localized
structural abnormalities of the amygdala contributes to a model linking
genetic risk in Williams syndrome to alterations in brain regions important for social and emotional processing.

A56
DOMINANT FREQUENCIES OF HUMAN CORTICAL OSCILLATORY ACTIVITY
IN A RESTING STATE AS MEASURED BY THE ELECTROCORTICOGRAM

David Groppe1, Stephan Bickel2, Corey Keller2, Lazlo Entz3, Ashesh Mehta1;
1
Feinstein Inst. for Medical Research, Long Island, NY, 2Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, New York, NY, 3National Institute of Neuroscience, Budapest,
Hungary — Human cortical electrical potentials often exhibit clear oscillatory activity at characteristic frequencies (e.g., alpha activity from 8-12
Hz). The strength of these oscillations has been found to vary between
cortical areas, which presumably reflects differences in the dynamics of
the functional networks to which these areas belong. However, characterizing these frequencies for different cortical areas has generally been
difficult due to the poor spatial or temporal resolution of non-invasive

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

measures of cortical activity (e.g., EEG). Here we remedy this problem
by using an invasive measure of cortical potentials, the electrocorticogram (ECoG), with high temporal and relatively good spatial resolution.
Specifically, we measured the spectral power of two separate periods of
several minute long ECoG recordings in 11 subjects while they rested or
watched television. Cortical areas under each electrode were estimated
using individual subject MRIs/CT scans and the FreeSurfer Desikan-Kiliany Atlas, which parses cortex into 35 areas. Mean spectral power per
cortical area generally exhibited strong theta (5-7 Hz) or alpha activity.
Areas with pronounced alpha activity were primarily in the lateral parietal and occipital lobes, though several additional areas (e.g., lingual and
fusiform gyri) also showed alpha peaks. Areas with strong theta peaks
tended to lie on the medial surface (e.g., posterior cingulate, medial orbitofrontal, and parahippocampal). Moreover, comparison of spectra
across the two recording sessions found these tendencies to be generally
reliable. These results indicate that alpha oscillations are not as predominant throughout cortex as has been suggested previously and should
help the interpretation of resting/background scalp EEG/MEG.

A57
STRUCTURAL CORRELATES OF WORKING MEMORY AND EPISODIC
RECALL WITH AN AUTOMATED SEGMENTATION ALGORITHM Michael A.

Sugarman1, John L. Woodard1; 1Wayne State University — Objective: Alzhe-

imer’s disease is characterized by cortical and hippocampal atrophy, in
addition to episodic and working memory impairment. Hippocampal
atrophy correlates with memory performance in older adults with or
without dementia. We investigated the relationship between volumetric
measurements of several brain regions and indices of verbal working
memory and delayed episodic memory performance. Methods: Study
participants included probable Alzheimer’s patients (n=16, Age=69.4
years) and age, gender, and education matched cognitively intact controls (n=17, Age=70.4 years). All participants completed three 5- and 10word working memory word rehearsal tasks, followed by a delayed free
recall of the word lists. Structural magnetic resonance imaging scans for
each participant were analyzed using Functional MRI of the Brain’s Integrated Registration and Segmentation Tool (FIRST), producing volumetric measures of total white and gray matter (corrected for total
intracranial volume), hippocampus, caudate, thalamus, putamen,
amygdala, accumbens, pallidum, and brainstem. Results: For all participants, total gray matter, combined white and gray matter, hippocampus,
and brainstem volume were all significantly correlated with the number
of unique words verbally rehearsed during the working memory task
and delayed episodic recall performance. Caudate volume was only correlated with episodic memory (r>.38 and <.60 for all significant correlations). Discussion: These results suggest that volumetric measures of
global atrophy and atrophy of the hippocampus, brainstem, and caudate
may be valid measures of memory functioning and impairment in older
adults. The observed effects are detectable with an automated segmentation procedure and do not require time-intensive manual tracing, which
is an advantage of this tool.

A58
THE SPACE STUDY: SPATIAL NAVIGATION TRAINING TRIGGERS
BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL CHANGES Elisabeth
Wenger1,
Sabine

Schaefer1, Nils Bodammer1, Hannes Noack1, Simone Kühn2, Johan
Mårtensson3, Hans-Jochen Heinze4,5, Emrah Düzel4,5,6, Lars Bäckman7, Ulman
Lindenberger1, Martin Lövdén1,3,7; 1Max Planck Institute for Human
Development, Berlin, 2Ghent University, 3Lund University, 4Otto-von-Guericke
University of Magdeburg, 5German Centre for Neurogenerative Disorders,
6
University College London, 7Karolinska Institute — It is unknown whether
an active lifestyle and appropriate training interventions may improve
spatial navigation performance and affect its underlying neural substrates. Here, we investigate whether spatial ability can be improved by
a cognitively demanding spatial navigation training, whether this training evokes changes in cortical and subcortical brain structures, and
whether these effects are differential for age groups. Ninenty-one men

49

Poster Session A — Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall
aged 20-30 or 60-70 years participated in the 4 months navigation training, with 50-min-training sessions every other day. Younger as well as
older navigators evidence large improvements in navigation performance that are partly maintained 4 months after termination of training.
The navigation groups display stable hippocampal volumes whereas
control groups show hippocampal volume decrements consistent with
longitudinal estimates of age-related decline. We also find that in the
young age group, changes in demands on spatial navigation induce
increases of N-Acetylsspartate (NAA) in the right hippocampus of brainderived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) Val homozygotes but not of Met
carriers. We do not detect this association in older adults. Additionally,
we report training-related cortical thickening in left precuneus and paracentral lobule that is observed in young navigators only. Thus, spatial
navigation training appears to affect cortical as well as subcortical brain
structure in a differential way for young and old adults.

OTHER
A59
CHOOSING THE RIGHT SEAT: REAL WORLD SEATING BIASES
EXAMINED Victoria Harms1, Miriam Reese1, Lorin Elias1; 1University of
Saskatchewan — Lateral biases can be seen throughout the range of
human behavior. Research examining lateral biases in seating preference
has shown that participants tend to choose seats on the right side of
movie theatres more than seats on the left side (Karev, 2000; Okubo,
2010). However, these studies have relied on participants choosing a
location based on a seating chart rather than examining real-world
behavior. Adding a new dimension to the solely chart-based seating
choice literature, the current study investigated whether right-side seating biases were present in the natural setting of an actual movie theatre.
Digital photographs taken from the projection booth of a mid-sized independent movie theatre were used to assess seating biases. These images
revealed a significant bias for movie-goers to select seats to the right of
center. Consistent with prior research these results support the view that
people will preferentially position themselves to most efficiently process
information. Movies provide primarily visual and emotional content,
both of which are preferentially processed within the right hemisphere.
It is thought that people position themselves on the right side of the theatre so that the screen falls mainly within the left side of visual space. As
information from the left hemifield is sent directly to the right hemisphere to be processed, right-side seating maximizes the efficiency of
visual and emotional processing.

A60
LEARNING FROM POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE FEEDBACK IN
PARKINSONISM:
DISSOCIATION
BETWEEN
ACTIVE
AND
OBSERVATIONAL LEARNING Stefan Kobza1, Martin Suedmeyer2, Bettina

Pollok2, Stefano Ferrea2, Alfons Schnitzler2, Christian Bellebaum1; 1Ruhr
to
University Bochum, 2Heinrich-Heine University Duesseldorf — Feedback

both actively performed and observed behavior allows adaptation of
future actions. For active learning, positive feedback leads to increased
activity of dopamine (DA) neurons in the substantia nigra, whereas DA
neuron activity is decreased following negative feedback. DA level
reduction in unmedicated Parkinson’s Disease (PD) patients has been
shown to lead to a negative learning bias, i.e. enhanced active learning
from negative feedback. Recent findings suggest that the neural mechanisms of active and observational learning from feedback might differ,
with the DA system playing a less prominent role in observational learning. Therefore, we hypothesized that unmedicated PD patients would
show a negative learning bias in active but not in observational learning.
In a between-group design, PD patients and healthy controls performed
either an active or an observational probabilistic feedback-learning task.
At the end of both tasks, a transfer phase aimed to assess the bias to learn
better from positive or negative feedback. As expected, actively learning
patients showed a negative learning bias, which was, however, caused
by reduced positive learning relative to controls. In contrast, patients

50

who learned by observation learned equally well from positive and negative feedback, which was comparable to controls. These findings add to
neural models of reinforcement-learning by suggesting that observational feedback learning – compared to active feedback learning – relies
less on the DA system. Future research may investigate the role of other
structures such as the medial temporal lobe in observational feedback
learning.

A61
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF MAPPING NUMERICAL AND NONNUMERICAL QUANTITIES INTO SPACE Stephan Vogel1, Roland Grabner2,

Michael Schneider3, Robert Siegler4, Daniel Ansari1; 1University of Western
Ontario, Canada, 2ETH-Zurich, Switzerland, 3University of Trier, Germany,
4Carnegie Mellon University, United States — Research into the neural correlates of numerical cognition has implicated the intraparietal sulcus (IPS)
as a key region for processing numerical magnitudes. Moreover, a growing body of evidence suggests a tight link between representations of
space and number. Space is frequently used as a reference frame - the
number line being a prominent example – and it has been demonstrated
that use of spatial representations in education helps to improve the
understanding of numerical magnitudes. However, how the human
brain mediates the mapping of numbers into space is not well understood. The present study seeks to answer this question by measuring
brain activity, while participants performed a numerical estimation (NE)
and a brightness estimation (BE) task in a 3 Tesla functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging scanner. In the NE condition, participants were
asked to estimate the correct position of a given target number on a presented number line ranging from 0 – 100. In the BE condition, participants were asked to estimate the correct position of a given gray level on
a continuous line that ranged from white (i.e., 0) to black (i.e., 100). Analysis demonstrated number specific activations in bilateral regions of the
anterior IPS, and common activation (NE and BE) in right parietal areas,
spanning the IPS and posterior superior parietal lobes. Results of this
study suggest that the parietal lobe plays a critical role in mapping
numerical and non-numerical magnitudes into space. Moreover, this
study identified regions that are specifically involved in the mapping of
numbers into space.

A62
THE CINGULUM BUNDLE IN PEOPLE WITH TYPE 2 DIABETES: A
S.
Hoogenboom1,2,
DIFFUSION TENSOR IMAGING STUDY Wouter

Veronica L. Flores1, Nicolas R. Bolo3, Donald C. Simonson2, Alan M.
Jacobson1,3,4, Jason S. Schneiderman2, Marek Kubicki2, Martha E. Shenton2,
Gail F. Musen1; 1Joslin Diabetes Center, 2Brigham & Women's Hospital, 3Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 4Winthrop-University Hospital — The cingulum bundle (CB) is a major white matter tract that connects the frontal
and parietal lobes with parahippocampal and adjacent temporal regions,
and is involved in memory, executive function, and emotion. It also
plays a role in interconnecting the active regions of the default mode network, which may be affected in Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Using
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), we measured diffusion within the CB in
thirteen people with T2DM and seventeen control non-T2DM subjects
who were matched for age, gender, education, and Body Mass Index. IQ
was higher in the control group (114±12) than in the T2DM group
(104±14, p=0.04), thus we controlled for IQ in our analyses. We collected
3T DTI images and neuropsychological data on all subjects. After
regions-of-interest (ROI) were placed on a color-by-orientation map for
each individual, we calculated DTI-derived diffusion values from the
resulting ROI seed-based tractography to assess overall white matter
health (fractional anisotropy, FA; trace), as well as measures related to
axonal integrity (axial diffusion) and axonal myelination (radial diffusion). After IQ-correction, people with T2DM had lower FA and axial
diffusion in the right CB compared to controls. Also, better performance
on delayed-recall and letter-fluency was correlated with higher axial diffusion in controls, but not in people with T2DM. These results suggest
that axial diffusion may be altered in the CB of T2DM patients despite

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session A
normal cognitive performance, and the underlying white matter pathology may be related to abnormalities in axon integrity.

A63
PROTECTIVE EFFECT OF ROFECOXIB AND CAFFEIC ACID AGAINST
INTRAHIPPOCAMPAL KAINIC ACID-INDUCED MEMORY DYSFUNCTION IN
RATS Atish Prakash1,2, Deeksha Pahwa1, Anil Kumar1; 1Pharmacology
Division, University Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Panjab University,
Chandigarh-160014, INDIA, 2Pharmacology Division, Institute of Pharmacy
and Emerging Sciences, Baddi University, Baddi, HP, INDIA — Role of neuroinflammatory mediators particularly cyclooxygenase, lipoxygenase,
have been well suggested in the pathophysiology of neurodegenerative
disorders. Rofecoxib is a selective cyclooxygenase 2 enzymes belongs to
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, commonly called as coxibs.
Whereas, caffeic acid is one of the natural phenolic compounds and
reported to inhibit 5-lipoxygenase activity as one of mechanisms. Present
study has been designed to investigate the effects of rofecoxib, caffeic
acid against intrahippocampal kainic acid-induced cognitive impairment, oxidative damage and mitochondrial respiratory enzyme alterations in rats. Kainic acid was administrated in the hippocampus region
of rat brain. Various behavioral (locomotor activity and memory performances were assessed by using actophotometer and Morris water maze
respectively) followed by oxidative stress, mitochondrial enzyme complex were assessed. Intrahippocampal administration of KA significantly
impaired locomotor activity, memory performance, mitochondrial
enzyme complexes and caused oxidative stress as compared to sham
treatment. Rofecoxib (5 and 10 mg/kg), caffeic acid (5 and 10 mg/kg),
treatment for 14 days significantly improved locomotor activity, memory retention and oxidative defense in hippocampus. Besides, alterations
in the levels of mitochondrial enzymes and acetylcholine esterase
enzyme were significantly restored by rofecoxib and caffeic acid as compared to control. Further, combination of rofecoxib (5 mg/kg) with caffeic acid (5 mg/kg) treatments significantly potentiated their protective
effect which was significant as compared to their effect per se. The
results of the present study suggest that the protective effect of rofecoxib
and caffeic acid against kainic acid induced cognitive impairment and
associated oxidative damage

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Other
A64
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR SCALAR VARIANCE IN
TEMPORAL PROCESSING Jamie N. Hershaw1, Paul D. Kieffaber1; 1The
College of William and Mary — Overt timing behaviors frequently exhibit
properties of scalar variance, wherein the variance of reproduced temporal intervals increases linearly as a function of interval duration. Scalar
expectancy theory (SET) attributes this property of scalar variance to the
internal clock, memory, and decision-making components of SET. Previous research has encountered difficulty isolating sources of variance and
evidence for scalar variance in the neural correlates of temporal processing is sparse. The goal of the current research was to determine whether
omission-evoked potentials (OEP) would exhibit scalar variance consistent with SET. Participants performed a finger tapping task in which
they tapped in sync with tones separated by 350, 450, 550, or 650ms
intervals, and continued tapping with the same intervals when the tones
were omitted. This paradigm enabled us to isolate the memory component of SET. Results demonstrated that the width of the latency
increased as the inter-tone interval increased. Furthermore, the onset
latency, but not the offset latency, of OEPs exhibited scalar variance. This
is interpreted as evidence for scalar variance in the memory component
of SET.

A65
DISSOCIABLE REPRESENTATIONS OF ACTION MEANS AND OUTCOMES:
EVIDENCE FROM STROKE Solene Kalenine1, Laurel J. Buxbaum1, Allison

D. Shapiro1; 1Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute, Philadelphia — Previ-

ous neuroimaging research in healthy adults has shown that during
action observation, coding action means (i.e. how the action is performed) recruits posterior regions, particularly in the left hemisphere,
while coding action outcomes (i.e. consequences of the action) activates
more anterior regions, particularly in the right hemisphere (Hamilton
and Grafton, 2008). Following these findings, we assessed the prediction
that these two components of action representation would dissociate in
stroke patients. Participants watched pairs of short videos of objectrelated actions and decided whether the two actions were the same or
not. Whereas the objects in the videos were kept constant (e.g. sponge),
the two actions displayed could differ according to their means (e.g. different wipes to remove detergent), outcomes (e.g., same wipe to remove
or apply detergent), or both (different wipes to remove or apply detergent). Errors and response times were measured. Results from 21 left
hemisphere stroke patients indicate that damage to left IPL correlates
with relatively greater impairment in action means coding. This selective
deficit was not associated with overall lesion volume or cognitive
impairment severity. Analysis at the voxel level in this region of interest
confirmed that patients with IPL lesion perform more poorly on means
coding than patients without IPL lesions. In contrast, neither damage to
left anterior areas nor right hemisphere lesions (10 patients) were related
to means or outcome coding deficits. These findings demonstrate that
action means and outcome coding can dissociate after stroke, with left
IPL selectively supporting representation of action means.

A66
THE INFLUENCE OF NEURAL CODING ON NUMERICAL COGNITION

Richard Prather1; 1Indiana University — Though research has begun to
describe neural coding of number, it is unclear how specific characteristics of the neural coding may relate to the expansive list of behavioral
phenomena in number cognition. In the current study I present a series
of simulations that demonstrate how the neural coding of number magnitude may contribute to several behavioral phenomenon described in
the cognitive literature. I also demonstrate that the model predicts counterintuitive limitations on numerical cognition that may be evaluated
with behavioral methods. The simulations reported are based on multiple nonhuman primate neural studies and computational accounts that
have reported both proportional scaling and positive linear skew in the
neural tuning functions for number magnitudes (e.g., Nieder & Dehaene,
2009). Given these characteristics of the neural coding, and the use of
parameters to account for some neurocognitive development (e.g. noise,
tuning function sharpening) a simple model of neural activity shows that
patterns errors in the neural coding mirror the specific error patterns
observed in human participants. The results suggest that several behavioral phenomena are to some degree, a “natural result” of the neural coding. Cognitive accounts of the number cognitive phenomena are not
necessarily inconsistent with the current account. However, the current
account requires a priori only the experimentally established neural coding of number magnitude. This is not to say that neural coding of number is the only influence on behavior in these or any other tasks. Instead,
the neural coding of number should be considered a foundation from
which behaviors arise.

A67
MONITORING INDIVIDUAL AND JOINT ACTION OUTCOMES DURING
INTERPERSONAL COORDINATION Janeen Loehr1, Dimitrios Kourtis1,

Cordula Vesper1, Natalie Sebanz1,2, Guenther Knoblich1,2; 1Radboud
University Nijmegen, Donders Centre for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, The
Netherlands, 2Central European University, Budapest, Hungary — When people coordinate their actions with each other to achieve a common goal,
they may monitor the joint outcome of their combined actions and/or
the specific actions produced by each individual. We investigated these

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

51

Poster Session A — Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall
possibilities using event-related potentials elicited by altered auditory
feedback during duet music performance, in which performers may
monitor their Own and their Partner’s parts for errors that can alter
either the Joint action outcome (musical harmony) or Individual action
outcomes (specific pitches produced by each performer). Pairs of pianists memorized both parts of a piano duet. Each then performed one
part of the duet while their partner performed the other; EEG was
recorded from both. The auditory feedback associated with pitches produced by each of the pianists was occasionally altered so that it either a)
changed both the pitch and the harmony of the chord to which it
belonged (joint outcome) or b) changed the pitch without changing the
harmony of the chord (individual outcome). Feedback-related negativities were elicited by alterations of both the joint and individual outcomes, whether they occurred in the own or the partner’s part. Pitch
alterations that changed the joint outcome elicited stronger error positivities than those that affected the individual outcomes, in both the own
and the partner’s part. These findings indicate that people monitor both
individual and joint outcomes during interpersonal coordination, and
that the more salient errors are those that affect the common goal.

A68
MUSIC PROCESSING IN EXPERIENCED DANCERS AND NON-DANCERS:
AN EEG SPECTRAL ANALYSIS Constanza Inez de Dios1, Nicholas J. A.

Wan1, Mari-Anne Rosario1, Hiroko Nakano1; 1Saint Mary's College of
California — This electroencephalographic (EEG) study investigated
music processing in experienced Argentine Tango dancers and nondancers when they listened to preferred music (tango for dancers, jazz/
classical for non-dancers) and non-preferred music. EEG at each music
condition was analyzed in terms of power percent change from baseline
(silence) across seven frequencies: delta, theta, low-alpha, high-alpha,
low-beta, high-beta, and gamma. Results showed that regardless of participant group, preferred music elicited stronger power compared to
other music in gamma, high-beta, and low-beta, suggesting all participants were attentive in listening to their favored music. Irrespective of
group or music type, delta power was greater in anterior than posterior
sites, implying participants’ internal focus on music. Differences
between groups were observed as follows: Listening to their dance
music, dancers elicited greater power in low-alpha than non-dancers listening to their jazz/classical music. Dancers’ high-alpha power during
dance music was positively correlated with years of dance experience.
These alpha-band results suggest ease of processing of preferred music
in dancers. In high-beta, dancers listening to preferred music showed a
region contrast, with lower power in anterior sites than posterior, implying that motor processes were involved in listening to dance music.
Finally, male dancers showed more powerful gamma for preferred
music than females at the posterior-right region. This could reflect attentive processes of spatial visualization of movement that the leader role
requires to initiate dance. Dance experts process tasks related to their
expertise such as listening to music in ways distinct from non-experts
(i.e., ease of music processing, body movement imagery).

A69
HOW AND WHEN THE MOTOR SYSTEM CONTRIBUTES TO SPEECH
PERCEPTION Alessandro D'Ausilio1, Luciano Fadiga1,2; 1IIT - Italian

Institute of Technology, 2University of Ferrara — Classical models of language consider an antero-posterior distinction between perceptive and
productive functions. In the last 15 years, this dichotomy has been weakened because of empirical evidence suggesting a more integrated view.
Passive listening to phonemes and syllables activate motor and premotor
areas. These activations were somatotopically organized according to the
effector recruited in the production of these phonemes. However, a feature of action-perception-theories is that motor areas are considered necessary for perception. In fact, it has been argued that in absence of a
stringent determination of a causal role played by motor areas in speech
perception, no final conclusion can be drawn in support of motor theories of speech perception. The mere activation of motor areas during listening to speech might be caused by a corollary cortico-cortical

52

connection that has nothing to do with the process of comprehension
itself. A possible solution might come from the selective alteration of
neural activity in speech motor centers and the evaluation of effects on
perception. Therefore, we designed a series of TMS experiments to tackle
the causal contribution of motor areas to speech perception. We demonstrated that activity in the motor system is causally related to the discrimination of speech sounds and might be more critical under adverse
listening conditions or when coping with inter-speaker variability. Interestingly, this functional association is somatotopically organized according to an effector-sound motor map. Listening to reproducible speech
sounds might activate the same motor gestures necessary for production
and thus help sensory classification and decision.

A70
I CARE BUT ONLY IF YOU ARE THERE: MOTOR BEHAVIOUR IN OBJECT
INTERACTION IS ALTERED BY THE PRESENCE OF AN OWNER. Merryn

Constable1, Ada Kritikos1, Andrew Bayliss2; 1University of Queensland,
2University of East Anglia — Ownership is a fundamentally social concept.

To navigate our social world we must be able to keep track of our own
possessions but appreciate that other objects are owned by other individuals. The importance of ownership in social cognition reveals itself in
subtle but consistent motor behaviour during interaction with owned
objects. Kinematic data suggest an aversion to interacting with other
peoples’ things and tendency to take greater care with them (Constable,
Kritikos & Bayliss, 2011, Cognition), indicating that ownership affects
social action. We sought to determine if these effects are replicable when
the owner of the object is known, but absent. Participants reached for
and lifted one of three mugs; the participant’s own, a confederate's mug,
and an unowned mug. Replicating our prior work, participants drew
their own mug closer but pushed the confederate’s mug away from
themselves along a natural ‘lift’ trajectory. This may indicate a general
aversion to interacting with another’s mug. However, there was little
evidence that greater care was taken with the confederate’s mug because
no differences between acceleration and deceleration of the mugs in
flight were found. These data indicate a dissociation between care taken
and an aversion to interact with objects owned by another person.
Although ownership is recognised and alters some aspects of behaviour
even in the absence of the owner, the social contract to take care of other
people’s things does not alter motor output unless the owner is present.

A71
OBSERVING SHARED INTENTIONS: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION Terry

Eskenazi1, Shirley-Ann Rueschemeyer2, Floris de Lange1, Guenther
Knoblich1,3, Natalie Sebanz1,3; 1Donders Institute for Brain Cognition and
Behavior, the Netherlands, 2University of York, UK, 3Central European
University, Hungary — Action perception studies have so far investigated
the perception of individual actions. It is unknown however how we
perceive joint actions. Joint actions involve multiple individuals coordinating their actions around a shared intention. According to philosophical accounts of joint action this is fundamentally different from
individuals acting in parallel without a shared intention. Do observers
process situations where individuals act towards a shared intention
(joint action) differently than situations where they act on independent
intentions (parallel action)? To answer this question, this fMRI study
compared perceptually identical yet intentionally ambiguous actions
observed in varying contexts. In an observation paradigm, a dialogue
between two individuals set the context for the following video depicting these individuals engaging in various actions. In the joint action condition, the dialogue conveyed two actors agreeing to do something
together (making a pizza). In the parallel action condition actors
expressed their own independent intentions (pizza/salad). Importantly,
the videos following the dialogues were identical. Data analysis focused
on the BOLD response during the observation of action performance.
Significant activations were observed in the rostral anterior cingulate
cortex, the temporal poles and the superior temporal gyri in the joint
action condition compared to the parallel action condition. Among these

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session A
areas which make up the mentalizing network, rostral ACC has been
implicated in engaging in social interactions. Our results suggest that
processing shared intentions in observed actions has higher mentalizing
demands than processing multiple independent intentions, and that rostral ACC is particularly sensitive to representation of social interactions.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Other

A72
VARYING THE GOAL-DIRECTED PLAUSIBILITY OF OBSERVED ACTIONS
CAUSES DIFFERENCES IN MIRROR NEURON SYSTEM ACTIVATION

Knierim1, Daniel S. Margulies1, Sonja A. Kotz1; 1Max Planck Institute for
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — Brain activation

1

1

1

1

Jonathan Silas , Joseph Levy , Margot Crossman ; University of
Roehampton — Some theoretical accounts of human mirror neuron system (MNS) functioning suggest a primary role in understanding the
observed actions of other people. Brass et al., (2007) aimed to empirically
test this hypothesis by varying the amount of inference required to
understand an observed action and measuring the resulting MNS
response. They showed that actions observed in a plausible context (e.g.,
turning on a light-switch with one’s knee with occupied hands) compared to those observed in an implausible context (e.g., switching on a
light switch with one’s knee with unoccupied hands) did not result in a
systematic modulation of MNS areas. Given that varying the plausibility
of an observed action affects the amount of inference required to understand that action, this finding suggests that MNS areas are not involved
in action understanding. In our study, we examine brain activation using
fMRI while participants observed videos of a person performing actions
that also differed in how plausible they were. In our experiment however, actions varied in plausibility in terms of the goal they achieved. For
example, a highly plausible action involved grasping and biting an
apple, whereas an implausible action involved grasping an apple and
placing it against one’s ear. Our analysis of the data reveals that MNS
activation is higher for the observation of plausible actions than for
implausible ones. We suggest that this demonstrates MNS involvement
in action understanding when the inference required is directly related
to the goal achieved by the observed action.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
A73
THE EFFECTS OF MEMORY REMOTENESS ON RECALL AND
RECOGNITION: DEVELOPMENT OF A NOVEL MEASURE OF NATURALISTIC
MEMORY Michael Armson1,2, Brian Levine1,2; 1University of Toronto,
2

Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Hospital — The Mask Fit Test (MFT) is
a procedure required of hospital employees to confirm the type of respiratory mask required to prevent infection. The current study capitalized
on this procedure to assess memory for a stereotyped, naturalistic event
occurring at a fixed time point. We created a novel test of true-false recognition memory for the MFT at Baycrest that enabled analysis of
receiver operating characteristics (ROCs) to derive independent measures of recollection and familiarity. Forty participants who had undergone the MFT at various time points within the last two years were
tested. The new measure was validated against the Autobiographical
Interview (AI; Levine, 2002), an established measure capable of dissociating elements of episodic and semantic autobiographical memory. We
found that scores on the AI for the MFT, as well as scores on our new
ROC measure were sensitive to time effects, consistent with the expected
rate of forgetting in remote memory. We also found a significant positive
correlation between measures of recollection as assessed by the ROC
analysis and episodic autobiographical memory as assessed by the AI,
supporting the validity of the new measures. This method of assessing
remote memory addresses limitations of other measures involving
unconstrained remote event selection, including the involvement of heterogeneous events across participants, imprecise memory dating, and a
lack of investigation of long-term memories within the one to two year
range. Overall, this study suggested that recognition for the MFT and
other stereotyped events is a viable method for studying naturalistic
memory.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

A74
DISSOCIATING PRACTICE EFFECTS AND LEARNING: EVIDENCE FROM A
FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING STUDY. Iris
Nikola

changes due to practice. Practice with the experimental task increases
already within one experimental session. Often, practice also leads to
enhanced performance accuracy. However, practice in form of increased
task familiarity is not equal to learning. How pure within-session practice reflects on brain activation has not yet been systematically investigated. In contrast, most studies use averaging across the whole session to
deal with within-session differences. The current experiment investigated which changes in brain activation occur due to within-session
practice when accuracy does not change as a side effect of practice. To
address this question, subjects (N = 25) performed a visual pseudoword
categorization task within the scanner. During the course of the experiment, subjects completed 400 task trials (divided into 40 blocks). Task
blocks were interleaved with blocks of a higher level baseline (240 trials).
To assess the effect of task practice on brain activity, we compared brain
activation for the first five blocks (task minus baseline) to the activation
of the five last blocks (task minus baseline). Our preliminary analyses
show more activity in left frontal as well as parietal areas for early task
performance compared to late task performance. Accuracy did not differ
between the early and the late phases of the experiment. We interpret the
differences in brain activity therefor as within-task practice effects. In
conclusion, our data suggest that practice effects occur during normal
task performance in the absence of behavioural learning.

A75
DECOUPLING CONSCIOUS AND NON-CONSCIOUS EFFECTS ON PLACEBO
ANALGESIA Scott Schafer1, Tor Wager1; 1University of Colorado at
Boulder — Previous experience with a treatment (conditioning) and belief
that the treatment works (expectancy) are two different mechanisms
considered to underlie conditioned pain relief to a placebo treatment.
During conditioning, subjects receive painful stimulation in the context
of two pharmacologically inert creams: a ‘control’ cream and a ‘treatment’ (placebo) cream, delivered with instructions about the cream’s
strong analgesic properties. Subjects receive higher temperature stimulations with the control cream compared to the placebo cream. Afterward,
when tested on identical temperatures, subjects report less pain with the
placebo. A combination of non-conscious learning and conscious expectation together give rise to the observed placebo effect, but the relative
contribution of each process is unclear. Here, we tested whether conditioned placebo analgesia is expressed even if the participant is made
aware that a treatment is a placebo, reversing conscious expectations,
and whether persistence of analgesia after expectancy reversal depends
on the duration of conditioning. Participants showed significant placebo
analgesia after both long conditioning (4 days) and short conditioning (1
day), and placebo analgesia persisted after expectancy reversal only in
the long conditioning group, in spite of strong reductions in expected
analgesia. These findings demonstrate an important role for non-conscious brain plasticity, as distinct from conscious expectations, in placebo analgesia and related affective learning processes.

A76
MOTOR SYSTEMS OUTPACE PERCEPTUAL SYSTEMS DURING
MANUALLY-ASSISTED SEARCH Grayden Solman1, J Allan Cheyne1, Daniel

Smilek1; 1University of Waterloo, Canada — Recent experiments using a
novel search paradigm (the ‘Unpacking task’) in which observers use the
mouse to sort through a ‘heap’ of items to locate the target, have
revealed a surprisingly common error. In this so called ‘unpacking
error,’ observers will select and move the target during search, but fail to
recognize it. We present results from several new experiments, using
eye-tracking, mouse monitoring, and contingent-visibility manipula-

53

Poster Session A — Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall
tions to clarify the causes and consequences of these errors. We confirm
that the target is visually inspected prior to the erroneous move, and further resolve the source of the error by demonstrating that the consequences – as indexed by the number of moves following the erroneous
rejection – increase with perceptual load. In addition, we analyze
detailed movement time-courses, showing that the error movement itself
shares the characteristics of typical non-target movements, indicating
that the system is operating in a similar fashion when erroneously rejecting a target as when appropriately rejecting non-targets. These results
provide further evidence that perception for action and perception for
identification can operate relatively independently even in naturalistic
contexts, and even in settings like search where they should be expected
to act in close coordination. In particular, it appears that the motor processes responsible for unpacking outpace the perceptual processes
responsible for recognizing the target. This counterintuitive incoordination provides an important constraint for models of naturalistic action.

A77
DISENTANGLING THE EFFECTS OF EXPECTANCY, AGENCY, AND
PERCEIVED CONTROL ON PAIN Liane Schmidt1, Luka Ruzic2, Daphna
Shohamy1, Tor D. Wager2; 1Columbia University, 2University of Colorado —

Perceived control over pain, expectancy, and agency are often confounded in their effects on neural processing of painful events and pain
experience. For instance, control exercised by means of agency could
attenuate the threatening effect of pain. However, as people perceive
control they also expect lower pain, and this expectancy strongly attenuates pain as well. In this study we aimed to disentangle these effects. We
reasoned that perceived control could directly affect pain or mediate
effects of expectancy and agency on pain. Alternatively, expectancy and
agency could influence pain independently from perceived control. To
address this issue we used a paradigm that varied agency (i.e. choice)
and expectancy (i.e. high/low pain probabilities) in a 2x2 design, and
measured perceived control and reported pain, respectively. Our results
show that pain was not always attenuated when subjects perceived control over it: When the relationship between choice and outcome was
uncertain, agency (i.e., having choice) increased pain reports, despite the
fact that agency also increased perceived control. In contrast, positive
expectations (low expected pain) reduced pain, whether agency was
high or low. Thus, we suggest that positive expectancy reduces the aversiveness of negative outcomes, whereas agency in uncertain situations
has a polarizing effect, making negative outcomes more aversive. These
results are compatible with therapeutic approaches based on acceptance,
which involves the voluntary surrender of control.

A78
HUMAN "MIRROR SYSTEM" CAN BE TRAINED TO RESPOND TO
ARBITRARY NON-ACTION RELATED OBJECTS Jonathan Venezia1, William
Matchin1, Gregory Hickok1; 1University of California, Irvine — The mirror neu-

ron theory of action understanding relies on the existence of an observation-execution matching system: observing an action activates the
internal motor representation used to produce that action. The system
must be action-specific if known actions are to be disambiguated from
other, similar actions. This predicts that observed actions produced by
different effectors should differentially activate the motor representations corresponding to those effectors. A recent study tested this hypothesis. Participants were shown videos of index and little finger abduction
during stimulation of hand motor cortex, and selective facilitation of
evoked responses was observed at index and little finger recording sites.
However, this effect was reversed by training – subjects who trained to
move their index finger while observing little finger abduction showed
an enhanced response at the index finger recording site. Here, we extend
this finding to arbitrary stimuli. Subjects trained to perform index or little finger abduction in response to viewing particular non-manipulable,
stationary objects (cloud or building, direction of training counterbalanced). After training, single-pulse TMS was applied to hand motor cortex during observation of trained stimuli, and motor-evoked potentials
(MEPs) were recorded at index and little finger abductors. MEP ampli-

54

tude was normalized by the response to a baseline stimulus. A preference ratio was constructed for each recording site by dividing the
normalized responses to the “train-index” and “train-pinky” stimuli.
The difference in preference ratios, indicating muscle-specific modulation of the response, was significant (P<0.05). Thus, activation of internal
motor representations is not necessarily effector-specific or specific to
actions.

A79
SUPPRESSED SEMANTIC INFORMATION ACCELERATES PROBLEM
SOLVING. Darya Zabelina1, Emmanuel Guzman-Martinez1, Laura Ortega1,

Marcia Grabowecky1, Mark Beeman1, Satoru Suzuki1; 1Northwestern
University — The present study investigated whether semantic integration
depends on awareness. We used compound remote associate (CRA)
word problems as a test for semantic integration. In these problems three
seemingly unrelated words (e.g., pine, crab, sauce) form a common compound with a single solution word (e.g., apple). During the first three
seconds of each trial, the three critical words (or irrelevant words on a
control trial) were suppressed from awareness using Continuous Flash
Suppression in which the words presented in the non-dominant eye
were masked by a strong dynamic mask presented to the dominant eye.
The words became visible thereafter and participants attempted to solve
the word problem as quickly as possible. If semantic integration occurs
without awareness, the problems should be solved faster when the critical words (compared to irrelevant words) were presented during the
suppression period.We included catch trials, in which we simulated
words breaking through the suppressing mask, to ensure that participants reported any words seen during the suppression period. All trials
in which participants saw any words during the suppression period
were removed from the analysis. As predicted, the word problems were
solved significantly faster when the critical words were presented during the suppression period, t (11) = -3.12, p < .01. These results demonstrate that when a dynamic mask renders the word problem invisible,
the presented words are still processed, and the words are semantically
integrated, facilitating subsequent solution rates.

THINKING: Other
A80
CULTURE AND EDUCATION SHAPE THE NEURAL BASES OF INDIVIDUAL
DIFFERENCES IN ARITHMETIC SKILL Jiayan Lu1,2, Jérôme Prado1, Li Liu2,

Qi Dong2, Xinlin Zhou2, James R. Booth1; 1Northwestern University, 2Beijing
Normal University — People differ widely from one another in their mathematical skills, and low achievement has major economic and social costs.
In the present study, we examined the neural sources of individual differences in arithmetic, as well as the extent to which those are affected by
culture and education. Twenty-seven Chinese and 26 Western participants evaluated single-digit multiplication problems while in a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scanner. We found crosscultural differences in the neural sources of multiplication skills, with
behavioral differences in Chinese participants being related to the
engagement of left mid-superior temporal and ventral inferior frontal
regions that were identified in a verbal processing task. In contrast,
behavioral differences in Western participants were related to the
engagement of intraparietal and dorsal inferior frontal regions that were
identified in a magnitude processing task. These differences are unlikely
to result from general cultural differences in numerical processes or
problem solving because Chinese and Western participants did not differ in the neural basis of their single digit subtraction skills. Rather, we
argue that these results are explained by cultural differences in educational practice with more extensive use of verbal memorization methods
during arithmetic learning in China than in Western countries.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session A

A81
DISTANCE MODULATES INTRAPARIETAL SULCUS ACTIVITY WHEN
VIEWING FRACTIONS AND DECIMALS Lisa Sprute1, Donna Coch1;
1Dartmouth College — In

the intraparietal sulcus (IPS), activation patterns
are more similar for whole numbers that are closer together. There is
scant evidence for a similar “distance effect” for representations of fractions, and no studies have examined neural processing of decimals. We
used a functional magnetic resonance adaptation (fMRA) paradigm to
examine whether distance modulates IPS activity for representations of
fractions and decimals. Participants adapted to “one half” presented in
black text for 30 s. Six deviant numbers (three distances) were shown as
fractions and decimals every 5 to 11 s after the initial adaptation period.
Attention was maintained by asking participants to press a button every
time they saw a red one half (either as text, a fraction or a decimal). Half
of the deviant numbers appeared in red. The effect of distance was
examined in a 3 (distance) x 2 (notation) x 2 (color) random effects analysis (N=28; F=13). For comparison to other adaptation studies of whole
numbers, a threshold of p < 0.01 with a cluster extent of 30 voxels was
used. Blood oxygenation-level dependent (BOLD) activity in the right
IPS increased with distance but was not modulated by notation or color.
Activity in the middle and medial frontal gyri and superior temporal
gyrus showed a similar pattern. These findings suggest that both fractions and decimals are automatically represented in a distance-dependent manner, and that processing fractional quantities recruits regions
similar to those identified in previous studies of whole numbers.

A82
THE ROLE OF THE RIGHT PARIETAL CORTEX IN CAUSAL PERCEPTION

Adam J. Woods1, Matthew Lehet1, Anjan Chatterjee1; 1University of
Pennsylvania — The ability to infer causality is a central feature of human

cognition. Research from our lab shows that people use space or time
flexibly when judging causality in billiard-ball-style launching events–a
blue ball approaches and contacts a red ball. The spatial trajectories and
the temporal delays of the movement of the second ball are parametrically varied in this paradigm. We previously reported that the right parietal cortex (rPC) contributes to spatial aspects of causal perception
(Straube & Chatterjee, 2010). We tested the hypothesis that the rPC contributes to perceptual causality because of its role in processing spatial
relations. Nine patients with focal rPC injury and 16 healthy young participants were assessed on tasks of elemental spatial and temporal processing, as well as causality judgments. Elemental time and space
perception were equivalent in patients (accuracy=69 vs. 67%, p>.05).
When participants were instructed to attend to either the relative angles
(space) or duration of contact between the objects (time) both groups
used space or time information to make causality judgments (?2’s>4.6,
p’s<.03). Healthy participants judged smaller angles and shorter time
delays as causal when explicitly attending to space or time, respectively
(t’s>3.0, p’s<.009). The patients also used shorter delays to judge causality when explicitly attending to time (t’s>2.5, p’s<.03), but, they did not
change their spatial criteria when asked to attend to space (p’s>.05). rPC
damage does not effect causal perception by interfering with elemental
spatial processing. Rather, rPC damage impairs people's ability to make
flexible use of spatial information.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional
responding
A83
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN CARDIAC VAGAL TONE MODULATES ERP
RESPONSES TO FEARFUL FACES AT LOW SPATIAL FREQUENCY

GEWNHI PARK1, Seung-Hwan Lee1,2, Eun-Ok Moon1, Yoon-Jae Moon1, Sangrae
Kim1; 1Clinical Emotion and Cognition Research Laboratory, Goyang, Republic
of Korea, 21Psychiatry Department, Ilsan Paik Hospital, Inje University,
Goyang, Republic of Korea — Objectives: Are individual differences in
emotion regulation abilities associated with different neural activity in

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

response to affectively significant stimuli? The present study explored if
individual differences in heart rate variability—proposed to be an index
of autonomic flexibility and emotional regulation—are associated with
different event-related potentials (ERPs) responses to fearful faces at
broad, high, and low spatial frequency. Methods: Thirty six healthy participants were asked to discriminate the emotion of fearful and neutral
faces at broad, high and low spatial frequency while different ERP components (P100, N100, N170, VPP, N200, N400) were measured. Participants were then divided into two groups, high or low HRV, based on the
median split of rMSSD, which is regarded as reflecting primarily vagal
activity, during baseline. We compared ERP activity of high and low
HRV participants in response to fearful and neutral faces at broad, high
and low spatial frequency. Results: Low HRV—characterized by poor
functioning of regulatory systems—showed significantly enhanced
P100, N100, N200 and N400 components in responses to fearful faces at
low spatial frequency, relative to participant with high HRV—characterized by superior self-regulatory functions. Conclusions: The study provided evidence that individual differences in HRV—considered to be an
indicator of autonomic, emotional, and attentional self-regulation—is
associated with differential ERP responses to fearful faces processed at
different neurofunctional pathways. More specifically, enhanced neural
activity exhibited by participants in low HRV suggested the dysfunctional processing of fearful faces at low spatial frequency which is primarily processed via a subcortical pathway (retinocollicular–pulvinar–
amygdalar).

THINKING: Other
A84
DIFFERENT ACOUSTIC CUES ARE USED BY RUSSIANS AND GERMANS TO
DETECT VOICING DIFFERENCES IN SPEECH: EVIDENCE FROM
MISMATCH NEGATIVITY Mariya Kharaman1, Carsten Eulitz1; 1University of
Konstanz — Do native speakers of Russian and German use different
acoustic cues to distinguish voicing contrasts? It has been argued among
linguists that for these languages the traditional distinction into voiced
and voiceless stop consonants is based on different laryngeal features.
German speakers use [spread glottis], i.e. differentiate between aspirated
and unaspirated stop consonants. The Russian native contrast, however,
includes stop consonants with negative voice onset time (VOT) and
unaspirated stop consonants. To test whether or not different acoustic
cues are the basis for categorization, we measured the mismatch negativity (MMN) to study three types of contrasts. CV-syllables used as stimuli
included voiceless unaspirated stop consonants, voiceless aspirated stop
consonants and voiced stop consonants with negative VOT. We predicted that relying upon native acoustic cues, Russian speakers would
perceive voiceless unaspirated stop consonant and voiceless aspirated
stop consonants (non-native in Russian) within the category [-voice],
whereas German speakers perceive voiceless unaspirated stop consonants and voiced stop consonants with negative VOT (non-native in German) within the category [+voice]. The predicted differential patterning
of contrast sensitivity was reflected by the MMN amplitudes. Our results
confirmed that during non-native speech perception native speakers categorize non-native stop consonants using their native language-specific
acoustic cues.

A85
SEMANTIC PROCESSING OF NUMBER AND SIZE WITHIN THE
APPROXIMATE NUMBER SYSTEM Courtney Lussier1, Jessica F. Cantlon1;
1

University of Rochester — Our world presents us with numerical information both symbolically (e.g. number-words) and non-symbolically (e.g.
sets of objects). The intraparietal sulcus (IPS) is known to contain regions
involved in processing numerical stimuli. However, whether activation
related to approximate numerical processing is domain-specific to ‘number’ or can be elicited by non-numerical magnitude judgment tasks (e.g.
size) is currently debated (e.g., Walsh, 2003). Using fMRI, we investigated semantic responses to number and magnitude in brain regions

55

Poster Session A — Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall
engaged in non-symbolic number processing. We identified the approximate number system by testing subjects on a numerical judgment task
with pairs of dot arrays of differing ratios (0.8 and 0.25) and performed a
whole-brain contrast on the numerical ratio effect (0.8 > 0.25). Within
those regions, we investigated the levels of activation on a second task:
magnitude comparisons and category classifications of number and
object words. Subjects indicated if number words were larger/smaller
than 15 (magnitude, number) or even/odd (non-magnitude, number),
and if the object word was larger/smaller than a cat (magnitude, nonnumber) or living/nonliving (non-magnitude, non-number). If these IPS
regions are involved broadly in judgments of magnitude, the magnitude
judgment tasks should produce greater activation in the defined IPS
region regardless of stimulus type. However, if they are domain-specific
for numbers, we should find greater activation to numerical values independently of task. The data show the latter: significantly greater activation for number stimuli than object stimuli independent of judgment
type. This suggests that IPS regions that process approximate numeric
stimuli are domain specific to numerical values.

A86
LOOKING UNDER YOUR THINKING CAP: DELIBERATELY TRYING TO THINK
MORE CREATIVELY INCREASES FRONTOPOLAR RECRUITMENT. Adam

Green1, Michael Cohen2, Joseph Kim3, Jeremy Gray4; 1Georgetown University,
2UCLA, 3Vanderbilt University, 4Yale University — While creativity has been
well studied as a static personality trait, the extent to which state creativity can be augmented within an individual is not clear. In addition, the
neural mechanisms underlying enhanced state creativity are unknown.
Evidence obtained by our group and others indicates that explicit cues
can elicit better performance on some creativity-related tasks. Separately,
we have found that frontopolar cortex activity increases as participants
evaluate and generate analogies that are increasingly creative. Here, we
tested the hypotheses that 1) an explicit cue to be creative would elicit
more highly creative responses in tasks of verb generation and analogical reasoning, and 2) frontopolar cortex would show increased activation
to support increased creativity under the cued condition. For both tasks,
event-related fMRI was employed and creativity was quantified using
semantic distance, which was calculated using latent semantic analysis.
In the verb generation task, the creativity cue elicited generation of verbs
that were more semantically distant from the prompt nouns. In the analogy task, the cue elicited more correct identification of semantically distant analogies. For both tasks, an a priori predicted region of frontopolar
cortex was significantly more active during the creativity cue. A
between-subjects parametric analysis revealed that frontopolar activity
in the Cued>Uncued contrast predicted stronger behavioral effects of the
cue (i.e., greater differences in semantic distance for cued vs. uncued
responses). Results indicate that deliberately trying to think more creatively is generally effective and is supported by increasing recruitment
of frontopolar cortex.

A87
INVESTIGATING THE NEURAL BASIS OF SPONTANEOUS THOUGHT WITH
FMRI AND CONTEMPLATIVE MENTAL TRAINING Melissa Ellamil1, Sean
Pritchard2, Evan Thompson3, Kalina Christoff1; 1University of British Columbia,
Fielding Graduate University, 3University of Toronto — Spontaneous mental

2

processes (e.g., mind wandering, daydreaming, stimulus-independent
thought) take up as much as one-third of our waking lives and are thus
crucial areas for scientific inquiry. However, there is a lack of methods
for their direct, immediate, and reliable observation during neuroimaging experiments. Vipassana or mindfulness meditation, which trains
non-reactive, introspective observation of moment-to-moment mental
processes, can help provide the more precise information required about
the timing and content of spontaneous thoughts. Thus, we used meditators in an fMRI experience sampling paradigm to better examine the
neural bases of spontaneous thought. Highly experienced Vipassana
meditators practiced mindfulness while in the scanner, and reported via
button presses when a thought arose or when a word appeared onscreen
and what type of thought or word it was (imagery, narrative, emotion,

56

and body sensation). Relative to reports of word trials, reports of the different types of spontaneously arising thoughts were preceded by
enhanced activation of the precuneus, hippocampus, temporopolar cortex, and rostrolateral prefrontal cortex, which are all regions consistently
activated in previous spontaneous thought processing and resting state
studies. Our results from combining objective neuroimaging measures
with subjective reports informed by meditation suggest a more specific
role for these regions in the generation of spontaneous thought content.

A88
ALTERED PATTERNS OF NEURAL CONNECTIVITY IN INDIVIDUALS WITH
RELAPSING-REMITTING MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS Alisha Janssen1, Amir

Abduljalil2, Aaron Boster3, Ruchika Prakash1; 1Department of Psychology, The
Ohio State University, 2The Wright Center for Innovation, The Ohio State
University, 3Department of Neurology, The Ohio State University — Multiple
Sclerosis is a neurodegenerative, inflammatory disease of the central nervous system, resulting in physical and cognitive disturbances. Individuals with MS demonstrate altered patterns of cortical recruitment during
tasks of exogenous processing, which exhibit further associations with
behavioral performance. An important confound in studies of externally
directed cognition is the difference in task performance between the clinical sample and healthy controls. Examining resting-state connectivity in
individuals with cerebral challenge offers a new way to observe the
alterations in the functional architecture of the brain as a result of the disorder. In this study, we examined the coherence of resting-state networks in relapsing-remitting MS patients as compared to a healthy
control sample. Fifty individuals with a clinically definite diagnosis of
relapsing-remitting MS and thirty age, gender, and education matched
healthy controls were recruited for this study. Resting-state data was collected from all participants using standard procedures, and data was
analyzed using tensorial ICA. Eight meaningful networks of interest
were identified from the ICA results and group differences between MS
individuals and healthy controls were examined using a novel technique
of dual regression. Areas of significantly reduced coherence in RRMS
individuals were found in five of the eight networks including the
default mode, fronto-executive, motor, lateral visual, and medial visual
networks. Future directions would involve examining the relationship
between these areas of reduced synchrony and measures of cognitive
performance and disease severity.

A89
ENHANCING MATHEMATICAL LEARNING: CONCURRENT NON-INVASIVE
BRAIN STIMULATION AND OPTICAL IMAGING Albert Snowball1, Tudor

Popescu1, Jacqueline Thompson1, Ilias Tachtsidis2, Tingting Zhu1,2, Margarete
Delazer3, Laura Zamarian3, Roi Cohen Kadosh1; 1University of Oxford,
2University College London, 3Innsbruck Medical University — Mathematical
skills are arguably one of the most important cognitive abilities that we
must master, with implications on our future income, career options,
level of education, as well as mental and physical health. We examined
here whether we could enhance arithmetic learning by using transcranial random noise stimulation (TRNS), a non-invasive brain stimulation
technique that pushes resting membrane potentials closer to the activation threshold to increase neural tissue excitability. Five consecutive
days of TRNS was applied to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex while 25
subjects learned to solve arithmetic problems. We uniquely coupled the
TRNS-cognitive training with concurrent near-infrared spectroscopy
(NIRS) recordings to examine the local and remote changes in oxygenated, deoxygenated and total haemoglobin concentrations that are associated with numerical learning and TRNS. Compared to sham
stimulation, TRNS both enhanced numerical performance, as indicated
by the learning rate, and reduced response time when increasing the
cognitive load. TRNS did not, however, improve the performance in control tasks used to quantify executive functions. At the neural level, compared to sham, TRNS facilitated the time-to-peak onset of oxygenated
haemoglobin rises at the site of stimulation but not in remote brain areas.
These results reveal that TRNS can be used to enhance arithmetic learn-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session A
ing by facilitating neural excitation, resulting in the earlier availability of
energy substrates, such as oxygen, within the region of stimulation.
These findings provide a first step to use TRNS to enhance numerical
learning in individuals with mathematical learning difficulties.

A90
BRAIN STRUCTURE OF CREATIVE EXPLORATION: CAUDATE VOLUME
PREDICTS DIVERGENT THINKING AND TRAITS RELATED TO COGNITIVE
EXPLORATION Rachael Grazioplene1, Colin G DeYoung1, Matthew Russell2,

Jeremy Gray3; 1University of Minnesota, 2University of Alberta, 3Yale
University — It has been theorized that the neurotransmitter dopamine is
involved in divergent thinking ability (Deitrich, 2004) Sensation Seeking
(Zald, 2010) and plasticity (the Big Five metatrait which includes Extraversion and Openness; DeYoung et al., 2006). The striatum is heavily
involved in dopaminergic neurotransmission, and caudate volume has
been linked to variation in dopamine genes (Stein, 2011). A positive association has been identified between caudate volume and creativity
(Takeuchi et al., 2010). We hypothesized that caudate volume would be
associated with divergent thinking scores; we also predicted that, if
dopamine function in the striatum represents an underlying connection
between divergent thinking and cognitive exploration, caudate volume
would also be associated with Sensation Seeking and Plasticity. Analyses
of the relation of these constructs to caudate volume were performed in a
group of 107 healthy male adults aged 20-40 years. Regression analyses
revealed that caudate volume was significantly associated with divergent thinking scores. Caudate volume was also associated with Sensation Seeking the Assertiveness facet of Extraversion, and the Intellect
Facet of Openness/Intellect (controlling for IQ). The present research
suggests that individual differences in brain regions tightly tied to
dopamine function are predictive of divergent thinking ability. Additionally, the relation of caudate volume to the Big Five aspects Assertiveness and Intellect (aspects of Extraversion and Openness/Intellect,
respectively) suggests that variation in caudate accounts for variation in
both divergent thinking and traits related to cognitive exploration, perhaps pointing to a role for the caudate in the general facilitation cognitive and behavioral flexibility.

THINKING: Problem solving
A91
EDUCATION-DEPENDENT BRAIN PLASTICITY: FRONTAL-PARIETAL
MECHANISMS FOR LINKING QUANTITIES AND SYMBOLS DURING THE
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL YEARS Edward Hubbard1, Bruce McCandliss1;

1Vanderbilt University — Mounting evidence supports the notion that children’s mastery of arithmetic is founded upon more elementary forms of
number cognition, including the ability to automatically translate
between number symbols and the quantities that they represent (e.g., 5 =
:•:). Although brain circuits that are sensitive to quantity have been identified in very young children, the acquisition of symbolic numbers may
refine these circuits as they learn to recognize and automatically link
Arabic digits to quantities. To examine the neural development of these
links, we measured fMRI responses in 63 children in grades K-3. Arrays
of dots of a standard quantity (6 or 8) were presented repeatedly, alternating with rare deviants that were either numerically close to or far
from the standard (5 or 9) in either the same format (dots) or a different
format (digits). We identified two distinct processes linking math fluency to developmental changes in brain responses. Regions in frontal
and parietal cortex responded to digits in a context-dependent manner:
responses to far deviants were larger than responses to close deviants,
across all children. Frontal and anterior IPS regions showed decreasing
context-dependent responses with increasing age and math skills, suggesting that increasing math skill is related to decreased recruitment of
these regions. Conversely, context-independent responses in posterior
parietal and frontal regions increased with age and math skills, suggesting that the degree to which children have constructed context-depen-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

dent and context-independent neural circuits for exact number may be
critical for explaining individual differences in learning formal arithmetic.

A92
VERBAL CREATIVITY AND ALPHA: A BRAIN WAVE ENTRAINMENT
STUDY Polly O'Rourke1, Timothy George1, Alexei Smaliy1, Kristin

Grunewald1, Joseph Dien1, Henk Haarmann1; 1University of Maryland —

Increases in alpha power in the right hemisphere are associated with
cognitive disengagement and increased creativity (Grabner et al. 2007).
The goal of the current study was to determine if increasing alpha power
via brain wave entrainment (consisting of acoustic beats presented at a
rate of 10 Hz) would improve performance on a verbal creativity task.
EEG was recorded while participants in both an entrainment and control
group performed the insight task in which they were presented with a
scenario (“a light in the darkness”) and asked to generate as many explanations as possible and to be creative in their responses. Self-rated originality of each response and fluency (total number of responses per item)
were used as measures of creativity. The key predictions were that the
alpha entrainment group would show greater creativity and increased
event-related synchrony (ERS) in the alpha band relative to controls.
While no group differences were found in self-rated originality, analysis
of the fluency data showed that the control group had greater verbal fluency than the entrainment group. During task performance, the control
group had reduced alpha ERS in the left hemisphere indicating
increased engagement. No hemispheric effects were found in the
entrainment group. The results suggest that alpha entrainment inhibits
engagement of speech and language areas in the left hemisphere, resulting in reduced verbal fluency. Future studies examining the relationship
between alpha power and performance in verbal creativity tasks must
consider the differential contributions of the two hemispheres.

A93
AUTOMATICITY IN PROCESSING OF NUMBERS THAT WERE NEVER
PRESENTED: AN FMRI STUDY Arava Y. Kallai1, Christian D. Schunn1, Julie

Fiez1,2; 1University of Pittsburgh, 2Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition —

The horizontal section of the intra-parietal sulci (hIPS) was previously
identified as specializing in number-related processing and was associated with analogic representation of numbers. Neurons in that region
were identified as being sensitive to specific numerical value, exhibiting
a distance effect (i.e., decreasing activation when the distance between
the presented numerosity and the preferred numerosity for that neuron
grew larger) (Nieder & Miller, 2004; Piazza et al., 2004). Piazza et al.
(2007) further showed that such sensitivity is notation-independent:
adaptation to Arabic numerals or non-symbolic quantities showed distance sensitive dishabituation for deviants from either notation. A stronger test of the general numerosity content of the analogic representations
would be to show adaptation to quantities never presented (i.e., generated internally). In an adaptation fMRI study, the spontaneous processing of arithmetical expressions was tested. Participants passively viewed
addition expressions, made of two double-digit numbers, which
summed to the same number within a run. Adaptation was found in
number-related regions in a fronto-parietal network. Following adaptation, deviants comprised of array of dots were introduced. Activation in
voxels that showed linear decrease during the adaptation period was
sensitive to the distance of the number of dots from the sum of the addition expressions. We conclude that participants were adapted to a number (sum) that was created internally but was never presented externally.
Given the difference in notation of the standard and deviant stimuli, we
suggest that adaptation was to an analogic representation of the quantity
represented by the sum of the addends.

57

Poster Session A — Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall

A94
LOOKING OUTSIDE THE BOX: BLINKS AND EYE MOVEMENTS
ASSOCIATED WITH INSIGHT VERSUS ANALYTIC PROBLEM SOLVING

Carola Salvi1, Steve Franconeri2, Emanuela Bricolo1, John Kounios3, Mark
Beeman2; 1Milano-Bicocca University, 2Northwestern University, 3Drexel
University — Previous studies have demonstrated distinct patterns of
activity in occipital cortex for solving verbal problems via insight compared to solving analytically, both immediately prior to solution and in
rest periods before each problem is presented. Here, we examined eye
movement and eye blink patterns associated with the two different problem-solving styles. Participants attempted to solve 120 Compound
Remote Associate (CRA) word problems within 15 seconds each, and
after each solution indicated whether they had solved it through insight
or analysis. Eye movements were recorded before the problem appeared
and while it was on the screen. In accordance with previous behavioral
and neuroimaging research, eye movement and blink patterns varied by
problem solving style. Specifically, made more frequent and longer-lasting blinks during the two second preparatory period before seeing problems that they subsequently solved with insight, compared to problems
they subsequently solved analytically. In the two second period immediately prior to solution, participants blinked longer and made fewer fixations in the problem area prior to solving with insight than prior to
solving analytically. Consistent with other studies, these results suggest
that insight involves and is facilitated by a mechanism oriented to avoid
external inputs, and direct attention inward, suggesting that internal versus external directed visual attention might contribute to the two solving
styles.

A95
NEURAL CORRELATES OF MATHEMATICAL COMPETENCE: PARIETAL
BRAIN ACTIVATION DURING SINGLE DIGIT ARITHMETIC PREDICTS
PERFORMANCE ON PSAT MATH TEST Price Gavin1, Mazzocco Michele2,

Ansari Daniel1; 1University of Western Ontario, 2Johns Hopkins University —

Acquiring basic arithmetic skill is a crucial prerequisite for successful
participation in modern society, and low mathematical competence has
severe consequences at the individual and societal levels. However, the
sources of individual variation in mathematical competence are poorly
understood. The present functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
study investigated in 32 participants, the relationship between the brain
activation during arithmetic verification, recorded at grade 12, and performance on a standardized national measure of college level mathematics aptitude (PSAT Math, which includes word problems, geometry,
algebraic equations, and arithmetic), recorded at grade 10. Results reveal
a negative correlation between PSAT Math standard scores and calculation related activity in the right intraparietal sulcus (IPS), a suggested
neural substrate of the ‘Approximate Number Sense’ (ANS). Furthermore, psychophysiological interaction analysis (PPI) revealed a negative
correlation between calculation activation in the right IPS and the bilateral parahippocampal gyrus, suggesting orthogonal engagement of calculation versus memory retrieval mechanisms during single digit
arithmetic. Participants also completed a nonsymbolic numerical comparison task in the scanner, revealing a significant parametric effect of
ratio on activation in the same IPS region reported above, confirming the
involvement of quantity processing mechanisms in the relationship
between calculation activation and PSAT math scores. These results suggest that individuals who do not shift from procedural to fact retrieval
calculation strategies show poorer outcomes on educationally relevant,
independently measured, mathematical competence measures, and that
these outcomes can be predicted by relative engagement of neural ANS
mechanisms during single digit arithmetic.

A96
RODENT MODEL OF THE EFFECT OF BETA-ADRENERGIC AGENTS ON
CREATIVE PROBLEM SOLVING Patrick Hecht1, Matthew Will1, Todd

Schachtman1, Bradley Ferguson1, Jill Hampton2, Lauren Welby1, Julian

58

Deville1, David Beversdorf1; 1University of Missouri- Columbia, 2Truman State
University — Previous research revealed benefit from ?-adrenergic antagonists in creative problem solving. However, animal models have exclusively explored set shifting tasks, where ?-1 adrenergic and
dopaminergic, but not ?-adrenergic effects have been found. To address
this gap, we developed a novel creative problem solving task in rodents
and examined the effect of propranolol. Rats were first trained to dig for
food in three reward pots. They were then trained in odor discrimination
and medium discrimination. Then, after administration of 1mg/kg propranolol or placebo, the rats were tested on simple discrimination, compound discrimination, reversal learning, and set shifting, using the 2 side
reward pots. During these tasks, the digging chamber in the middle was
blocked off. Then, the digging chamber was filled with sawdust, the
entrance to the digging chamber was unblocked, and the reward was
moved from the side pots to the end of the digging chamber, such that
the rats were required to generate the novel solution to this problem by
digging through the sawdust to access the reward pot. Preliminary data
revealed no effect of propranolol on any of the reversal learning or set
shifting tasks. However, performance on propranolol was found to be
better as compared to placebo for the novel digging task as assessed by
time to completion. This is, to our knowledge, the first rodent model of
creative problem solving, allowing for the possibility of examination of
the mechanism of action of this process in a way not possible with most
other organisms.

A97
A CUSTOMIZED ARITHMETIC PROGRAM FOR USE IN FUNCTIONAL
NEUROIMAGING EXPERIMENTS Christian Battista1, Daniel Ansari1, J

Bruce Morton1; 1University of Western Ontario — Most functional neuroimaging studies use the same trials to estimate brain activation across participants. This can be problematic when the strategies used to respond to
experimental trials differ between individuals. It has recently been established that brain activation during an arithmetic tasks depends heavily
on the problem strategies used. Memorized problems involve parietal
regions like the left angular gyrus, whereas problems that require the
use of procedural problem-solving strategies induce widespread prefrontal activation (Grabner et al., 2009). Given these differences in brain
activation associated with arithmetic strategies it is important to carefully control for the strategies that individuals use during arithmetic
problem solving. Researchers should customize the set of problems that
are being presented to the individual’s ability level and thus control for
variability in strategy use, particularly when comparing groups with different proficiencies. To facilitate this, a customized arithmetic (CA) program was developed. Participants were shown a series of addition
problems and asked to identify the solution. Following response, they
indicated which strategy they used to solve the problem. Examinations
of both reliability and validity of self-reports were favourable, with good
agreement between self-reports, and a tendency for memorized problems to be solved more quickly than calculated problems. This demonstrates that self-reported strategy can be successfully used to create
individually tailored problem sets. These problem sets should be used in
investigations of mental arithmetic, particularly those which compare
arithmetic performance in people with different skill levels. The CA program can be obtained by contacting the first author.

A98
INSIGHT FOLLOWS INCUBATION IN THE REMOTE ASSOCIATES TEST

Stephanie Hare1, John Molony1, Sean McCarthy1, Kelly Brandstatt1, Leonidas
Skiadopoulos1, Krishna L Bharani1, Robert G Morrison1; 1Loyola University
Chicago — Problem solving through insight differs from traditional trial
and error strategies in that problem solvers experience an impasse (e.g.,
fixation) prior to a sudden conscious awareness of an answer of which
they are confident. Various studies of insight problem solving suggest
that a period of time away from the problem (i.e., incubation) can sometimes help overcome problem fixation. In this study we use a Remote
Associates Test in which the solution time is divided into two epochs. On

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session A
some trials the second epoch is preceded by a brief incubation period
during which the participants performed a simple working memory distractor task. When participants solved a problem they were asked to
report whether they experienced insight. 20 of 36 participants solved at
least one problem during the second epoch. While second epoch solution
rates did not differ based on whether participants incubated or not, participants who solved problems during the second epoch reported significantly more experiences of insight after an incubation period. We discuss
this result with respect to recent neuroimaging studies detailing the neural correlates of insight.

A99
MEMORY UPDATING CAPACITY IS THE BETTER PREDICTOR OF
MULTIPLICATION PERFORMANCE THAN NUMERICAL ACUITY. Cheng-

Ching Han1, Nai-Shing Yen1, Daniele Didino2, Brian Butterworth2; 1National
Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2University College London, London, UK —
It has been claimed that approximate numerosity system (ANS) is a
foundational for learning arithmetic. In particular, “numerical acuity”,
individual differences in the ability to discriminate the numerosities of
two visual displays, predicts arithmetical ability. Here we assessed
whether capacity on this ANS task predicts arithmetical performance as
compared with measures of working memory capacity. Forty-seven college students to participated in tasks that evaluate (1) general cognitive
activities (four working memory tests that included memory updating,
operation span, sentence span, and spatial short-term memory), (2)
numerical acuity, and (3) multiplication performance. Participants who
performed well in multiplication task had higher accuracy rates and
shorter reaction times than low performing ones; these two groups also
showed different calculation strategies. There are two methods to work
through the multiplicand. One is from right to left, and the other is from
left to right. The later method was used to solve multiplication problems
in the high performing group more (more than 63% trials) than the low
performing group (less than 21% trials). Multiplication performance is
highly correlated with working memory capacities. Participants with
good performance in memory updating test performed better in multiplication test. Performances between approximate number system and
multiplication tasks were only weakly correlated. Comparisons between
working memory tests and approximate number system task to multiplication performance had suggested working memory capacity, especially
the memory updating capacity, was a better predictor for multiplication
performance. The present study thus concluded executive function is
more crucial for arithmetic learning.

A100
GREY MATTER DENSITY IN INDIVIDUALS WITH HIGHER CREATIVITY: A
VOXEL BASED MORPHOMETRY STUDY Joseph Frantz1, Sephira G.

Ryman2, Ranee A. Flores2, Rex E. Jung2; 1Mind Research Network,
Albuquerque, NM, 2University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center–
Department of Neurosurgery — Recent theoretical models (Dietrich, 2004;
Flaherty, 2011; Heilman, et al., 2003) as well reviews (Arden et al., 2010;
Dietrich & Kanso, 2010) support involvement of frontal and temporal
regions underlying creative idea generation and drive. Lesion studies
also show increased creative output in select patients with frontal and
temporal lobe damage (Miller et al., 2000). We hypothesized that frontal
and temporal gray matter volume would relate to creative capacity in
normal, healthy subjects. Creativity was assessed in 130 subjects via
Divergent thinking (DT) measures, scored by a panel of peer judges on
the quality of creative responses, using the Consensual Assessment
Technique, and compiled into a “Composite Creativity Index” (CCI). We
utilized optimized Voxel-based morpohometry (VBM) to determine the
relationship between CCI scores and grey matter volume, covarying for
total grey matter, IQ, and age. Significant inverse relationships were
observed between grey matter density and CCI scores within bilateral
inferior frontal gyri and bilateral hippocampus, (p < 0.001 uncorrected).
This inverse correlation between CCI scores and the inferior frontal
gyrus were consistent with a frontotemporal model of creativity; the sig-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

nificant correlation to the hippocampus was unexpected. Mood disorders have been found to be associated with higher incidence of
creativity. In severe cases of depression and post traumatic stress disorder, lower gray matter volume is seen in the frontal lobe and hippocampus (Tischler, et al., 2006). While none of our healthy subjects presented
with mood dysfunction, the current results suggests a continuum of
frontotemporal volume decreases associated with creative capacity.

A101
UNDERSTANDING THE NEURAL BASIS OF CREATIVE COGNITION:
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL AND NEUROIMAGING EVIDENCE Naama

Mayseless1, Simone Shamay-Tsoory1; 1Dep. of Psychology, University of Haifa,
Haifa, Israel — Based on the twofold model of creativity according to

which creativity involves an “idea generation” and an “idea evaluation”
phase, we sought to examine the hypothesis that the neural network
mediating creativity involves interaction between an idea generation
system (medial prefrontal cortex-mPFC and posterior parietal cortex PPC) and an evaluation system (left temporoparietal junction -TPJ, left
inferior frontal gyrus- IFG). To test this hypothesis we assessed creative
abilities of healthy subjects who were further scanned while performing
a modified version of the Alternate Uses Task, which examines the generation of original ideas as well as the evaluation of original ideas generated by other subjects. Evaluation of originality engaged left frontal and
parietal regions including the left TPJ (BA 39) while generation of creative ideas engaged areas in the Anterior Cingulate (bilateral) and the
Posterior Cingulate (bilateral). Additionally, beta values in the left TPJ
were negatively correlated with fluency scores of a different creativity
task (the Torrance Circle subset of the TTCT, Torrance Tests for Creative
Thinking, 2007), indicating that the larger the activation in left TPJ the
fewer answers given in the TTCT. Taken together, these findings demonstrate the existence of two dissociable neural networks that contribute to
the creative process, a left lateralized evaluation system and a medial
generation system. These findings are largely supported by recent neuropsychological evidence of enhanced creativity in patients with frontotemporal dementia.

A102
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CREATIVITY PERFORMANCE, SELF-REPORTED
CREATIVE ATTRIBUTES, AND FINE MOTOR CONTROL: POTENTIAL
Ferguson1,
RELATIONSHIP WITH DOPAMINERGIC ACTIVITY Bradley

Aiden Lee1, Kristi Stringer2, David Beversdorf1, Paul Foster3; 1University of
Missouri-Columbia, 2University of Alabama-Birmingham, 3Middle Tennessee
State University — Spreading activation in the brain, a critical aspect of creative thought, has been shown to increase as levels of the neurotransmitter dopamine decrease. Furthermore, dopamine is involved in the
modulation of motor movements. Specifically, rates of finger tapping
covary positively with dopamine levels as well as dopamine D2 receptor
density in the brain. Therefore, it is possible that a relationship exists
between dopamine (as estimated by finger tapping), spreading activation, and creativity. Previous research suggests that and inverted Ushaped relationship exists between spontaneous eye blink rate, which
has been shown to be sensitive to dopamine levels, and cognitive flexibility on a divergent thinking task. Consistent with the aforementioned
finding, we hypothesized that an inverted U-shaped relationship would
exist between rates of finger tapping and performance on creativity
tasks. Further, we predicted that this relationship would also exist
between rates of finger tapping and self-reported attributes and behaviors associated with creative individuals, as we previously found this
measure to correlate with performance on a standardized measure of
creativity. For the current study, participants completed a finger tapping
test, measures of creative performance, and questionnaires assessing
behaviors commonly associated with creative individuals, handedness,
and current mood. Indeed, our results indicated that an inverted Ushaped relationship exists between finger tapping score and creativity.
These results begin to suggest that a relationship may exist between creativity and behavioral correlates of dopaminergic functioning.

59

Poster Session A — Saturday, March 31, 5:30 – 7:30 pm, Exhibit Hall

A103
TRANSFER OF ABSTRACT ACTION RULES DURING REINFORCEMENT
LEARNING James Brew1, Michael J. Frank1,2, David Badre1,2; 1Brown

University, 2Brown Institute for Brain Sciences — Often, we must behave

appropriately in circumstances that are novel, but nevertheless share
deep analogy to situations we already understand. In such cases, we can
apply previously successful rules for action to achieve our goals. This
ability is termed positive transfer and is thought to underlie reasoning
and adaptive behavior. However, the neural systems supporting transfer
are not well understood. Here, we sought to investigate transfer of
abstract rules. Through reinforcement, participants learned rules that
mapped visual stimuli to responses in two learning sessions. Superficial
mappings between stimulus features and responses changed between
sessions, making concrete rules novel in the second session. Following
prior work (Badre et al., 2010), either concrete rules had to be learned
individually (flat structure) or an abstract rule could be used for efficient
generalization (hierarchical structure). Participants received the flat or
hierarchical structure in the first session, followed by either the same
structure or the other one in the second session. Across several behavioral metrics, learning of a hierarchical structure in the second session
was facilitated only when preceded by a hierarchical structure in the first
session, providing evidence of transfer. We next applied a previously
developed computational model (Frank and Badre, in press) to estimate
a subject’s latent hypotheses about rule structure based on her/his specific sequence of responses. This analysis specified that prior exposure to
a hierarchical rule structure encouraged search for this rule during subsequent learning. These results have implications for theories of hierarchical fronto-striatal organization during learning and cognitive control.

60

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Poster Session B

Sunday, April 1, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall

ATTENTION: Development & aging
B1
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN SELECTIVE ATTENTION IN THE VERY OLD: A
BOTTOM-UP OR TOP-DOWN PROBLEM? Tatyana Zhuravleva1, Anna

Haring1, Brittany Alperin1, Phillip Holcomb2, Dorene Rentz1, Kirk Daffner1;
1Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 2Tufts University —
Previous research has demonstrated age-related deficits in selective
attention, which have been attributed to declines in top-down control
mechanisms. Such theories would predict greater impairment of selective attention under more demanding conditions, which consume capacity-limited resources. The current study expanded previous research by
including a large sample of 80+ year-olds. ERPs were recorded in 15
young-old (65-79) and 23 old-old (80-99) subjects with high executive
capacity during a color-selective attention task. Subjects responded to
target letters in a specified color (Attend) while ignoring letters in a different color (Ignore). The task was completed under both low (1 target
letter) and high (4 target letters) memory load. There was a marginal
decrease in accuracy for the old-old group, but no group differences in
RT. There were no latency differences between groups for early ERP
components (P1, N1, Selection Positivity, Selection Negativity). Under
both memory loads, the old-old group showed a reduction in preliminary visual discrimination, as indexed by the posterior N1. Old-old subjects also demonstrated a marked decrease in selective modulation of
attention to features, as indexed by the posterior Selection Negativity,
generating no differences between Attend and Ignore conditions. In contrast, there were no group differences in frontally-mediated selective
modulation, as indexed by the anterior Selection Positivity, regardless of
memory load. The current findings pose a challenge to the top-down,
inhibitory-deficit hypothesis of aging by suggesting that age-related degradation of early visual processing, and not executive control mechanisms, are largely responsible for deficits in selective attention to color.

B2
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN THE PROCESSING OF TO-BE-IGNORED
STIMULI: PRESERVED SELECTIVE ATTENTION DOES NOT PREVENT
SUBSEQUENT ALLOCATION OF EXCESSIVE PROCESSING RESOURCES

Brittany Alperin1, Anna Haring1, Tatyana Zhuravleva1, Phillip Holcomb2, Dorene
Rentz1, Kirk Daffner1; 1Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, 2Tufts University — A critical mechanism for conserving capacitylimited resources and efficiently carrying out task demands is to limit the
allocation of resources to stimuli that are supposed to be ignored. This
study investigated age-related changes in attentional operations
involved in the processing of to-be-ignored stimuli. ERPs were measured in 12 young (mean age 23) and 15 old (mean age 74) well-matched
adults during a color-selective attention task. Subjects responded to target letters in a specified color (Attend) while ignoring letters in a different color (Ignore). There were minimal age-associated differences in
selective attention (Attend-Ignore), as indexed by the size of the poste-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

rior Selection Negativity (SN) and anterior Selection positivity (SP). In
striking contrast to their younger counterparts, old subjects appropriated
a similar amount of resources to targets under the Attend and Ignore
conditions for operations involved with orienting and decision-making,
as measured by the size of the P3a and P3b components. Old subjects
also exhibited prolonged latencies of the SP, SN, P3a, and P3b, suggesting delays in carrying out pertinent operations. In summary, despite the
relative preservation of early selective attention, old subjects appropriated substantially more controlled processing resources in response to
target-like stimuli under Ignore. Although inefficiencies in selective
attention may undermine the quality of information available for subsequent operations, they do not fully account for the increased allocation
of resources in response to to-be-ignored targets. One consequence of
this age-related deficit is that older adults are at high risk for running out
of processing resources to manage increased task demands.

B3
SENSORY-PERCEPTUAL ENCODING AND SELECTIVE ATTENTION: AN
EXAMINATION OF PROCESSING SPEED AND INHIBITION AMONG WELLMATCHED YOUNG AND YOUNG-OLD ADULTS Anna Haring1, Tatyana

Zhuravleva1, Brittany Alperin1, Phillip Holcomb2, Dorene Rentz1, Kirk Daffner1;
1Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 2Tufts University —
This study addressed limitations in electrophysiological research on agerelated changes in selective attention by 1) matching age groups for executive capacity and performance, 2) employing experimental conditions
to distinguish mechanisms of neural enhancement and suppression, and
3) examining the relationship between sensory-perceptual encoding and
selective attention. ERPs were measured in 12 young (mean age 23) and
15 old (mean age 74) adults. Subjects identified target letters under a
color-selective attention task requiring responses to the Attend (A) but
not the Ignore (I) color, and a color-neutral (N) attention task in which
color was not task-relevant. Old subjects had lower task demands (fewer
target letters). There were no group differences in accuracy or RT. Old
subjects exhibited delayed sensory-perceptual encoding (P1 latency).
The magnitude of selective attention modulation between Attend and
Ignore did not differ between groups, indexed by the size of the posterior Selection Negativity (SN) and anterior Selection Positivity (SP).
However, unlike young subjects, old subjects did not exhibit reduction
in neural activity under the Ignore relative to Neutral condition. Agerelated delays in SN latency and lack of suppression under Ignore were
not predicted by differences in P1 latency. In summary, this carefully
matched sample demonstrates that older adults execute selective attention processes less efficiently than their younger counterparts, failing to
suppress activity under the Ignore condition. Although there are agerelated delays in sensory-perceptual encoding, they do not account for
subsequent delays in posterior selective attention operations or in the
reduced ability to inhibit the processing of to-be-ignored stimuli.

B4
NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF AGE-RELATED IMPAIRMENTS IN VISUAL
SELECTIVE ATTENTION Franziska Labrenz1, Maria Themann2, Edmund

Wascher2, Bettina Pfleiderer3, Christian Beste1; 1Institute for Cognitive
61

Poster Session B — Sunday, April 1, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
Neuroscience, Biopsychology, Ruhr-University Bochum, 2Leibniz Research
Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors, TU Dortmund,
3
Department of Clinical Radiology, University of Muenster — In the course of

Axel Mueller1; 1San Diego State University, 2Harvard Medical School,
University of California San Diego, 4Brown University — Individuals
with

3

demographic development, the topic of aging has taken on greater significance in neurocognitive research. Impairments in cognitive abilities
of older adults are a well-documented phenomenon and a substantial
body of research has revealed performance deficits in a wide range of
cognitive functions. Especially attentional processes are vulnerable to
the effects of aging in the sense of older people being more sensitive to
interference from task-irrelevant information. Accordingly, older adults
reveal an inability to effectively suppress neural activity associated with
distracting bottom-up information. Therefore, the question arises as to
how the suppression of a concomitant distractor along with a behaviorally relevant target stimulus varies dependent on age and how these differences are reflected neurally. We conducted an fMRI study using a
biased competition paradigm in which two bars changed either luminance and/or orientation separately or simultaneously at the same location (non-conflict) or at opposite locations (conflict). Subjects (N=38)
were instructed to respond to luminance changes only and to ignore
changes of orientation. Behavioral results indicated that older adults performed overall more erroneously than younger adults. Neuroimaging
results revealed that older adults exhibited activation in additional brain
areas and higher activation in fronto-parietal sites than younger adults.
Hence, our data suggests that older people are functionally deficient in
regions mediating top-down attentional control. These results may indicate that older people overactivate brain areas to compensate for declining efficiency and beyond, to obtain an equivalent level of proficiency.

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) show pervasive abnormalities of
attention (Allen & Courchesne, 2001). Suppositions have been made that
atypical attention modulation may contribute to the development of
socio-communicative deficits in ASD. It has been suggested that attention is organized into three functionally separate but interrelated networks: alerting, orienting, and executive control networks (Posner &
Rothbart, 2007). The present study used resting state functional connectivity MRI (fcMRI) to assess connectivity between network regions and
the Attention Network Test (ANT) to examine network efficiency. Participants were 17 adolescents with ASD and 23 typically developing (TD)
individuals. Group comparisons showed clusters of underconnectivity
in the alerting and orienting networks for ASD adolescents compared to
the TD group. In subsamples of participants with ANT scores, there was
a positive correlation between functional connectivity between regions
of the orienting network and executive control efficiency measured with
the ANT in the ASD group (r = .80, p = .03), but not in TD individuals.
These results are consistent with previous studies showing atypical
interdependence between attention networks in ASD (Keehn et al.,
2010). Additionally, alerting network efficiency was positively correlated
with ADI diagnostic scores for social interaction and communication and
language in the ASD group (r = .60, p = .02 and r = .58, p = .03). ADOS
scores for repetitive/restrictive behaviors positively correlated with
executive control functional connectivity (r = .552, p = .041). Our findings
provide further evidence for attention dysfunction in ASD and its relationship to socio-communicative dysfunction.

B5
THE EFFECTS OF AGE, TASK DEMANDS, AND AUDITORY CUES ON VISUAL
SELECTIVE ATTENTION Paula McLaughlin1, Jill Rich1,2, Nicole Anderson3,4,

B7
AUDITORY TEMPORAL PROCESSING IN OLDER ADULTS: DIMINISHED
C.
ATTENTION MODULATION WITH STRUCTURAL DECLINES Kelly

tively attend to information in the environment is a complex skill used
each day. Previous research has demonstrated that this ability declines
with age, particularly under difficult conditions where executive processing is required. However, by manipulating different environmental
factors, age-related declines in visual selective attention may be exacerbated or ameliorated. The present study explored how visual selective
attention changes across the adult lifespan, and examined whether agerelated declines can be mitigated with auditory cues. Young (ages 18-25),
middle-aged (ages 40-54), and older (ages 65-82) participants were
administered a cued choice reaction time (RT) task that became progressively more demanding. This was achieved by increasing the level of
processing from simple response-location compatibility to conflict resolution and by varying the number of test stimuli. Age-related differences
in selective attention emerged when the task required more executive
components of attention. These aging effects were evident in the middleaged group, albeit to a lesser extent than in the older group. Furthermore, performance significantly improved when participants were provided with an informative auditory cue that spatially oriented attention.
These cueing effects were larger in the simplest condition, and the older
participants benefit more from the auditory cues relative to the young
and middle-aged groups. In sum, age-related deficiencies in selective
attention were associated with conflict resolution, response suppression,
and working memory. These findings support the frontal hypothesis of
aging, which states that age-related differences on various tasks are associated with declines in executive processing, and extend this hypothesis
to middle-aged adults.

tion across auditory and attention-related networks. The quality of auditory representations diminishes with age, which can increase the
demands on diminishing attention-related networks that support stimulus perception and decision making. We examined the extent to which 1)
stimulus-driven and task-driven neural activity predict auditory temporal processing, and 2) neural activity is altered with age-related changes
in the structure of auditory and attention-related networks. We measured gap detection, EEG during active and passive listening, and
regional gray matter volume in younger and older adults with normal
hearing. Age-related differences in auditory temporal processing were
greatest during challenging listening conditions, with older and younger
adults exhibiting robust differences in stimulus-driven and task-driven
neural activity. Power and phase synchronicity varied less as a function
of active versus passive task conditions in older compared to younger
adults and early theta power during passive listening was predictive of
gap detection. Furthermore, ventral lateral prefrontal cortex and auditory cortex estimates of gray matter volume exhibited age-group differences and were predictive of EEG measures of attention modulation in
older adults. Age-related differences in oscillatory activity and regional
gray matter volume suggest a possible change in how information is
gated between attention and auditory-related regions, which may be
dependent on age-related changes in the structure of auditory and attention networks. Taken together, these results suggest an age-related
decline in top-down modulation and an increased reliance on coherent
bottom-up or stimulus-driven neural representations. [Work supported
by NIH/NIDCD]

B6
ATTENTION NETWORKS IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS: A
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY MRI STUDY Merage Ghane1, Aarti Nair1,

B8
TESTING THE AUDITORY SCAFFOLDING HYPOTHESIS: THE ROLE OF
EARLY LANGUAGE IN ATTENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT Matthew Dye1, Peter

Susan Murtha1; 1York University, 2Baycrest Centre, 3Kunin-Lunenfeld Applied
Research Unit, Baycrest Centre, 4University of Toronto — The ability to selec-

Brandon Keehn1,2,3, Chris Keown1, Patti Shih1,4, Jeanne Townsend3, Ralph-

Harris1, Mark A. Eckert1, Judy R. Dubno1; 1Medical University of South
Carolina — Auditory processing depends on the integration of informa-

C. Hauser2; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Rochester Institute of
Technology — The Auditory Scaffolding Hypothesis (Conway et al., 2009)
is one variant of hypotheses that attribute deficits in visual functions to

62

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session B
auditory deprivation in deaf children. However, studies that support
these "deficit hypotheses" have typically tested deaf children who were
not exposed to a natural language from birth (ex. Horn et al., 2005; Yucel
and Derim, 2008). The possibility remains, therefore, that any deficits
observed in these deaf children may be attributable to delayed language
acquisition and impoverished communicative environments in infancy.
One commonly used measure of visual functions that has been used to
demonstrate apparent visual deficits is the continuous performance test.
This is a class of tests that all present long sequences of stimuli containing rare target events. The inability of deaf children to respond correctly
to these rare events, and withhold responses to non-target events, has
been used to suggest they have difficulties sustaining attention to
sequences and in inhibiting inappropriate responses. In the study
reported here, a continuous performance test (the Gordon Diagnostic
System) was administered to hearing children aged 6-13 years and to
deaf children who acquired American Sign Language as a native language from deaf parents, displaying typical natural language acquisition. The data suggest that a significant proportion of the deficits
reported in the literature are attributable to delayed language acquisition
during infancy, and not to auditory deprivation per se. Implications for
educational practice and the impact on learning in deaf children are discussed.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Development & aging
B9
RELATIONSHIPS AMONG WHITE MATTER HEALTH, DEPRESSION, AND
COGNITION: A DIFFUSIONS TENSOR IMAGING STUDY. Kelly Rowe1,2,

Vincent Magnotta1,2, Joy Matsui1,2, Kelsey Vitense1, Eric Axelson1, Michael
Brumm1, Stephan Arndt1,2, Sergio Paradiso1,2, Peg Nopoulos1,2, David
Moser1,2; 1University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, 2The University of
Iowa — Diffusion tensor imaging is a sensitive modality with which to
study white matter integrity. This technique was employed to study the
effects of atherosclerotic vascular disease (AVD) on white matter, and to
examine the relationship between white matter health and measures of
depression, attention, and processing speed. Participants were 35 community-dwelling, stroke-free elderly AVD and 22 elderly healthy control
(HC) participants. Fractional Anisotropy (FA), was calculated for wholebrain white matter and Talairach-defined sub-regions. Standardized
psychological instruments assessed processing speed, attention, and
depressive symptoms. T-tests and ANCOVA analyses were used to test
the effects of group, age, gender, and interactions. Partial correlations
were calculated between FA measures and scores from the psychological
instruments. The relationship of FA in the subgenual cingulate with
depressive symptoms was also analyzed. Compared to HC participants,
AVD participants showed significantly lower FA values globally and in
3 sub-regions. ANCOVA analysis revealed significant effects of group,
age, and sex. Significant correlations were found between FA values and
depression and attention measures when analyzed across the whole
group of participants (AVD + HC). An additional significant relationship
between depressive symptoms and white matter health in the subgenual
cingulate was identified in the right hemisphere of AVD participants,
which was not significant in the left hemisphere or in the HC participants. The current findings suggest that white matter integrity shares an
important relationship with cognition and mood functioning, even
among individuals who are generally cognitively intact and whose level
of depressive symptoms fall within broad normal limits.

B10
THE EFFECT OF DIVIDED ATTENTION AND AGING ON RECOGNITION OF
Berger1,
POSITIVE FACES IN OLDER AND YOUNGER ADULTS Natalie
Elizabeth A. Kensinger2, Katja Werheid3; 1Free University of Berlin, 2Humboldt
University of Berlin, 3Boston College — Recent research has revealed a posi-

tivity-induced recognition bias for faces in elder adults. However, it is
yet unclear whether this bias reflects a prioritization of positive information in the elderly, or a method to compensate for memory deficits. In

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

this study we investigated biased recognition in healthy old and young
adults using a divided attention paradigm. Younger and older adults
studied happy, neutral, and angry faces, which in a subsequent recognition memory task were intermixed with 50% distractors. Half of the
items were presented under full attention conditions; the other half were
presented under divided attention conditions, along with an auditory
decision task. In the full attention condition, older adults showed an
enhanced recognition bias for happy faces compared to the young. In the
divided attention condition, memory performance was diminished, and
there were no longer age differences in recognition bias: older participants’ enhanced bias for happy faces persisted, but young adults’ recognition bias for happy faces was enhanced to the same level as in older
adults. Our results support the view that the positivity-induced recognition bias is not related to aging itself, but to conditions in which cognitive resources are restricted, whether by age or by higher task demands.

B11
SUBREGIONS OF THE THALAMUS CONNECTED WITH FRONTAL AND
TEMPORAL CORTEX SHOW GREATER AGE-RELATED DEGENERATION
THAN OTHER SUBREGIONS David Clewett1, Hanna Damasio1, Mara

Mather1; 1University of Southern California — As a central relay station to
cortex, the thalamus plays a critical role in the facilitation of sensory,
motor, memory and executive processes. Distinct patterns of thalamocortical connectivity reflect the functionality of separate thalamic nuclei
and relates to normal brain function. While previous studies have
focused on disorders associated with thalamic pathology, little is known
about how normal aging may affect specific sub-regions of the thalamus
and their connections to cortical brain regions. To address this issue, we
used diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to examine thalamocortical connectivity in vivo in three age groups ranging from younger adults to older
adults. Probabilistic tractography was used to trace connectivity
between the left and right thalami and six cortical target regions. Putative nuclei were delineated for individual subjects via connectivity-based
segmentation of the thalamus, such that subdivisions were determined
by the cortical target with the highest probability of connectivity. Fractional Anisotropy (FA) and Mean Diffusivity (MD) values were
extracted from the derived nuclei to localize and quantify age-related
changes in microstructural integrity. Global decline in thalamic size and
cortical connectivity was observed in older adults. Statistically significant degeneration with age was found in sub-regions predominantly
connected to the frontal and temporal lobes, while sensory and motor
regions were relatively spared. Changes in the spatial distribution of
thalamo-temporal connections also suggests age-related decline in the
mediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus, an area implicated in emotion and
working memory. We conclude that differential thalamic degeneration
may contribute to cognitive decline associated with normal aging.

B12
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF THE HIPPOCAMPUS AND AMYGDALA
VARY WITH AGE AND NEGATIVITY Zachary Ingbretsen1, Kristin Flanary1,

Robert S. Chavez1, Catherine J. Norris1; 1Dartmouth College — Clinical levels
of chronic and traumatic stress have been implicated in atrophy and
functional impairments of the hippocampus and amygdala. In the current study, we examined the relationships between age (18-25 vs. 60-85
year olds), individual differences in negativity, and the structure and
function of the hippocampus and amygdala in a healthy population
using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and voxel-based
morphometry (VBM) to see if stress-related personality traits have similar effects to clinical levels of stress on these structures. We predicted
that individuals high in negativity may exhibit structural and functional
impairments of the hippocampus and amygdala, and that such impairments would increase with age. Negativity was defined using a factor
analysis to combine across individual difference measures of depression,
neuroticism, negative affect, trait anxiety and loneliness, which loaded
on one dimension. A VBM analysis showed that negativity correlated
with decreased gray matter density in the anterior heads of the bilateral
hippocampi. Importantly, this association was stronger in older individ-

63

Poster Session B — Sunday, April 1, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
uals, consistent with our hypothesis that effects of personality traits on
the structure and function of brain structures regions increase over the
life-course. Furthermore, more negative older individuals tended to
exhibit greater activation in of the hippocampus and amygdala in
response to unpleasant stimuli, and they rated such stimuli as more
arousing than both less negative and younger individuals. Our results
provide evidence that highly negative but otherwise healthy individuals
may experience structural and functional changes in the hippocampus
and amygdala that could have implications for emotional memory and
reactivity.

B13
AGE AND SEX EFFECTS ON COGNITIVE AND EMOTIONAL EMPATHY
Janelle Beadle1, Natalie Denburg1, Jessica Caballero2, Sergio Paradiso1;
1
University of Iowa, 2University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez — INTRODUC-

TION. Older adults report lower cognitive empathy than younger
adults. In youth, women report higher empathy because they may be
motivated to be seen as nurturing. However, sex is typically not considered in aging studies of empathy. In late life, both men and women demonstrate a newfound prioritization of close relationships and may prefer
to be viewed as empathetic. This study examined sex and age effects on
cognitive and emotional empathy. It was predicted that men would
show higher empathy with older age, whereas women would show stable empathy. METHOD. Emotional empathy (Interpersonal Reactivity
Index Empathic Concern subscale; score range: 0-28) and cognitive
empathy were measured (Empathy Quotient Cognitive Empathy factor;
score range: 0-18). RESULTS. The model predicted females to score 5.3
points higher than men in emotional empathy with age predicting a .1
point increase each year [model: R2=.13; F(3,248)=12.6; p<.001; Sex
B=5.3; Age B=.1; sex x age B= -.05]. On the other hand, for cognitive
empathy age was predicted to decrease empathy .1 points each year,
while sex was found to be not significant [model: R2=.07; F(3,153)=4.1,
p<.001; sex: B= -2; age: B= -.1; sex x age: B=.05]. DISCUSSION. Women
reported higher emotional empathy across the lifespan. Corroborating
aging studies, cognitive empathy was lower with older age. In contrast,
emotional empathy showed age-related increases. Among women, motivation to be perceived as empathetic may influence emotional empathy
to a greater extent than cognitive empathy. Future studies should consider effects of sex and age on motivation to report high empathy.

B14
DEVELOPMENT OF FEAR EXTINCTION LEARNING AND SPONTANEOUS
RECOVERY IN MICE AND HUMANS Stephanie
Duhoux1,
Siobhan

Pattwell1, Alisa Powers1, Natasha Mehta1, Erika Ruberry1, Theresa Teslovich2,
B.J. Casey1,2, Francis S. Lee1,2; 1Weill Cornell Medical College, 2Weill Cornell
Graduate School of Medical Sciences — Despite a high prevalence of anxi-

ety disorders in children and adolescents, there is little evidence for
when, during development, an intervention or treatment will be most, or
least, effective. One of the most commonly used therapies, exposure
therapy, relies on principles of fear extinction learning. We utilized parallel paradigms, in mice and humans, to identify differences in the persistence and attenuation of fear memories across development.
Conditioned fear memories were acquired via tone-shock pairings and
colored square-aversive sound pairings, in mice and humans, respectively. Extinction of fear memories was then examined across several
days. Dependent measures were percent freezing, in mice, and peak
amplitude of galvanic skin response, in humans. We found age-specific
differences in extinction learning and spontaneous recovery of conditioned fear memory. In particular, pre-adolescent and adult mice and
humans showed significant extinction learning, whereas adolescent mice
and humans showed little evidence of fear extinction learning. In addition, pre-adolescent mice did not show spontaneous recovery, supporting the idea of a fragile memory trace that is susceptible to erasure,
whereas adolescent mice did show spontaneous recovery, suggesting an
intact memory trace. The spontaneous recovery findings tended to be
replicated in humans, but were less robust in part due to attrition with
multiple days of testing. The mouse and human findings suggest a

64

potential temporal window during adolescence when exposure therapy,
may be less effective. These findings suggest that development of fear
regulation through adolescence is not linear and that therapeutic interventions should be designed based on these temporal windows.

B15
NEURAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING SUCCESSFUL EMOTION
REGULATION: A COMPARISON OF TWO STRATEGIES USING DYNAMIC
VIDEO STIMULI Eric Allard1, Elizabeth Kensinger1; 1Boston College — Several studies have contributed to our knowledge of the neural mechanisms underlying emotion regulation. However, a large proportion of
studies examining neural links to successful emotion regulation have
been limited in the strategies assessed and stimuli employed. The goal of
the current study was to examine neural recruitment during two voluntary emotion regulation tasks using dynamic, emotionally evocative
video stimuli. Twenty subjects (aged 18-35) viewed a series of positive,
negative, and neutral film clips during an event-related fMRI scan session. Participants viewed the videos in three blocks with a separate set of
instructions for each block: passive viewing, guided selective attention
(engage with positive and avoid negative-evoking portions of the film),
and cognitive reappraisal. In the cognitive reappraisal task, participants
were instructed to downregulate their response to the negative videos
while maximizing their pleasant feelings toward the positive videos.
Results revealed diminished activation in a region of the left amygdala
when regulating responses to negative videos as compared to passively
viewing negative videos. In examining valence differences within the
regulation conditions, activation was greater within a region of MPFC
when selectively attending away from negative film clips as compared to
engaging with positive film clips. Furthermore, when reappraising negative videos, activation with a region of ACC was greater than when
amplifying reactions to positive videos. This pattern of findings is in line
with previous studies of emotion regulation demonstrating diminished
amygdala activation and increased medial prefrontal engagement during voluntary regulation of negative emotional inputs.

B17
OLDER ADULTS’ POSITIVITY EFFECT IN MEMORY IS RELATED TO THEIR
AMYGDALA-MPFC FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY DURING REST Michiko

Sakaki1, Lin Nga1, Mara Mather1; 1University of Southern California — Older

adults tend to remember and pay attention to more positive and less
negative information than do younger adults (Mather & Carstensen,
2005). This positivity effect was revealed to be associated with increased
couplings between amygdala and medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC)
when processing negative information (St Jacques et al., 2010). However,
little is known about whether the positivity effect in older adults modulates functional connectivity even during baseline states. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we examined amygdala functional
connectivity during rest from 20 older and 20 younger adults (age range
61-78, 19-37 respectively). To address the similarity in brain activity
between during baseline and emotional processing, all participants
underwent a learning phase after the resting scan, where they viewed
videos depicting angry and neutral faces. Finally, their memory about
emotional and neutral faces was tested. Consistent with previous results,
older adults' positivity effect in emotional face memory was associated
with greater activity in MPFC during learning angry than neutral faces.
Moreover, older adults' positivity effect for the emotional faces was
related with stronger functional connectivity between amygdala and
MPFC during rest. In older adults but not in younger adults, the
amygdala-MPFC connectivity during rest predicted the enhanced MPFC
activity when learning angry faces compared with neutral faces. These
results suggest that chronic emotion regulation goals in older adults
increase amygdala-MPFC coupling even during resting states, which
may help support greater MPFC recruitment when emotion regulation is
needed to inhibit responses to negative stimuli.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session B

B18
KIDS, CANDY AND THE BRAIN: NEURAL RESPONSE TO CANDY REWARDS
AND PUNISHMENTS OVER DEVELOPMENT Katherine Luking1, Deanna

Barch1; 1Washington University in Saint Louis — How we react to rewarding
and punishing stimuli in our environment is a critical component of a
host of cognitive processes including attention, motivation, learning, and
risk taking. Converging evidence from animal models and human studies has clarified the neural systems underlying reward processing in
adults. However, fewer studies have investigated developmental
changes within these systems using groups defined by both age and
pubertal development. We utilized fMRI and a modified version of a
card guessing game where candy pieces delivered post-scan served as
the reinforcer. Healthy pre-pubertal children 7-10 years old and young
adults 22-26 years old won and lost large and small amounts of candy
based on their ability to guess whether the number on a mystery card
was above or below 5. BOLD activity following the candy gain (large/
small), loss (large/small) and neutral feedback (no gain/loss) was compared between developmental groups. During gains, both children and
adults recruited regions such as the caudate, putamen, midbrain and
insula, typically involved in reward response. Interestingly, however,
the adults display a much stronger response to reward in the insula and
orbital frontal cortex. During losses, both children and adults displayed
greater activation in the insula and midbrain to punishment than neutral, but less activation in regions such as the hippocampus/amygdala.
Thus, although there are clear similarities in the regions recruited by
children and adults during both candy gain and loss, there are also significant differences in level of activity in regions such as the insula and
orbital frontal cortex.

B19
MINDFULNESS DISPOSITION AND DEFAULT-MODE NETWORK
CONNECTIVITY Ruchika Prakash1, Maryanna Klatt1, Angeline DeLeon1,

William Malarkey1; 1The Ohio State University — An extensive body of
research defines the default-mode network to be one of the critical networks of the human brain, demonstrating coherence throughout our
lifespan, and playing a pivotal functional role in regulating affective and
cognitive control. Alterations in the connectivity of this network as a
function of aging have been found, with reductions associated with functional ramifications for the elderly population. This study examined
associations between age-related reductions in the integrity of the DMN
and trait levels of mindfulness disposition, defined by our ability to
experience the present moment in its entirety, without dwelling on the
past or worrying about the future. Twenty-five older and twenty
younger adults participated in the study and underwent a brief functional MRI session and filled out questionnaires related to their overall
health, and mindfulness disposition. Consistent with previous research,
we found an age-related reduction in the coherence of the default-mode
network in the precuneus, posterior cingulate cortex, and the left parahippocampal gyrus. Mindfulness disposition, in turn, was associated
with an increased coherence between regions of the DMN, such that
higher levels of mindfulness disposition in the elderly were associated
with increased spontaneous oscillations between the precuneus and the
posterior cingulate cortex. Mindfulness disposition thus explains some
variance in the connectivity of one of the more intrinsic networks of the
human brain, known to be critical for promoting self-relevant mental
explorations and building cognitive reserve to engage in exogenous processing.

B20
PUBERTY EFFECTS ON SUBCORTICAL BRAIN VOLUMES DURING
ADOLESCENCE: A LONGITUDINAL STUDY Snezana Urosevic1, Ryan

Muetzel1, Paul Collins1, Kelvin Lim1, Monica Luciana1; 1University of
Minnesota--Twin Cities — Puberty is an essential developmental process of
adolescence and increasingly linked to the maturation of emotional processing functions that extend beyond sexual contexts. There is also preliminary evidence for a link between puberty and structural changes in

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

subcortical brain regions involved in emotional processing and those
with sexual dimorphic patterns (e.g., Bramen et al., 2011). However,
there is no data examining unique effects of puberty (controlling for age)
on longitudinal changes in subcortical brain volumes. The present study
examined these unique effects of puberty and interaction effects of
puberty and sex on concurrent subcortical volumes and prospective
changes in these volumes. The sample of 106 healthy adolescents, ages 9
to 18, was assessed for pubertal status using picture depictions of Tanner
stages (Taylor et al., 2001). To assess brain volumes at baseline and at a
two-year follow-up, MRI images were acquired using a 3-T Siemens Trio
scanner (TR = 2530 msec, TE = 3.65 msec, TI = 1100 msec, 240 slices, voxel
size =1.0mm x 1.0mm x 1.0mm, flip angle = 7°, FOV = 256 mm) and processed using FreeSurfer software to quantify subcortical volumes (e.g.,
amygdala, caudate, hippocampus, nucleus accumbens, pallidum, putamen) within each hemisphere. Results suggest unique effects of puberty
on subcortical volumes involved in emotional processing, such as
nucleus accumbens, and puberty by sex interaction effects on some subcortical volumes, such as caudate. Thus, the study implicates puberty as
potentially driving structural brain changes that may underlie increased
reward sensitivity and emerging sex differences during adolescence.

B21
UNLIKE ADULTS, INFANTS' VISUAL PREFERENCES ARE DRIVEN BY
LOWER-LEVEL VISUAL FEATURES Edward Vessel1, Lauren Burakowski2,

Lauren Krogh2, Scott Johnson2; 1New York University, 2University of California,
Los Angeles — What information guides infants' visual preferences? Adult
spontaneous visual preferences are largely determined by semantic associations - when asked to indicate preferences for real-world scenes containing shared semantic associations, adults show high agreement in
which images are preferred (Vessel & Rubin, 2010). However, when the
same adults indicate preferences for abstract images (e.g. fractals) containing no common semantic interpretations, preferences are highly
individual. Therefore, adults' shared semantics lead to shared preferences. Infants, however, are unlikely to have developed semantic associations. What drives their preferences, and will they show agreement?
We measured preferences for fourteen 5-month-old infants. During each
session, infants viewed a set of real-world or abstract images. Pairs of
images were presented side-by-side (4sec) and preference was measured
by which image the infant fixated longer. Preference scores computed
from the paired-comparison data were compared across infants. Surprisingly, agreement in preference across infants was high for both realworld and abstract images (0.45 for scenes: t(44) = 18.4, p <0.0001; 0.46
for abstract images: t(44) = 16.1, p <0.0001). These means are not different
(t(44) = 0.32, p = 0.75), indicating that infants have similar agreement for
both types of images. These data suggest that infants' visual preferences
are driven by lower-level visual features (e.g. shape and color), which
are present in both abstract and real-world images. The highly individual preferences for abstract images in adults strongly suggests a developmental change in the information used to compute preferences. As
children acquire knowledge of semantic associations, these associations
come to dominate preference.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development &
aging
B22
A FUNCTIONAL MRI INVESTIGATION OF THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN
CHILDHOOD AEROBIC FITNESS AND NEUROCOGNITIVE CONTROL

Laura Chaddock1, Kirk Erickson2, Ruchika Prakash3, Michelle Voss1, Matt
VanPatter1, Matthew Pontifex1, Charles Hillman1, Arthur Kramer1; 1University
of Illinois, 2University of Pittsburgh, 3The Ohio State University — Aerobically

fit children have been found to exhibit superior cognitive control relative
to lower-fit children, and performance differences are related to brain
volumes and ERP indices. This study used fMRI to examine brain activity of higher-fit (N=14) and lower-fit (N=18) 9- and 10-year-old children
during a flanker task. The flanker task requires a response to the direc-

65

Poster Session B — Sunday, April 1, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
tion of a central target amid distractors, and incongruent trials (e.g.,
>><>>) are said to require increased cognitive control relative to congruent trials (e.g., >>>>>). We examined fMRI activation and performance
during early and late task blocks of the flanker paradigm as a function of
aerobic fitness and task difficulty. For congruent trials, all children
showed increased recruitment of frontal and parietal regions during the
early block when the task was unfamiliar, followed by a decrease in
activity in the later block as the task became more familiar. No withingroup changes in congruent accuracy were reported across task blocks,
despite a decline in performance across all participants, likely due to
fatigue. During incongruent trials, only higher-fit children maintained
accuracy across blocks, coupled with increased prefrontal and parietal
recruitment in the early task block and reduced activity in the later
block. Lower-fit children showed a decline in incongruent accuracy
across blocks, and no changes in activation. We suggest that higher-fit
children are better at adapting neural processes involved in cognitive
control to maintain task goals. Because children are becoming increasingly unfit, understanding the neurocognitive benefits of an active lifestyle has important public health implications.

B23
DEVELOPMENT OF INDIVIDUAL ACTIVATION DURING PERFORMANCE
MONITORING IN MEDIAL FRONTAL CORTEX: A HIERARCHICAL LINEAR
MODEL OF TOPOGRAPHIC PATTERNS Suzanne Perkins1, Robert Welsh1,
Emily Stern2, Stephan Taylor1, Kate Fitzgerald1; 1University of Michigan,

2Mount Sinai School of Medicine — Age-related

improvements in performance monitoring have been linked to the maturation of medial frontal
cortex in healthy youth. Previous studies do not control for number of
peak activations, size of clusters, age and accuracy on the task. A threelevel hierarchical linear model (HLM) was fitted to examine locations of
peaks and both between subject and within brain characteristics. We
used two different outcome measures of location of activation, radius
from the corpus callosum and longitudinal spline (LS) (distance along
the corpus callosum, Stern, Welsh, Fitzgerald, & S. F. Taylor, 2009). In the
final interference model, age (? = -0.80, t = -6.69, p < 0.001) and percent
accuracy (? = -29.97, t = -2.77, p = 0.012) were predictors of LS when controlling for differences in cluster extent, such that for each year older
peak location was .8 mm more dorsal and posterior along the corpus callosum and with 1% greater accuracy activation was ~3 mm more dorsal
and posterior. In the final error model, age was not a factor, however,
there was a difference in LS based on total number of errors (? = -0.29, t =
-2.19, p < 0.05), such that with fewer errors, activations were more rostral
and anterior. The results suggest that with greater maturity improved
performance interference processing becomes more dorsal and posterior
whereas during the processing of errors the greater number of error
committed the more rostral and anterior processing takes place, separate
from development.

B24
THE EFFECTS OF BRAIN TRAINING GAMES ON COGNITIVE
PERFORMANCE, SELF-EFFICACY, AND MOOD Janna K. Comrie1, Ashley

F. Curtis1, Laura Branscombe-Caird1, Paula M. McLaughlin1, Susan J.E.
Murtha1; 1York University — OBJECTIVE: The present study investigated

whether computerized brain training programs can influence cognitive
functioning and mood in middle-aged adults. METHODS: Fourteen participants (ages 46-55 years) engaged in an experimental Brain Training
condition that required them to play “Big Brain Academy” on a Nintendo DS for one hour, three times a week, for six weeks. To emulate the
time working with technology, during the control Trivia Questions condition, participants spent the same amount of time using an online
search engine finding answers to trivia questions. Half the participants
completed the Brain Training condition first followed by the Trivia
Questions condition. The remaining participants did the conditions in
the reverse order. A comprehensive neuropsychological battery was
used to measure the influence of brain training on cognitive functioning.
RESULTS: Brain Training significantly increased verbal fluency (p =

66

.003) and significantly decreased self-reported anxiety (as measured by
both the Profile of Mood States & the Hospital Anxiety and Depression
Scale) as compared to the Trivia Questions condition. The decrease in
anxiety was sustained over an additional 6-week follow-up period.
CONCLUSIONS: Brain Training provided limited improvement on standardized measures of cognitive functioning. Upon completing the Brain
Training program, participants demonstrated a significant reduction in
anxiety and an increase in cognitive fluency. It is possible that reduced
anxiety resulted in improved verbal fluency, but more research is
needed to define this relationship. Future research should investigate the
neural mechanisms of this effect and the longer-term cognitive training
benefits on different measures of anxiety and executive functions.

B25
AGE DIFFERENCES IN INCENTIVE PROCESSING: BEYOND THE REWARD
NETWORK Julia Spaniol1, Holly J. Bowen1, Pete Wegier1, Cheryl L. Grady2,3;
1Ryerson

University, 2Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest, 3University of

Toronto — Reward anticipation is associated with activity in the dopaminergic midbrain as well as the ventral striatum, amygdala, and medial
prefrontal cortex. Dopaminergic neuromodulation declines with age,
suggesting that incentive processing should also undergo age-related
change. However, the literature is mixed, perhaps reflecting variation in
the degree to which tasks made demands on learning and memory. Furthermore, the emphasis has been on the reward network, with few studies addressing reward-related activations in other brain regions. In the
current study, 16 younger adults (mean age: 25.4) and 15 older adults
(mean age: 69.0) underwent fMRI while completing a variant of the monetary incentive delay task (Knutson et al., 2001; Samanez-Larkin et al.,
2007). This task allowed the separate assessment of responses to gain
and loss incentive cues, while minimizing demands on learning and
memory. We assessed incentive-related activations using mean-centered
Partial Least Squares (PLS; McIntosh et al., 2004), a data-driven multivariate technique optimal for identifying spatio-temporal whole-brain
activation patterns associated with variation in task conditions. The analyses yielded two significant latent variables representing distinct incentive-related activation patterns. The first pattern showed robust
activation of the reward network and was not modulated by age. The
second pattern, peaking ~10s after cue onset, showed increased activation in older adults of a network of fronto-parietal regions. Neither pattern was modulated by incentive valence. Overall, these findings suggest
that aging may not affect primary motivational processing in the reward
network, but may be associated with incentive-driven up-regulation of
cognitive control in the service of action preparation.

B26
COGNITIVE TRAINING IN HEALTHY OLD AGE: COMPARISON OF 3
TRAINING TASKS ON COGNITIVE FUNCTIONING AND WHITE MATTER
INTERGRITY. Pamela Greenwood1, Ellen Clarke1, Maren Strenziok1, James
Bicksel2, Ryan McGarry1, Jon Strohl1, James Thompson1, Raja Parasuraman1;
George Mason University, 2Memory Center of Fairfax Inova Hospital — Cogni-

1

tive training has the potential to slow or delay cognitive decline in
healthy aging. Neural plasticity may play a role in far transfer, with
training-related changes observed in white matter integrity (e.g. Takeuchi et al., 2010). To understand what aspects of training are important for
improving cognition and brain function in old age, we assessed 3 training tasks on training transfer, cortical thickness, and white matter integrity. Healthy, screened older adults (aged 60-80) were assessed for
baseline brain structure (sMRI scan with MPRAGE, DTI, resting connectivity) and cognitive function (neuropsychological tests, working memory (WM) and attention tasks, objective assessments of everyday
problem solving). Participants were randomly assigned to one of three
cognitive training tasks: Posit’s Brain Fitness (BF) focused on auditory
cognition, Microsoft’s Rise of Nations (RoN) - a broad-based strategy
game, and Space Fortress (SF) which is a complex task involving both
cognitive and motor components. Training sessions were supervised
weekly in the laboratory with feedback and instruction. Participants

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session B
played an hour a day, 6 days a week, for 6 weeks and performance at
home was monitored. Following training, a post-training sMRI and cognitive battery were administered. Benefits of training were strongest for
SF on everyday problem solving and WM. Effects of SF and BF but not
RoN were seen on WM. Fractional anisotrophy showed training-related
change following SF and BF in white matter in left prefrontal and parietal cortices and temporal lobe. Thus, tasks which loaded discrimination
and motor skills showed stronger cognitive and brain effects.

B27
OBESITY, FITNESS, AND COGNITION IN CHILDREN Cynthia

Krafft1,
Benjamin Austin2, Qingyang Li3, Abby Weinberger1, Kara Dyckman1, Patricia
Miller4, Phillip Tomporowski1, Jennifer McDowell1, Catherine Davis5;
1
University of Georgia, 2University of Wisconsin, 3Child Mind Institute, 4San
Francisco State University, 5Georgia Health Sciences University — Previous
studies have demonstrated that there are relationships between obesity,
fitness, and measures of cognitive control. In adults, increased obesity
and decreased fitness have been associated with better executive control
(EC). In children, increased obesity and decreased fitness have been
associated with lower performance on tests of aptitude, achievement,
and EC. The current study further investigated how fatness and fitness
are related to EC by examining performance on behavioral measures of
EC. Participants were 125 sedentary, overweight (BMI greater than or
equal to the 85th percentile) children 8 - 11 years old. All participants
underwent standard tests measuring fatness and fitness. The antisaccade
task was used as a behavioral measure of EC. Correct antisaccades
require the inhibition of a reflexive glance towards a visual cue presented in the periphery, and the generation of a volitional saccade
towards its mirror image (opposite side, same distance from center). An
initial glance towards the cue is an antisaccade error and is construed as
a failure of EC. Exploratory analyses in this group of overweight children indicate that performance on antisaccades was associated with
measures of fatness and fitness, as well as performance on other cognitive measures. Generally, better antisaccade performance was associated
with lower fatness and higher fitness measures. Specifically, increased
treadmill time was associated with an increased percent of errors corrected when controlling for race and gender. In sum, this study extends
the documented relationship between obesity, fitness, and EC into an
overweight sample of children engaged in behavioral measures of EC.

B28
FUNCTIONAL ACTIVATION MEDIATES THE AGING EFFECT ON REACTION
TIME IN A TASK-SWITCHING PARADIGM. Yunglin Gazes1, Christian

Habeck1, Jason Steffener1, Brian Rakitin1, Yaakov Stern1; 1Columbia
University — The goal of this study was to determine the age-related neu-

ronal changes (via fMRI) that predict age-related performance changes
in single-task and task-switching conditions for elder (n = 23, M = 65.2 ±
2.65) and young (n = 24, M = 25.2 ± 2.73) participants. The activation task
was a task-switching paradigm consisting of vowel/consonant and
upper/lower-case identification using the color of the stimulus as task
cue. Ordinal trend covariance analysis, a multivariate analysis, was used
to isolate a task-related fMRI activation network. This analytical
approach specifically identifies the set of brain regions that increases in
activation with increasing task demand. Expression of the task-related
network was then tested as a mediator of age and reaction time (RT) in a
mediation analysis. A task-related network was identified in which
regions that increased in activation with task level included extensive
bilateral insula extending into superior temporal cortex, bilateral anterior cingulate, right supplementary motor area, and left inferior frontal
cortex. Expression of this pattern was found to be a significant mediator
of the aging effect on RT in both task conditions such that expression of
the task-related network correlated negatively with both age and RT,
suggesting that younger subjects express this pattern more than elder
adults and that expression of the pattern is associated with better performance. Our result showed that the age-associated change in performance is partially explained by reduced expression of a task-related

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

network, thus providing evidence for the link between age-related
behavioral changes and altered brain activation.

B29
SCAFFOLDING ACROSS THE LIFESPAN IN CHOICE-DEPENDENT,
DYNAMIC DECISION MAKING Jessica A. Cooper1, Darrell A. Worthy2, W.
Todd Maddox1; 1University of Texas at Austin, 2Texas A&M University — The

scaffolding hypothesis of cognitive aging suggests that older adults
recruit a broader range of frontal regions, relative to younger adults, to
compensate for age-related neural declines in a variety of cognitive tasks
(Park & Reuter-Lorentz, 2009). Recent work from our lab (Worthy, et al,
2011) found an age-related performance advantage in choice-dependent
decision making that we attributed to a shift in reliance from a striatally
mediated model-free system to a frontally mediated model-based system
(Glascher et al., 2010). Scaffolding is also predicted to occur across the
lifespan when more neural resources must be recruited due to increased
task demands. Older adults may face a “crunch” point when task
demands exceed the neural resources that can be recruited, resulting in
poor performance (Reuter-Lorenz & Cappell, 2008). However, younger
adults may perform better with increased task demands due to a shift
toward model-based decision making. To test this hypothesis we had
older and younger adults perform either a two-choice dynamic decisionmaking task under either pressure or no pressure, or a four-choice task
under no pressure. We found strong support for our predictions. Older
adults performed better on the two-choice task while under no pressure,
while younger adults performed better under pressure on the two-choice
task and better on the four-choice task. Thus the older brain under no
pressure and with low task complexity operates similarly to the younger
brain under pressure and with increased task complexity. We interpret
these results as evidence of compensatory scaffolding across the lifespan.

B30
AGE DIFFERENCES IN PREFRONTAL ACTIVATION ENHANCE SELECTION
OF FUTURE REWARDS Marissa Gorlick1, Darrell Worthy2, Akram Bakkour1,

Jeanette Mumford1, Russell Poldrack1, Todd Maddox1; 1University of Texas at
Austin, 2Texas A&M University — Park and Reuter-Lorentz’ (2009) scaffold-

ing hypothesis of cognitive aging suggests that older adults recruit a
broader range of prefrontal regions relative to younger adults to compensate for age-related neural declines. We (Worthy, Gorlick et al, 2011)
recently found an age-related performance advantage in two-option
choice-dependent decision-making. In this task, one option always
yields a larger immediate reward, but causes rewards for both options to
decrease, whereas the other option always yields smaller immediate
reward, but causes future rewards to increase. The optimal strategy is to
forgo the immediately rewarding option and to select the option that
increases future rewards. We attribute the age-related advantage to
older adults’ ability to switch from a striatally mediated model-free system, which seeks options with better immediate rewards, to a frontally
mediated model-based system, which develops a global mental model of
the reward structure (Glascher et al., 2010). In the current research,
younger and older adults completed the Worthy et al decision making
task in an fMRI scanner. In line with the scaffolding hypothesis, we predicted that older adults would recruit a broader range of prefrontal
areas, and may show weaker activation in the striatum. We replicated
the age-related performance advantage. Our fMRI results support the
hypothesis that older adults are using increased prefrontal activation to
guide selection of future rewards. Older adults have greater orbitofrontal and frontal pole activation than younger adults. On the other hand,
older adults have weaker bilateral caudate and right putamen activation
than younger adults.

B31
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN NEURAL ACTIVATION: THE ROLE OF
DEFAULT MODE NETWORK CONNECTIVITY Angeline De Leon1, Beth

Patterson1, Ruchika Shaurya Prakash1; 1The Ohio State University — Aging is
associated with prominent changes in the functional neuroarchitecture
of the brain. A consistent finding within this domain of study is a general
67

Poster Session B — Sunday, April 1, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
pattern of task-related cortical overactivation in older adults. To date,
however, the operational significance of this increased neural activity
remains unclear. Recent investigations of the resting-state brain have
implicated the Default-Mode Network (DMN), distinguished by its consistent patterns of activation and fluctuation during rest periods and its
extensive connectivity with other higher-order brain networks, in the
critical modulation of cortical activity. Given additional evidence for the
age-related deterioration of DMN functionality (i.e., reduced activation
as well as functional connectivity), the present study investigated agerelated differences in task-related cortical recruitment as a function of
DMN integrity. 18 young and 20 older adults were recruited to complete
the Flanker Task and a resting-state scan inside an MRI scanner. For
Flanker data, a direct comparison of young and older subjects confirmed
overall enhanced cortical recruitment of attentional areas for older
adults, relative to young. In examining the influence of reduced DMN
connectivity on cortical recruitment, a voxel-based linear regression
revealed age-related differences in the functional significance of DMN
disintegration. While DMN breakdown in older adults was associated
with patterns of task-related cortical activation as well as regional overactivation, in young adults, it was specifically associated with activation
of DMN-related areas. Overall, findings provide evidence for the importance of the DMN’s intrinsic coherence in regards to neural functioning,
highlighting in particular the implications of DMN disintegration for the
aging brain.

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
B32
AGE, SEX, AND VERBAL ABILITIES AFFECT LOCATION OF LINGUISTIC
CONNECTIVITY IN VENTRAL VISUAL PATHWAY Douglas D Burman1,
Taylor Minas2, Donald J Bolger3, James R Booth2; 1NorthShore University
HealthSystem, 2Northwestern University, 3Maryland University — Previous

studies have shown that the strength of connectivity between regions
can vary depending upon the cognitive demands of a task, implicating
these connections in task performance. In this study, the location of taskdependent connectivity from the primary visual cortex (V1) is examined
in 43 children (ages 9-15) performing visual tasks. Task-dependent connectivity maxima were identified for a visual task requiring a linguistic
(spelling) judgment. Multiple regression analysis demonstrated significant effects of age, sex, and verbal IQ on maxima coordinates; analysis of
variance identified interaction between these factors. Increases in age
and verbal IQ produced similar shifts in maxima location; in girls, connectivity maxima shifted primarily laterally within the temporal lobe,
whereas the shift was primarily posterior within occipital cortex among
boys. A composite map across all subjects shows an expansion in the
area of connectivity with age, extending posterior into extrastriate occipital cortex, lateral within fusiform gyrus and adjacent inferotemporal
cortex, and anterior within inferotemporal cortex. Our findings indicate
that developmental changes in connectivity are important for linguistic
function, that girls and boys may use different strategies for performing
linguistic tasks, and that individual variability in the location of connectivity can vary systematically.

B33
LEARNING TO READ REORGANIZES THE ORAL LANGUAGE NETWORK
ONLY IN ALPHABETIC WRITING SYSTEMS Christine Brennan1, Fan

Cao1,2, Nicole Pedroarena-Leal1, Chris McNorgan1, James R. Booth1;
1
Northwestern University, 2Nanyang Technological University — We sought to

investigate how the nature of different writing systems (i.e., English and
Chinese) influences the development of the oral language network. We
expected that orthography should influence the phonological network to
a greater degree in English because of strong associations between the
visual letter forms and the phonemes they represent, whereas Chinese
has weaker associations between orthography and phonology. Wholebrain and region-of-interest analyses were utilized to compare English
and Chinese children and adults who completed an auditory rhyming

68

task during fMRI. Manipulation of spelling and rhyme information
allowed us to measure the influence of conflicting and non-conflicting
orthographic information in both languages. We found an interaction
between language and age in the phonological network with the greatest
developmental increases in English for conflicting compared to non-conflicting conditions, suggesting that reading influences the nature of the
phonological system. Alphabetic systems foster development of strong
phonological representations due to strong associations between visual
letter forms and corresponding phonemes. A positive correlation
between reading skill and activation of the auditory cortex was found
only for English children, suggesting that alphabetic orthographies
enhance phonological skills and lead to greater engagement of phonological regions during spoken word processing; this is not seen for Chinese because letter to sound mappings are not engaged. In conclusion,
the current study reveals that writing system differences do seem to lead
to cross-cultural brain divergence with alphabetic orthographies enhancing phonological awareness skills and restructuring the auditory cortex.

B34
PRIMARY AUDITORY CORTEX SHOWS AGE-RELATED INCREASES IN
SENSITITIVITY TO MULTIMODAL CONGRUENCY Chris McNorgan1, Neha

Awati1, James R. Booth1; 1Northwestern University — Multimodal cognitive
processes are ubiquitous, involving integration of information from multiple senses. Fluent whole word reading is dependent on a learned association between phonemes and an abstract orthography and is therefore
one such process that requires integration of input from both auditory
and visual processing areas. Studies that have more closely examined
the multisensory nature of reading have attempted to identify and clarify the network and functionality of the brain regions involved in multisensory language processing. Previous research has shown the posterior
region of the superior temporal sulcus to be sensitive to manipulations of
congruency, in terms of temporal and letter-phoneme identity, between
simultaneously presented letter and speech sounds, implicating this
region as an audio-visual integration locus (van Atteveldt et al., 2009).
Additionally, these studies have shown that crossmodal congruency
modulates activity in primary auditory processing areas, namely the
Heschl’s Gyrus (HG), and planum temporale (PT). In the present study,
we test whether analogous congruency effects appear at the whole word
level, were dependent on lexicality, and develop with age. Eighteen typically developing children made phonological judgments to two sequentially presented words in one of three modality conditions. Results
showed developmental increases for crossmodal versus unimodal congruency in both the HG and PT. These results suggest that increased
reading skill in alphabetic languages is accompanied by an increasingly
multimodal phonological store.

B35
NEURAL PROCESSING OF WORD STRESS AND PHONEMES IN 3- AND 6MONTH-OLD INFANTS Angelika Becker1, Ulrike Schild1, Claudia K.
Friedrich1; 1University of Hamburg — Infants process the prosody of their

maternal language different from other language prosodies quite after
birth. However, within their first months of life they do not show different processing of phonemes of their maternal language compared to
phonemes that are not used in their maternal language. Here we tested
whether neural processing of word stress and phonemes undergoes fundamental changes between 3 and 6 months after birth. We presented
stressed syllables and unstressed syllables (primes). Each prime was followed by an initially stressed disyllabic spoken German word (target).
Half of the primes shared the initial phonemes with their targets (e.g.
pup – Puppe [Engl. doll]). Half of the primes did not share the targets’
phonemes (e.g. fe – Puppe). EEG – Data of 30 3-month-olds and 30 6month-olds from German speaking environments were analyzed. In the
3-month-olds target words elicited different ERPs if they were preceded
by stressed vs. unstressed primes. There was no ERP effect for phoneme
overlap between prime and target in 3 month-olds. We observed the
opposite pattern for 6-month-olds. Target words elicited different ERPs
if they were preceded by primes with the same initial phonemes com-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session B
pared to primes with different phonemes. There was no ERP effect for
stress overlap between prime and target in 6 month-olds. Thus, it seems
that stress-based language representations develop earlier and independent from phoneme-based language representations in infancy.

B36
LARGE-SCALE PHASE SYNCHRONY OF BRAIN ACTIVITY IN PREVERBAL
INFANTS DETECTING SOUND SYMBOLISM Keiichi Kitajo1,2,3, Michiko

Asano4,5,6, Guillaume Thierry7, Sotaro Kita8, Hiroyuki Okada6, Mutsumi Imai4;
1RIKEN BSI-Toyota collaboration center, 2RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 3JST
PRESTO, 4Keio University, 5JSPS, 6Tamagawa University, 7Bangor University,
8
The University of Birmingham — Sound symbolism refers to a non-arbitrary relationship between linguistic sound and meaning. A previous
study has suggested that sound symbolism helps 3-year-olds to identify
the referents of a new word (Imai et al., 2008). An important question is
whether infants are sensitive to “natural” sound-meaning correlates
before they start word leaning, which may be mediated by biologicallydriven, spontaneous auditory-visual integration. To answer this question, we conducted a “bouba-kiki” experiment (Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2001) with 11- to 12-month-olds (N=19) using EEG measures. The
infants were presented with a spiky or rounded visual shape followed
by a nonsense linguistic sound consisting of either voiceless stops and
high vowels or nasal consonants and mid/low vowels (“kipi” and
“moma”, respectively). Shape and sound were sound-symbolically
matched in half of the trials, and mismatched in the other half. We measured 9-channel scalp EEG, computed the instantaneous phase of EEG
signals using the Gabor wavelet transform, and used phase locking
value (PLV) to estimate the degree of phase synchrony between EEG signals. Long-lasting beta-band (13-25Hz) phase synchrony between frontal
and parietal electrode pairs was observed more prominently in the mismatch condition than in the match condition. We interpret this finding as
reflecting effortful auditory-visual integration when the sound mismatched the shape. The PLV analyses not only revealed that preverbal
infants were able to detect sound symbolism but also revealed that there
are differences in the dynamical networking for processing sound-symbolically matched and mismatched auditory-visual information.

B37
CONTRASTING INFANTS WITH A FAMILY HISTORY OF SPECIFIC
LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT TO THOSE WITH A FAMILY HISTORY OF
DYSLEXIA: CONTINUUM OR DISCRETE GROUPS? Naseem Choudhury1,2,
April Benasich2; 1Ramapo College of New Jersey, 2Rutgers, Newark — The

ability to perform fine-grained acoustic analysis in the tens of millisecond range during infancy has been shown to be a robust predictor of language development and disorders. Here the early processing abilities of
infants at higher risk for language impairment as a function of family
history of Specific Language Impairment (FH+SLI, n=11) or Dyslexia
(FH+Dys, n=10) were compared to control children (FH-/Ctrl, n=10)
using scalp electrocortical recordings (ERPs). An oddball paradigm to
complex tone-pairs (standard:100-100 Hz, deviant:100-300 Hz [15%])
with 300ms or 70ms ISI was employed. ERP morphology suggests significant differences in early obligatory and auditory detection components
for the 70ms ISI stimuli only. Infants in the FH+SLI group showed significantly larger P1 peaks as compared to FH+Dys and FH-/Ctrl groups
(1.24?V versus 0.35 & 0.5?V, respectively) and absent N2 peaks. Differences were also observed on the subtraction waveform: while there were
no differences in the MMR latency between FH-/Ctrl (400ms) and
FH+Dys (420ms) infants, the peak latency in the FH+SLI group was
delayed (500ms). FH+Dys infants, however, showed significantly
weaker MMR responses as compared to other groups. Association
between infants ERPs and 3-year language abilities revealed a continuing impact of poor auditory processing. Infants with faster N2 latencies
and more robust MMR’s had better expressive language scores (R2= 0.25
– 0.15, p<.05). These findings suggest differences in basic auditory detection and discrimination processes of infants with familial risk factors and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

that familial risk for SLI and/or dyslexia differentially affect early auditory processing mechanisms.

B38
MATURATIONAL
DIFFERENCES
IN
LANGUAGE-RELEVANT
FRONTOTEMPORAL WHITE MATTER FIBER TRACTS Michael A. Skeide1,

Jens Brauer1, Angela D. Friederici1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — Frontotemporal brain areas are

crucially involved in processing various types of linguistic information
both in the syntax and the semantics domain. Although progress has
been made in exploring the cortical connectivity of perisylvian language
areas (Dehaene-Lambertz, 2006; Friederici, 2009) further research is
needed to achieve a detailed understanding of language-related structural maturation stages in the developing brain. In the present diffusionweighted imaging study we investigated differences between perisylvian white matter fiber tracts in 3-4-year old and 9-10-year old children as well as adults. To tackle this issue, we directly compared
fractional anisotropy (FA) values between whole brain white matter
skeletons for each group running a tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS)
analysis. In the older child group significantly higher FA values (p<0.01,
threshold-free cluster enhancement corrected) compared to the younger
child group were found in various cortical and subcortical regions
including the inferior frontal gyri (IFG) and the superior temporal gyri
(STG). Remarkably, FA differences where more robust and broader in
the left IFG and to a lesser degree in the left posterior STG. A similar
comparison of FA values between 9-10-year old children and adults still
revealed significant differences in both the IFG and the STG. However,
these effects were less robust and less left-lateralized. Results indicate
ongoing neuronal maturation, presumably fiber myelination as well as
increasing axonal density, in frontotemporal neural language networks
of the developing brain. Although this process is much more pronounced between 3-4-years and 9-10-years of age it seems to continue
into adulthood.

B39
ANATOMICAL CORRELATES OF SPOKEN NARRATIVE PERFORMANCE IN
CHILDREN WITH HIGH FUNCTIONING AUTISM Brian Mills1, Pamela

Moses1, Janie Lai1, Matt Ignacio1, Judy Reilly1, Matt Erhart2, Tim Brown2, Mark
Appelbaum2; 1San Diego State University, 2University of California, San
Diego — Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by defi-

cits in language and communication. Previous research examining cortical thickness in regions central to language has shown abnormalities in
autism. Studies correlating language performance and cortical thickness
often rely on standardized language tests. However, these studies provide a limited portrait of language ability and do not examine language
in real world contexts, namely spoken discourse. In the current study, 16
typically developing (TD) children and 11 children with high functioning autism (HFA) ages 8-12 told a story of an instance when they had a
conflict with another person. Spoken narratives were scored for length,
syntactic complexity, and narrative structure. In addition, children were
administered the Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals (CELF).
Structural magnetic resonance imaging data were measured for cortical
thickness in classic language regions. Results for the spoken narrative
measures in the HFA group revealed a positive correlation between cortical thickness and language performance; the thicker the cortex, the better the language score. In contrast, the TD group shows a negative or
absence of correlation across narrative measures. For the standardized
CELF measures, there were no group differences in correlations between
thickness and performance. Further, Performance IQ did not show
group differences in relation to cortical thickness. Children with HFA
show a distinctly different relationship between language and cortical
development and this aberrant relationship appears to be specific to spoken narrative language. A delay or reduction in normal developmental
pruning may support better narrative performance in HFA.

69

Poster Session B — Sunday, April 1, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall

B40
RESTING GAMMA POWER AS AN INDEX OF MATURATIONAL RATE.

Adam Tierney1, Dana Strait1, Nina Kraus1; 1Northwestern University — Gamma
oscillations have been associated with a wide variety of cognitive and
perceptual processes, including visual short-term memory, spatial attention, selective attention, and object perception. Little is known, however,
about the development of spontaneous gamma oscillations during adolescence and its relationship with cognitive and perceptual abilities.
Here, we collected ongoing EEG from subjects aged 14-16.5 while they
sat quietly with their eyes open. Results reveal that resting gamma
power decreases between ages 14 and 15 (early adolescence) but then
remains stable for ages 15 and 16.5 (later adolescence). Moreover, early
but not late adolescent subjects demonstrated correlations between resting gamma power and reading and language perception, such that lower
gamma power was linked to better performance. These results suggest
that resting gamma power can be used as an index of maturational
progress in adolescence and that reading and speech-in-noise abilities
are particularly sensitive to differences in maturational rate. Supported
by training grants T32 DC009399-02 and F31DC011457 and a grant from
the G. Harold and Leila Y. Mathers Foundation.

B41
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL RECORDINGS OF BRAIN ACTIVITY IN
PRESCHOOLERS REVEALS THE CONCEPTUAL PROCESSING OF SPOKEN
NUMBER WORDS Michal Pinhas1, Sarah Donohue1, Marty Woldorff1,

Elizabeth Brannon1; 1Duke University — A handful of studies have explored
the neural correlates of numerical cognition in young children aged 5
and younger; no studies, however, have investigated the learning and
processing of spoken number words. This is a gap in the literature, given
the substantial controversy over (a) why children seem to learn the
meaning of number words very slowly, and (b) whether children rely on
the approximate number system when they first map number words
onto preverbal representations (e.g., Carey, 2009; Gelman & Gallistel,
1978; Wynn, 1990; 1992). Here we use event-related potentials (ERPs) to
study neural processing related to number-word comprehension in 4and 5-year-old children. We used a picture/spoken-word match-mismatch paradigm analogous to toddler word-learning ERP studies (e.g.,
Friedrich & Friederici, 2004). Children heard the spoken number words
one, two, three or six while looking at pictures of 1, 2, 3 or 6 objects, with
the number word being incongruent with the number of visual objects
on half the trials, and congruent on the other half. Incongruent number
words, relative to congruent ones, elicited a long-lasting, frontocentral,
negative-polarity ERP wave onsetting at ~200 ms, presumably reflecting
the detection of the numerical inconsistency. Preliminary analysis suggests this enhanced negative wave for incongruent trials was also modulated by the numerical difference between the number word and the
visual image. These results provide the first neural correlates of spoken
number-word comprehension in preschoolers and establish a basis for
studying younger children as they learn the meaning of number words.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Development &
aging
B42
DIFFERENCES IN BRAIN ACTIVITY DURING A VERBAL ASSOCIATIVE
MEMORY ENCODING TASK IN HIGH AND LOW-ACTIVE ADOLESCENTS

Megan M Herting1, Bonnie J Nagel1; 1Oregon Health & Science University —
Aerobic exercise is not only good for the body but also benefits the brain.
Greater aerobic fitness relates to better memory, as well as brain function
in elderly adults and preadolescent children. However, the impact of
exercise on the adolescent brain has received little attention, and no
study has explored how exercise may influence brain activity during the
encoding of new memories. Here we examined brain activity in 15 highactive (age=16.2, SD=.9) and 11 low-active (age=16.5, SD=.8) male adolescents during a verbal associative memory encoding task. Participants

70

were presented with a series of novel word pairs to learn during a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scan, and then performed a
post-scan recognition task. Voxelwise ANCOVA were used to examine
group differences in blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal during encoding of word pairs subsequently remembered with high confidence compared to those later forgotten. Despite equivalent task
performance, low-active youth displayed greater BOLD signal in a number of memory-related brain regions compared to high-active youth during encoding of remembered versus forgotten word pairs (p<0.05,
multiple comparison corrected), including the left middle temporal
gyrus, superior frontal gyrus, and inferior frontal gyrus. This is the first
study to show that aerobic fitness impacts adolescent memory-related
brain response using functional MRI. These findings may reflect compensatory brain activity necessary for low-active youth to accomplish
comparable task performance to their high-active peers. Taken together
with previous research on children and elderly, these findings provide
further evidence that exercise influences the brain across the lifespan.

B43
AEROBIC FITNESS ENHANCES RELATIONAL MEMORY IN
PREADOLESCENT CHILDREN: THE FITKIDS RANDOMIZED CONTROL
TRIAL Jim M. Monti1, Charles H. Hillman1, Neal J. Cohen1; 1University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — It is widely accepted that aerobic exercise
enhances hippocampal plasticity in non-human animal models. Often,
this plasticity co-occurs with gains in hippocampal-dependent memory.
Cross-sectional work investigating this relationship in preadolescent
children has found behavioral differences in higher versus lower aerobically fit participants for tasks measuring relational memory, which is
known to be critically tied to hippocampal structure and function. The
present study tested whether similar differences would arise in a clinical
intervention setting where a group of preadolescent children were randomly assigned to a nine-month after school aerobic exercise intervention versus a wait-list control group. Specifically, 53 children (mean Age
= 9.45 years) were randomized to an afterschool physical activity intervention which met each school day, versus to a wait-list control group
who performed their normal afterschool activities. Results indicated that
children in the intervention increased their aerobic fitness, whereas no
change in fitness was noted for the control group. Performance measures
included eye-movements as a measure of memory, based on recent work
linking eye-movement indices of relational memory to the hippocampus.
Compared to the control group, those who entered the aerobic exercise
program displayed eye-movement patterns indicative of superior memory for face-scene relations, with no differences observed in memory for
individual faces. These results (1) support the view that the hippocampus is critical for memory for relations amongst items, (2) indicate the
positive influence of increased aerobic fitness on hippocampal-dependent memory, and (3) emphasize the utility of using eye-tracking as a
method to study memory. Funded by NIH HD055352.

B44
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL RETRIEVAL IN HEALTHY OLDER ADULTS Jaclyn

Ford1, David Rubin2, Kelly Giovanello1; 1University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, 2Duke University — Research suggests that significant age-related
changes are apparent in autobiographical memory retrieval when the
qualitative content of the memories is examined. For example, older
adults tend to retrieve autobiographical information that is overly general (i.e. not restricted to a single event) relative to young adults’ specific
memories (the overgenerality effect). Additionally, older adults retrieve
memories that are rated as more positive overall relative to those of
young adults. This positivity effect has been extensively reviewed in the
episodic memory literature, but had been less researched in autobiographical memory. Although these two effects have been investigated
independently, no studies have examined how these aging effects relate
to one another at the neural level. An event-related functional neuroimaging study was conducted to examine the neural networks recruited by
autobiographical memory retrieval in healthy young and older adults.
Music was selected as a retrieval cue due to its unique capability to elicit

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session B
specific emotional memories without explicit retrieval instructions. Neural activity during young and older adults’ positive and specific autobiographical memories were compared, focusing on regions preferentially
engaged in older adults’ memory retrieval. Preliminary analysis suggests that young and older adults rely on distinct cognitive and neural
mechanisms during retrieval of autobiographical memories. Understanding how healthy aging influences older adults’ autobiographical
memory retrieval provides valuable insight into how memory representations change with time, experience, and cognitive manipulations. As
autobiographical memory is particularly important to older adults’ daily
functioning and sense of well being, this information may be invaluable
for the aging population.

B45
LONGITUDINAL ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN PHYSICAL ACTIVITY,
COGNITIVE STATUS, AND BRAIN FUNCTION IN OLDER ADULTS AT
GENETIC RISK FOR ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE J Carson Smith1,2, Sally

Durgerian2, John L. Woodard3, Kristy A. Nielson4,2, Alissa M. Butts4, Nathan
Hantke4, Michael Seidenberg5, Melissa A. Lancaster5, Monica Matthews5,
Michael A. Sugarman3, Stephen M. Rao6; 1University of Maryland, 2Medical
College of Wisconsin, 3Wayne State University, 4Marquette University,
5
Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, 6Cleveland Clinic —
The apolipoproteinE epsilon4 (APOE-?4) allele is associated with cognitive decline in old age and is a risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
Physical activity (PA) is associated with a reduced risk of incident cognitive impairment, particularly among APOE-?4 carriers. We recently
reported greater semantic memory related brain activation in cognitively
intact physically active (High PA) APOE-?4 carriers compared to physically inactive (Low PA) ?4 carriers and non-carriers (Smith et al., 2011).
Here, we compared longitudinal changes in semantic memory-related
brain activation in High PA and Low PA APOE-?4 carriers. Thirty-two
older ?4 carriers completed neuropsychological testing and a fMRI
semantic memory task (famous name discrimination) at baseline and
after 18 months. All participants were cognitively intact at baseline and
were classified as High PA (n = 16) or Low PA (n = 16) based on selfreport. After 18 months, 5 of 16 High PA and 13 of 16 Low PA were classified as cognitively declining by at least 1 SD decrease in neurocognitive
performance (Group difference, p = .011, Fisher’s exact test). A fROI
analysis of the fMRI data and repeated measures ANOVAs revealed significant Group by Time interactions for intensity of semantic memoryrelated activation. Significantly greater activation at baseline in the High
PA group was attenuated over time (no change in Low PA) and resulted
in no group differences at the 18-month follow-up. These findings suggest that greater PA at baseline is associated with greater cognitive stability over 18-months in APOE-?4 carriers and reduced neural activation
during fame discrimination.

B46
CEREBRAL AND VASCULAR FACTORS MAY PREDICT MEMORY
PERFORMANCE IN HEALTHY AND PATHOLOGICAL AGING Jil Humann1,

Anouk Vermeij1,2, Arenda H.E.H. van Beek2, Ondine van de Rest2, Jurgen A.H.R.
Claassen1,2, Roy P.C. Kessels1,2; 1Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, The Netherlands, 2Radboud
University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Alzheimer Centre Nijmegen, The
Netherlands — Aging is associated with several changes to the structure
and function of the brain and vasculature. This study aimed to investigate the relationship between cerebral and vascular factors that may play
a role in the development of Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), and associated cognitive impairments. Participants were 27 healthy older adults (76.3±4.1 years), 21 MCI patients
(71.8±9.2 years) and 22 AD patients (73.0±6.8 years). We rated the degree
of medial temporal lobe (MTL) atrophy on coronal T1-weighted MRI,
and white matter hyperintensities on transverse T2-FLAIR MRI images.
We measured blood pressure (BP) and cerebral blood flow velocity
(CBFV, Transcranial Doppler) under resting conditions, and calculated
cerebrovascular resistance (CVR). Additionally, participants performed

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

the Dutch equivalent of the Rey auditory verbal learning task. Preliminary results showed that both structural and vascular measures predict
memory performance. Specifically, when corrected for age and education, low performance on the memory task was associated with high
rates of atrophy (r= -.588) and white matter degeneration (r= -.450) as
well as higher CVR (r= -.314). AD patients compared to healthy controls
exhibited higher rates of both MTL atrophy and white matter lesions.
Furthermore, CVR was higher in patients (both MCI and AD) than in
controls. Since we did not observe differences in CBFV between groups,
this seems to be related to heightened mean BP in the patient group.
These results suggest reciprocal interactions between structural pathology, vascular changes and cognitive performance during aging and support the idea that cerebrovascular dysfunctions may cause AD.

B47
ROLE OF RECOLLECTION IN EPISODIC FEELING-OF-KNOWING
ACCURACY IN YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS Michel Isingrini1, Audrey

Perrotin1, Celine Souchay1, Laurence Taconnat1, Mathilde Sacher1, Badiaa
Bouazzaoui1; 1University of Tours, France — In feeling of knowing (FOK)

studies, participants predict subsequent recognition memory performance on items initially encoded but that cannot be recalled. This study
examined the hypothesis that FOK accuracy may be influenced by the
recollection of contextual information related to the unrecalled target by
asking participants to indicate whether the information on which they
based their prediction of future recognition was related or not to the contextual episode of learning. Such procedure enabled to distinguish two
type of episodic FOK accuracy, associated to the recollection of the context information (R-FOK) or not (NR-FOK). In addition, we tested
whether the episodic FOK accuracy deficit demonstrated by older adults
could be reduced. Results confirmed that R-FOK accuracy was significantly higher than NR-FOK accuracy confirming that the recollection of
contextual information enhanced episodic FOK. However, this was not
the case for older adults indicating that, contrary to the younger adults,
they do not benefit from this recollection effect. This suggests a lack in
older adults in the quality of contextual details retrieved pertaining to
the unrecalled target that are required to make accurate FOK judgments.

B48
SLEEP-DEPENDENT MEMORY CONSOLIDATION IN OLDER ADULTS – A
PILOT STUDY Kathryn Atherton1, Christopher Butler1, Anna C Nobre1;

1
University of Oxford — There is now a large body of evidence demonstrating that sleep plays a role in memory consolidation. The overwhelming
majority of these studies have used young adults as participants. There
is evidence to suggest that there may be a decline in sleep-dependent
memory consolidation with age. Here we present data showing that
sleep is very beneficial for memory even in older adults (mean age
59±1.65). Participants learnt new arbitrary associations between pairs of
word stimuli. Memory was tested twelve hours later following a night of
sleep or a day of wake. Interfering pairs of words were learnt ten minutes before the memory test. This interference learning has been shown
in previous studies with young adults to ‘unmask’ the benefit of sleep
for memory. Each participant took part in both conditions and the order
was counterbalanced. Retention was significantly better in the sleep condition than the wake condition. Learning was not significantly different
in the two conditions, arguing against a circadian interpretation of the
data.

B49
AGE-RELATED
AND
GENETIC
EFFECTS
ON
FUNCTIONAL
REORGANIZATION OF MEMORY SYSTEMS Nicolas Schuck1,2, Peter

Frensch1, Shu-Chen Li2; 1Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 2Max-Planck Institute
for Human Development, Berlin — Aging research shows that some forms
of memory are more affected by aging than others. Intriguingly, this
research has revealed a mismatch between age-related behavioral and
neurophysiological decline for the habitual/procedural and declarative
memory systems: behaviorally the former exhibits smaller age-related
decline than the later, while negative effects of aging on the associated

71

Poster Session B — Sunday, April 1, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
brain networks, striatum and medial-temporal lobe (MTL), respectively,
are comparable. We present data that shows that (a) key memory functions attributed to the striatum and the MTL, i.e., habit-like, reinforcement based memory and flexible, declarative memory, respectively,
show differential age effects and (b) behavioral correlations between
skill and declarative memory differ between age groups. Furthermore,
preliminary results from the already genotyped subsample hinted at
effects of genotypes affecting neuromodulatory processes. Our data is in
line with the proposal that neural correlates of memory systems change
across age. Accordingly, we suggest that both aging and individual differences in genetic predispositions affect the functional organization of
memory systems in the brain. More specifically, we propose that agerelated and individual differences in neuromodulation could contribute
to functional reorganization of memory systems that preserves nondeclarative, habit like memory functioning in old age to some extent.

B50
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS (ERPS) REFLECT A DISTINCTIVE FRONTAL
ACTIVITY IN A FEATURE-BASED OBJECT KNOWLEDGE RETRIEVAL
PROCESS IN AGING Hsueh-Sheng Chiang1, Raksha Anand Mudar1,2,

Elizabeth Kanter Bartz1, Michael Kraut3, John Hart Jr.1; 1Center for BrainHealth,
The University of Texas at Dallas, 2Department of Speech & Hearing Sciences,
The University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, 3Department of Radiology, The
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine — In the course of aging, quali-

tative changes in certain aspects of semantic memory processing occur.
We explored the effects of aging on the electrophysiological correlates of
feature-based object memory retrieval. We used a task that required subjects to respond whether two presented words (e.g., humps and desert)
retrieve the memory of an object (in this case, camel; the “retrieval” condition) or not (the “non-retrieval” condition). We administered this task
while we recorded scalp EEG in 17 young adults (mean age: 21.5 years, 7
males) and 17 older adults (mean age: 63.5 years, 2 males). We found that
RT was longer in the non-retrieval trials compared to the retrieval trials
in both groups (p < .001). While older adults had higher accuracy in the
non-retrieval than they did in the retrieval trials (p = .002), young adults
had comparable accuracy in both conditions. In the younger subjects we
found a frontal central scalp-surface negative potential between 500 and
800 ms post-stimulus that was more negative in the non-retrieval trials
than in the retrieval trials (p = .008). By contrast, the older subjects demonstrated a later frontal positive-going waveform between 800 and 1000
ms post-stimulus, with the non-retrieval trials eliciting larger responses
than did the retrieval trials (p = .009). These findings indicate distinct
neural correlates of object memory retrieval process in older adults that
might suggest a strategy difference in semantic processing.

B51
THE ROLE OF RECOLLECTION IN SOURCE MEMORY PARADIGMS
DURING EARLY CHILDHOOD: EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS Leslie Rollins1, Tracy Riggins1; 1University of Maryland,
College Park — Improvements in children’s memory stem from: 1) accurately identifying previously encountered items, 2) recalling contextual
details associated with these items (e.g., location), and 3) resisting falsely
identifying novel items as previously encountered (i.e., committing false
alarms (FA); Lloyd, Doydum, & Newcombe, 2009; Drummey & Newcombe, 2002). The current study assessed these abilities in 31 young children (M = 5.57 years, SD = .33, 15 males) using a behavioral source
memory paradigm and event-related potentials (ERPs). Children
encountered items in two distinct locations. One week later, children’s
memory for items and their locations was assessed as well as their ability
to reject new items (including items similar and dissimilar to the old
items). Regression analysis revealed that FA to similar novel items (b = .22, t(27) = -2.47, p < .05 ) predicted memory for location whereas FA to
dissimilar novel items and memory for individual items did not. Children were then separated into two groups based on the number of FAs
committed. The low FA group (n=15) was marginally more likely to
remember the location of items than the high FA group (n=16), t(29) = -

72

1.94, p = .06. The low FA group showed ERP episodic memory effects. A
recollection effect was present over frontal leads during 300-600 ms and
800-1200 ms time windows. These ERP effects were not present in the
low FA group. These results suggest that individual differences in recollection underlie memory for contextual details and the rejection of similar novel items in childhood.

B52
HIPPOCAMPAL SUBFIELDS VOLUMES REVEAL SPECIFIC MEMORY
DEFICITS IN MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT Josiah Leong1, William

Irwin1, Howard Rosen1, Bruce Miller1; 1University of California, San
Francisco — Performance for persons with mild cognitive impairment

(MCI) has been reliably shown to be related to volumetric measures of
the hippocampi. Various magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) techniques
have documented atrophy of the hippocampi in elderly people with neuropsychological indices of MCI. Thus, the utility of MRI techniques have
been increasingly employed to examine memory, dementia, and aging
both for diagnosis and prospective treatments. Our goal was to identify
relations between hippocampal subfields and specific domains of memory performance. Physiological studies have emphasized immediate
recall is related to the volume of the dentate gyrus and CA1 regions,
whereas delayed recall is related to entorhinal cortical volume. The
Auditory Verbal Learning Test provided a unique measure to investigate
the role of these regions, iv vivo, in the human brain. Participants were
read 15 words, thereafter tested for immediate recall; this procedure was
repeated 5 times in succession. Verbal recall was tested after a distraction
task, and again 30 minutes subsequent, followed by visual recognition of
the test items. Twelve subjects (5 control, 7 MCI) underwent neuropsychological testing and a MRI protocol including a 3-dimensional, T1weighted sequence (3.0 Tesla Siemens TIM Trio). Data were collected as
part of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). FreeSurfer (version 5.1.0) was used to segment hippocampal subfields. Our
findings demonstrate hippocampal subfield volumes are differentially
related to performance on specific memory indices.

B53
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN THE CONSOLIDATION OF MEMORY
TRACES Karolina Janacsek1, Dezso Nemeth1,2; 1University of Szeged,

Szeged, Hungary, 2University of Texas, Austin — Memory formation does not

occur only during learning, in the online periods, but also between practice sessions, during the offline periods. The process that occurs during
the offline periods is referred to as consolidation, which denotes the stabilization of a memory trace after the initial acquisition; this can result
increased resistance to interference or even improvement in performance
following an offline period. Although a growing body of research
advances our understanding of age-related deficits in online learning, little is known about the effects of aging on consolidation and its time
course. We studied aging effects on the time course of consolidation.
Young and elderly adults performed a probabilistic implicit sequencelearning task before and after a 12-hour, a 24-hour and a 1-week interval.
The task enabled us to separate two components of learning and consolidation: 1) general motor learning (primarily based on the general familiarization with the task requirements) and 2) sequence-specific learning.
We found offline improvement of general motor learning with a higher
degree in the young groups. The elderly adults showed enhancement
after the 12-hour period. However, this improvement disappeared in the
24-hour and the 1-week delay conditions. Regarding sequence-specific
learning, no improvement was found in either age group and at either
consolidation interval. In contrast, sequences-specific knowledge
decreased in the elderly group independently of the delay. These results
draw attention to the fact that consolidation is not a single process;
rather there are multiple mechanisms which are differentially affected by
time course and by aging.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session B

B54
ENHANCED PREFRONTAL AND MEDIAL TEMPORAL ACTIVATION
CHARACTERIZES COGNITIVE MAINTENANCE OVER TWO DECADES Sara
Pudas1, Jonas Persson1, Maria Josefsson2, Xavier de Luna2, Lars-Göran
Nilsson1, Lars Nyberg2; 1Stockholm University, 2Umeå University — Partici-

pants from a population-based longitudinal study (N=1558) were classified as either cognitive maintainers or average performers based on the
change of an episodic memory score, measured four or five times during
15-20 years. The classification procedures took into account both initial
test score and rate of change, and factored in scores from drop-outs in
order to control for attrition. Fifty-two maintainers and 52 age-matched
average performers (M=68 years, range 55-80) underwent functional
magnetic resonance imaging during an episodic memory face-name
paired associates task. Maintainers displayed increased activation, relative to average performers, in left prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate,
left hippocampus as well as right parahippocampal gyrus during episodic encoding. Activity in the medial temporal clusters was correlated
to task performance and thus interpreted as contributing to the superior
task performance of maintainers, while the frontal activity was hypothesized to reflect more general cognitive control processes. Activation differences could not be directly attributed to differences structural brain
integrity between the groups. The current result help to elucidate the
neural correlates of successful cognitive aging, potentially providing a
reference point for medical and cognitive training interventions aimed at
preventing age-related cognitive decline.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Development &
aging
B55
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF TEMPORAL
DECISION-MAKING Cutter Lindbergh1, Paul Kieffaber1; 1The College of
William and Mary — Nearly every psychological model that has been proposed to account for the ability to keep track of time involves a clock
component, a memory component, and a decision component. Although
older adults have been shown to exhibit behavioral deficits in mental
timekeeping, there has been a paucity of research mapping the origins of
these deficits to specific components of the temporal processing system.
The present study employed electroencephalography to determine the
integrity of the temporal processing system during aging as well as the
specific component(s) that may play a role in age-related timing dysfunction. Twenty older adults and twenty younger adult controls completed a temporal bisection task, which required temporal judgments to
be made about visual stimuli ranging from 1250 to 3000 milliseconds
(ms) in duration. Significant abnormalities in event-related brain potentials at 200 to 700 ms post stimulus offset were observed in older adults.
This finding suggests that the behavioral timing deficits observed in
older adults have their origins in the decision-making component of the
temporal processing system.

B56
THE EARLY DEVELOPMENT OF THE MIRROR MOTOR SYSTEM: INSIGHT
FROM AN EMG STUDY IN INFANTS Nadia Bolognini1, Irene Senna1, Elena

Natale1, Marta Picozzi1, Elena Longhi1, Viola Macchi Cassia1, Chiara Turati1;
1Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca — Seminal studies

in monkeys and humans suggest the existence of a mirror neuron system
(MNS) that maps visual descriptions of actions done by others onto the
observer’s motor representations of the same actions (Rizzolatti &
Craighero, 2004). This mechanism allows the observers to have an internal copy of the observed action, enabling them to understand directly
the agent’s intention. So far, little is known about the origins and development of the human MNS. Using electromyographic recordings
(EMG), we explored in healthy full-term infants aged 3 and 6 months
whether action observation can induce covert activation of the muscles
responsible for the final action goal. EMG was recorded from muscles

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

responsible of mouth opening while infants watched two video-clips displaying an agent either reaching an object and bringing it to the mouth
(i.e., mouth action) or reaching an object and placing it on the head (i.e.,
head action). At 6 months of age, we found a mirror motor facilitation
contingent upon observation of the mouth action, while observing the
head action decreased the motor activation. Motor activity was specifically modulated during the bringing phase, but not during reaching and
grasping phases. Instead, at 3 months there was no mirror motor modulation according to the goal of the observed action during any of the
actions phase. These findings strongly argue for an involvement of the
human MNS in action understanding early in development, but also
speak in favour of a gradual development of mirror mechanisms rather
than of a prewired innate MNS.

B57
SEQUENCE-SPACE ASSOCIATIONS IN PRE-LITERATE CHILDREN Laura

Gibson1, Daphne Maurer1; 1McMaster University — Associations
between
sequences and space are ubiquitous and robust in adulthood. There is
some evidence that these associations are based in literacy; for example,
English-speaking adults tend to perceive sequences as beginning on the
left and progressing towards the right side of space, while adults in cultures that read from right to left exhibit the opposite tendency (e.g.,
Zebian, 2005; Shaki et al., 2009). However, there is also evidence that
neonatal chicks perceive sequences as beginning on the left side of space
(Rugani et al., 2010). These results suggest that the cortex may preferentially process sequences arranged from left to right, perhaps as a result of
a natural inclination stemming from right-hemisphere dominance in
visuo-spatial tasks, but that this initial bias may be overridden with
exposure to cultural reading direction. To test this hypothesis, we examined sequence-space associations in preliterate children. Five-year-olds
were asked to assign box locations to items in two familiar ordinal
sequences: numbers 1, 2, and 3, and breakfast, lunch, and dinner. Children ordered numbers from left to right significantly more often than
would be expected by chance (81%; p=0.021); but responded randomly
in ordering meals (43%; p=0.791). Our results suggest that children do
exhibit a left-to-right bias prior to learning to read; however, this left-toright mapping may be restricted to sequences frequently encountered in
ordered print (1,2,3) and not those they understand (breakfast, lunch,
dinner) but do not encounter regularly in print. These data support the
role of experience in the development of sequence-space associations.

B58
EFFECT OF COMT VAL158MET GENOTYPE ON AGE-RELATED MOTOR
DECLINE Fatemeh Noohibezanjani1, Nathaniel Boyden1, Jenn Humfleet1,

Youngbin Kwak2, Nicolaas Bohnen1, Martijn Muller1, Joshua.L West1, David.T.
Burke1, Rachael.D. Seidler1; 1University of Michigan, 2Duke University —
Motor decline in older adults has been linked to age-associated dopaminergic denervation. Genetic polymorphisms of the Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) enzyme partially determines cortical dopamine
availability. Individuals homozygous for the methionine allele (met-met)
show reduced cortical COMT enzymatic activity, resulting in an increase
of dopamine levels in the prefrontal cortex. This is in contrast to individuals homozygous for the valine (val-val) allele. We hypothesize that
motor performance will be worse in individuals with at least one val
allele, and this effect will be mediated by age. Female participants; 58
Older adults (OA), mean age 70.5 yrs, and 72 young adults (YA), mean
age 21 yrs with no history of stroke or neurological disease performed a
manual sensory adaptation task and a manual explicit learning task.
Repeated measures ANOVA showed an age group effect for both motor
learning tasks (F=6.917, p=0.01 and F=54.025, p < 0.01, for the sensorimotor and sequence learning tasks, respectively). However, there was no
significant main effect of genotype in either task, although there was a
statistical trend (p=0.092) in the sensorimotor task showing that val-val
homozygotes performed better on average than either val-met or metmet individuals. Additional participants will be added to the analyses as
genotype data becomes available. We also plan to examine the effects of
DRD2 and BDNF genotypes.

73

Poster Session B — Sunday, April 1, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall

B59
MOTOR PROCESSING DURING GESTURE PERCEPTION ACROSS
DEVELOPMENT: AN FMRI STUDY Elizabeth Wakefield1, Karin H. James1;
1Indiana University — Visual

object perception is affected, both behaviorally and neurally, by our history of actions with objects. Our actions
serve to change the information stored about objects, as evidenced by the
broader neural system associated with objects that have been acted
upon. This extended system includes the posterior middle temporal
gyrus and the premotor cortex. Interestingly, these regions are also
recruited during the perception of manual gesture produced by another
during speech. This common activation suggests that gesture perception
may also be reliant on our history of actions-specifically producing gesture while speaking. If gesture perception is affected by gesture production, then one would see differences in neural processing across
development –given that gesture production changes dramatically during childhood. To address this question, three groups of children, 5.0-6.0,
7.5-8.5, and 10.0-11.0 year-olds, and adults watched movies in which an
actor spoke a sentence and (1) performed no gesture, (2) performed a
congruent iconic gesture, (3) produced the same iconic gestures, without
speech during a functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) session.
Results reveal dramatic changes in how gestures are processed in the
MTG and premotor cortex across development. We suggest these differences arise from a difference in proficiency at integrating gesture information into semantic representations, driven by differences in
production, thus demonstrating how action can drive our perceptual
system.

B60
DURATION OF HEARING-AID USE PREDICTS CROSS-MODAL
REORGANIZATION IN EARLY-DEAF PEOPLE Martha M. Shiell1,2, Robert J.

Zatorre1,2, François Champoux2,3; 1Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill
University, 2BRAMS International Laboratory for Brain, Music and Sound
Research, 3Université de Montréal — In early-deaf people, auditory cortical
regions increasingly respond to visual motion. This phenomenon is
referred to as cross-modal reorganization. Previous research has focused
on people with profound deafness, with little consideration of people
with residual hearing. As such, we do not know how varying degrees of
auditory deprivation affect cross-modal reorganization. Based on the
hypothesis that cross-modal reorganization in deaf people depends on
auditory deprivation, we predicted that deaf people with less auditory
deprivation, as measured by how long participants used a hearing-aid,
will demonstrate less cross-modal reorganization. We recruited earlydeaf people, with severe-to-profound hearing loss, who varied in their
duration of hearing-aid use. We used fMRI to measure brain activity in
auditory cortical regions while participants viewed moving and static
visual stimuli. Visual motion activated the right-hemisphere planum
temporale, an auditory association area. To test for a relationship
between the duration of auditory deprivation and cross-modal reorganization, we entered each deaf participants’ duration of hearing-aid use, in
years, as a regressor in our analysis. Activity in the right-hemisphere
planum temporale was related to hearing-aid use: Participants with
longer duration of hearing-aid use demonstrated less activity. This relationship was largely driven by a sub-group of long-term hearing-aid
users. We conclude that, although short-term hearing aid use does not
have a clear effect, long-term hearing-aid use may prevent cross-modal
reorganization. This knowledge is relevant, as cross-modal reorganization can interfere with rehabilitation of hearing loss through cochlear
implantation.

B61
EVIDENCE FOR A SENSITIVE PERIOD ASSOCIATED WITH MUSICAL
TRAINING: CHARACTERIZING DIFFERENCES IN GREY MATTER BETWEEN
EARLY- AND LATE-TRAINED MUSICIANS Jennifer A. Bailey1,2, Robert J.

Zatorre2,3, Virginia B. Penhune1,2; 1Concordia University, 2International
Laboratory of Brain, Music and Sound Research, 3McGill University — The idea
of a sensitive period, a time during maturation when experience or stim-

74

ulation has a greater influence on brain development, has been proposed
for musical training (Watanabe et al., 2008). Early-trained musicians (ET)
have demonstrated enhanced sensorimotor synchronization abilities
compared to late-trained musicians (LT), even when matched for years
of musical experience (Watanabe et al., 2008; Bailey & Penhune, 2010).
However, the underlying differences in brain structure have yet to be
explored. In this study, fifteen ET and LT adult musicians, matched for
years of musical experience, were compared on a battery of musically
relevant tasks. T1-weighted images (32 channel head coil; 1x1x1 mm3)
were acquired in a Siemens 3T scanner. Differences in grey matter were
analyzed using FreeSurfer (Dale, Fischl, & Sereno, 1999; Fischl & Dale,
2000). The groups were compared in terms of cortical thickness, cortical
volume, surface area and mean curvature for specific regions of interest
(ROIs). Preliminary analyses suggest increased cortical surface area in
the pre-central, post-central, and inferior temporal gyri in the ET, as well
as increased cortical volume of the superior frontal and transverse temporal sulci. Interestingly, thicker cortex in these ROIs was observed in
the LT. Differences in mean curvature were also observed and will be
considered when interpreting these findings. These results highlight the
importance of characterizing differences in grey matter. In addition,
these results suggest that early musical training influences brain structure differently than when the training is received later in development,
when the brain regions involved are more mature.

THINKING: Decision making
B62
ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX SIGNALS MULTIPLE PREDICTED
OUTCOMES OF ACTIONS Andrew Jahn1, Derek Nee1, Joshua Brown1;

1Indiana University — A number of theories have been proposed to account

for the role of anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the broader medial
prefrontal cortex (mPFC) in cognition. We recently proposed a new computational model of the mPFC, the prediction of response outcome
(PRO) model, which casts the mPFC in part as learning to predict the
various possible outcomes of actions. Simulations show that this new
model can account for an unprecedented range of known mPFC effects.
A key untested prediction of this model is that when multiple possible
outcomes are anticipated to result from an action, the mPFC will be
active in proportion to the number of predicted outcomes. Here, we test
this hypothesis using fMRI and a task designed to manipulate the number of outcomes that subjects predicted, while controlling other confounding factors. We show that activations in the dorsal ACC increase
with the number of predicted outcomes. Further, the dorsal ACC region
showing this effect is distinct from regions involved in evaluating the
predictions against the actual outcome. Whereas it is not clear how other
existing theories of mPFC could account for these effects, they are consistent with predictions derived from the PRO model.

B63
VALUE AND PREDICTION ERROR IN THE HUMAN MEDIAL FRONTAL
CORTEX: PUTATIVE INVOLVEMENT IN ADHD PATHOGENESIS Massimo

Silvetti1, Roeljan Wiersema1, Edmund Sonuga-Barke2, Tom Verguts1; 1Ghent
University, 2University of Southampton — The many behavioral and physio-

logical findings deriving from ADHD research defy a unified and satisfactory theory on its pathogenesis. Based on the evidence of mesolimbic
dopaminergic deficit in ADHD, and on the recent findings on anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC) involvement in reinforcement learning (RL), we
propose a novel computational theory of ADHD pathogenesis. The core
of this theory is a biologically plausible neural model of ACC, the
Reward Value and Prediction Model (RVPM), representing both the
ACC circuitry and its interactions with brainstem dopaminergic nuclei.
We created an ADHD version of the model by decreasing its dopaminergic input to ACC. In a series of computer simulations, we tested the
ADHD model in basic decision making processes (two armed bandit
task), partial and continuous reward schedules, and immediate versus
delayed rewards. The model was able to replicate the typical experimen-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session B
tal findings comparing controls versus ADHD patients in these paradigms. At the behavioral level, the ADHD model showed impairments
in reward-based decision making, a preference for immediate rather
than for delayed rewards, and a performance recovery under a continuous reinforcement schedule. At the neurophysiological level the ADHD
model showed impaired activity for reward expectations, impaired
error-related responses, and a deficit of brainstem dopamine transfer
from reward period to cue period. The RVPM provided a unified neurocomputational explanation for ADHD, from the neurophysiological to
the behavioral level, with ACC playing a pivotal role. Finally the model
was able to generate novel experimental predictions.

B64
INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY REFLECTS THE EFFECTS OF
REWARD ON MULTIPLE LEARNING SYSTEMS. Juliet Y. Davidow1, G.

Elliott Wimmer1, Juan Deliz1, Itamar Kahn2, Daphna Shohamy1; 1Columbia
University, New York, 2Technion Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel —
Converging evidence demonstrates that different kinds of learning
depend on distinct neural systems. The hippocampus supports rapid
encoding of single events, resulting in learning that has ‘representational
flexibility’. By contrast, the striatum is thought to support feedbackbased gradual learning of stimulus-reward associations, resulting in
learning that is inflexible and habitual. Open questions remain about
how the striatum and hippocampus may interact to support flexibility
for learned associations motivated by rewards. We employed a behavioral task that is thought to involve both forms of learning: incidental
episodic encoding of relations between pairs of items, followed by incremental learning that some of these items are repeatedly paired with
monetary reward. Critically, a subset of items overlapped in these two
phases, which leads to flexible transfer of value from reward-associated
items to the incidentally paired non-rewarded items. Emerging evidence
suggests that such value transfer depends on hippocampal-striatal interactions during learning. Here, we sought to characterize this interaction
using resting state functional connectivity. We explored the relationship
between intrinsic functional connectivity in brain networks known to
underlie reward learning and decision making, using regions of interest
defined in an independent functional imaging study of the same task.
Individual differences in performance on value transfer measures in our
behavioral task relate to the individual differences in connectivity within
reward networks in the brain. These results have implications for experience-guided decision-making, based on stimuli that are encountered
together in the environment and followed by subsequent rewarding outcomes.

B65
EFFECTS OF DIFFERENT LEARNING STRATEGIES ON THE FEEDBACKRELATED NEGATIVITY – EVIDENCE FROM THE WEATHER PREDICTION
TASK Martina Rustemeier1, Lars Schwabe1, Christian Bellebaum1; 1Ruhr
University Bochum, Germany — The feedback-related negativity (FRN), an
event-related potentials (ERPs) component observed following performance feedback in probabilistic learning tasks, has been hypothesized to
reflect the activity of the midbrain dopamine (DA) system. Research on
probabilistic categorization learning, however, has shown that the
recruitment of the DA system depends on the strategy engaged during
learning. Some subjects use non-declarative learning strategies, which
are supposed to rely on the DA system, whereas others engage more
declarative strategies that are dependent on the medial temporal lobe.
We hypothesized that interindividual differences in the engaged learning strategy would be reflected in FRN amplitude. The participants of
the present study performed a modified version of the ‘Weather Prediction Task’ (WPT) in which they learned probabilistic cue-outcome associations based on trial-by-trial feedback. Feedback processing was
assessed with ERPs. By means of analysis of the individual choice patterns, subjects were divided into two groups: declarative learners (DL)
and non-declarative learners (NDL). While FRN amplitude was higher
for negative than positive feedback, NDL showed overall higher FRN

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

amplitudes compared to DL. A group by feedback type interaction further revealed that amplitude differences between negative and positive
feedback were more pronounced in NDL than in DL. Moreover, NDL
were generally more successful in obtaining positive feedback. Our
results suggest that the neural correlates of feedback processing depend
on the strategy that is engaged in feedback-based learning. Additional
analyses showed that learning success only played a minor role for the
modulation of FRN amplitude.

B66
HEMISPHERIC EFFECTS ON STRATEGY UPDATING Elisabeth

Stoettinger1, Alex Filipowicz1, Britt Anderson1,2, James Danckert1;
of Psychology, University of Waterloo, 2Centre for Theoretical
Neuroscience, University of Waterloo — Does focal brain injury selectively

1Department

and differentially impair strategy updating? We compared left brain
damaged (LBD), right brain damaged (RBD) and control (CTRL) participants for strategy updating by having them play the game Rock, Paper,
Scissors against a computer opponent that altered its strategy of play
from a uniform selection to a strongly biased strategy of playing paper
80% of the time. CTRLs rapidly recognize this transition and adopt a
probability matching strategy. LBDs also recognize the transition, but
adopt a maximizing strategy: choosing scissors nearly 100% of the time.
RBDs typically fail to note the transition, and continue to play an apparently random sequence of RPS. This impairment seems general as it was
supported by the pattern of choices made on a computerized version of
the Wisconsin-Card-Sorting-Test (Berg Card Sorting Task) where RBDs
either failed to achieve a single correct category or took much longer to
do so than did the LBDs and CTRLs. For RBDs there was a negative correlation between performance on the RPS game and the number of trials
needed to sort the first category. Given that there was no indication of
increased perseverative responding in the RBD patients we argue that
their failure in the RPS task was not due to an inability to shift mental
set, but instead reflects an inability to successfully develop a model.

B67
OVERRELIANCE OF HABITUAL OVER GOAL-DIRECTED ACTIONS IN
PATIENTS WITH BIPOLAR DISORDER Woo-Young Ahn1,2, Jeri S. Kent1,

Jerome R. Busemeyer1, William P. Hetrick1, Brian F. O'Donnell1; 1Indiana
University-Bloomington, 2University of Illinois at Chicago — Individuals with
bipolar disorder (BD) often show decision-making deficits on neurocognitive tasks. However, the precise cognitive and neural mechanisms
underlying their deficits remain unclear. The current study aims to test
two working hypotheses regarding their deficits. Patients with BD:
(Hyp1) show an exaggerated response to negative feedback or (Hyp2)
over rely on habitual actions versus goal-directed actions. Recent evidence suggests that habitual and goal-directed actions depend on distinct brain regions. We tested these hypotheses of decision-making
deficits in BD by building reinforcement learning (RL) models that
mimic each hypothesis (model-based and model-free RL) and an experimental design that can falsify these hypotheses. BD patients and healthy
individuals completed two reversal learning tasks: the probability-tracking task and the probabilistic reversal learning task. Both tasks involve
negative feedback. The behavioral results showed that: (1) BD patients
performed similarly to healthy individuals in the stationary block, which
is contrary to Hyp1; (2) However, BD patients performed significantly
worse than healthy individuals and made more switches in the non-stationary stage. These behavioral results and preliminary modeling results
support the hypothesis that their deficits are due to their overreliance on
habitual actions over goal-directed actions, rather than their abnormal
response to negative feedback. This study attempts to quantify learning
strategy and reward learning deficits in BD patients by using a rigorous
experimental design and mathematical modeling of their RL. We believe
this is an important first step towards developing and testing more
empirically-based methods for diagnosing, predicting, and ameliorating
symptomatology in BD.

75

Poster Session B — Sunday, April 1, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall

B68
COMMON PROCESSING OF EFFORT AND DELAY IN THE HUMAN
BRAINSTEM Eliana Vassena1, Massimo Silvetti1, Wim Fias1, Tom Verguts1;
1Ghent University — Reward

evaluation is encoded by dopaminergic activity in the brain (Schultz, 1998). However, for optimal learning and decision-making, the costs attached to the reward are to be considered as
well. Lesion studies in animals confirm that costs, such as delay and
effort, are taken into account (Rudebeck et al., 2006). fMRI experiments
show that effort cost is integrated with reward (Croxson et al., 2009).
Furthermore, they suggest that different areas selectively respond to different costs, though measured in a choice paradigm involving different
tasks (Prevost et al., 2010). In fact, if and how multiple costs are integrated in a cost signal is still unclear. The goal of this fMRI study was to
test for a common cost evaluation signal for effort and delay, addressing
both costs in the same task and avoiding decision-making confounds. A
good candidate for the current hypothesis was dopaminergic activity in
midbrain and brainstem nuclei, known to be crucial in value estimation
and recently proved to play a role in cost evaluation. Interestingly, conjoint activation for the effortful and delayed condition involves two separate areas in the brainstem, corresponding to Ventral Tegmental Area,
known to be crucial in value prediction (Bromberg-Martin et al., 2010)
and Dorsal Raphe Nucleus, consistent with recent findings in animals
and humans (Miyazaki et al., 2011, Tanaka et al., 2004), and with theories
of serotonin and dopamine interactions in cost and reward coding (Daw
et al., 2002). This result provides evidence for a common cost signal in
the brainstem.

B69
DEPRESSION IMPAIRS CHAINING WHEREAS SEROTONIN SPECIFIC
REUPTAKE INHIBITORS IMPAIR CONTEXTUAL LEARNING IN PATIENTS
WITH MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER Mohammad Herzallah1,2, Joman

Natsheh1,2, Omar Danoun2, Catherine Myers1,3, Mark Gluck1; 1Rutgers
University-Newark, 2Al-Quds University, Jerusalem, Palestine, 3Veterans Affairs
Medical Center - New Jersey Health Care System — In a study of chaining

and context sequence learning, using the same task as that used in Nagy
et al 2008, we tested never medicated Major Depressive Disorder (MDD)
patients, Serotonin Specific Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs) treated MDD
patients, and matched healthy control subjects. Never medicated MDD
patients were the most impaired on the chaining phase of the sequencelearning task and this impairment was remediated with SSRI treatment,
thus replicating results obtained in patients with Parkinson’s disease
(PD) with and without dopaminergic medication treatment using the
same task. On the other hand SSRI treated MDD patients showed
impairment on the context-learning phase, showing the same deficit as
patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). These results are consistent with findings from previous research that MDD is associated with
decreased levels of monoamines (serotonin, dopamine, norepinephrine).
Conversely, these findings suggest that SSRIs might have detrimental
effects on the medial temporal lobe (MTL) structures that were shown to
be critical for contextual learning.

B70
DEPRESSION ENHANCES SENSITIVITY TO PUNISHMENT WHEREAS
SEROTONIN SPECIFIC REUPTAKE INHIBITORS SUPPRESS SENSITIVITY
TO PUNISHMENT IN PATIENTS WITH MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER

Joman Natsheh1,2, Mohammad Herzallah1,2, Omar Danoun2, Catherine
Myers1,3, Mark Gluck1; 1Rutgers University-Newark, 2Al-Quds University,
Jerusalem, Palestine, 3Veterans Affairs Medical Center - New Jersey Healthcare
System — Using a reward and punishment learning task, we tested never
medicated Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) patients, Serotonin Specific Reuptake Inhibitor (SSRI) treated MDD patients, and healthy control (HC) subjects. Never treated MDD as well as SSRI treated MDD
patients achieved marginal, but similar, learning rates from reward stimuli, and therefore resembled the reward learning pattern of patients with
Parkinson’s disease (PD). On the other hand, never medicated MDD
patients learned from punishment stimuli better than SSRI treated MDD

76

patients. These results are consistent with findings from previous
research that MDD is associated with decreased levels of monoamines
(including dopamine) which were shown to be critical for learning from
reward. Conversely, the suppressed sensitivity to punishment sheds the
light on the role of monoamines as well as monoamine enhancement
therapies (such as SSRIs) on learning from punishment.

B71
DECISION MAKING WITH EXPLICIT RULES AND EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS
D.
Radomski1,
IN PATIENTS WITH MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS Ashley

Christopher Power1, Kenneth G. Warren1, Ingrid Catz1, Scot E. Purdon1,2, Derek
J. Emery1, Esther Fujiwara1; 1University of Alberta, 2Alberta Hospital
Edmonton — Multiple sclerosis (MS) is commonly associated with cognitive and emotional changes. We examined decision making using the
Game of Dice Task (GDT) in MS patients with the relapsing-remitting
(RR) or the secondary progressive (SP) MS-subtype. The GDT explicitly
displays decision rules and probabilities for gains and losses. Thus,
unlike the more common Iowa Gambling Task, it focuses more on cognitive/executive than emotional aspects of decision making. We hypothesized that 1) MS patients are impaired in decision making compared to
controls, 2) GDT deficits are related to executive dysfunctions, 3) GDT
deficits reflect brain atrophic processes in MS. The GDT and a standard
neuropsychological battery were administered to MS patients (n=27)
and healthy controls (n=25). Patients’ enlargement of the third and lateral ventricles was studied with linear measurements on axial 5-mm T1weighted MRI images. GDT netscores (risky minus safe decisions) were
significantly lower in both patient groups than controls. Patients’ problems in the GDT were due to poor utilization of negative response feedback. Composite performance in four cognitive domains (Processing
Speed, Memory, Executive Functions: Inhibition, Planning), revealed RR
MS-patients, but not SP MS-patients demonstrated a relationship
between GDT netscores and (executive) Planning. GDT was unrelated to
a variety of psychosocial and mood measures. Furthermore, the number
of highest risk-level choices in the GDT was related to global brain atrophy (intercaudate nucleus distance) in patients, even when controlling
for MS severity. In conclusion, MS patients’ decision making deficits
seem related to executive dysfunctions and brain atrophy in the course
of their disorder.

B72
VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL DAMAGE INCREASES SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
CONTEXTUAL EFFECTS ON DECISION-MAKING Stav Atir1, Joseph Kable1;
1

University of Pennsylvania — Previous work in decision neuroscience has
implicated the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) in encoding or
comparing the subjective value of different choice options. For example,
individuals with damage to this area are less consistent in their decisions
and more likely to make intransitive choices. Our study extends this line
of work by testing human subjects with damage to the vmPFC in an
asymmetric dominance paradigm. Subjects chose between a smaller,
sooner monetary reward and a larger, later monetary reward in the presence or absence of a third option. This third option was always clearly
dominated by the larger, later option – it was the same on one dimension
(size or delay) but worse on the other. The presence of the third option
typically shifts preferences towards the targeted (dominating) option.
We found that subjects with vmPFC damage were more likely to switch
their preference to the larger, later reward in the presence of a dominated option compared to subjects with dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
damage or to demographically-matched controls. Subjects with vmPFC
damage were not more likely to switch their preference to the smaller,
sooner option, suggesting that they were not changing their preferences
randomly. These results suggest that, since individuals with vmPFC
damage may have less strong or reliable preferences, they may rely more
on easy reasons for decisions when these are available. These results also
suggest that individuals with reduced function in vmPFC (e.g., drug
abusers or depressed individuals) might be more susceptible to context
effects such as asymmetric dominance.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session B

B73
CORRECTION OF HIGH CONFIDENCE FALSE BELIEFS Janet

Metcalfe1,
Brady Butterfield , Christian Habeck , Yaakov Stern ; Columbia University —
1

1

1 1

Despite the intuition that strongly held beliefs are particularly difficult to
change, the data on error correction indicate that general information
errors that people commit with a high degree of belief are especially easy
to correct. This finding is called the hypercorrection effect. The hypothesis was tested that the reason for hypercorrection stems from enhanced
attention and encoding that results from a metacognitive mismatch
between the person’s confidence in their response and the true answer.
This experiment, which is the first to use imaging to investigate the
hypercorrection effect, provided support for this hypothesis, showing
that both metacognitive mismatch conditions—that in which high confidence accompanies a wrong answer, and that in which low confidence
accompanies a correct answer—revealed anterior cingulate and medial
frontal gyrus activations. Only in the high confidence error condition,
however, was an error that conflicted with the true answer mentally
present. And only the high confidence error condition yielded activations in right temporal parietal junction (rTPJ) and the right dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (rDLPFC). These activations suggested that during the
correction process, after error commission, people were (1) entertaining
both the false belief as well as the true belief (as in theory of mind tasks
which also manifest the rTPJ activation), and (2) that they were suppressing the unwanted, incorrect, information that they had, themselves, produced (as in think/no think tasks which also manifest the rDLPFC
activation).

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

77

Poster Session C

Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

ATTENTION: Multisensory
C1
NEURONAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN STIMULUS CONFLICT AND
SUBJECTIVE PERCEPTION OF DISTRACTION IN A MULTISENSORY
STROOP TASK Ulrike Zimmer1,2, Marty Woldorff1; 1Center for Cognitive

Neuroscience, Duke University, 2Cognitive Psychology & Neuroscience, KarlFranzens University, Graz, Austria — The processing of audiovisual stimulus

conflict is known to activate the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). It also,
however, appears to activate the associated sensory cortices, apparently
reflecting the attentional capture by distracting input from the irrelevant
stimulus modality and the need for boosted attention to the task-relevant
modality (Zimmer et al., 2010, Neuroimage). It is unclear, however, how
much conflict-related brain activation depends on subjects’ awareness of
the conflict. Here, using a modified numerical-Stroop task and fMRI, we
asked how the subjective perception of multisensory conflict corresponds to the conflict-related activation in the brain. Twenty subjects
were asked to detect the number of flashing dots (“two” or “three”)
while ignoring a matching versus non-matching spoken number. After
each trial, subjects rated the degree of perceived distraction by the spoken number on a scale from one (not distracted) to four (very distracted).
The relationship between the rated distraction and the conflict-related
fMRI response (non-matching versus matching stimulus types) was then
estimated. The results showed that conflict-related fMRI activity was
found mainly in visual and auditory cortices, replicating our previous
results. In addition, higher distraction rating covaried with activation
magnitude in the rostral ACC and ventral-medial prefrontal cortex.
Thus, the perceived distraction particularly modulated the conflictrelated activation in frontal areas associated with appraisal and regulation in emotional decision making (Etkin et al., 2011,TICS). This result
suggests that increased awareness of distraction may influence a subject’s emotional state, which might in turn contribute to cognitive-control
adjustments in response to conflicting stimulus input.

C2
AMPLITUDE-MODULATED SOUNDS ARE SYSTEMATICALLY ASSOCIATED
WITH NATURAL SCENES AND INFLUENCE VISUAL SCANNING
STRATEGY Aleksandra Sherman1, Marcia Grabowecky1,2, Satoru Suzuki1,2;
1

Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL,
Neuroscience Program, Northwestern University,
Evanston, IL — We previously demonstrated a linear perceptual relation2Interdepartmental

ship between auditory amplitude-modulation (AM) rate and visual spatial-frequency using simple gratings as the visual stimuli. Here, we
investigated whether this frequency-based auditory-visual association
would generalize to perception of natural scenes. We found that participants consistently matched specific auditory AM rates to visual scenes
from diverse categories (nature, urban, and indoor). A correlation analysis indicated that this crossmodal association was mediated by the subjective impression of density within the visual scene, with higher

78

subjective density ratings associated with faster AM-rate matches. Furthermore, both the density ratings and AM-rate matches were relatively
scale invariant suggesting that the underlying crossmodal association is
between visual coding of object-based density and auditory coding of
AM rate. Based on these results, we hypothesized that concurrently presented fast (7Hz) or slow (2Hz) AM-rates might influence the way in
which visual attention is allocated to dense or sparse aspects within a
scene. We tested this hypothesis by monitoring eye movements while
participants examined each scene for a subsequent memory task. Their
initial five saccades had significantly smaller amplitudes and smaller fixation durations when the faster sound was played than when the slower
sound was played. This suggests that faster sounds may promote a local
scene scanning strategy in which objects within a dense region are individuated, whereas slower sounds may encourage a global scanning
strategy. In summary, our results suggest that auditory AM rate and
visual object density are crossmodally associated, and that this association can modulate visual inspection of scenes.

C3
CROSS-MODAL, POSITIONAL, AND SEMANTIC EFFECTS IN VISUAL
SLOPE PERCEPTION Stacey Parrott1, Emmanuel Guzman-Martinez1, Laura

Ortega1, Marcia Grabowecky1, Satoru Suzuki1; 1Northwestern University —

Extracting slopes from arrays of visual features is relevant to perceiving
terrains and interpreting graphs. To understand slope perception in a
broader context, we investigated the effects of sounds, position, and
semantic priming on a visual search task in which observers searched for
a graph that displayed a specific slope. Four bar graphs or scatter plots
were simultaneously presented in separate quadrants. The task was to
press the space bar as quickly as possible if one of the graphs displayed a
specific (positive or negative) slope and to refrain from response otherwise. Concurrently presented ascending (or descending) pitch slowed
responses to the positive-slope (or negative-slope) targets, indicating
crossmodal interference. Positive slopes were rapidly detected in the
upper-right quadrant but slowly detected in the upper-left quadrant
whereas negative slopes were rapidly detected in the upper-left quadrant but slowly detected in the upper-right quadrant, indicating position
dependence. Finally, positive slopes were detected faster when the
search display was immediately preceded by a briefly flashed word
“uphill” than “downhill” and vice versa for detecting a negative slope,
indicating a semantic priming effect. This priming effect is unlikely due
to reminding observers of the target because the target type (defined as
positive and negative slopes) was blocked, and the semantic priming
only affected the perception of scatter plots (not bar graphs). In summary, perception of visual slope is systematically influenced by auditory
signals, placement of graphs, and semantic priming, suggesting that
graph perception can be improved by appropriate manipulations of contextual information.

C4
BRAIN MECHANISMS OF COGNITIVE DISTRACTION WHILE DRIVING

Richard Young1, Li Hsieh1, Sean Seaman1; 1Wayne State University — Goals
and Methods: Review brain mechanisms underlying response delays to

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session C
visual events while performing visual-manual and cell phone secondary
tasks while driving. Associate these mechanisms with the orienting
attention network in the brain. Results: Detecting and responding to onroad events during secondary visual-manual tasks constitutes a second
orthogonal “cognitive distraction” dimension, independent of eye movements to secondary in-vehicle tasks (1). The right superior parietal lobe
is the primary brain site associated with the delay in foot pedal response
times to an intermittent red light during hands-free cellular conversations during a driving-like scenario (2). It is also a key site in the orienting attention network (3). Conclusion: The effect of cognitive distraction
from secondary tasks on event detection while driving is associated with
the orienting attentional network, particularly with neural mechanisms
in the right superior parietal lobe. This approach may lead to understanding cognitive distraction while driving in terms of attention networks and well-established experimental paradigms in cognitive
neuroscience, hopefully leading to new and effective countermeasures to
reduce crashes and improve driving safety. (1) Young, R.A. & Angell,
L.S. (2003). The dimensions of driver performance during secondary
manual tasks. Driving Assessment 2003, Park City, Utah. (2) Bowyer,
S.M., Hsieh, L., Moran, J.E., Young, R.A., et al., (2009). Conversation
effects on neural mechanisms underlying reaction time to visual events
while viewing a driving scene using MEG. Brain Research, 1251, 151-161.
(3) Posner, M.I. & Petersen, S.E. (1990). The attention system of the
human brain. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 13, 25-42.

C5
BEHAVIORAL FACILITATION AND INTERFERENCE EFFECTS WHILE
HOLDING A PAIR OF SPEAKERS DURING AN AUDITORY DISCRIMINATION
TASK Stephanie Simon-Dack1, Shannon Doody1, Kathleen Burkhart1, Kelly
Fogle1, Brittney Klauser1, Lindsay Marsh1, Sam Godsey1, Derek Gosman1,
Grant Sinning1; 1Ball State University — This study addresses the conditions

under which behavioral facilitation or interference is observed for an
auditory oddball task when participants are touching the sound source
in comparison to having no physical contact. Participants performed a
difficult target discrimination task by detecting when a rare deviant
“oddball” sound was emitted from an attended speaker while ignoring
frequently occurring standard sounds. Participants ran in two sessions
each and were randomly divided into two possible conditions. In condition 1 (Lap, Lap), participants kept their hands in their laps for both sessions. In condition 2 (Lap, Hold), participants kept their hands in their
laps for session one and held the speakers for session two. Reaction time
(RT) and accuracy differences between the sessions were compared
across groups. Participants were also given the Barkley and Murphy
Current Symptoms Scale - Self Report Form for ADHD (1998) and were
compared on the basis of whether they qualified as having attention deficit symptomatology. Current results suggest that participants with
attention deficits demonstrate speeded RT differences between the sessions for condition 1, while they demonstrate slowed RT differences
between the sessions for condition 2. In contrast, participants who do not
show ADHD symptomatology demonstrate no change between the sessions for condition 1 and speeded RTs between the sessions for condition
2. Overall, individuals are faster when holding a set of speakers than
when resting their hands in their laps. However, individuals with
ADHD symptomatology show an opposite effect, such that holding the
speakers may cause behavioral interference.

C6
ATTENTIONAL MODULATION OF SENSORY PROCESSING: AN FMRI
STUDY Erica Sieg1, Yangfeifei Gao2, Barrett Kern3, John Sweeney4, Sarah

Keedy2; 1The Chicago School Of Professional Psychology, 2University of Illinois
at Chicago, 3Roosevelt University, 4University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center — Attention systems in the brain play a top-down modulatory role

affecting how sensory cortices respond to stimuli. Understanding such
mechanisms may be clinically important, as uncontrolled processing of
context-irrelevant sensory stimuli is a common feature of neuropsychiatric disorders and may contribute to multiple abnormalities. Studies have

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

not been conducted which examine how parametric modulation of attentional demand affects processing of task-irrelevant information both
within-mode (irrelevant visual information during a visual task) and
cross-mode (irrelevant auditory information during a visual task). To
test the hypotheses that increasing attentional demand diminishes cortical response to irrelevant sensory information, fMRI studies were conducted with healthy subjects performing a visual attention task with
varying levels of difficulty (an X-CPT with visually degraded letters).
While the task was performed, irrelevant stimuli were added: either
visual motion was added to the periphery of the visual field or pure
tones were played binaurally. As predicted, increased difficulty of the
primary task was associated with reduced cortical response to irrelevant
visual motion in area MT (medial temporal area) to the irrelevant
motion. However, auditory cortex did not show modulated response to
the irrelevant sounds as the primary task difficulty increased. These data
provide insight into top-down regulation of basic sensory processing
and suggest a need for further exploration of within- and cross-modal
effects.

C7
PERCEPTUAL LOAD INFLUENCES PERCEPTION AND INHIBITION OF
RETURN IN TOUCH. EVIDENCE FROM ERPS AND BEHAVIOUR Alexander
Jones1, Bettina Forster1; 1City University London — The perceptual load the-

ory of attention suggests increased load in a central task decreases the
ability for irrelevant peripheral stimuli to capture our attention. Participants viewed a rapid serial visual presentation stream (RSVP) of letters
on a central monitor. During the presentation of letters participants
received a lateralized tactile exogenous cue to the left or right hand. In a
single task participants responded to a tactile target to the same or opposite hand as the cue (low perceptual load). In a dual task, participants
searched the RSVP stream for a number and responded also to this
visual target (high perceptual load). Behavioural results demonstrated
tactile inhibition of return (IOR) in the single whilst no exogenous attention effect in the dual task. ERPs immediately following the cue (cuelocked ERPs) demonstrated increased perceptual load resulting in
decreased somatosensory processing at the P100. ERP analysis of attentional control processes (cue-target interval) demonstrated an ADAN in
both tasks. The ADAN was significantly larger in the single compared to
the dual task. That is, increased perceptual load led to a decreased
ADAN. Analysis of post-target ERPs demonstrated earlier attention
modulations (N80) when perceptual load was low compared to high.
Taken together, this study demonstrates, through several analyses
(behavioural and ERP), that increased visual perceptual load resulted in
decreased processing of irrelevant tactile stimuli.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
C8
ANXIETY AND THE PERCEPTION OF SMALL QUANTITIES Adi

Dayan1,
Andrea Berger1; 1Ben Gurion University, Israel — The goal of this research
was to examine the relationship between the ability for number perception in the subitizing range (quantities 1-4) and levels of trait anxiety,
with perceptual sensitivity serving as a possible mediator. These factors
are hypothesized to be linked by a common adaptive advantage used by
animals and human infants. A dis-habituation task was used, in which a
slide, with a fixed number of schematic faces (angry and neutral), is presented repeatedly (habituation phase), at the end of which a slide with a
different quantity is shown (dis-habituation phase). Participants then
become habituated to the new quantity and so forth. Trait anxiety was
evaluated using the State-Trait Anxiety Questionnaire (Spielberger,
1984), and perceptual sensitivity was evaluated using Adult Temperament Questionnaire (Evans & Rothbart, 2007). ERP amplitudes along
with reaction times for key pressing at the appearance of a new quantity
were measured. Results show high correlation between anxiety and perceptual sensitivity as well as high fit indices for a mediation model. It

79

Poster Session C — Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
further seems that angry stimuli, compared to neutral stimuli, evoke
smaller amplitudes in right parietal scalp localization (related in literature to quantity perception). Furthermore, participants higher in trait
anxiety and perceptual sensitivity showed smaller amplitudes, and
faster reaction times. It is plausible to conclude that both trait and state
anxiety allow for the advantage of less cognitive effort when dealing
with small quantities. Research implications may include an implicit
measure of trait anxiety using a quantitative task, and future research
will focus on young children.

C9
PUSHING FEAR ASIDE: NEURAL REGIONS INVOLVED IN IGNORING
IRRELEVANT FEAR EXPRESSIONS. Erik C. Nook1, Ajay B. Satpute1,

Sandhya Narayanan1, Jochen Weber1, Kevin N. Ochsner1; 1Columbia University
in the City of New York — While at times affective signals in the environ-

ment can be our ally, in other situations they can interfere with what is
required to be done. Here, cognitive control is required to attend to goalrelevant information and to ignore the more salient affective information. Current neurocognitive models underlying the cognitive control of
emotion posit that prefrontal regions downregulate regions involved in
processing affective information to facilitate goal-directed behaviors. We
investigated this neurocircuitry further by using a parametric design,
addressing the question of how this network responds as affective information becomes increasingly more salient. Twenty participants were
scanned while they viewed faces that were morphed to vary in affective
intensity (five levels, from calm to fearful), and to range on a non-affective perceptual dimension (five levels, from centered to tilted). In a
within-subject design, participants judged either the amount of affect or
tilt of faces. Even though the fearfulness of the expression was irrelevant
to judging the tilt, participants took longer to judge the tilt as the fearfulness of the face increased, suggesting that affectively salient information
interfered with task goals. Tracking these behavioral effects, neuroimaging results showed that increasing fearfulness while judging tilt elicited
activation of the prefrontal cortex and deactivation of the insula. These
results support current themes in the field suggesting that affect signals
in the environment are salient and may interfere with ongoing task
goals, and that dealing with this interference may rely on prefrontal
regions to down-regulate the response in affective sensitive regions,
such as the insula.

C10
OXYTOCIN INCREASES EMPATHY FOR VICTIMS OF CRIMINAL
OFFENSES Lara Moody1, Raja Parasuraman1, Peter Twieg1, Ewart de

Visser1, Kevin McCabe1, Martin O'Hara2, Mary Lee3, Frank Krueger1; 1George
Mason University, Fairfax, VA, 2Virginia Hospital Center, Fairfax Hospital, Falls
Church, VA, 3National Institute on Drug Abuse, Baltimore, MD — The neuro-

petide oxytocin functions both as a hormone and neurotransmitter and
facilitates prosocial affiliative and approach behavior. Given that empathy (i.e., capacity to share and understand the feelings of others) is an
essential mental state for approach related affective behavior, we
hypothesized that oxytocin promotes empathy for victims of criminal
offenses. Healthy males received either intranasal oxytocin or placebo in
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, between-subject
design. Fifty-four male participants were given a set of legal vignettes
that described an event during which an offender engaged in criminal
offenses against fictional victims. As an unaffected third-party, participants were asked to rate those criminal offenses on the degree to which
the offender deserved punishment and how much harm was inflicted on
the victim. Exogenous administration of oxytocin selectively increased
empathy for the victim but not for the perpetrators of criminal offenses
leading to higher harm ratings for the victim. We propose that oxytocin
promotes prosocial affiliative and approach behavior regarding the
interpersonal relationship between an unaffected third-party and fictional characters in the criminal scenarios, which in turn increased
empathic concern for the victim but not for the offender. Given the selective effect found in this study, future research should explore the con-

80

text- and person-dependent nature of exogenous oxytocin
administration in individuals with antisocial personality disorders,
which are far more common among males. One strategic therapeutic
approach might be the combination of oxytocin pharmacotherapy with a
psychosocial intervention design to target specific cognitive outcomes
that improve victim empathy.

C11
POST-ERROR ALPHA SUPPRESSION PREDICTS ANHEDONIC
DEPRESSION AND REDUCED DAILY REPORTS OF POSITIVE EMOTION
AND ACTIVE COPING Rebecca Compton1, Julia Hofheimer1, Rebecca

Kazinka1, Amanda Levinson1, Amanda Zheutlin1; 1Haverford College — This

study predicted that changes in neural activity following performance
errors are associated with depression and can predict daily affect and
coping. Sixty-two participants, including 24 scoring high on the CESD
self-report measure of depression, completed a 6-choice Stroop task
while EEG was recorded, and subsequently completed daily self-reports
of stressors, affect, and coping behaviors. EEG alpha power was significantly reduced in the 1-sec period following mistakes compared to correct responses, indicating increased cortical arousal following errors
(main effect of accuracy, p < .0001). Error-related alpha suppression in
the frontal region was more pronounced in depressed versus nondepressed participants (accuracy x site x group, p < .05). Greater errorrelated alpha suppression in both frontal and parietal regions predicted
lower positive affect throughout the subsequent daily reporting period
(rs = - 0.30 and -0.28, ps < .05). Furthermore, greater frontal alpha suppression following errors on incongruent Stroop trials predicted higher
levels of anhedonic depression at the time of the lab session (MASQ-AD;
r = 0.26, p < .05) as well as reduced use of task-focused coping (r = -0.28,
p < .05) and approach-focused coping (r = -0.31, p < .05) in the daily
reporting period. Alpha suppression was not related to negative affect or
emotion-focused coping, although these were highly correlated with
depression. In sum, cortical arousal following performance errors was
associated with anhedonia and low levels of active, adaptive coping
strategies. Results imply that the anhedonic aspect of depression may be
especially associated with maladaptive responses to failure.

C12
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN FRONTOPARIETAL ACTIVITY AND
CONNECTIVITY PREDICT HIGH-STAKES CHOKING Andrew Mattarella-

Micke1, Sian Beilock1; 1University of Chicago — In high-stakes tests, pres-

sure to succeed can cause students to perform below their ability (or
“choke under pressure”) instead. Distraction theories propose that choking is caused by a disruption of working memory (WM). Distraction theories thus predict that individuals who choke the most should exhibit
characteristic differences in the functioning of their WM systems under
stress, relative to those who are not impacted by pressure. Using functional MRI, we explored the hypothesis that online disturbances of WM
might predict high-stakes choking. Participants completed math problems before (low-pressure) and after (high-pressure) introduction of a
high-stakes situation during fMRI acquisition. Math problems were
selected to place either high or low demands on WM. As a result of the
high-stakes situation, performance of high WM-demand problem accuracy significantly dropped from low (M=0.71,SE=.02) to high-pressure
(M=0.61,SE=03) situations [t(12)=3.78, p=.003], while low demand accuracy did not (Low-pressure: M=0.87,SE=.03; High-pressure:
M=0.89,SE=.02) [t(12)=0.67,p=.52,ns]. Low- and high-demand problem
activity was contrasted to localize WM-related regions. Within the
resulting network, activity during high-demand problems in the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) and the inferior frontal junction (IFJ) predicted individual differences in choking. The more an individual choked, the less
activity exhibited in these regions during high-pressure math problem
performance. Connectivity analyses revealed a subset of WM-related
regions that decouple from the IPS and the IFJ under pressure. Individual differences in degree of decoupling predicted further variance in
choking. These results shed light on how high-stakes situations compro-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session C
mise performance and why some people are more prone to performance
loss than others.

C13
HOW EMOTIONAL STATE AFFECTS EMPATHY FOR PAIN—AN ERP
STUDY Rui Sun1, Shihui Han1; 1Peking University — Social and developmental psychology research have found that individuals’ emotion can
affect empathy. However, different research have reached different conclusions, and few research have directly explored the relationship
between the two using neuroimaging methods. The current study used
the high time-resolution event-related potentials (ERPs), and used movie
clips to prime subjects into happy, neutral and sad emotions aimed at
directly studying the relationship between emotion and empathy. Subjects were instructed to judge the expressions they saw to be painful or
neutral. Results showed that during 80-110ms, in happy emotion, painful faces triggered a larger N1 compared to neutral faces, while there’s
no difference between painful and neutral faces in neutral and sad emotions. During 300-400ms, in happy emotion, the difference between painful and neutral emotions decreased but in sad and neutral emotions,
there were still difference between two expressions. The results proved
our previous early and late model of empathy for pain, suggesting that
emotional states can dynamically affect empathy for pain in both early
automatic emotion sharing stage and late cognitive appraisal stage. It
also indicated that happy emotion would increase the ability to detect
painful expression in the early stage but would decrease empathy for
pain in the late cognitive appraisal stage; sad emotion could not increase
the detection of painful expression in the early stage but would last
longer in the late stage.

C14
THE INFLUENCE OF SPATIAL FREQUENCY INFORMATION FOR THE
PROCESSING OF IAPS PICTURES Liane I Schoenwald1, Matthias M

Mueller1; 1Institute of Psychology, University of Leipzig, Germany — We examined to what extent the spatial frequency of an emotional picture has an
influence on their processing. Recent research showed that low spatial
frequency (LSF) information in pictures of emotional faces is processed
by a fast pathway to the amygdala and elicited higher amygdala activation for these faces. However, less is known about the influence of LSF
information in pictures from the International Affective Picture System
(IAPS). Therefore, we presented unpleasant and neutral pictures with
broadband spatial frequency (BSF), only with high spatial frequency
(HSF) or only with low spatial frequency (LSF). Subjects had to view pictures and rated valence and arousal afterwards. During this procedure
EEG was recorded. As index for emotional processing we analyzed the
Early Posterior Negativity (EPN) and the Late Positive Potential (LPP).
In line with previous research, emotional BSF pictures elicited a greater
negativity on posterior electrodes from 170 to 290 ms and a greater positivity on central-parietal electrodes from 400 to 1000 ms compared to
neutral pictures. In contrast, HSF pictures as well as LSF pictures triggered later and shorter differences (for HSF from 230 to 290 ms and for
LSF from 260 to 320 ms) between emotional and neutral pictures in the
EPN. Furthermore, only the HSF pictures, but not the LSF pictures, were
further processed as indexed by the LPP.

C15
INEQUITY AVERSION AS AN ABSTRACT RULE IN THE ULTIMATUM GAME:
AN FMRI STUDY. Claudia Civai1, Cristiano Crescentini1,2, Aldo Rustichini3,

Raffaella Ida Rumiati1; 1SISSA, Trieste, Italy, 2Azienda OspedalieroUniversitaria Santa Maria della Misericordia, Udine, Italy, 3University of
Minnesota — Neuroscientific findings support the idea that emotional

reactions to unfairness cause the non-utilitarian, and irrational, rejections
in the Ultimatum Game (Sanfey et al, 2003). However, not only emotions
should be accounted for triggering rejections (Civai et al., 2010). Here,
we aim at understanding the role played by the perception of equity and
its neural basis. In the task, the participant has to accept or reject monetary divisions, randomly established by a device, between two couples of
players: a) the participant and another person (myself –MS- condition);

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

b) two uninvolved third parties (third party –TP- condition). In both conditions, players are not responsible for the outcome, but they are all
affected by participant’s decision. Behavioral results indicate that
unequal outcomes in TP are rejected significantly more than equal and
MS unequal advantageous, but not MS unequal disadvantageous, outcomes. Analysis of BOLD signal shows, on the one hand, a higher activation of the anterior part of the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) in MS for
disadvantageous outcomes, as opposed to equal and advantageous outcomes, that is likely to reflect the negative affective reaction to disadvantageous inequity, that affects the self; on the other hand, a higher
activation of anterior insula (AI) for unequal outcome, irrespectively of
the target, reflects a sensitivity to inequity. Our interpretation is that
equity is perceived as a basic social norm, and its violation is signaled by
the activation of AI (King-Casas et al., 2008), whereas MPFC is related to
the frustration elicited by a disadvantageous outcome.

C16
GOAL-DIRECTED BEHAVIOR UNDER EMOTIONAL DISTRACTION:
COMPENSATORY HYPER-ACTIVATION IN TASK-SPECIFIC BRAIN
REGIONS Philipp Kanske1,2, Janine Heissler1, Sandra Schönfelder1,

Michèle Wessa2; 1Central Institute of Mental Health, Mannheim, Germany,
2
University Hospital Heidelberg, Germany — Despite the distracting effects
of emotional stimuli on concurrent task performance, humans are able to
uphold goal-directed behavior. Here, we investigated the hypotheses (1)
that this effect is due to the increased recruitment of task-specific neural
resources and (2) that individuals with heightened emotional reactivity
show a more pronounced compensatory hyperactivation. In a two-step
functional magnetic resonance imaging study we first localized those
areas involved in mental arithmetics by contrasting arithmetic problems
with a number detection task. The resulting activation maps were then
used as masks in a second experiment that compared the effects of neutral and emotional distracter images on mental arithmetics. We found
increased response times in the emotional distracter condition, accompanied by increased activation in task-specific areas, including superior
parietal cortex, dorsolateral and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex. This activation increase correlated with larger behavioral impairment through
emotional distraction. Similar error rates in both conditions indicated
that cognitive task performance is preserved through increased recruitment of task-specific neural resources when emotional distracter stimuli
are present. We also tested a group of patients with bipolar disorder,
who are particularly sensitive to the emotional content of stimuli. Even
though they were also able to perform the arithmetic task, they showed a
stronger increase in compensatory task-related activation than matched
healthy controls. The data show that neural efficiency during task processing is decreased through emotional distracters, an effect that is particularly pronounced in individuals with heightened emotional
reactivity.

C17
SEX INFLUENCES THE ROLE OF THE AMYGDALA IN MEMORY FOR
POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE STIMULI Jennifer Strafford Stevens1, Janice M.

Hassett1, Stephan Hamann1; 1Emory University — The amygdala enhances

subsequent episodic memory for emotional stimuli via modulation of
hippocampal/parahippocampal activity. Previous studies have reported
a sex-related hemispheric asymmetry, with this effect observed for the
left amygdala in women but the right amygdala in men. However, prior
studies examined only negative emotional stimuli. It is not known
whether a similar effect extends to positive emotional stimuli. Here we
investigated this question, and for the first time examined whether sex
differences exist in amygdala-hippocampal interactions previously
linked to the emotional enhancement of episodic memory. Women and
men viewed emotionally positive, negative, and neutral pictures during
event-related fMRI. Subsequent cued recall for positive and negative pictures was enhanced vs. neutral pictures, with similar memory effects in
women and men. Women showed greater subsequent-memory-related
activation than men for negative vs. neutral stimuli in the left amygdala.
In the corresponding analysis for positive stimuli, women showed

81

Poster Session C — Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
greater memory-related activation in the right amygdala and at a lower
statistical threshold, the left amygdala. Women, but not men, showed
greater functional connectivity related to subsequent memory for positive stimuli between the left and right amygdala and the contralateral
hippocampus. Findings suggest that previously observed sex-related
hemispheric asymmetries differ according to positive or negative emotional valence of stimuli, and that functional connectivity related to subsequent memory for emotional stimuli differs by sex. Results highlight
how emotional memory encoding recruits different brain regions and
networks in women and men, differences that may relate to behavioral
sex differences in emotional memory.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional
responding
C18
LESIONED BRAIN REGIONS CORRELATING WITH ANXIETY IN VIETNAM
VETERANS Kris Knutson1, Shana Rakowsky4, Jeffrey Solomon1,2, Frank

Krueger1,6, Vanessa Raymont3,7, Eric Wassermann1, Jordan Grafman1,5;
1National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of
Health, 2Medical Numerics, Inc., Germantown, Maryland, 3Imperial College
London, 4Georgetown University, 5Kessler Foundation Research Center, West
Orange, New Jersey, 6George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, 7Johns Hopkins
University — Anxiety negatively affects quality of life and psychosocial
functioning. Previous research has shown anxiety in healthy volunteers
to be related to variation in the volume of brain regions such as the
amygdala, hippocampus, and the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis.
Evidence based on the lateralization of lesions suggests that the hemisphere affected also modulates levels of anxiety. We studied a unique
sample of Vietnam War veterans with penetrating traumatic brain injuries (TBI), and found that lesions in limbic and cortical structures in the
left hemisphere were associated with increased anxiety as measured by
the Neurobehavioral Rating Scale, a clinician rating which helps define
the impact of brain injury and an important source of information about
a patient’s everyday behavior after TBI.

C19
RESTING VAGAL REGULATION PREDICTS SYMPATHETIC AND
Porges1,
TESTOSTERONE RESPONSES TO OBSERVED VIOLENCE Eric

Karen Smith1, Jean Decety1; 1University of Chicago — Viewing videos of vio-

lent content has been hypothesized to increase antisocial behaviors
including interpersonal violence. Previous research evaluating the
impact of observing violence on the autonomic nervous system has
focused on measures that reflect changes in states of arousal as indexed
by the sympathetic nervous system. Measurement of the self-regulatory
calming influences of the parasympathetic nervous system has been
neglected, although reduced parasympathetic activity, as indexed by
respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA), has been shown to facilitate antisocial behavior. Consistent with a hierarchical model of the autonomic nervous system (i.e., Polyvagal Theory), individual differences in
parasympathetic nervous system activity reflected in RSA were hypothesized to have an inhibitory impact on sympathetic and hormonal reactivity while observing violence. Autonomic data (i.e., electrodermal activity
(EDA), heart rate and RSA) were collected from forty adult males prior
to and while viewing either a violent sporting event or a non-arousing
documentary. In addition, pre- and post-video saliva samples were collected for analysis of cortisol and testosterone changes. Participants who
viewed the violent video exhibited significantly increased EDA and
heart rate relative to participants who viewed the documentary. There
were no significant differences in RSA in response to the stimuli, suggesting that while viewing violence increases sympathetic activity it
does not elicit parasympathetic withdrawal. However, within the group
viewing violence, only those with lower levels of resting RSA demonstrated an increase in salivary testosterone. This suggests that high rest-

82

ing parasympathetic activity protects against increased reactivity and
antisocial behavior after viewing violent content.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
C20
THE EFFECT OF VALENCE AND AROUSAL ON ASSOCIATIVE WORKING
MEMORY AND LONG-TERM MEMORY Heiko Bergmann1,
Christien

Marsman1, Mark Rijpkema1,2, Guillén Fernández1,2, Roy P.C. Kessels1,3;
1Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, 2Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department for
Cognitive Neuroscience, 3Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Department of Medical Psychology — Emotional content typically facilitates
subsequent memory, known as the emotional enhancement effect. However, the differential effects of valence and arousal on associative working memory (WM) and long-term memory (LTM) have been scarcely
studied. To fill this gap, we conducted a five-pair associative delayedmatch-to-sample (DMS) task and an unexpected subsequent recognition
memory (LTM) task for both single items and binding. The encoding
phase of the DMS task consisted of five picture pairs, each containing
one emotionally-neutral picture and one emotional IAPS picture.
Valence (positive, neutral, negative) and arousal (high, low) of the emotional stimulus were manipulated across trials. This was followed by a
10s-delay and a probe phase in which five pairs were tested. Participants
had to indicate for each pair whether it matched one of the presented
ones. In the subsequent LTM task we first presented one emotional picture, being either an old or new stimulus. In the former, this was followed by the presentation of the same emotional picture together with
one neutral picture, which was also shown during the first task but not
necessarily together. The results for both the associative WM and LTM
task, where we corrected for WM performance, showed an arousal effect:
picture pairs containing low-arousal pictures were better remembered
than high-arousal pairs. For the single-item LTM task we obtained a
valence effect: negative stimuli were better remembered than positive
stimuli. Arousing stimuli might attract attention and therefore the processing of associations consisting of arousing elements may be disrupted, affecting both WM and LTM performance.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional
responding
C21
ERP STUDY ON CATEGORICAL PERCEPTION OF HAPPINESS AND FEAR
FACIAL EXPRESSIONS Shih-Tseng Tina Huang1, Ming Chun Lee1, Bethany

C. Y. Wu2; 1National Chung-Cheng University,Taiwan, 2National Cheng-Chi
University, Taiwan — The present study investigates differences between

judging between-category facial expressions and judging within-category facial expressions, using ERP measures. Pairs of happy and fearful
faces were morphed into a continuum of happy-fearful expressions in
100 steps. In each trial, two morphed faces were presented in sequence.
In the same condition, the two faces were identical to each other. In the
between-category condition, the two faces were on the two sides of the
continuum midpoint, and were always 30% apart (e.g., 40% vs. 70%).
Finally, in the within-category condition, the two faces were also 30%
apart but on the same side of morphed continuum (e.g., 8% vs. 38%).
There were altogether 288 trials, including 144 same pairs, 72 betweencategory pairs, and 72 within-category pairs. A trial began with a cross
for fixation presented for 400 ms, followed by a pair of faces presented in
sequence. Each face was shown for 400 ms, with a 1300-ms blank in
between. The second face was followed by a response period of 1200 ms,
and then an ISI of 1500 ms. Peak amplitudes of P120, N170 at PO8, and
mean amplitude of P300 at Fz, Cz, Pz were analyzed. Results showed
that the peak amplitudes of P120 and N170 of the second face were
greater than those of the first face at PO8. Furthermore, P3 at both Cz
and Pz were higher in the between-category condition than those in the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session C
same and within-category conditions, suggesting an advantage judging
facial expression between categories than within a category.

key role in focusing attention and directly influences activity in auditory
cortex.

C22
STRIATAL FMRI RESPONSES TO TRANSIENT EVENTS DURING PLAYING
VERSUS VIEWING A VIDEO GAME Jari Kätsyri1, Lauri Nummenmaa2,3,

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional
responding

Riitta Hari2,4, Niklas Ravaja1,5; 1Aalto University School of Economics, Helsinki,
Finland, 2Aalto University School of Science, Espoo, Finland, 3Turku PET
Centre, Finland, 4Advanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging Centre, Espoo,
Finland, 5University of Helsinki, Finland — Although video game playing
elicits tonic striatal activation in the brain’s reward circuitry, striatal
reward responses to transient video-game events remain poorly known.
The present functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study compared striatal responses to rewarding (winning), aversive (losing), and
neutral (starting a new game round) game events during video game
playing and passive viewing of game play. Eleven healthy adults both
played and watched a game play video recorded from a competitive
first-person tank shooter game during fMRI at 3 T. Event-related statistical parametric mapping, based on automatic annotation of the game
events, was followed by region-of-interest analyses in six anatomically
defined striatal regions. Activation was weaker to aversive than neutral
events in all other regions except the sensorimotor posterior putamen.
Furthermore, the suppression of activity due to losing was more pronounced during playing than viewing. We suggest that this loss-related
striatal suppression reflects aversion that is stronger during active videogame playing than passive viewing. No region displayed stronger activation during rewarding than neutral events; on the contrary, activation
in anterior putamen was suppressed also during winning in both conditions, and activation in ventral caudate was suppressed during winning
in the active playing condition. Consistently with our findings, also
Mathiak et al. (BMC Neurosci 2011) found weaker striatal responses to
winning compared with playing in general. A possible explanation
could be that striatal activation remained so elevated throughout the
game that additional increases could not be detected by our methods.

ATTENTION: Auditory
C23
VISUAL INPUT AIDS SELECTIVE SPEECH TRACKING AT A “COCKTAIL
PARTY” Elana Zion Golumbic1,2, Gregory Cogan3, Morgan Harvey2, Charles

Schroeder1,2, David Poeppel3; 1Columbia University, 2Nathan Kline Institute for
Psychiatric Research, 3New York University — Our ability to attend to a particular conversation amidst competing input streams (e.g. other speakers), epitomized by the “cocktail party” problem, is remarkable. One
neuronal mechanism proposed for achieving this feat is synchronization
of low-frequency neural activity in auditory cortex (1-7Hz) to the temporal envelope of the attended stream (‘selective speech tracking’). Topdown attention may also aid this tracking by predicting upcoming temporal events in the stream. How these two mechanisms are integrated
and consequently, how attended speech is selectively tracked, remains
unresolved. We investigated whether congruent visual input of the
attended speaker contributes to selective speech tracking in auditory cortex. Since lip and head movements during speech are highly correlated
with the temporal envelope of speech, but precede them by ~150 ms,
visual input provides excellent predictive cues for the timing of upcoming acoustics. We presented natural speech to participants while recording neuromagnetic activity. Speech segments were presented alone
(single speaker) or concurrently with another speech segment (cocktail
party). In addition, audio was either presented alone (A) or accompanied
by a video of the speaker (AV). In the Single Speaker condition we found
selective low-frequency speech tracking in both AV and A conditions.
However, in the Cocktail Party condition selective speech tracking was
only found when visual input was provided, but not when listening to a
‘cocktail party of voices’. These results suggest that under perceptually
challenging situations such as the ‘cocktail party’, visual input plays a

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

C24
SPECIFIC AND GENERAL PAVLOVIAN-TO-INSTRUMENTAL TRANSFER IN
AN AVOIDANCE LEARNING TASK Andrea H. Lewis1, Michael A.

Niznikiewicz2, Natasha Nadler3, Andrew R. Delamater3, Mauricio R. Delgado1;
1Rutgers University - Newark, 2University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
3Brooklyn College - City University of New York — Pavlovian-to-instrumental

transfer (PIT) is a procedure that probes the influence of Pavlovian cues
over instrumental responding. A long-standing model of animal learning, PIT and its underlying neural basis have recently been extended to
investigation in humans. The current study examined both specific and
general PIT in a simple avoidance learning paradigm using fMRI. In the
instrumental phase, associations between instrumental responses (R1
and R2) and the avoidance of aversive outcomes (O1 and O2) were
acquired. In the Pavlovian phase, five stimulus-outcome pairings were
presented, such that each visual stimulus (S1-S5) was paired with either
one of the previously viewed aversive outcomes (O1 and O2), a novel
aversive outcome (O3), or one of two different neutral outcomes (O4 and
O5). The transfer phase involved separate presentation of the five visual
stimuli in the absence of reinforcement. During this phase, subjects were
instructed to respond whenever they saw fit in order to avoid the aversive outcomes. Behavioral results exhibited a selective increase in
responses to S1 and S2 when both the stimulus and response shared a
learned Pavlovian outcome. Additionally, a general transfer effect was
observed such that the stimulus (S3) associated with the novel aversive
outcome (O3) elicited a nonselective increase in both available responses
(R1 and R2) as compared to the two neutral stimuli. Initial analysis of
BOLD data (n=10) suggests a correlation between both specific and general PIT and increases in striatal activation. Further analyses will probe
differential activation in corticostriatal circuitry for specific and general
forms of PIT.

C26
CARDIAC VAGAL CONTROL AND CULTURAL BACKGROUND CONTRIBUTE
TO BEHAVIORAL REACTIVITY AND DIFFERENT PHASES OF HEART RATE
RESPONSE DURING COMPASSION FOR PHYSICAL PAIN Xiao-Fei

Yang1,2, Mary Helen Immordino-Yang1,2,3; 1Brain and Creativity Institute,
University of Southern California, 2Neuroscience Graduate Program, University
of Southern California, 3Rossier School of Education, University of Southern
California — Both cardiac vagal control (CVC) and cultural background
are known to modulate people’s emotional responses. For example,
higher CVC has been linked with less negative emotional expression
(Pu, et al., 2010); and members of the Chinese culture have been
described to value emotion moderation (Russell & Yik, 1996), and to
experience emotions with lower frequency, intensity and duration
(Bond, 1993). However, it is unclear how these two factors together influence emotional behavior and the heart rate (HR) responses that may
underlie it. We investigated participants’ emotional responses during
compassion for physical pain (Immordino-Yang, 2009) in three cultural
groups, Chinese, Asian American and non-Asian American. Participants
first viewed video-clips depicting another person’s painful physical
injury during a one-on-one naturalistic interview session. Independent
coders rated participants’ behavioral reactivity during the videotaped
interviews. Later, participants viewed brief reminders of the video-clips
(stimulus processing phase, SPP), followed by periods of black-screen
for reflection/deliberation (reflection/deliberation phase, RDP). Participants’ HR responses during SPP and RDP were measured with electrocardiogram (ECG). Baseline ECG recordings were also taken to establish
measures for CVC. We found that: 1) Behavioral reactivity correlated
with the peak HR acceleration during SPP. 2) CVC and culture indepen-

83

Poster Session C — Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
dently predicted behavioral reactivity. 3) CVC predicted the range of HR
change during SPP, whereas culture affected the peak HR acceleration
during RDP. Taken together, our findings suggest that CVC and culture
are independently associated with people’s emotional responses, with
CVC influencing the initial SPP, and culture influencing the later RDP.

C27
HEART RATE VARIABILITY DISTINGUISHES BETWEEN OBSERVATION OF
PLEASANT AND PAINFUL CONDITIONS Adrienne Moore1, Andrea Chiba1;
1University of California, San Diego -- Cognitive Science Dept. — The

goal of
this study was to test the hypothesis that empathy for the physical discomfort of others involves a simulation of the other's autonomic
response to the discomfort. Pairs of female participants were recruited to
observe one another inserting the left hand into ice water (a cold pressor
pain task) and warm water for short intervals. EKG heart rates were collected from one participant per pair, both during the experience of (self
condition) and the observation of (empathy condition) the hand immersion in water baths of comfortable (warm) and uncomfortable/painful
(cold) temperatures. A wavelet based time-frequency analysis was used
to quantify heart rate variability in frequency bands indicating the distinct contributions from the parasympathetic and sympathetic branches
of the autonomic nervous system to heart rate. Statistically significant
differences in parasympathetic driven heart rate variability were found
when the empathy cold/painful condition was compared to the empathy warm/pleasant condition. This finding is consistent with an "embodied cognition" view of empathy as involving a set of bodily responses
associated with emotion which are referred to another. However, heart
rate variability was not found to differ in the same way in the cold/
warm empathy conditions as in the cold/warm self conditions. So this
study does not confirm an "embodied simulation" account of empathy
expressed through heart rate, which would predict that the empathy
conditions would mimic the self conditions. Relationships between
visual analog scale ratings of the pleasant and painful experiences, trait
empathy, and HRV responses will be discussed as well.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Other
C28
SELECTIVITY AND MULTIFUNCTIONALITY IN THE STS Ben Deen1, Kami
1

Koldewyn ,

Sarah

1

Weigelt ,

Nancy

1

Kanwisher ,

1Massachusetts Institute of Technology — Prior

Rebecca

1

Saxe ;

research has found that
regions of the superior temporal sulcus (STS) are engaged during a range
of social and linguistic processes, including biological motion processing, face processing, theory of mind, syntax, semantics, phonology, and
voice processing. Should the STS be characterized as multifunctional cortex, flexibly engaging in different processes depending on task demands,
or is it composed of subregions specialized for specific processes? In the
present study, we address this question by acquiring fMRI data on a
range of tasks – including face perception, biological motion perception,
theory of mind, language, and voice perception – in a single set of subjects. We find that different tasks evoke largely differing patterns of
responses along the STS, but with some overlap between specific pairs.
Responses to biological motion and theory of mind were nearby but
largely nonoverlapping, pointing to dissociable systems for social processing along the STS. Additionally, STS responses to faces overlap posteriorly with regions responding to biological motion in point-light
displays, and anteriorly with regions responding to human voices.
Regions responding to human voices and to syntactic and semantic
properties of linguistic input were largely nonoverlapping. Thus, the
STS may include both multifunctional and functionally specific subregions.

C29
WILLIAMS SYNDROME SOCIAL-EMOTIONAL COGNITIVE
PERCEPTUAL PROCESSES: EVIDENCE OF SOCIAL BIAS Rowena

AND

Ng1,
Anna Jarvinen-Pasley1, Ursula Bellugi1; 1Laboratory for Cognitive
Neuroscience, Salk Institute for Biological Studies — Williams
syndrome
(WS) is genetic disorder characterized by hypersocial personality, i.e.,
increased propensity to approach strangers (Doyle et al., 2004) and
attraction to faces (Jones et al., 2000), and social closeness (Klein-Tasman
& Mervis, 2003). While WS individuals typically have cognitive impairment, face-processing is an unusual strength demonstrated by these
individuals (Rose et al., 2007). For example, research shows WS participants perform better in emotion-identification of facial over scenic stimuli (Järvinen-Pasley et al., 2010). However, it is not clear if WS
individuals show this social bias solely in the affective-cognitive sensory
modality (emotion-recognition) or if it persists in the perceptual domain
(emotion-discrimination). The present study addresses this question by
administering emotion-recognition and discrimination assessments
using social (faces, voices) and non-social (scenes, music) stimuli to WS
and typical developing (TD) participants. Results on group differences
indicate emotion-recognition and discrimination of faces are a relative
strength in WS. Additionally, within WS group, social bias in both cognitive and perceptual domains was observed, regardless of the sensory
stimuli (visual, auditory). Conversely, TD controls show social bias in
emotion-identification but not affect-discrimination tasks. Thus, it
appears in emotion-processing assessments that require greater cognitive resources, both WS and TD share a tendency to identify emotions of
social stimuli (faces, voices) better than those non-social in nature
(scenes, music). However, in less cognitive-laden emotion-perceptual
tasks, WS continues to demonstrate this bias whereas TD controls do not.
Altogether, WS process social information atypically in both cognitive
and perceptual sensory modalities, mirroring their gregarious personality.

C30
NEUROIMAGING STUDIES OF NICOTINE ADDICTION AND OBESITY

Vlad B. Papa1, Laura E. Martin1, Kevin Ruprecht1; 1University of Kansas
Medical Center — About 20 percent of the United States population currently smokes, and 30 percent of the United States population is obese
(body mass index [BMI]?30 kg/m2. Tobacco use and obesity are the top
preventable causes of death in the United States. Based on behavioral
studies we know that smokers and obese individuals are more sensitive
to signals of reward. Neuroimaging studies in smokers and obese participants show activations in the reward processing brain regions when
smokers view smoking cues and when obese individuals view food cues.
The current study used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to
examine the neural systems of reward among healthy weight and obese
smokers to see if obese smokers responded differently than healthy
weight smokers to food and smoking cues. To date six healthy-weight
(BMI18.5 – 25) and five obese individuals have participated. Participants
were scanned while viewing images of smoking and nonsmoking, as
well as food and nonfood cues at least 4 hours following their last cigarette and meal. Preliminary results revealed Ventromedial Prefrontal
Cortex responded more to food cues than smoking cues in both healthy
weight and obese smokers despite increased urges to smoke among
obese smokers. There were no significantly different brain responses to
smoking cues, however obese compared to healthy weight smokers did
show increases activations to food cues in the Left Anterior Insula. Consistent with past studies, we also found activations in the VMPFC
between Food and Smoke cues among all participants.

C31
LINGUISTIC MARKERS OF EMOTIONAL ELABORATION IN THE PAST AND
THE PRESENT IN ONLINE BLOGS Katherine Adams1, Ethan Kross1, Oscar

Ybarra1, Lisa Feldman Barrett2,3, John Jonides1, Sepandar Kamvar4, Emre

84

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session C
Demiralp1; 1University of Michigan, 2Harvard Medical School, 3Northeastern
University, 4Stanford University — Over 152 million blogs currently exist on
the internet, many of which are used by their authors as a platform to
share current, past, and predicted emotions. While large-scale data-mining of blogs has been a common practice in the information industry,
blog content has only recently emerged as a venue for psychological
research. By investigating the number of feeling words that a blogger
uses in a blog sentence, we can characterize the degree to which individuals elaborate on their emotional experiences when describing them to
the online community. In this study, data were obtained from the website, wefeelfine.org, which collects sentences from English language
blogs containing the phrases, “I feel”, “I felt”, and other tenses of the
verb “feel”. The number of emotion words in each sentence was counted
and used as a metric of emotional elaboration. The results show that sentences containing the phrase “felt” included significantly more emotion
adjectives than those sentences that are formed from the words “feel,”
“feels,” or “feeling.” This suggests that writing about past emotional
experiences leads individuals to use more elaborate and descriptive language compared to writing about current emotional experiences. Additionally, in sentences that contain the negatively valenced words “sad,”
“unhappy,” “helpless,” and “depressed,” more emotion adjectives were
used compared to sentences that contain the positively valenced words
of “great,” “better,” “good,” and “fine.” This result suggests that describing negative emotional states requires a larger number of emotion adjectives compared to positive emotional states.

C32
SYNCHRONIZED EEG OSCILLATIONS FROM 2 INDIVIDUALS DURING
SYNCHRONIZED ALTERNATE TAPPING Masahiro Kawasaki1,2, Keiichi

Kitajo1,3,4, Yoko Yamaguchi1,2; 1Rhythm-based Brain Computation Unit, RIKEN
BSI-TOYOTA Collaboration Center, Japan, 2Laboratory for Dynamics of
Emergent Intelligence, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Japan, 3PRESTO, Japan
Science and Technology Agency (JST), Japan, 4Laboratory for Cognitive Brain
Mapping, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Japan — A synchronized behavior
plays an important role in facilitation of our communications. This ability is supposed to be processed by mirror neuron system. However,
there is little neurological evidence about synchronized brain activities
from 2 individuals during achievement of cooperative communications.
Here, we simultaneously recorded electroencephalograms (EEGs) from 2
subjects (in total, 40 right-handed subjects) during an alternate tapping
task. In this task, 2 subjects individually faced to each PC display and
tapped each key alternately with right index finger. When one and
another subject tapped, a red and green square was presented, respectively. If a difference between time intervals of previous other’s tapping
(from self to other) and current self tapping (from other to self) was small
(threshold: 50msec), a yellow square was presented. Subjects were
instructed to tap the key with equal time interval of previous tapping of
another subject. According to the behaviors, trials were divided into 4
conditions; self tapping and observation of other tapping with synchronized and desynchronized behaviors. The wavelet analyses for EEG data
showed the 10Hz de-synchronizations, that is decrements of the oscillatory amplitudes, on the left central electrode before the onset of tapping
during both the synchronized and desynchronized behaviors. The contralateral central de-synchronizations to using hand are known to be
motor-related mu suppressions. Interestingly, the mu suppressions are
also found in different activities for observation of other tapping
between synchronized and desynchronized behaviors. These results
suggested that the mu suppression would be associated with the mirror
systems, especially the synchronized behaviors.

C33
TAKING ONE’S TIME IN FEELING OTHER-RACE PAIN: NEURAL ACTIVITY
REVEALS DIFFERENT EMPATHIC RESPONSES TO PAIN OF OWN AND
OTHER-RACE INDIVIDUALS Paola Sessa1, Federica Meconi1; 1University of
Padova — The current study used event-related potentials (ERPs) to
investigate the time-course of emphatic response to pain of White partic-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

ipants when exposed to stimuli showing own-race (White) or other-race
(Black) neutral faces receiving painful (needle penetration) or non-painful (Q-tip touch) stimulation. Participants had to judge painful vs. nonpainful pictures on each trial. The general structure of ERPs evoked by
pictures was characterized by the N1 component, followed by the P2 and
the N2 components. There was also another negative deflection peaking
at 380 ms (N380) over the fronto-central area followed by a long-latency
positivity between 380 and 650 ms (P3) with the maximum amplitude
over the parietal area. In line with previous studies, the N1-P2-N2 complex was modulated as a function of race, indicating earlier orienting of
attention to the more novel individuals (other-race faces; N1 and P2) and
later and deeper orienting of attention to the more familiar individuals
(own-race faces; N2). Notably, both the P2 and the N380 were modulated
as a function of the interaction between the race of the faces and the stimulation condition, produced by a positive shift only when participants
watched own-race faces penetrated by a needle. The P3 amplitude was
modulated only by the stimulation condition, with larger amplitude for
the painful stimulation. These findings support the notion of an early
(automatic) empathic response to pain of own-race individuals, while
empathy to pain of other-race individuals manifests only later, likely
relying on slower controlled processing.

C34
THE NOVEL PSYCHOSIS RISK VARIANT RS7914588 AT CNNM2 IS
ASSOCIATED WITH VARIABILITY IN SOCIAL COGNITIVE FUNCTION AND
GRAY MATTER VOLUME. Emma Jane Rose1,2, April Hargreaves1,2, Derek

Morris1,2, Ciara Fahey1,2, Michael Gill1,2, Aiden Corvin1,2, Gary Donohoe1,2;
1Neuropsychiatric Genetics Group, Department of Psychiatry, Trinity College
Dublin, 2Trinity College Institute for Neuroscience, Trinity College Dublin —
Introduction: A recent ‘mega-analysis’ identified five new genome-wide
associated risk loci for schizophrenia (SZ), including rs7914558 within
the cyclin M2 gene (CNNM2; OMIM:607803). The aim of this investigation was to ascertain the potential influence of rs7914558 on brain structure and neuropsychological function. Methods: Patients with SZ
(N=400) and healthy controls (HC; N=160) completed a neuropsychological battery, which included measures of social cognition concerned with
attributional style (e.g. the IPSAQ). In addition, structural imaging data
(MRI/T1) were acquired from HC (N=159). Voxel based morphometry
(VBM) was used to compare homozygous carriers of the risk ‘A’ allele to
a cohort of non-risk carrying individuals (i.e. ‘GG’ & ‘AG’). Results:
CNNM2 genotype impacted two IPSAQ subscales. Risk carriers (AA or
AG) had higher ‘external positive’ scores compared to homozygous ‘G’
individuals (p<0.05), whereas there was a linear effect of genotype on
‘externalizing bias’ such that GG>AG>AA (p<0.05). Thus, CNNM2 was
associated with a tendency to attribute positive situations externally, and
negative situations internally, i.e. in a manner that is inconsistent with
self-serving bias. Post hoc region-of-interest VBM analyses focusing on
brain regions relevant to our social cognitive findings revealed greater
GM volumes in homozygous ‘A’ individuals compared to combined
group of ‘G’ allele carriers in two putative social cognition regions – the
right temporal pole and anterior cingulate (pcorrected(FWE)<0.05). Conclusions: The contribution of CNNM2/rs7914558 to SZ risk appears to be
mediated by the influence of this variant on social cognitive function and
structural variability in brain regions that support these processes.

C35
IMAGED ACTIONS PRODUCE AFFECTIVE REPONSES Valerie Dennehy1,

Amy E. Hayes1, Nichola Callow1; 1Bangor University, U.K. — Previous research
has demonstrated that fluency of actions influences affective judgements
of objects (Hayes, Paul, Beuger, & Tipper, 2008). This study aimed to
investigate whether imaged motor actions influence affective responses
to objects in the same manner as actually performing the movement.
Forty-eight participants completed the Vividness of Movement Imagery
Questionnaire – 2 (VMIQ-2) to assess imagery ability and were assigned
to one of two groups; a movement imagery group (MIG), or a static
imagery group (SIG). MIG participants imaged moving objects in one of

85

Poster Session C — Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
two ways; fluently (no avoidance of an obstacle) or non-fluently (avoiding an obstacle)...SIG participants imaged fluent and non-fluent conditions, but instead of motor imagery, imaged the fluent/non-fluent
conditions as static scenes with no movement present. Results indicated
that for MIG, liking ratings were higher for objects associated with fluent
action conditions. For SIG, there was no significant difference in liking
ratings for objects in fluent and non-fluent conditions. To examine the
role of imagery ability in fluency dependent affect (difference between
fluent affect scores and non-fluent affect scores), an additional sample of
41 participants were collected. The additional participants completed the
MIG task and these data were then added to that of the original MIG
group. For participants who adopted internal visual imagery perspective
for the task (76% of participants), results indicated that higher kinaesthetic imagery ability was associated with greater fluency dependent
affect. Taken together, these findings indicate that imaging non-emotive
actions evokes emotional responses, and that imagery ability may moderate the response.

associated with neural responses to child stimuli in the same regions.
This study is the first to integrate the methods of social neuroscience
with genetic imaging and the psychology of maternal parenting to contribute to the emerging literature on the associations of estrogen and
oxytocin with human social behavior. The findings open avenues to further delineate neural pathways from receptor gene variants to harsh
maternal parenting, which can then be translated into methods of preventing maternal maltreatment of children.

C36
EVIDENCE FOR DISSOCIABLE ROLES OF BASOLATERAL AND CENTRAL
AMYGDALA IN HUMAN FEAR CONDITIONING Sabrina Boll1, Matthias

involving the processing of social information by those with Obsessive–
Compulsive Disorder (OCD) has been relatively scarce. Our study investigated the perceptual abilities of patients with OCD to recognize human
faces and bodies. Fifty-four patients with OCD and 42 healthy controls
performed discrimination tasks consisting of four types of stimuli: two
sets of faces that were manipulated with regard to configuration and features, human bodies, and chairs. The stimuli were presented in upright
and inverted orientations. It was found that patients with OCD were significantly less accurate in discriminating pairs of bodily postures implying actions. However, there was no significant difference between
patient and control groups in the ability to recognize faces and chairs.
The inversion effects for bodies and faces were also comparable between
the two groups. The current findings suggest that patients with OCD
experience difficulty in perceiving static forms of bodily postures, but
are able to adequately recognize human faces. Our data indicate a selective deficit in the perception of bodily postures in those with OCD and
suggest that this deficit is probably not related to the abnormal configurational processing of social objects. The loss of the ability to recognize
bodily postures, which is an important source of social information, may
impede adequate social interaction by patients with OCD. Key Words:
Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder, Face recognition, Body perception,
Social information processing, Configurational processing.

Gamer1, Christian Buechel1; 1University Medical Center HamburgEppendorf — Human fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging) studies suggest a role for the amygdala in signalling computational learning
signals such as prediction errors (differences between expected and
actual outcomes) in appetitive and aversive (money loss) associative
learning paradigms. However, a prediction error signal during aversive
fear conditioning is yet to be unequivocally demonstrated. One possible
shortcoming of previous fear conditioning studies in human fMRI
research might relate to limitations in the spatial resolution that have
hitherto prevented the functional segregation of different amygdala subregions. Here, we employed a first-order pavlovian fear conditioning
procedure with a partial reinforcement schedule using electrical shocks
as aversive reinforcers and combined this approach with high-resolution
fMRI in order to differentiate the contributions of amygdala subregions.
We show that prediction errors correlate with activation in the basolateral amygdala during the acquisition of conditioned fear – a region that
is known to be subject of synaptic changes during learning of aversive
fear memories in rodents. Signal changes associated with aversive outcomes (i.e. electrical shocks) in contrast, were observed in the central
amygdala in line with its role as an output stage of the amygdala with
projections to the peri-aqueductual gray and brainstem areas. These
results provide unique insights into amygdala function during fear conditioning in the human brain and contribute to the knowledge of how
associative fear memories are formed.

C37
GENETIC IMAGING OF THE ASSOCIATION OF OXYTOCIN AND ESTROGEN
RECEPTOR GENE POLYMORPHISMS WITH HUMAN MATERNAL
PARENTING Kalina J. Michalska1, Benjamin B. Lahey1, Jean Decety1; 1The
University of Chicago — Why do some mothers parent adaptively whereas
others are neglectful or abusive? To understand the neurobiology of
deficient human parenting and examine the relations between parenting
behaviors and neural activation, we conducted a genetic functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study of 35 women selected on the basis
of scores on observed parenting with their 4-6 year old children. When
viewing a photo of their own child, relative to a photo of an unrelated
child, mothers who engage in harsh parenting exhibited less hemodynamic response than other mothers in brain areas known to be involved
in social cognition. Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the estrogen-?
receptor gene were significantly associated with both negative parenting
and neural responses to child stimuli in a band of regions from the left
precuneus to the left frontal gyri. Conversely, hemodynamic responses
in brain regions mediating reward and social behavior were significantly
correlated with positive parenting. Polymorphisms in genes encoding
oxytocin receptors were associated with variations in positive parenting
with large effect sizes. Furthermore, genetic variants were significantly

86

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Person perception
C38
IMPAIRED BODY BUT NOT FACE PERCEPTION IN PATIENTS WITH
OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER Na Young Shin1, Joon Hwan Jang2,

Geumsook Shim2, Hye Yoon Park2, Hee Sun Kim2, Jae Yeon Hwang2, Sung Nyun
Kim2, Jun Soo Kwon2; 1Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, 2Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea — Empirical evidence

C40
MENTALIZING AND THE FUNDAMENTAL ATTRIBUTION ERROR Joe

Moran1, Eshin Jolly1, Jason Mitchell1; 1Harvard University — Explaining the
sources of another’s behavior is a task fraught with difficulty. Much evidence shows that observers gravitate to explaining people’s behavior by
appealing to internal dispositions and ignoring the influence of situational effects on that behavior – the fundamental attribution error. The
psychological mechanism responsible for this error has remained elusive. Since our default tendency is to mentalize about people with whom
we interact, we hypothesized that orienting to people's mental states
might lead us to explain their behavior in terms of their dispositions,
thus underlying the fundamental attribution error. During fMRI scanning, participants read stories that, in a separate group, attracted either
mostly dispositional or mostly situational attributions. When participants read dispositional stories, greater activation was observed in dorsal medial prefrontal cortex and the temporoparietal junction. In a
second analysis, we took advantage of the fact that certain stories
attracted approximately even numbers of dispositional and situational
attributions. For these stories, dorsal medial prefrontal cortex predicted
later dispositional attributions. That is, even when story information was
kept constant across dispositional and situational conditions, medial prefrontal cortex was preferentially activated when participants made dispositional attributions. These results suggest that a consequence of our
default tendency to mentalize is a bias to make unwarranted assumptions about people's underlying behavioral dispositions which may
underlie the fundamental attribution error.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session C

C41
SOCIAL WORKING MEMORY: AN FMRI STUDY OF PARAMETRIC
INCREASES IN SOCIAL COGNITIVE DEMAND Meghan Meyer1, Robert

C43
NEURAL BASIS OF NON-VERBAL SOCIAL INTERACTIONS: A DUAL-EEG
STUDY Mathilde Menoret1, Aurore Curie1, Vincent des Portes1, Tatjana A.

Spunt1, Elliot Berkmen2, Shelley Taylor1, Matthew Lieberman1; 1University of
California, Los Angeles (UCLA), 2University of Oregon — Keeping track of

Nazir1, Yves Paulignan1; 1L2C2, Laboratory on Language, Brain and Cognition,
CNRS-UCBL, Lyon, France — Encoding of non-verbal social interactions has

varying amounts of social cognitive information, including people’s
mental states, traits, and relationships, is fundamental to navigating
social interactions. However, the brain mechanisms supporting our ability to maintain and manipulate social cognitive information, or social
working memory (SWM), remain elusive. On the one hand, the medial
frontoparietal system and tempoparietal junction (‘mentalizing system’)
engage in simple social cognition tasks and may therefore support SWM.
On the other hand, this brain network reliably reduces activation as a
function of traditional (i.e. non-social cognitive) working memory
demand. The goal of the current study therefore was to examine if the
mentalizing system increases in activation in response to SWM. We also
explored whether the mentalizing system’s response to SWM corresponded with individual differences in social cognitive ability. Parametric analyses showed increases in the mentalizing system as a function of
the number of friends’ considered along a trait dimension during the
delay and probe response periods of the SWM task. Additionally, perspective-taking scores predicted activation in mentalizing regions during the delay period. These findings run counter to the common finding
of parametric decreases in mentalizing regions as a function of working
memory demand and suggest that the mentalizing network supports
working memory for social cognitive information. Given that medial
frontoparietal activity during the SWM task was linked to trait perspective-taking, a core social cognitive ability, social working memory capacity may be a useful new construct to explore social cognitive skill.

to be dynamic in order to optimally respond to environmental changes
in a social context. Understanding online-processes of social interactions
in the brain is therefore an important challenge. For this, we recorded
dual-EEG and kinematics from two participants, an “actor” and an
“observer”, in a real face-to-face paradigm implying or not a complementary action (e.g. the actor presents a saucer and the observer places
the corresponding cup or does nothing). We compared EEG signals of
both participants (i.e. oscillations in 10Hz and 20Hz frequency bands,
which index cortical motor activity) in the two experimental conditions.
By synchronizing EEG on the onset of actor’s movement, a clear indicator of social interaction became evident in both participants. For the
actor, who always performed an action, suppression of 10Hz and 20Hz
oscillations was observed starting around movement onset. Interestingly, this suppression was stronger when the action implied a response
from the observer despite the fact that kinematics of actor’s movement
was identical in the two conditions. For the observer, there was no modulation of the 10Hz band. However, similar to the actor, clear 20Hz suppression emerged at about 200 ms after onset of actor’s movement.
Importantly, here as well, suppression was stronger in the social-interaction condition. Hence, acting in a social context mobilizes processes visible in motor specific brain oscillations. Differential effects observed
between actor and observer further suggest that these processes depend
on the assignment of each participant’s role in communication.

C42
ATYPICAL UNDERSTANDING OF OTHER INDIVIDUALS’ MINDS IN
RELATION TO SELF IN AUTISM Akiko Mizuno1, Timothy A. Keller1, Marcel
Adam Just1; 1Center for Cognitive Brain Imaging, Carnegie Mellon University —

Atypical interpersonal cognition has been recognized as one of the pivotal characteristics of autism, known as a Theory of Mind (ToM) impairment. A recent study suggests that when making judgments about
others, typically developing adults use their own mind as an anchor
point, and make an adjustment based on the perceived difference relative to oneself (Tamir & Mitchell, 2010). This process is called “anchoring-and-adjustment,” and appears to be mediated by the medial
Prefrontal Cortex (mPFC). The present fMRI study investigates the specific hypothesis that an atypical anchoring-and-adjustment process in
the mPFC is the neural basis of disturbed understanding of others’
minds in relation to oneself in autism. Participants were 16 adults with
high-functioning autism and 19 matched neurotypical adults. They
made judgments about how well a series of personality statements apply
to individuals whose states and actions were described in a brief passage. The within-group analyses revealed that only the autism group
exhibited near absent mPFC activation while mentalizing about other
individuals who are dissimilar from themselves (“Dissimilar” trials),
whereas the control group showed mPFC activation similar to that
observed by Tamir and Mitchell (2010). The between-group comparison
showed a complimentary result, by exhibiting significantly reduced
mPFC recruitment during the “Dissimilar” trials in the autism group.
The results indicate that atypical interpersonal cognition among individuals with autism may reflect disturbed interpretation of the social world
in the relation to oneself, as well as disturbed mPFC recruitment as a
potential neural basis for atypical understanding of other individuals’
mind in autism.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

C45
EVIDENCE FOR CROSS-GENDER EFFECTS ON ATTENTIONAL AND
Goodrich1,
Jason
CATEGORICAL PROCESSING OF FACES Robin

Samaha1, Lars Hedin1, Darwin Guevarra1, Sierra Niblett1, Avi Ben-Zeev1, Mark
W. Geisler1; 1San Francisco State University — The tendency for individuals

to exhibit recognition deficits for outgroup faces and enhanced performance for ingroup faces is a well-established phenomenon that is, in
part, due to outgroup homogeneity effects. While strong cross-gender
effects have been found in studies using behavioral or self-report measures, electrophysiological results on the interaction between face gender
and participant gender remain ambiguous. Thus, the goal of this study
was to examine the influence of cross-gender effects on early attentional
processes and subsequent categorization using event-related brain
potentials (ERPs). Participants completed a modified oddball task in
which they were presented with all male (n = 6) or all female (n = 4)
faces; same-gender stimulus sets were created to ensure equivalent perceptual homogeneity between stimulus gender conditions. Preliminary
analyses revealed cross-gender effects, such that outgroup faces elicited
larger N2 and P3 components than ingroup faces; P2 amplitude did not
differ between conditions. Our results suggest that cross-gender faces
were identified as outgroup faces, and required more visual attention for
processing than same-gender faces, within 250 ms of stimulus onset. Furthermore, the enhanced working-memory and event categorization processes observed in the cross-gender condition, as indexed by the P3,
demonstrates that perceptual homogeneity of outgroup faces was magnified. These findings are in line with cross-gender effects observed in
past behavioral studies and provide electrophysiological support for the
existence of outgroup homogeneity effects. Such automatic and implicit
cross-gender effects during person perception are particularly important
given the powerful social-psychological consequences they may carry
for certain social groups.

87

Poster Session C — Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

C46
P300 AMPLITUDE AS AN INDEX OF MEMORY DISTORTIONS FOR SKIN
TONE Branden Kolarik1, Tara Dennehy2, Jason Samaha3, Robin Goodrich3,
Avi Ben-Zeev3, Mark Geisler3; 1University of California-Davis, 2University of
Massachusetts-Amherst, 3San Francisco State University — This study inves-

tigated whether a stigmatized person’s skin tone can be distorted in
memory as a function of a stereotypic social label using scalp recorded
EEG and a modified visual oddball task where each image occurred with
equal probability. Twelve participants were presented with a masked
prime of “Ignorant” (stereotypic), or “Something” (baseline) before
studying an image of a Black male on a computer screen. Following a 1minute filler task, participants performed a test of recognition involving
the original face (target) and six modified faces (non-targets: 25%, 37%
and 50% darker and lighter skin tone). All images were presented one at
a time for 250ms and occurred with equal probability to ensure that any
recorded changes in the EEG were due to the stimulus features and not
probability of occurrence. As predicted by our hypotheses and previously collected behavioral data, participants who were primed with the
baseline “Something” showed larger P300 amplitude to the original photograph and lower amplitude P300-like responses to the other images.
When primed with “Ignorant” there was a larger amplitude P300 for the
25% and 37% darker images. ERP amplitudes were similar across both
accurate and inaccurate recognition trials. The finding that the P300
amplitude was similar across trials regardless of accuracy on the task,
(Accuracy for both conditions = 67.5%, SD = 9.07), suggests that the P300
can be used as an index of memory distortion for a stimulus feature.

C47
ON THE ROLE OF THE ANTERIOR TEMPORAL LOBE IN SOCIAL COGNITION:
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL EVIDENCE Caroline Michel1, Agnesa Pillon1,
1

1 1

Adrian Ivanoiu , Dana Samson ; University of Louvain, Belgium — Neuroimaging studies have shown that the anterior temporal lobes (aTLs) are
part of the neural network commonly activated when people are
engaged in Theory of Mind (ToM) tasks. However, the functional role of
the aTLs in social cognition still remains to be clarified. Based on the
observation that these structures are not only involved in social cognition tasks but also in semantic processing, some authors have recently
hypothesized that the aTLs contribute to ToM by subtending the abstract
representations of social concepts that we need to infer other people’s
mental states (e.g., Ross & Olson, 2010). Compatible with this view, these
regions have been shown to be preferentially activated for social as compared to non-social concepts in neuroimaging studies (e.g., Zahn et al.,
2007). Here, we report the case of a patient, C.M., who suffers from conceptual/semantic deficit following a brain degeneration affecting mainly
the left anterior temporal lobe. On several semantic tasks, C.M. appeared
to be equally if not less impaired for social compared to non-social concepts. Furthermore, despite his lesion, the patient was perfectly able to
infer other people’s mental states in non-verbal tasks. These findings
challenge the hypothesis regarding the functional role of the aTLs in
ToM: they suggest that (i) the left aTL is not specifically (if at all) dedicated to the storage of social concepts that would be needed to infer
other people’s mental states and, (ii) despite its recurrent activation in
neuroimaging studies, the left aTL is not even necessary for inferring
mental states.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development &
aging
C48
AGE-RELATED DEFICIT OR FOCUS ON ACCURACY OVER SPEED? ERP
EVIDENCE FOR AGE DIFFERENCES IN REACTIVE COGNITIVE CONTROL

Daniela Czernochowski1, Julia Saße1, André Haese1; 1Heinrich-HeineUniversity, Düsseldorf — According to the dual mechanisms of control
framework (Braver et al., 2007), two alternate routes may lead to correct
response selection. When response conflict is detected, reactive control

88

processes are recruited immediately before the response, at the expense
of longer RTs. If advance preparation is feasible, control can be recruited
proactively to allow for both rapid and correct response selection. Previous research (Czernochowski et al., 2010) has demonstrated that older
adults rely predominantly on reactive control. However, so far it is
unclear whether this age difference reflects a preference for accuracy
over speed or older adults' deficit in recruiting proactive control. Here,
young (20-25 years) and older (65-74) participants were instructed to
emphasize either accuracy or speed in separate blocks during a cued
task-switch paradigm. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded to
determine potential age differences in the neural correlate for reactive
control (pre-response negativity, PRN). Behavioral data indicate that
adjustments in response criteria in terms of speed and accuracy were
larger in young compared to older participants. Starting around 200 ms
pre-response, the corresponding ERPs revealed a (left-) frontal PRN for
both age groups. In young adults, it was observed selectively for task
switches under accuracy instructions, but across task-conditions for
older adults. Together, these results suggest that young adults are able to
flexibly adjust their response criteria and to recruit reactive control selectively to meet higher task demands. By contrast, older adults appear
unable to relax their strict response criterion and rely on reactive control
irrespective of task demands.

C49
THE AGING PULSE: REGIONAL ARTERIAL ELASTICITY IN THE BRAIN IS
ASSOCIATED WITH FITNESS AND COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE. Chin

Hong Tan1, Benjamin Zimmerman1, Kathy Low1, Nils Schneider-Garces1, Mark
Fletcher1, Timothy Weng1, Ed Maclin1, Gabriele Gratton1, Monica Fabiani1;
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Cognitive changes are associ-

ated with normal aging, including declines in working memory and
executive function/attentional control. Some of these changes may be
related to arteriosclerosis, i.e., loss of arterial elasticity. Cardiopulmonary fitness may prevent arterial stiffness and help cognitive functioning
by improving oxygenation and perfusion conditions in the brain. Optical
methods based on near-infrared (NIR) light provide a sensitive measure
of arterial pulse in the brain that can reveal changes in arterial elasticity.
Accurate localization is achieved by using a full-head coverage optical
montage and coregistering it with each individual’s structural magnetic
resonance image (MRI). An estimate of local arterial elasticity is obtained
by time locking the signals to the R-wave of the electrocardiogram (EKG)
and determining the latency associated with 75% return from peak systole to diastole (pulse return) in different brain regions. Studying participants ranging in age from 55 to 87, we found that average pulse return
across the cortex was correlated with physical fitness. Localized pulse
return estimates in the left and right frontal cortex were correlated with
several neuropsychological measures of working memory and executive
function, while verbal fluency was correlated with overall average pulse
return. Measurements of pulse using diffusive optical methods may thus
provide information on the relationship between cerebrovascular and
cognitive health. Further, regional measures of arterial stiffness could be
used in the future as predictors of specific patterns of cognitive decline.

C50
ABNORMAL ATTENTIONAL BLINK PERFORMANCE IN ADULT MALE
CARRIERS OF THE FRAGILE X PREMUTATION ALLELE MAY BE DUE TO
DECREASED WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY Ling M. Wong1,2, Tony J.

Simon1,2; 1University of California, Davis, 2M.I.N.D. Institute, Sacramento,
CA — OBJECTIVE: Fragile X premutation carriers (fXPCs) have an
expanded CGG trinucleotide repeat size within the FMR1 gene, and
have increased risk of developing Fragile X-associated Tremor Ataxia
Syndrome (FXTAS), often characterized by impaired attentional control.
The attentional blink (AB) describes the reduced identification accuracy
for the second of two targets presented in close temporal proximity
within a rapid visual stream of distractors, and may reflect attentional
control ability (Temporary Loss of Control model; see Di Lollo 2005). In
this study, we tested whether adult male fXPCs asymptomatic for

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session C
FXTAS exhibited impaired attentional control in this task. METHOD:
Participants were fXPC and healthy control (HC) men aged 22-35. Each
trial consisted of 5-10 digits, 3 target items, and one final digit. In the
Uniform condition, all 3 targets were letters. In the Varied conditions,
the targets were a letter-number-letter sequence. In the Varied-2 condition, only the letters were to be reported, and in the Uniform and Varied3 conditions, all 3 targets were to be reported. RESULTS: In both groups,
T3 identification performance was worse in the Varied relative to Uniform conditions, and equivalent between the Varied-2 and Varied-3 conditions. FXPCs showed impaired T3 relative to T2 performance in the
Uniform condition. CONCLUSIONS: Abnormal performance in fXPCs
could be due to decreased working memory capacity, which would differentially affect the Uniform condition given specific response strategies. This suggests that impairments in working memory may interact
with attentional control in adult male fXPCs.

C51
PUBERTAL DIFFERENCES IN THE NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF COGNITIVE
CONTROL DURING ADOLESCENCE Madison L. Stroup1, Kristen L.

Mackiewicz Seghete1, Stephanie F. Sasse1, Megan M. Herting1, Bonnie J.
Nagel1; 1Oregon Health & Science University — Puberty is a developmental
period characterized by profound changes in social, emotional, and cognitive functioning. However, the extent to which developmental differences in cognitive processes are related to puberty, rather than
chronological age, remains unclear. Thus, the goal of the current study
was to investigate whether pubertal status, controlling for age, differentially affects cognitive control mechanisms using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) and a counting Stroop task. To examine the
effect of pubertal status on the neural substrates of cognitive control, we
divided 46 participants into early to mid-puberty (mean estimated Tanner stage=2.46±.1.18) and mid- to late puberty (mean estimated Tanner
stage=3.48±.1.08) groups, matching for age and gender (22 females;
mean age=13.42±.1.6). No significant group differences in task performance were observed. Using analysis of covariance, controlling for reaction time, we examined brain activity during incongruent compared to
neutral trials. Results indicated that, on average, adolescents at later
pubertal stages showed significantly greater activity in the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) during incongruent compared to neutral trials and significantly greater activity in the fusiform gyrus during
both incongruent and neutral trials (in contrast to baseline) compared to
those earlier in puberty (p<0.05, whole-brain corrected). Given the
importance of the DLPFC for executive control and the fusiform gyrus
for processing task relevant attributes, under-recruitment of these brain
regions earlier in puberty may suggest weaker top-down cognitive control and decreased ability to maintain an attentional task set during earlier stages of pubertal development.

C52
EFFECTS OF DIFFERENCES IN WORKING MEMORY SPAN ON THE
PATTERN OF BOLD FMRI RESPONSES IN MIDDLE-AGED AND OLDER
ADULTS. Nils Schneider-Garces1, Mark Fletcher1, Tim Weng1, Tauheed Ali1,

Kathy Low1, Gabriele Gratton1, Monica Fabiani1; 1University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign — Working memory (WM) performance declines with
age. It has been suggested that the additional processes required by
higher WM loads pose a particular problem for older adults. However, a
previous study using a Sternberg paradigm (Schneider-Garces et al.,
2010) found that, after equating for WM span differences, older adults
showed activation-by-load functions similar to younger adults. In the
present study using the same paradigm, we extended our age range to
include middle-age adults to achieve a more continuous sample. We also
increased the highest load condition to set size 8 to examine supra-span
performance in all subjects. We recorded behavioral and Blood-oxygenlevel dependence (BOLD) functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
data from 46 adults ranging from 55 to 87 years of age, with set sizes of 2,
4, 6, and 8 consonants. Older adults were less accurate and slower than
middle aged adults, especially at the higher set sizes. For the fMRI data,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

slope analyses were performed separately for set sizes 2-4, 4-6, and 6-8.
All age groups showed an increase from set size 2-4 in a network of
occipital, parietal, and frontal regions. However, when subjects were
sorted by memory span, the low-span group showed the strongest
increase at load 2-4, whereas high-span subjects’ increases were shifted
to loads 4-6 and 6-8. This is further evidence that WM span is important
in the evaluation of WM-related activation in older adults.

C53
CHANGES IN LOCAL AND GLOBAL BRAIN ORGANIZATION IN HEALTHY
AGING Courtney L. Gallen1, Emi M. Nomura1, Caterina Gratton1, Mark

D'Esposito1; 1University of California, Berkeley — Resting-state

functional
brain networks are known to have a small-world structure and modular
organization, reflecting efficient information transfer on local and global
scales. However, it is not fully understood how such network properties
change in normal aging. Here, we use resting-state fMRI (rs-fMRI) to
compare the global and local organization of brain networks between 48
healthy older (ages 60-80) and younger (ages 18-36) adults. Five minutes
of rs-fMRI data was collected in each participant, preprocessed as in Fox
et al. (2005), and correlation matrices were created reflecting functional
connectivity between 90 AAL atlas nodes. These matrices were thresholded and used to create undirected, unweighted graphs which we then
evaluated using Newman’s modularity (ratio of intra- to inter-module
connections), small-worldness (ratio of clustering coefficient to path
length), and average Euclidian distance of paths between nodes. Additionally, the hub- and connector-ness of 10 nodes from lateral prefrontal
cortex (PFC) and occipital/motor regions were assessed. Modularity and
small-worldness were reduced in older participants, while path distance
was increased relative to younger participants. Further, PFC nodes
showed reduced hub and connector properties, while those in occipital
and motor cortices remained unaffected by age. These results suggest
that aging impacts the global and local organization of the brain. Local
metrics of nodal importance within the lateral PFC highlight this region
as particularly susceptible to age-related changes. Future work will
relate these metrics to cognitive performance as changes in neural organization, namely in PFC, may contribute to cognitive decline in aging.

C54
NON-INVASIVE MEASURE OF BLOOD FLOW TO THE BRAIN IS
ASSOCIATED WITH POORER STRATEGIC RETRIEVAL AND OUTPUT
MONITORING IN HEALTHY OLDER ADULTS Myra Fernandes1, Andrew
Robertson1, Suzanne Tyas1, Eric Roy1, George Heckman1, Richard Hughson1;
University of Waterloo — Neuropsychological research suggests that per-

1

formance on tests that require executive functions, specifically strategy
use, organization, and monitoring, are critically dependent on brain
integrity, particularly in frontal cortex. As we age, our blood vessels lose
some of their elasticity which, in turn, affects how much the vessels can
stretch with each heartbeat, and their capacity to deliver oxygen-rich
blood to the brain. One measure of integrity of brain vasculature is its
responsiveness to the demand for blood flow in response to a non-invasive manipulation, known as carbon dioxide (CO2) reactivity. Brain
blood flow velocity through the middle cerebral artery was measured
using Transcranial Doppler ultrasound. Reactivity was assessed by
quantifying the percent increase in blood flow velocity in response to
breathing a hypercapnic gas mixture (5% CO2, 21% O2). Participants’
performance on a standard battery of neuropsychological tests, including the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task (WCST), the Trail Making Test, California Verbal Learning test (CVLT), and Warrington words and faces
was also assessed. Data show that in healthy older individuals (over age
65), higher CO2 reactivity, indicative of a higher potential to deliver oxygen to the brain, was significantly positively correlated with semantic
clustering scores (p < .05) on the CVLT memory test, at both short and
long delays. Perseveration errors on the WCST showed a trend to
decrease as CO2 reactivity increased. No other neuropsychological test
showed such associations. Results suggest that executive functions such
as those required to organize and monitor output are most sensitive to
changes in cerebrovascular health.

89

Poster Session C — Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

C55
DECOUPLING OF THE REWARD AND WORKING MEMORY NETWORK IN
CHILDREN. Michael Tennekoon1, Gillian Cooke1,2, Jessica Gayda1, Mark

Stein1,3, James R Booth1; 1Northwestern, 2University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, 3University Of Illinois at Chicago — Reward regions such as the
nucleus accumbens (NA) may play a crucial role in gating information
flow in the parieto-frontal working memory network (WMN). Furthermore studies have suggested that informative feedback alone can act as a
reward. We used a verbal n-back task to investigate the developmental
differences in the effects of reward and feedback on the WMN. For large
rewards, adults showed greater activation for immediate versus delayed
feedback in both the WMN and NA, and the difference scores were correlated between regions. With delayed feedback, adults showed greater
activation for small versus large rewards in both the WMN and NA, and
again the difference scores were correlated between regions. Children (9to 11-year-olds) showed the effects of feedback and reward in the NA,
but not in the WMN, and activity was not correlated between NA and
WMN. Taken together, our study suggests that in adults, when large
rewards are given with immediate feedback, reward regions allow information to flow within the WMN. Under conditions of delayed feedback,
large rewards may create a pressure to protect representations, resulting
in reward regions preventing information flow. Conversely, small
rewards may be treated as inconsequential, and hence did not generate
pressure to protect representations. For children, the NA and WMN
appear to be decoupled so that the gating mechanism controlled by the
NA cannot effectively influence information flow within the WMN.

C56
WORKING MEMORY LOAD-RELATED ACTIVITY VARIES IN AGING: A TEST
OF COMPETING NEUROCOGNITIVE AGING THEORIES Ilana J. Bennett1,2,

Hannah G. Rivera1, Bart Rypma1,2,3; 1Center for Brain Health, University of
Texas at Dallas, 2School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences, University of Texas
at Dallas, 3Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center — Multiple theories have been proposed to account for relationships among neural activity, cognitive performance, and age group.
Neural efficiency frameworks (NEFs), for example, propose that efficient
young are able to minimize neural processing and maximize cognitive
performance, whereas reduced efficiency in older adults results in
increased activity and impaired performance. Similar activity-performance relationships are predicted by other theories, such as those proposing that age-related reductions in cognitive capacity result in
increased compensatory recruitment. The present study directly compared these competing models using same dataset of 22 younger and 20
older adults who performed a Sternberg working memory task during
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). In this task, participants
encoded either 2 or 6 letters (i.e. the load manipulation), maintained
them during a delay, and then responded whether a single probe
matched an item from the memory set. Behavioral results revealed faster
and more accurate responses to the low versus high load condition, with
age group differences in this load condition effect for the accuracy measure. Consistent with both models, the fMRI results showed less neural
activity for the low versus high load condition in younger adults, but
greater activity for the low versus high load condition in older adults.
However, older adults showed no significant differences in working
memory load-related activity when they were separated according to
whether they had high versus low working memory capacity as would
be predicted by models of capacity-related compensation. Thus, taken
together, these data support interpretations consistent with models of
NEFs.

C57
WHITE MATTER MICROSCTRUCTURE AND COGNITIVE CONTROL IN A
DEVELOPMENTAL SAMPLE Kristen L Mackiewicz Seghete1, Megan M

Herting1, Bonnie J Nagel1; 1Oregon Health & Science University — Studies

have established networks of brain regions recruited for cognitive control during development, but less is known about how white matter

90

microstructure in children and adolescents relates to cognitive control.
This study explored the relationship between white matter microstructure and inhibition in a sample of 35 children and adolescents (age 10-15,
mean = 12.93; 17 female). Fractional anisotropy (FA) values, indexing
water diffusivity in white matter, were derived from diffusion tensor
imaging using Tract-Based Spatial Statistics. Youth completed the ColorWord Interference task from the Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System, a modification of the Stroop paradigm. The scaled contrast score for
Inhibition compared to Color Naming was the behavioral measure of
cognitive control, with higher scores representing relatively better performance on the Inhibition than Color Naming task. Scaled contrast
scores were regressed on the FA white matter skeleton, controlling for
IQ. Results demonstrated greater FA in the left external capsule and left
cerebellum were associated with higher contrast scores, whereas greater
FA in white matter along the left inferior frontal gyrus was associated
with lower contrast scores (p<.05, whole-brain corrected). These results
suggest a greater ability to inhibit irrelevant word information is related
to greater integrity of white matter microstructure in regions supporting
cross-cortical projections and less white matter microstructure in regions
representing word representation. Given that prefrontal regions subserving cognitive control continue to develop through adolescence,
white matter related to coordinating cross-cortical communication and
reducing the processing of task-irrelevant information may be particularly important when selectively attending to task-relevant information.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring &
inhibitory control
C58
RESPONSE INHIBITION IN INDIVIDUALS WITH PSYCHOPATHIC
TENDENCIES USING A VISUAL GO/NOGO TASK: AN EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS STUDY Young Youn Kim1; 1Kyonggi University — This study
investigated response inhibition in undergraduate students divided into
psychopathic tendencies and control groups according to the scores of
Psychopathic Personality Inventory-Revised. Event-related potentials
were collected as participants performed visual Go/NoGo discrimination task that required participants to respond to Go condition (circle
stimuli) and to inhibit response to NoGo condition(square stimuli). The
response inhibition was investigated in the NoGo condition. The statistical analysis of P3 elicited by NoGo stimuli indicated that psychopathic
tendencies group showed significantly reduced NoGo-P3 amplitudes
than the control group at the central area. In Wisconsin card sorting test,
the psychopathic tendencies group showed significantly higher perseverative response and perseverative error than the control group. These
results support the hypothesis that the neural processes involved in
response inhibition are abnormal in individuals with psychopathic tendencies.

C59
THE ROLE OF DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTICES IN POST-ERROR
SLOWING: A SINGLE PULSE TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION
CHRONOMETRIC STUDY. Aurélie Manuel1,2, Francisco Bravo1,2, Roland

Vocat3, Ayse At1, Gilles Pourtois4, Lucas Spierer1,5; 1Department of Clinical
Neurosciences, Vaudois University Hospital Center and University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Department of Psychiatry, Vaudois University Hospital
Center and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of
Neuroscience and Clinic of Neurology, University of Geneva, Geneva,
Switzerland, 4Department of Experimental Clinical and Health Psychology,
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 5Department of Medicine, Neurology Unit,
University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland — Adjusting behavior following the detection of inappropriate actions allows flexible adaptation to
task demands and environmental contingencies during goal-directed
behaviors. Post-error behavioral adjustments typically consist in adopting more cautious response mode, which manifests as a slowing down of
response speed. Although converging evidence point to the involvement

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session C
of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) in post-error behavioral
adjustment, whether and when the left or right DLPFC is critical for
post-error slowing (PES), as well as the underlying brain mechanisms,
remain open questions. To address these issues, we used single-pulse
transcranial magnetic stimulation in healthy human adults with the aim
to disrupt the left or right DLPFC selectively at various delays within the
30-180ms interval following false alarms commission and hits, while participants preformed a standard visual Go/NoGo task. PES significantly
increased after TMS disruption of the right DLPFC at 150ms post-FA
response. By contrast, magnetic stimulation of the same region after hits
did not influence subsequent response time. These results are discussed
against the notion of the involvement of the right DLPFC in downplaying the detrimental effects of error detection on subsequent behavioral
performance, as opposed to implementing adaptative error-induced
slowing down of response speed.

C60
CONTEXTUAL
TASK
DIFFICULTY
MODULATES
STIMULUS
DISCRIMINATION:
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
EVIDENCE
FOR
INTERACTION BETWEEN SENSORY AND EXECUTIVE PROCESSES John

Fedota1, Craig McDonald1, Raja Parasuraman1; 1George Mason University —

Theoretical models of executive control in the human brain suggest that
difficult tasks require top-down executive control, which influences
accurate sensory processing. However, the event-related potential (ERP)
component most associated with stimulus discrimination, the occipitaltemporal N1, has not consistently been shown to be sensitive to the difficulty of stimulus discrimination. The current paradigm manipulated the
difficulty of the required stimulus discrimination not by cluttering the
visual field as in previous studies, but by manipulating the similarity
between serially presented targets and non targets. Critically, the same
target stimulus was employed in both easy and difficult discrimination
contexts. Consequently, our difficulty discrimination manipulation necessarily implicates trial-to-trial executive control as opposed to within
trial, bottom-up changes in sensory processing. The N1 and P3b components were evaluated as indices of discrimination and categorization,
respectively. Physically identical target stimuli elicited a larger N1 and
smaller P3b in the hard task context as compared to the easy task context. Moreover, when targets were incorrectly categorized, N1 amplitude
was diminished and a P3b was not elicited. Thus, the current study provides evidence that the N1 component indexes a sensory discrimination
process that is modulated by executive control.

C61
INEFFICIENCY OF POST-ERROR ADJUSTMENT IN IMPULSIVE VIOLENT
OFFENDERS Chiaoyun chen1, Jia-Ren Chang2, Daisy L. Hung3; 1Department
and Graduate Institute of Criminology, National Chung Cheng University,
2
Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, 3Institute of
Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central University — Repeated impulsive
violent offenders are often described as impairment in inhibitory control
and error processing. A flanker task (interference control) with a stopsignal task (behavior inhibition) was used to examine conflict monitoring, error detection, and post error processing. The ERP results showed
that no group differences were seen in incompatibility Go N2 and ERN,
indicating that the impulsive violent offenders may have normal conflict
monitoring and error detection. The amplitude of stop signal N2 of successful inhibition trials at the frontal area reflected different degrees of
inhibition in impulsive violent offenders compared with matched controls. The stop signal N2 was significantly lower in the impulsive violent
offenders than in matched control. This showed that they might have
difficulties in inhibitory control. A reduced Pe at the parietal area was
seen in the impulsive violent offenders. The behavioral data indicated
that the impulsive violent offenders did not show post-error slowing
compared with control group. We suggested that they had problems in
the error awareness, the subjective emotional error assessment process
and error correction.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

C62
THETA AND ALPHA DYNAMICS REVEAL DIFFERENT TYPES OF ERROR
DETECTION AND ADAPTATION Joram van Driel1, Michael X Cohen1,2;
1University of Amsterdam, 2University of Arizona — Performance

errors in
conflict tasks are thought to signal the need for increased control over
the motor system. However, errors may also result from lapses in sustained attention, which may require different adaptation mechanisms. In
this study we measured EEG during three variants of a Simon task in
which errors were more likely to occur due to attentional lapses, failures
of motor control, or both. Importantly, these conditions only differed in
task instructions on speed and accuracy, in block length, and in trial predictability. Behavioral results showed that subjects exhibited less conflict-effects in the sustained attention condition compared to the other
conditions. In addition, there was no error speeding in the sustained
attention condition, while the other conditions did show faster error trials than correct trials. Crucially, time-frequency analyses showed that
the sustained attention condition, compared to the motor control condition, was characterized by: 1) less error-related MFC theta (4-8 Hz)
power and less MFC–dlPFC theta synchronization; 2) stronger errorrelated suppression of parieto-occipital alpha (8-12 Hz) power and stronger parieto-occipital–frontal alpha synchronization. Together, these
results show that minor differences in cognitive control paradigms can
result in different post-error brain dynamics. Averaging together all
errors during typical cognitive control tasks may thus result in heterogeneous activity from multiple neurocognitive processes.

C63
RISK AVERSION UNDERLIES MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX ACTIVITY IN
SUBSTANCE DEPENDENCE William Alexander1, Rena Fukunaga1, Joshua

Brown1; 1Indiana University, Bloomington — Substance dependence is frequently associated with deficits in decision-making and cognitive control of behavior. Despite this link, however, the influence of substance
dependence on the function of brain regions implicated in cognitive control, especially medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), remains unclear. Psychologically, a number of mechanisms have been suggested by which
substance dependence may impair behavior, including: risk-seeking
behavior resulting from increased reward salience, underweighting past
events either through increased attention to more recent outcomes or
disruption of learning processes, a general disruption of learning due to
decreased attentional function, or, more controversially, increased risk
aversion. In this study, we attempt to distinguish amongst these hypotheses with a combined fMRI/computational modeling study. First, using
a computational model of mPFC, the Prediction of Responses and Outcomes model, we derive predictions for the expected pattern of activity
in mPFC under the hypotheses outlined above. Second, we test these
predictions using fMRI to record brain activity in substance-dependent
individuals and non-substance dependent individuals performing a version of the Change Signal task in which the likelihood of error commission and expected magnitude of reward for correct and incorrect
performance were manipulated. We find that activity in mPFC for substance-dependent individuals is consistent with the hypothesis that aversion to risk influences activity in mPFC, and is inconsistent with other
possible explanations.

C64
ABSENCE OF CONFLICT ADJUSTMENT FOLLOWING TWO CONSECUTIVE
CONFLICT TRIALS: AN FMRI STUDY Chobok Kim1, Nathan F. Johnson1,

Brian T. Gold1; 1University of Kentucky — Conflict adjustment includes faster
reaction times on incongruent trials preceded by incongruent (iI) trials
when compared to incongruent trials preceded by congruent trials (cI).
According to the conflict monitoring hypothesis, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) play critical roles
in conflict adjustment through detecting (ACC; monitor) and regulating
(DLPFC; controller) conflict. It predicts that cI trials yield greater ACC
activity when compared to iI trials, whereas iI trials yield greater DLPFC
activity when compared to cI trials. Although many studies have

91

Poster Session C — Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
focused on the effect of the preceding (N-1) trial type on the current (N)
trial, no study has investigated the effect of the N-2 trial type. In this
study, we employed the Stroop task to test whether conflict adjustment
is affected by the N-2 trial using an event-related design. The task design
included three factors (N-2, N-1 and N) with congruent (C) and incongruent (I) trial types, resulting in 8 different trials types: ccC, ciC, icC,
iiC, ccI, ciI, icI, and iiI. Behaviorally, conflict adjustment was observed
only when N-2 trials were congruent. Imaging results demonstrated that
ACC activity was greater for ccI when compared to ciI, whereas it was
lower in icI when compared to iiI. DLPFC demonstrated the opposite
pattern (ciI > ccI and icI > iiI). These findings suggest an absence of conflict adjustment following two consecutive conflict trials. We propose
that the monitor-controller loop appears to be refreshed or reset after
two consecutive conflict trials in order to perform the current task.

C65
BEYOND THE ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX: CONFLICT AND ERROR
PROCESSING IN AN EXTENDED CINGULO-OPERCULAR NETWORK
Karla Becerril1, Deanna Barch2; 1Neuroscience Program, Washington
University in Saint Louis, 2Departments of Psychology, Neurology, and
Radiology, Washington University in Saint Louis — The successful regulation

of behavior requires brain systems capable of detecting increasing cognitive demands and implementing control accordingly. Despite the wealth
of data involving the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) on these processes,
accurate performance monitoring and behavioral adjustments are
unlikely to rely on a single region. Prior research shows that a distributed network, not just the ACC, responds to errors. We contrasted error
and conflict activity during a change-signal task (n=32) in all regions
identified to show error-related activity in the cingulo-opercular and cerebellar networks, and examined the relationship between brain activity
and behavioral adaptations to error and conflict. Several key findings
emerged 1) we replicated previous behavioral findings showing slowing
in reaction time (RT) after error and conflict; 2) consistent with previous
literature, more ventral/anterior portions of the ACC were sensitive to
error versus more dorsal/posterior regions sensitive to conflict; 3)
regions outside the ACC showed similar distinctions, with error-related
activity in ventral regions, and conflict activity more dorsally and superiorly to error-sensitive regions; and 4) in contrast to previous findings, a
greater difference in ACC activity between correct and incorrect trials
was associated with a smaller difference in RT between incorrect and
correct trials. Taken together, our results suggest qualitative differences
in the mechanisms supporting the up-regulation of control due to error
or conflict, and line up with the hypothesis that posterior and dorsal
regions may be involved in the initiation or selection of action sets, while
more rostral portions may prepare control systems for task demands.

C66
WITHIN-TRIAL DISSOCIATION OF ERROR INHIBITION AND VOLITIONAL
RESPONSE INHIBITION IN A PATIENT WITH DAMAGE TO THE RIGHT
INFERIOR FRONTAL GYRUS Avinash Vaidya1, Eldad Hochman1, Lesley

Fellows1; 1Montreal Neurological Institute, Department of Neurology and
Neurosurgery, McGill University — Recent evidence indicates the existence
of a right lateralized network involved in inhibitory control, though the
conditions that engage this network have yet to be fully specified. Lesion
and activation studies have implicated the right inferior frontal gyrus
(rIFG) in performance of the stop-signal task. Although this task is
intended to measure volitional response inhibition, inhibition is confounded with the need to attend to the stop signal. We tested a participant with damage to the rIFG and eight healthy controls in a task that
demanded volitional response inhibition cued by error detection, rather
than an external stop signal. We also measured 'automatic' error inhibition, indexed by the time taken to lift the finger committing an error
compared to the lifting time for correct responses. Participants completed a speeded flanker task with alternating blocks requiring them
either to correct their errors or inhibit 'automatic' corrections. The patient
with rIFG damage was slow to volitionally inhibit corrective responses:

92

in the first half of the experiment, she failed to inhibit automatic corrections. Subsequently, she was able to improve the frequency of successful
inhibitions to control levels, but only by slowing her corrective
responses. However, she was able to inhibit the erroneous response
itself. Thus, within a single trial she demonstrated the intact ability to
inhibit an on-going error, but a degraded ability to volitionally inhibit
the subsequent correction. This helps to specify the conditions that
engage rIFG-related response inhibition, indicating a critical role in
rapid, volitional response inhibition, but not in inhibiting errors.

C67
THE ROLE OF FRONTO-STRIATAL SYNCHRONIZATION PROCESSES FOR
RESPONSE INHIBITION: ERP PHASE-SYNCHRONIZATION ANALYSES IN
PRE-MANIFEST HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE GENE MUTATION CARRIERS

Vanessa Ness1, Michael Falkenstein2, Carsten Saft3, Christian Beste1;
1
Institute for Cognitive Neuroscience, Department of Biopsychology, RuhrUniversity Bochum, Universitätsstrasse 150, D-44780 Bochum, Germany,
2
Leibniz Research Centre Dortmund, Aging and CNS Diseases, Germany,
3
Department of Neurology, Huntington Centre NRW, St. Josef Hospital, RuhrUniversity Bochum, Germany — Fronto-striatal loops play an important role
in action selection processes, especially when discordant sensory and
contextual information has to be integrated for adequate selection of
actions. Neurodegeneration weakens neural inter-connectivity, compromising the precision of neural synchronization processes. Yet, it is
widely unknown how far changes in the precision of neural synchronization processes are induced by only slight dysfunctions of striatal neural inter-connectivity and in how far such slight changes may affect
action selection processes. We investigated these processes in a sample
of 25 pre-HDs and case-matched controls in a modified Go/Nogo task.
Neural synchronization processes were assessed by means of phaselocking factors (PLFs) derived from event-related potentials (ERPs). The
results show pre-HDs only encounter problems in response inhibition,
when discordant contextual information and sensory input have to be
integrated. While ‘habitual’ action selection is unaffected by changes in
striatal structures influencing reliability of neural synchronization processes, efficient ‘controlled’ processes of action may closely dependent
upon highly reliable neural synchronization processes. Neurophysiological analysis suggests especially pre-motor inhibition processes (NogoN2) are affected. This effect was most strongly reflected in a decline in
the degree of phase-locking in the Nogo-N2 range. Deficits in pre-HDs
may emerge as a consequence of phase-locking-behavioral decoupling.
Of clinical interest, declines in the precision of phase-locking depended
on the amount of the individual’s mutant huntingtin exposure, predicting the probability of disease manifestation in the next five years. This
suggests phase-locking parameters may prove useful in future studies
evaluating a possible function as a biomarker in Huntington’s disease.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Other
C68
THE FEEDBACK-RELATED NEGATIVITY AND EXECUTIVE FUNCTION IN
ADOLESCENTS Tina Zottoli1,2,3, Jill Grose-Fifer1,2; 1John Jay College of

Criminal Justice, 2City University of NY, Graduate Center, 3St. Joseph's College
of NY — Increased risk taking in adolescence may be due, in part, to
immature incentive processing. Age related differences have already
been reported for the feedback related negativity (FRN), an ERP component generated in the Anterior Cingulate (AC) and thought to reflect the
motivational significance of external feedback. However, the relationship of the FRN to observable behavior has not been well established.
For this study, we recorded the FRN in adolescent and young adult
males as they performed a gambling task involving unpredictable monetary losses and gains of low and high magnitude. The amplitude and
latency of the FRN were examined in relation to performance on two
executive function measures that rely on feedback processing and are
known to activate AC: the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task (WCST) and the
Iowa Gambling Task (IGT). In adolescents, smaller FRN amplitude after

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session C
losses was related to slower learning on the WCST and longer latency of
the FRN after high magnitude losses was predictive of poorer performance on the IGT. In contrast, there was no relationship between the
FRN and task performance in adults. Importantly, neither the variability
in task scores, nor in the physiological measures differed significantly
between groups. These findings suggest that the FRN is more directly
tied to observable behavior in teenagers than in adults. We suggest that
this may be due to the presence of more mature prefrontal systems in
adults which exert stronger top-down modulation on behavior, whereas
adolescent behavior may be driven by more bottom-up processes,
reflected in the FRN.

C69
CHRONIC METHAMPHETAMINE ALTERS MULTIPLE DOMAINS OF
COGNITIVE FUNCTION Sarine S. Janetsian1, Maureen M. Timm1, Brianna
M. Todd1, Christopher C. Lapish1,2,3; 1IUPUI Department of Psychology,
IUSOM Stark Neuroscience Institute, 3IUPUI School of Science Institute for
Mathematical Modeling and Computational Sciences — Repeated intermit2

tent injections of methamphetamine (MA) yield protracted changes in
neurophysiology and behavior, which have been shown to effectively
model a number of the behavioral and cognitive abnormalities observed
in addiction. In the current studies, sensitization was induced in Sprague-Dawley rats (5 mg/kg MA for 7/14 days) and multiple domains of
cognition were assessed. Locomotor activity and stereotyped behavior
were used as an index of behavioral sensitization. MA-treated animals
initially exhibited a robust increase in locomotion that transitioned to
stereotypy as the induction phase progressed. 25 days after the induction
phase, cognition was assessed. In an operant attentional set-shifting task,
there were no group differences in trials to criteria during the visual-cue
discrimination component. During the extra-dimensional shift, MAtreated rats made significantly fewer errors compared to saline treated
rats. However during the intra-dimensional shift, MA-treated rats made
significantly more errors than saline-treated rats. Impairments in TOR,
but not novel-object recognition, were also observed in MA-treated rats.
Finally, no differences in social interaction were observed between
groups. Collectively, these data provide further evidence that repeated
intermittent exposure to MA differentially alters various cognitive
domains and likely the neural systems that mediate them. Future studies
will explore how neural systems necessary for the performance of these
behaviors are altered in MA-treated animals and assess strategies to
remediate these cognitive pathologies.

C70
THE LONG TERM INFLUENCE OF CONCUSSION ON YOUNG ADULTS'
COGNITION Robert D. Moore1, Steven P. Broglio2, Kelly M. Brander1, Vita F.
Wu1, Charles H. Hillman1; 1University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2University
of Michigan Ann-Arbor — Recently, increasing attention has been paid to

the deleterious effects of sport-related mild traumatic brain injury (mtbi/
concussion) on cognitive health and function. The aim of the current
research was to evaluate the influence of mTBI incurred during early life
on young adults’ (mean age=22.1, ±2.4 at time of testing) cognitive function. Forty young adults were bifurcated into groups according to concussive history (0, 1+). Participants incurred all injuries during sport and
recreation prior to the age of 18 and were an average of 7.1 years from
last injury. All participants completed a 3-stimulus visual oddball task, a
numerical switch task, and a modified flanker task during which ERP
and behavioral measures were measured. Analysis revealed a significant
group difference in response accuracy during the flanker task, with
decreased accuracy for previously concussed participants. Further, participants with a history of concussion exhibited decreased P3 amplitudes
compared to control participants during each of the cognitive tasks. The
current findings suggest that individuals with a concussive history may
demonstrate persistent decrements in neurocognitive function, including the allocation of attentional resources. While behavioral and neuroelectric differences were observed during the flanker task, neuroelectric
differences in the switch and 3-stimulus oddball task exist in the absence

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

of behavioral differences, suggesting that the neuroelectric system may
be more sensitive than traditional behavioral measures to persistent and
selective decrements resulting from concussion.

C71
ERP CORRELATES OF MALINGERED EXECUTIVE DYSFUNCTION Steven

Hoover1, Jill Grose-Fifer1,2; 1The Graduate Center, CUNY, 2John Jay College of
Criminal Justice — Measures designed to assess malingering have become
an integral part of many neuropsychological evaluations. However,
behavioral malingering measures have been demonstrated to be vulnerable to both manipulation and coaching. Consequently, recent research
has attempted to identify physiological indices of cognitive functioning
that are less susceptible to overt manipulation. Previous physiological
studies have focused on assessing the validity of an individual’s memory
impairment; however, the current study evaluates the effectiveness of a
potential physiological measure of malingered executive dysfunction.
Specifically, this study evaluated whether the P3a ERP component,
which has been shown to be highly correlated with overall executive
functioning, is resilient to intentional manipulation. ERPs were recorded
using a three stimulus (standard, target, distracter) auditory oddball
design, in order to compare differences in neural responses in participants simulating the executive functioning deficits associated with traumatic brain injury (TBI), and controls. Results demonstrated that in the
malingering group, the amplitude, timing, and scalp distribution of the
P3a elicited by the distracter stimuli was not significantly different from
that in control participants, and did not demonstrate any of the characteristics reported in prior studies with TBI patients. Not only were
malingerers unable to produce significant change in their basic orienting
response (P3a), but the very process of attempting to employ additional
strategies produced other physiological markers of deception, in terms
of the timing and scalp distribution of the P3b to the target stimuli. This
methodology shows promise for differentiating between malingerers
and those with genuine brain injury.

C72
EXECUTIVE CONTROL IN LARGE SCALE SEARCH Kate, A. Longstaffe1,

Iain, D. Gilchrist1, Bruce, M. Hood1; 1University of Bristol — Humans live in a
distracting and demanding world in which efficient search is a fundamental skill. In the past, computer-based experiments have been conducted to investigate the cognitive mechanisms that allow individuals to
remember where they have been, decide where to search next, and control perceptual salience while searching. These skills can be defined by
three executive sub-processes: working memory, inhibition and attention. In our studies, we investigate these processes while adult participants search within a large environment. The search environment
contained search locations on the floor which were illuminated green.
The target location was discovered when pressing the switch at a location turned the green light red. The perceptual salience of search locations was manipulated by having some lights flashing and some static.
Participants were more likely to search at the flashing locations, even
when explicitly informed that the target was equally likely to be located
at any location. This effect was robust; present in all participants, across
all trials. Participants’ attention was captured by the perceptual salience
of flashing lights and they were unable to inhibit preference for them.
This inability to inhibit attending to repeated salient events represents a
failure of executive function. Participants were however able to remember previously visited locations and avoid revisits, showing a functioning spatial working memory. This suggests that individual executive
sub-processes play different roles during large scale search.

C73
SHARED USE OF NEURAL RESOURCES BETWEEN FINGER TAPPING AND
ADDITION Firat Soylu1, Sharlene Newman1; 1Indiana University,
Bloomington — Recent advances in the study of embodied cognition have
yielded to a new interest in how mathematical thinking relates to our
body and the sensorimotor system. One of the main claims in the
embodied cognition perspective is that mathematical processes are

93

Poster Session C — Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
grounded in the sensorimotor system, i.e., sensorimotor processes share
neural resources with mathematical processes. In this study, we explore
one instance of this claim by investigating the neural overlap between
arithmetic and finger tapping. In a previous behavioral dual-task study
we showed that finger tapping interferes more with addition compared
to a control sentence comprehension task (Soylu & Newman, 2011).
Based on this study, we investigated the overlapping neural resources
between addition and finger tapping, and studied the effects of tapping
and addition difficulty, using a dual-task fMRI paradigm. Results
revealed that neural correlates of addition overlaps with a frontoparietal
network that is also used by finger tapping. Angular gyrus was deactivated, compared to resting state, across all conditions. The deactivation
was modulated by both addition and tapping difficulty. We also found
evidence for angular and supramarginal gyri having different functional
contributions to arithmetic processing. Based on the results we inferred
that bilateral angular gyri participate in mental representation of fingers
where left supramarginal gyrus mediates sequential activation of finger
representations, such as it is the case in finger tapping. Overall the
results further our understanding of shared use of neural resources
between arithmetic and the sensorimotor system, and makes a strong
case for embodiment of arithmetic.

C74
PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE STREAM OF CONSCIOUSNESS:
INTROSPECTIONS ABOUT THOUGHTS AND THE INTERNAL OBSERVER
Christine A. Godwin1, Allison McBride1, Carlos Montemayor1, Mark W. Geisler1,
Ezequiel Morsella1,2; 1San Francisco State University, 2University of California,
San Francisco — Building on research on mind wandering and its neural

correlates (e.g., the Default Mode Network; Raichle et al., 2001), we
examined the phenomenology of the stream of consciousness using new
paradigms amenable to psychophysiological methods. In Study 1, participants (n = 29) self-reported what they believed to be the origins of spontaneously experienced thoughts. While performing a 9-min
concentration exercise requiring one to focus on one’s breathing, participants, when they experienced spontaneous cognitions, were asked to
count the number of thoughts/percepts (‘links’) they believed led to
each spontaneous thought. Participants reported 1.58 links per thought
(SEM = .23); a second group of participants (n = 74) indicated which
thoughts were triggered by stimuli in their immediate, external environment (M = 53%, SEM = .54). With a variant of this paradigm, we began
examining the electroencephalogram (EEG) correlates of our link measures. Study 2 examined the perceived stability of the "observing self" of
the stream of consciousness. During 30-sec trials, participants (n= 26)
observed ambiguous (e.g., Necker cube) or unambiguous figures (e.g., 12
dots) and pressed a button whenever they sensed a change in themselves
or in the stimulus. Compared to either kind of figure (mean changes =
2.8, SEM = .42 and M = 1.6, SEM = .09, respectively), participants
reported that the self was more unchanging (M = 1.2, SEM = .07), F(16) =
17.92, p = .0006. The aim of these new paradigms is to elucidate the neural correlates of these distinct aspects of the stream of consciousness.

C75
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES OF SPEED-ACCURACY TRADEOFF ON A CONTINUOUS PERFORMANCE TASK IN NON-CLINICAL
CHILDREN Kazufumi Omura1, Eriko Suzuki1, Katsuhito Yamaguchi1, Kenji

Kusumoto1; 1Yamagata University — It is suggested that the amplitude and
latency of electrophysiological components of event-related potentials
(ERPs) have been modulated by several factors, such as physical parameters of stimuli and instructions for response execution. The effects of
speed instruction and the effects of accuracy instruction have been discussed in the sensitivity of P3 latency reflecting stimulus–processing.
However, there is not much evidence that speed-accuracy trade-off
affects on electrophysiological responses. This study investigated how
these instructional differences affect on the N2 and P3 components in a
continuous performance task (CPT). Seven healthy children were asked
to perform an AX-type CPT with EEG recording. They had a mean age of

94

10.40 (S.D.: 0.89) years. Participants were instructed to press a button as
fast or accurate as possible, whenever the letter “9” was preceded by the
letter “1” (Go condition). For all other letters following the letter “1”, the
prepared motor response had to be suppressed (Nogo condition). Two
instructions were prepared, (1) emphasizing speed over accuracy, and
(2) emphasizing accuracy over speed. Each instruction was counter-balanced. The results showed no clear differences of the amplitude and
latency of the N2 and P3 in the both conditions between the speed and
accuracy instructions. In contrast, the behavioral reaction time of the
speed instruction was significantly faster than that of the accuracy
instruction. The results suggest the strategy emphasizing speed over
accuracy includes accurate response to the stimuli at the elementary
school level. Future research needs to increase number of participants for
the detailed investigation.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working memory
C76
DISTINCT NEURAL CORRELATES OF ASSOCIATIVE WORKING MEMORY
AND LONG-TERM MEMORY DURING MAINTENANCE AND PROBE
PHASE Sarah Beul1, Heiko Bergmann1, Mark Rijpkema1,2, Guillén

Fernández1,2, Roy P.C. Kessels1,3; 1Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, 2Radboud University Nijmegen
Medical Centre, Department for Cognitive Neuroscience, 3Radboud University
Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department of Medical Psychology — An increas-

ing number of neuroimaging and lesion studies show hippocampal
involvement, not only in long-term memory (LTM) but also in workingmemory (WM) tasks. However, this hippocampal involvement could
reflect incidental LTM encoding. To disentangle WM processing and
LTM formation we administered a delayed-match-to-sample associative
WM task in an fMRI study. In each trial of this WM task, four face-house
pairs had to be remembered and maintained during a delay of 7-13s.
This was followed by a one-pair-probe phase; participants had to indicate whether it matched one of the presented pairs. Subsequently, an
unexpected recognition-memory (LTM) task was administered. Hence,
maintenance- and retrieval-related activity predicting WM success in the
absence of successful LTM formation was isolated. Data acquisition is
completed but here we report initial whole-brain analyses (?=.001, contiguous voxels > 60) of the first 17 participants for the WM contrasts
only. During the late-delay period, elevated activation was observed in
the precuneus and in the right insula. During the probe phase increased
activation for WM hits vs. misses was found in left and right superior
temporal sulcus, right middle temporal gyrus, posterior cingulate gyrus
(PCiG), precuneus, and ventro-medial pre-frontal cortex (VMPFC),
which even survived a FWE cluster correction. Particularly these latter
three areas have previously been reported to be active during the
retrieval phase, reflecting visual processing / imagery in the absence of
external visual stimulation (PCiG, precuneus) and strategic retrieval processes (VMPFC), respectively. Additional analyses will be presented,
also focusing on LTM contrasts and the medial temporal lobe.

C77
THE LEFT TPJ IN NOVELTY DETECTION AND VERBAL WORKING MEMORY:
IS STIMULUS-DRIVEN ATTENTION THE COMMON FACTOR? Susan
Ravizza1, Jennifer Van Loon1, Jonathan Hakun1, David Zhu1; 1Michigan State
University — Bilateral activation of the temporoparietal junction (TPJ) is

reported during novelty detection tasks in which stimuli appear infrequently (c.f., Kiehl et al., 2001, 2005; Laurens et al., 2005; Wolf et al.,
2008). In addition, the left TPJ is active during the encoding and retrieval
stages of a verbal working memory task (Ravizza et al., 2011). This pattern of activity across studies suggests a role of the left TPJ in stimulusdriven attention that is critical in performance for both novelty detection
and stimulus encoding. The goal of the current study was to determine
whether the same region of the left TPJ was active in both verbal working memory and novelty detection tasks as assessed within the same
individuals. In an fMRI study, participants completed a visual novelty

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session C
detection task using verbal and non-verbal stimuli as well as a serial-recognition task in which a temporal jitter (200-1000ms) was induced during the encoding phase. Novelty detection and verbal encoding recruited
overlapping regions of the left TPJ. These findings demonstrate the
importance of stimulus-driven attention in memory encoding and support a functional role of the left TPJ in stimulus-driven attention.

C78
MEMORY TRAINING FACILITATES MOTOR LEARNING IN YOUNG AND
OLDER ADULTS John S.Y. Chan1, Jin H. Yan2; 1The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, 2The Shanghai University of Sport — Procedural skills and work-

ing memory are functionally related. The effect of practice on working
memory is promising. We examined the benefits of computerized visuospatial working memory training for the accuracy of sequential finger
movements in both older (n = 20, M = 70.6 years) and young adults (n =
20, M = 21.1 years). Participants in each age group were randomly
assigned to the experimental and control groups. Baseline performance
of 2-, 3-, 4-, 5-back numerical and spatial tasks, and the retention of the 4, 8-, 12-, 16-element sequences were evaluated. After the pretests, for one
hour each day over 10 consecutive days, the participants in the experimental group practiced an adaptive version of n-back spatial task while
those in the control group practiced the non-adaptive version. The baseline tests were given to all participants in the posttest. Results showed
faster reaction times for both numerical and spatial n-back tasks in all
participants. Spatial accuracy increased in both age groups. Performance
in numerical n-back tasks remained unchanged. Young adults showed
significant improvements in the retention of the 12- and 16-element
sequences. The improvements in the 4- and 8-element sequences were
insignificant. Ceiling effects of the simple tasks explain the performance
of young adults. More importantly, older learners improved the accuracy of motor sequences in all conditions. The results support our
hypothesis that computerized working memory training improves procedural motor learning, especially for older learners.

C79
COGNITIVE SEQUELAE OF TBI FOR YOUNG ADULTS George

Spilich1,
Lauren Littlefield1, Katherine Leekley1; 1Washington College, Chestertown,
MD — This study was designed to investigate the effects of concussions
on the working memory (WM) and attentional performance of young
adults, skills that are essential for success in college and in life. Participants were tested on two working memory tasks: the Sternberg scanning
task and the Shepard-Metzler mental rotation task, and also the TOVA, a
neuropsychological test of sustained and selective attention. Participants
were 82 college students; 40 were non-concussed controls and 42 were
individuals who self-reported having had at least one concussion in the
last 5 years. Controls were significantly faster at verbal and visuospatial
WM processing than the concussed participants on both WM tasks. The
comparison of the performance of concussed and non-concussed individuals on the TOVA showed that concussed individuals demonstrated
significantly greater RT variability, as well as significantly greater commission/false alarms and significantly lower d' which suggests difficulty
differentiating targets from non-targets. The TOVA results are indicative
of a meaningful attentional deficit. WM and TOVA deficits were greatest
for those individuals who had 3 or more concussions, while individuals
with 2 or less were relatively unaffected. Finally, the objective and subjective impact of these episodes upon cognitive performance lasted
longer than 6 months for the 3 and over concussion individuals.

C80
A META-ANALYSIS OF EXECUTIVE COMPONENTS OF WORKING
MEMORY Derek Nee1,2, Joshua Brown1, Mary Askren2,3, Marc Berman4,

Emre Demiralp2, Adam Krawitz5, John Jonides2; 1Indiana University, 2University
of Michigan, 3University of Washington, 4Rotman Research Institute,
5University of Victoria — Working memory (WM) enables the online maintenance and manipulation of information and is central to intelligent
cognitive functioning. Much research has investigated executive processes of WM in order to understand the operations that make WM

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

“work”. However, there is yet little consensus regarding how executive
processes of WM are organized. Here, we used quantitative meta-analysis to summarize data from 36 experiments that examined executive processes of WM. Experiments were categorized into four component
functions central to WM: protecting WM from external distraction (distractor resistance), preventing irrelevant memories from intruding into
WM (intrusion resistance), shifting attention within WM (shifting), and
updating the contents of WM (updating). Data were also sorted by content (verbal, spatial, object). Meta-analytic results suggested that rather
than dissociating into distinct functions, two separate frontal regions
were recruited across diverse executive demands. One region was
located dorsally in the caudal superior frontal sulcus (SFS) and was especially sensitive to spatial content. The other was located laterally in the
mid-lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) and showed sensitivity to non-spatial
content. We propose that dorsal-“where”/ventral-“what” frameworks
that have been applied to WM maintenance also apply to executive processes of WM. Hence, WM can largely be simplified to a dual selection
model.

C81
ACCESS TO LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE ENHANCES VISUOSPATIAL
WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY Mary Rudner1, Eleni Orfanidou2,3, Cheryl

Capek4, Velia Cardin2, Bencie Woll2, Jerker Rönnberg1; 1Linköping University,
2University College London, 3University of Crete, 4University of Manchester —

Verbal and visuospatial working memory (WM) have been widely studied but little is known about linguistic versus non-linguistic WM in the
visuospatial domain. Sign languages (SL) are visuospatial languages that
have a neurocognitive representation in deaf people similar to that of
speech-based languages in hearing people. Thus SL can be used to study
linguistic WM in the visuospatial domain. In the present study, SL stimuli were used as linguistic stimuli for signers and non-linguistic stimuli
for non-signers to investigate how access to semantic and phonological
representations of SL influences visuospatial WM. Materials were videos
of a deaf signer modeling three types of sign-based stimuli and matched
non-linguistic stimuli. 25 deaf native signers (DS) took part along with 25
hearing non-signers (HN) who could not access any linguistic content of
the material. Sign-based stimuli were familiar signs (semantic and phonological content), unfamiliar signs (phonological but no semantic content) and non-signs (illegal combinations of phonological components
with no semantic content). All participants performed 2-back WM tasks,
targeting either the identity (visual aspect) or location (spatial aspect) of
the stimuli, with all four materials. In the identity task DS performed better than HN with sign-based materials but did not gain extra benefit
from semantic or phonological content. In the location task DS benefited
from semantic but not phonological content. These results show that
signers can use linguistic knowledge in visuospatial WM tasks. Specifically, access to phonological components (sign-based material) supports
identity processing and semantic content (familiar signs) supports location processing in visuospatial WM.

C82
PATTERN CLASSIFICATION OF ERPS PREDICTS
DIFFERENCES IN READING COMPREHENSION Julia

INDIVIDUAL

Mossbridge1,

Marcia Grabowecky1, Satoru Suzuki1; 1Northwestern University — We investigated whether pattern classification of event-related potentials (ERPs)
can provide insight into individual differences in reading comprehension. We visually presented an excerpt from a novel, one word at a time
(rate=2 Hz), and analyzed ERPs to a target function word (“and”) in two
conditions. In the ordered condition, participants followed the story in
anticipation of a subsequent comprehension test and pressed a key
whenever they saw “and.” In the scrambled condition, participants performed only the latter task and the words were presented in a randomized order. The rationale was that “and” would be processed differently
when participants attempted to comprehend the story in the ordered
(dual-task) condition versus the scrambled (single-task) condition, and
that ERP correlates of this difference might predict individual differences in reading comprehension. Across all participants (N=28), a target-

95

Poster Session C — Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
induced positivity at frontal electrodes peaking at 400-500 ms was significantly smaller in the ordered than the scrambled condition. We next
determined whether target difference waves (ERPs to “and” in the
ordered minus scrambled condition) could differentiate good comprehenders (above median comprehension score) from poor comprehenders
(below median). To this end, we used a random-forest classification
method to determine whether a specific spatio-temporal ERP pattern
reliably classified good/poor comprehenders. ERPs from right-frontal
electrodes at 400-500 ms reliably predicted comprehension (90% correct
classification at p<0.00005 by chi-squared test; confirmed by classification of the same data but with randomized labels for comprehension
ability). Our results thus suggest that right-frontal mechanisms, potentially related to working memory, contribute to reading comprehension.

C83
VISUAL AND SPATIAL COMPONENTS OF VISUAL WORKING MEMORY
REPRESENTATIONS: AN ERP STUDY Federica Meconi1, Paola Sessa1;
1

C85
BEHAVIORAL AND EEG EFFECTS OF WORKING MEMORY TRAINING

Bornali Kundu1, David W. Sutterer1, Bradley R. Postle1; 1University of
Wisconsin - Madison — Training on working memory tasks can improve
performance on that task, an effect that can also generalize to other
domains. In this study, we tested the idea that plasticity underlies training-related improvement by testing for changes in brain function preand post-training. Prior to training, we collected a battery of neural and
psychometric measures encompassing working memory, selective attention, and interference control, then divided subjects into experimental
(n=8) and control (n=8) groups. The experimental group trained on an
adaptive n-back task for 40 minutes per day, 5 times per week, for 5
weeks. The control group trained on an adaptive task without overt
memory demands (Tetris). All subjects showed training-related
improvement on their training task. The experimental group also
showed greater improvement in working memory capacity (determined
from performance on a change-detection task; mean K-value for experimental group pre-training=2.25, post-training=2.62; for control group
pre-training=2.31, post-training=2.40), as well as in spatial delayed-recognition performance (mean change in percent accuracy from pre- to
post-training for experimental group +3.5%, for control group +0.5%).
These behavioral effects were paralleled by post- vs. pre-training
increase in the magnitude of contralateral delayed activity (CDA),
recorded during a change-detection task (experimental group only).
Interestingly, the control group showed greater improvement than the
experimental group on the Operation Span task, the Stroop task, and a
guided visual search task. These results illustrate how training can be
used to reveal overlapping versus distinct mechanisms underlying performance on seemingly related cognitive tasks.

University of Padova — We investigated the contribution of visual and
spatial working memory (WM) subsystems in building a visual WM representation. To this aim we tested 15 participants in a color-change
detection task by monitoring an electrophysiological marker of visual
WM capacity: The Sustained Posterior Contralateral Negativity (SPCN).
We compared two spatial arrangements of 2, 4 and 6 colored squares: 1.
randomly positioned on a visual display or 2. organized in accordance
with the Gestalt grouping principle of proximity. Behavioral results
showed no significant differences between the two spatial arrangements.
Notably, when compared the same number of stimuli, electrophysiological results showed larger SPCN amplitude in the random arrangement
than in the organized arrangement. In addition, no significant interaction between spatial arrangement and the number of stimuli was
observed. These data support the independence of the two distinct WM
subsystems in building a visual WM representation.

LANGUAGE: Development & aging

C84
DYNAMIC CHANGES IN NEURONAL NETWORK ARCHITECTURE DURING
WORKING MEMORY TASK Felix Siebenhuehner1, Danielle S. Bassett1,

C86
GESTURAL EFFECTS ON LANGUAGE LEARNING IN YOUNG CHILDREN
WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER Tracey A. Knaus1, Jodi Kamps2,

Richard Coppola2, Daniel R. Weinberger2; 1Department of Physics, University
of California, Santa Barbara, 2Clinical Brain Disorders Branch, National
Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda — Oscillatory brain activity synchronized over an extended network of cortical areas is associated with a
variety of cognitive processes crucial for working memory performance.
Recent work suggests that changes in network organization underlie
changes in complex behaviors such as learning. We investigate temporal
changes and variation across individuals in whole-brain functional network structure during a 2-back working memory task using MEG data
in healthy subjects. Sensor time series were decomposed into frequency
bands of interest using a wavelet transform and functional brain networks were constructed from each of 66 trials by computing the mutual
information between wavelet coefficients of all pairs of sensors. Using a
battery of network properties, we examine the temporal variability in
network architecture and identify metrics that reliably measure subjectspecific activity. Our analysis shows that the brain's network organization in short-term working memory changes substantially over time and
between individuals. We observe that qualitatively distinct patterns of
network organization characterize subgroups of the population. For
most metrics, the variability over subjects was greater than the variability over trials within subjects, indicating that network structure is a
robust and reliable measurement of subject-specific brain function. Our
work demonstrates that functional network architecture differs meaningfully across individuals and shows a degree of temporal variability
that suggests it might be associated with task behavior. More specifically, our work provides important insights into specific network organizational properties that may be signatures of short-term behavioral
variables such as task accuracy.

96

Anne L. Foundas1; 1Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center - New
Orleans, 2Children's Hospital - New Orleans — Autism spectrum disorder
(ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder which involves deficits in social
functions and language and communication, accompanied by repetitive
behaviors or restricted or unusual interests. The development of action
semantics (tool use and communicative gestures) facilitates the development of language (linguistic semantics and speech output) in typically
developing individuals. Seeing gestures has been shown to affect how
language is processed. Although previous studies in ASD have demonstrated impaired gesture production, few studies have examined gesture
comprehension (action semantics) and its effects on language in ASD.
The purpose of this study was to determine whether young children
with ASD can use gestural information to learn new words. Subjects
included 9 young boys with ASD, 3-6 years old. There were 2 conditions,
a gesture condition and a control (no gesture) condition. During both
conditions 2 toys were presented with each toy performing a different
action. During the control condition, each toy was presented with a
made-up action word; during the gesture condition an associated gesture was presented with a made-up action word. One of the toys was
then requested, using the made-up word. All ASD boys performed
above chance for the control condition (most at 100%). During the gesture condition, however, only 3 of 9 (33%) performed above chance.
Results indicate that young children with ASD have difficulty using gestural information to assist with language learning. This differs from typically developing children, providing support for the hypothesis that the
development of action semantics may be disrupted in ASD.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session C

C87
AUDITORY PROCESSING OF GRAMMATICAL GENDER: AN ERP STUDY ON
TURKISH-DUTCH BILINGUALS Bregtje J. Seton1,2, Hanneke Loerts1,2,

Monika S. Schmid1, Laurie A. Stowe1,2; 1University of Groningen, the
Netherlands, 2University Medical Center Groningen — While Turkish does

not have grammatical gender, the Dutch language has a rather opaque
system of a common and a neuter gender that is visible on definite determiners and on adjectival inflections in indefinite noun phrases. Previous
studies on grammatical gender processing in bilinguals investigate late
L2 acquirers and used visual presentation of stimuli. In the present
study, we were interested in early bilinguals and auditory processing of
gender violations. We used event-related potentials (ERPs) to compare
early bilingual Turkish-Dutch adults (Age of Acquisition < 3 yrs) to an
age- and education matched native Dutch control group. Participants
were presented with auditory sentences in Dutch, containing either correct or incorrect grammatical gender concord, followed by a grammaticality judgement task (GJT). The Turkish-Dutch bilinguals who scored
highest on the GJT showed an ERP pattern which was similar to that of
the Dutch control group, showing a positive peak in activation around
600 ms after the target onset (P600) for the gender violations, which was
most pronounced on centro-posterior electrodes. The bilingual participants with the lowest accuracy rates on the GJT showed no difference
between correct and incorrect sentences. These results imply that early
acquisition and balanced use of the two languages are not necessarily
predictors of native-like processing. In contrast, we propose that the
large variation within the bilingual group could have originated in differences between quality of input and the amount of correct input.

C88
INFANTS SHOW INCREASED PHASE LOCKING OF OSCILLATORY BRAIN
ACTIVITY IN THE THETA FREQUENCY BAND DURING SPEECH
PERCEPTION Silvia Ortiz-Mantilla1, Jarmo A Hämäläinen1,2, April A
Benasich1; 1Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 2University of
Jyva?skyla?, Finland — Stimulus-induced modulation of cortical rhythms

in the theta (4-8 Hz) and gamma (30-80 Hz) frequency bands during
speech processing has been found in adults. However, very little is
known about the frequency composition of infant event-related potentials (ERPs). Low frequency oscillations have been reported to be prominent in infant EEG, and it is hypothesized that low frequency oscillations
also underlie infant ERP responses. One way to examine the frequencies
within infant ERPs is inter-trial phase locking (ITPL). ITPL is a measure
of how consistently the phase at different frequency bands locks to stimulation presented across trials. In this study, we examined ITPL of 6month-olds in response to spoken syllables. Infants were given a passive
oddball paradigm using a voice-onset time contrast within consonantvowel syllables. Dense array EEG/ERP cortical signals were collected
and mapped onto age-appropriate MRIs. Discrete dipole source models
identified ERP generators in primary auditory cortex. Individual source
models were then applied to each raw EEG recording in order to conduct time-frequency analyses. Repeated measures ANOVAs [Hemisphere (left, right temporal cortex) x Stimulus (standard, deviant) x
frequency band (4, 6, 8, 10, 12 Hz)] contrasting baseline (-100 ms) and
using a 150-250 ms post-stimulus time window revealed an increase in
ITPL in the 4-8 Hz theta band, that was particularly prominent during
deviant detection. Our results demonstrate that in a period critical for
setting-up language, at least part of the infant auditory change detection
response to speech signals can be attributed to alignment of low frequency brain oscillations.

C89
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MEASURES OF ATTENTION DURING SPEECH
PERCEPTION PREDICT HIGHER-LEVEL VERBAL SKILLS IN CHILDREN
1

1

2

1,2 1

Lori Astheimer , Monika Janus , Sylvain Moreno , Ellen Bialystok ; York
University, 2Rotman Research Institute — Recent event-related potential
(ERP) evidence demonstrates that preschool-aged children modulate
attention over time during speech perception, selectively attending to

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

informative moments such as word onsets. Although this observation
provides additional support for a role of attention in language processing, it is unclear whether this type of attentional modulation reflects
basic speech perception mechanisms, higher-level language skills, or
more general cognitive abilities. The current study examined these
potential relationships by measuring ERPs from 5-year-old children listening to a narrative containing attention probes presented at word
onsets and random control times. Children also completed behavioral
tests assessing verbal (receptive vocabulary, grammaticality judgment)
and nonverbal (nonverbal intelligence, working memory) performance.
Consistent with previous findings, probes presented at word onsets elicited a more negative ERP response beginning around 100 ms after probe
onset than control probes, indicating increased attention to word-initial
segments. Crucially, the magnitude of this difference was correlated
with behavioral performance on verbal tasks, but showed no relationship to nonverbal measures. Within the language domain, ERP attention
effects were most strongly correlated with performance on complex linguistic tasks as opposed to simpler measures of vocabulary or grammar.
In particular, greater attention to word onsets was associated with better
performance on grammaticality judgments of semantically anomalous
sentences which require children to attend to syntactic structure while
ignoring semantic violations. These results demonstrate that effective
allocation of attention during speech perception supports higher-level
language processing in children by allowing them to focus on relevant
information at both individual word and complex sentence levels.

C90
MUSIC AND LANGUAGE SHORT-TERM TRAINING REVEAL BRAIN
PLASTICITY IN EARLY CHILDHOOD Yunjo Lee1, Monika Janus2, Ellen

Bialystok1,2, Sylvain Moreno1,3; 1Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Centre,

2York Unversity, 3University of Toronto — Bilinguals

and musicians have
been shown to perform better than monolinguals in executive function,
memory and working memory tasks. For bilinguals, these findings have
been attributed to their need to manage attention to two languages that
are jointly available during linguistic performance. For musicians, these
findings have been attributed to their training requirements involving
intensive memorization and motor coordination. To further explore
these effects of experience, we conducted an intervention study testing
the outcome of music vs second-language training to determine (1)
whether training can change preattentive sound processing and (2)
whether this change is domain-specific or not. We used a pre-test/posttest design with 53 English-speaking children, 4-5 year old, with no prior
musical or second-language training. Groups were equated on age, IQ
score and maternal education and received computer-based music or
French language training for one month. Here, we report the results of
ERP recordings of the mismatch negativity (MMN) while children were
passively listening to music notes (A, A sharp) or French vowels (u, ou).
After training, the music group showed an average of 34.8 ms shift in
MMN latency, revealing faster sound processing in the music note condition but not in the French vowel condition. In contrast, the French
group showed enhanced MMN amplitude only in the vowel condition,
accompanied by brain reorganization revealing a bi-hemispheric pattern
after training. These results show that a short period of music and second language training induced domain specific and domain general
brain plasticity of sound processing in early childhood.

C91
ERP EVIDENCE FOR DIFFERENT SEQUENTIAL PATTERN-LEARNING
MECHANISMS IN CHILDREN AND ADULTS Christopher Conway1, Anne

Walk1, John Purdy2, Gretchen Smith1; 1Saint Louis University, 2Purdue
University — A long-held assumption in language acquisition is that there

is a critical period for learning natural language (Lenneberg, 1967). To
explore whether sensitive periods in language acquisition might be due
to developmental constraints on more fundamental, domain-general
learning abilities, we investigated the ERP correlates of implicit sequence
learning in children (ages 8-10) and adults. In the learning phase of this
artificial-grammar learning experiment (based on Conway et al., 2010),

97

Poster Session C — Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
children and adults used a touchscreen monitor to replicate rule-based
sequences of visual-spatial patterns presented on the screen (each
sequence consisted of flashing black squares that could appear in one of
four different positions). Following experience with the structured patterns, participants then completed a test phase involving the reproduction of novel sequences, with half of the sequences following the
grammatical rules, and half containing violations. ERP responses to rule
violations differed between the children and adults: whereas the adults
displayed a bilateral anterior positivity around 250-300ms (a P3a component), sometimes considered a reflection of the allocation of attention,
the children displayed a left-lateralized positive deflection around
100ms. These findings provide electrophysiological evidence that in this
sequential learning task, children utilized a learning mechanism that
was different from that used by adults. It may be that the end of the critical period for natural language corresponds to a transition between two
different types of domain-general learning mechanisms, with the left-lateralized component observed in children reflecting the kind of implicit,
incidental learning so important for natural language acquisition.

C92
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN THE NEURAL BASES OF PHONOLOGICAL
AND SEMANTIC PROCESSES Michele Diaz1, Micah Johnson1, C. Christine
1,

Burke2,

Madden1; 1Duke

2Pomona

David
University,
Camblin Deborah
College — Within the domain of language, older adults demonstrate considerable preservation of semantic function compared to younger adults,
but also impairments on several indices of phonological retrieval. This
suggests a fundamental difference in the cognitive organization of these
abilities. According to the Transmission Deficit Theory, this pattern may
represent the effects of different levels of redundancy for semantic and
phonological information. Healthy younger and older adults participated in an fMRI experiment (n=16 per group). Stimuli consisted of a cue
followed by a pair of photographs that were semantically or phonologically related. The task was to decide whether both photographs matched
the cue. Behavioral analyses of drift rate yielded a significant Group x
Condition interaction, such that, for older adults, semantic retrieval was
more efficient than phonological retrieval, whereas for younger adults,
phonological retrieval was relatively more efficient. We defined regions
selectively activated by either semantic or phonological retrieval (p<.001,
corrected). In the semantic network, younger adults elicited greater activation than older adults in left posterior inferior temporal gyri and bilateral occipital gyri, independently of condition. In contrast, in the
phonological network, activation was dependent on both age group and
condition. Two clusters in the left hemisphere, inferior frontal/insula,
and the anterior cingulate. For both clusters, older adults exhibited more
activation in the phonological condition than in the semantic condition,
whereas younger adults showed either the reverse pattern or no difference. These results support a differential decline for older adults on phonological, but not semantic retrieval, consistent with Transmission
Deficit Theory.

C93
EXAMINING AT-RISK CLASSIFICATION FOR FUTURE READING
DIFFICULTY IN KINDERGARTENERS Ola Ozernov-Palchik1, Elizabeth S.

Norton2,3, Abigail B. Cyr3, Sara D. Beach3, Keri-Lee A. Garel3, John D. E.
Gabrieli3,4, Nadine Gaab1,5,6; 1Children’s Hospital Boston; Developmental
Medicine Center, 2Center for Reading and Language Research, Department of
Child Development, 3Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 4Athinoula A. Martinos Imaging Center
at the McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 5Harvard Medical School, 6Harvard Graduate School of
Education — Developmental Dyslexia (DD) is characterized by difficulties
with accurate/fluent word recognition and decoding. DD is typically
diagnosed in 2nd or 3rd grade and affects 5-17% of the population. Several studies have examined behavioral pre-markers of DD in kindergarteners and have identified Letter Knowledge (LK), Phonemic Awareness
(PA), and Rapid Automatized Naming (RAN) as the most reliable pre-

98

dictors of reading difficulty. However, behavioral measures alone have
been somewhat ineffective at identifying children at-risk for dyslexia
before reading acquisition, and two recent studies in a phonologically
transparent orthography (German) have shown that brain measures in
kindergarten can significantly add to the predictive value of behavioral
measures. The goal of our study is to identify the best set of behavioral
predictors for later reading outcome in English-speaking kindergartners
and to determine whether brain measures (EEG/fMRI) can add any predictive value. To date, we have assessed 300 kindergarteners from 17
ethnically and socioeconomically-diverse schools. Each child completed
a 45-minute screening battery including measures of PA, RAN and LK.
Children with/without risk will complete MRI and EEG and be followed
longitudinally. Preliminary results suggest great variability of risk classification between selected constructs . 7% of children were at risk based
on PA, 2% on LK, 17.5% on RAN and 8% on multiple measures. Our
study will determine which measures (behavioral, brain, or a combination) best predict a reading difficulty. Our results have significant implications for educational policy and may help to maximize the specificity
and sensitivity of early identification of children at risk for DD.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition
C94
EFFECTS OF SYNCHRONIZATION, RHYTHM, AND MELODY ON APHASICS’
PRODUCTIONS Pascale Lidji1,2, Caroline Palmer1, Michele Morningstar1,

Isabelle Peretz2; 1McGill University, 2Brams, University of Montreal — Studies

suggest that choral singing or coordinating with rhythmic stimuli have
beneficial effects on clinical conditions such as stuttering or aphasia.
However, it is unclear whether these effects arise from the temporal regularity of the rhythmic stimuli or from the synchronization task. To
investigate whether the temporal regularity and / or the synchronization task cause the improvement in vocal production, we examined
whether synchronizing with or repeating sentences of varying regularity
facilitates non-fluent aphasics’ vocal productions. Eight non-fluent aphasics were asked to either repeat or synchronize their speech or singing
with sentences that had been recorded in 3 conditions: naturally spoken
(spoken with a natural prosody), regularly spoken (every other syllable
aligned with a metronome click that was not heard by the participants)
and regularly sung (sung on a simple melody with a metronome). Overall, aphasic participants produced more correct syllables in the synchronization than in the repetition task. They did not produce more correct
syllables in the song or the regular speech condition than in the natural
speech condition. However, the number of metrical positions filled (the
proportion of syllables produced in the correct temporal position, irrespective of syllable accuracy) was higher when participants were singing. Finally, participants filled more metrical positions on strong than on
weak beats. These results suggest that synchronizing with an external
speech stimulus improves the quality of aphasics’ speech. Rhythm
(strong and weak beats) and melody improve the quantity, but not the
quality, of aphasics’ speech.

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
C95
BRAIN STRUCTURE IN PRESCHOOL IS ASSOCIATED WITH LATER
READING ABILITY Nadine Gaab1,2,3, Michael Figgucio1,4, Sarah

Meissner1,5, Nora Raschle1,2; 1Children's Hospital Boston, 2Harvard Medical
School, 3Harvard Graduate School of Education, 4Boston University,
5University of Konstanz, Germany — Developmental Dyslexia (DD) affects
5-17% of all children and is characterized by difficulties in word recognition and decoding. Various (f)MRI studies and meta-analysis have
reported hypoactivation and reduced gray matter volume indices within
left-hemispheric parietotemporal and occipitotemporal areas in adults
and children with a diagnosis of DD (e.g.; Richlan et al., 2011). A few
studies have linked functional brain measures in beginning readers to
later reading ability (e.g. Maurer et al., 2009; Bach et al. 2011) but a link

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session C
between brain structure indices in preschool and later reading ability has
not been established yet. The goal of this study was to investigate the
relationship between gray matter volume in left-hemispheric parietotemporal and occipitotemporal areas prior to reading onset and later
reading ability. Whole brain T1-weighted MPRAGE structural scans
were collected in 20 children with and without a family history of DD
before (5.7y) and after (6.9y) one year of kindergarten. Standardized language scores were obtained before and after reading onset. Statistical
analyses of gray matter volume were performed using voxel-based morphometry. Correlational analyses were employed to link gray matter
volume indices prior to kindergarten to behavioral measures after reading onset. Our results show that gray matter volume indices in left-hemispheric temporoparietal/occipitotemporal brain regions obtained prior
to reading onset correlate with reading skills (including Word and Letter
ID and Passage Comprehension) after one year of kindergarten. Further
research is needed to determine if brain structure indices may be utilized
as early pre-markers of DD for the identification of children at risk.

C96
MMN RESPONSES IN ACQUIRED APRAXIA OF SPEECH: EVIDENCE FOR
PHONOLOGICAL INVOLVEMENT Karen Froud1, Reem Khamis-Dakwar2,
Melissa Randazzo3, Felicidad Garcia1; 1Teachers College, Columbia University,

2

Adelphi University, 3NorthWestern Unversity — Acquired apraxia of speech
(AOS) commonly co-occurs with Broca’s, anomic, or unclassified aphasia. It is characterized by inconsistent articulation errors as well as abnormal speech prosody (Duffy, 2005; McNeil, Robin, & Schmidt, 2008). Two
main theoretical approaches attempt to explain the nature of the speech
disorder in AOS: it may be viewed as a motor speech planning disorder
(e.g. Kent, 2000); or the speech disorder may be associated with an
underlying phonological representation deficit, namely overspecification in the phonological domain (Dogil & Mayer, 1988; Dogil, Mayer, &
Vollmer, 1996). To evaluate these hypotheses, we investigated auditory
MMN responses from monolingual English-speaking adults with a primary diagnosis of moderate-severe AOS, and age-matched controls. All
participants passed hearing screens. High density EEG (128 channels,
Tucker, 1993) was recorded while participants listened to CV syllables
presented in passive-listening oddball paradigms: phonemic (standard /
ba/vs deviant /pa/), allophonic (/pha/vs. /pa/), and nonspeech (FM
sounds). MMN was derived from high-density EEG recordings by averaging and subtraction of averaged standard responses from averaged
deviant responses within each condition. For all participants, the nonspeech condition resulted in MMN enhancement to deviant presentations, as did the phonemic speech sound contrast. For the AOS group
only, MMN enhancement was also apparent in response to the allophonic contrast; however, a greater right-lateralized scalp distribution of
the MMN was observed compared to controls, which likely indexes
lesion-related functional redistribution. We propose that these preliminary findings are consistent with a view of AOS as a disorder affecting
underlying phonological representations.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Development &
aging
C97
MUSICAL EXPERIENCE BUFFERS AGE-RELATED DECLINES IN
FRONTALLY-MEDIATED PROCESSES DURING A NOVEL OBJECT MEMORY
TASK. Brenda Hanna-Pladdy1, Rebecca Lepping2, Hyun Choi2, Cary

Savage2; 1Emory University, 2University of Kansas — Numerous studies have

implicated under-recruitment of frontally-mediated processes required
for memory as responsible for age-related declines. However, the presence of cognitive aging variability emphasizes the need to identify moderating factors that can enhance memory maintenance. Mounting
evidence supports training-induced structural and functional changes in
musicians, although it is unclear if these plastic changes can result in
transfer to nonmusical cognitive functions sustained in advanced age. To
this end, we evaluated healthy older amateur musicians (>10 years) and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

nonmusicians (n=24; m=68 years) during encoding and short delayed
recognition (8 minutes following structural scanning) of multicolored
fractal images with 6 bold fMRI sequences, and long delayed recognition
(30 minutes) after scanning. Following encoding, where subjects were
presented 48 novel object designs across 2 trials in a block design, subjects underwent an event-related fMRI session of immediate and short
delay recognition trials. Results revealed that musicians had greater activations in left frontal regions than nonmusicians for correctly recognized
images; while nonmusicians relied more heavily on right medial temporal and superior parietal regions. These findings imply that extended
musical training can result in plastic changes that can enhance agerelated frontally-mediated compensation and memory performance.
Furthermore, results suggest that musicians may uniquely process nonverbal information through a highly developed left lateralized network
common to musical material, skilled movements and auditory processing.

C98
THE EFFECTS OF AGENCY ON SEQUENTIAL MEMORY IN 3-YEAR-OLD
CHILDREN: COMBINING BEHAVIOR AND EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS

Lauren Howard1, Amanda L. Woodward1, Tracy Riggins2; 1University of Chicago,
Chicago, 2University of Maryland, College Park — Previous research has
shown that agency is a central theme found in the verbal recall of narrative events in both adults and school-age children (e.g., Trabasso et al.,
1992). However, the effect of agency on memory in young children
remains unexplored due to their verbal limitations, and has lead to the
erroneous assumption that young children have poor memory for social
events. The current study sought to address this issue by exploring the
effects of agency on memory in 3-year-old children (n=20). By using a
form of deferred imitation coupled with an event-related potential (ERP)
task, we explored social episodic memory in a non-verbal/behavioral
manner. Specifically, children learned an action sequence via pictures
with or without an agent present. Preliminary results suggest that children who viewed the agent had better memory (i.e., reconstructed more
steps in the action sequence) after a delay than those that did not see the
agent in the pictures (p<.05). Furthermore, those who viewed the agent
also evidenced ERP episodic memory effects, present over midline leads,
in the 350-550 ms and 650-900 ms time windows. Participants who did
not view the agent in the demonstration pictures did not show any such
ERP effects. Taken together, agency appears to increase memory for an
event and these effects are apparent at both behavioral and neural levels.

C99
GRAY VERSUS WHITE MATTER DAMAGE ACROSS VERBAL MEMORY
PERFORMANCE IN LATE LIFE DEPRESSION Rebecca Charlton1, Melissa

Lamar1, Aifeng Zhang1, Anand Kumar1; 1University of Illinois at Chicago —
Verbal memory deficits attributed to late life depression (LLD) may
result from executive dysfunction that is more detrimental to list-learning than story-based recall. Despite these behavioral dissociations, few
studies have investigated related neuroanatomical dissociations in verbal memory performance. We compared list-learning to story-based
memory in 25 non-demented individuals with LLD (age~66.3+7.8) and
41 non-demented/non-depressed healthy controls (HC; age~67.6+5.3).
Performance was correlated with grey matter volumes in frontal, temporal and parietal regions associated with verbal memory; tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) explored associations between performance and
white matter integrity on a voxel-by-voxel basis. Lower verbal memory
performance was observed in LLD compared to HC, only during longdelay free recall on list-learning. No group differences were observed in
regional grey matter volumes or on TBSS. Significant positive correlations were noted in the LLD group, between list-learning long-delay free
recall and grey matter volumes of prefrontal, temporal and parietal
regions - a network important for subjective organization (an aspect of
executive function). No correlations between TBSS and memory performance were observed in either group. This study is the first to demonstrate neuroanatomical dissociations in verbal memory performance in
LLD and provides structural evidence for the executive dysfunction

99

Poster Session C — Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
known to be detrimental to list-learning performance. While associations
existed with gray matter structures, none were observed with white matter integrity. The majority of our LLD sample had life-long rather than
late-onset depression, suggesting that grey matter changes may have
greater effect on cognition in LLD whereas white matter changes may be
more significant in late-onset LLD.

C100
DOPAMINE MODULATION OF LEARNING WITH IMMEDIATE VS. DELAYED
FEEDBACK: EVIDENCE FROM PARKINSON’S DISEASE. Karin Foerde1,

Erin Kendall Braun1, Daphna Shohamy1; 1Columbia University, Department of
Psychology — Multiple brain systems support learning and memory.

Gradual feedback-driven learning depends on the basal ganglia (BG),
and the importance of dopamine for learning in the BG is widely recognized, but emerging evidence suggests a critical role for dopamine in
modulating the medial temporal lobes (MTL) as well. Pharmacological
manipulations of dopamine have shown mixed results for learning that
depends both on the BG and the MTL: increasing levels of dopamine can
lead to impaired, unaffected, or even enhanced performance on learning
and memory tasks. Thus, fundamental questions remain about the role
of dopamine in modulating different kinds of learning. We addressed
this question by testing individuals with Parkinson’s disease either ‘off’
medication (low dopamine levels) or ‘on’ dopaminergic medication
(high dopamine levels). Parkinson’s patients, healthy age-matched
adults, and young adults completed an associative learning task where
response-contingent feedback was delivered either immediately or after
a delay of seven seconds. We previously found with fMRI that learning
from immediate feedback depends on the BG, whereas learning the same
associations with delayed feedback is supported by the MTL. Healthy
control participants learned equally from immediate and delayed feedback. However, Parkinson’s disease patients exhibited a selective
impairment when learning from immediate feedback, a deficit that was
present in patients both on and off dopaminergic medication in contrast
with previous reports of worse learning in patients tested on dopaminergic medication. The findings also and raise questions about the impact of
dopamine modulation on multiple forms of learning.

C101
THE ROLE OF SPATIAL CONTEXT IN OBJECT RECOGNITION MEMORY: A
DEVELOPMENTAL APPROACH Jamie Edgin1, Spano Goffredina1, Kevin

Kawa1, Lynn Nadel1; 1University of Arizona — In Hayes, Nadel and Ryan
(2007) adults had 10% poorer object recognition if objects were removed
from a rich visual context between study and test. This effect (the “contextual shift decrement (CSD)”) was robust across several conditions,
suggesting that object-context binding was automatic. We examined this
effect in typically developing children and in Down Syndrome (DS), a
population with impaired medial temporal lobe (MTL) function. Children in both groups learned common objects in semantically congruent
contexts or on a white background. At test five minutes later, objects
remained in the learned context (scene or white background), or objects
were removed from the learned context. Children had to determine if the
object was seen before (i.e., old or new judgment). Three-year old children and children with DS showed the effect, but children between the
ages of 4- 12 years did not. The CSD re-emerged after 13 years. The presence of a u-shaped trajectory in the development of context dependency
suggests that the CSD might reflect different underlying mechanisms
across the age range tested. Given the relative under-development of the
MTL in young children and those with DS, context dependency in these
groups may reflect the formation of unitized object-context representations, while more flexible object-context associative representations
emerge as children develop.

100

C102
ASPECTS OF METABOLIC SYNDROME ACROSS THE LIFESPAN:
IMPLICATIONS FOR BRAIN STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION Melissa

Lamar1, Rebecca Charlton1, Laura Korthauer1, Anand Kumar1; 1Department of
Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago — Metabolic syndrome affects

45% of Americans age 60 years and older and increases the risk of cardiovascular disease in affected individuals. Metabolic syndrome consists
of a constellation of risk factors including hypertension, hyperglycemia,
hypertriglyceridemia, low high-density lipoprotein levels and abdominal obesity. It promotes cerebral white matter damage which negatively
impact cognitive and affective functioning; whether this pattern of
impairment exists across the lifespan is less clear. 173 participants
(age~58.3+13.0; range=30-89) were grouped based on the number of
metabolic syndrome criteria met and compared across measures of medical, behavioral and neuroanatomical variables. Groups did not differ on
age, education, overall cognitive or depressive symptomatology. They
differed on stroke risk profile and cumulative illness rating scales (all pvalues>.01) with individuals meeting no criteria having lower scores
across these indices than individuals meeting one, two or three criteria
for metabolic syndrome (0<1=2=3). A similar pattern emerged for an
estimate of full-scale IQ (0>1=2=3; p=.03). After controlling for IQ, only
immediate recall for prose passages remained significantly different
(0=1>2, p<.01; 0>3, p=.06). In a subset of older participants (n=59),
between-groups differences emerged for depressive symptomatology
(3>2=1=0, p=.01) and FLAIR-derived white matter hyperintensity volumes (2>1>0, p=.02). Results suggest that symptoms of metabolic syndrome across the lifespan negatively impact a similar pattern of medical,
cognitive and neuroanatomical sequelae as that seen in older adults.
Given the risk for dementia imposed by the presence of metabolic syndrome, individuals meeting even a few criteria for this syndrome
regardless of age should be monitored and aggressively treated.

THINKING: Decision making
C103
NEURAL PREDICTORS OF RISKY BEHAVIOUR Annabel

B. Losecaat
Vermeer1,2, Maarten A.S. Boksem2,3, Alan G. Sanfey1,2; 1Radboud University
Nijmegen, Behavioural Science Institute, The Netherlands, 2Donders Institute
for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Erasmus
University Rotterdam, Rotterdam School of Management, The Netherlands —
In risky decision-making scenarios people are generally risk averse,
however, when deciding in loss situations they often become risk-seeking. This preference reversal, often attributed to loss aversion, is termed
the reflection effect (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). This study explored
the processes underlying the reflection effect by investigating risky decision-making following real losses and gains. Specifically, is there a neural mechanism that predicts the observed preference reversals for risky
decisions following gains and losses? We predicted brain areas involved
in both evaluating losses and in the subsequent adjustment in behaviour
(e.g. anterior insula, inferior frontal gyrus, cingulate cortex) would be
related to preference reversals. Participants (n=26) played a task while
undergoing fMRI in which they experienced either small losses or small
gains. Following each individual gain or loss, participants could choose
a gamble that would either compensate for or double their loss (after an
initial loss) or either double or eliminate their gain (after an initial gain).
Results demonstrated behaviour predicted by the reflection effect; participants switched their risk preferences depending on the initial gain or
loss. Moreover, this behaviour was reflected in enhanced activity in the
anterior insula and inferior frontal gyrus. These results support a proposed role of these areas in adaptive behavioural control involving risky
decisions and demonstrate that such behavioural control is strongly context dependent.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session C

C104
EFFECTS OF ATYPICAL ANTIPSYCHOTIC MEDICATION ON REWARD
LEARNING IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Catherine Insel1, Jenna Reinen1, Daphna

Shohamy1, Tor D. Wager2, L. Fredrik Jarskog3, Jochen Weber1, Sergio Francis M.
Zenisek1, Edward E. Smith1,4; 1Columbia University, 2University of Colorado at
Boulder, 3University of North Carolina, 4New York State Psychiatric Institute —
Schizophrenia is associated with an abnormal dopamine system, and
dopamine receptors are the primary target for pharmacological treatment. Dopamine is known to underlie reward processing in general, and
recent studies reveal impairments in reward processing in both medicated and unmedicated patients with schizophrenia. These impairments
may reflect, in part, dysfunctional activity at dopamine receptors in
patients with schizophrenia. Better understanding of the mechanism of
antipsychotic action at dopamine receptors may further reveal how
dopamine modulates reward processing. Antipsychotic medications
may have differential effects on components of reward processing, such
as response to feedback, anticipation of reward, and reward receipt. To
explore this, we tested patients with schizophrenia (n=20) taking a variety of atypical antipsychotics and matched healthy controls. Participants
underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while performing a reward-learning task. On each trial, participants first chose a
shape, next received probabilistic feedback (correct, incorrect), and then
received a monetary outcome. This task took place in two counterbalanced conditions, where the first involved accumulating monetary gain
(Gain condition) and the second involved avoiding monetary loss (Loss
condition). Using model-based analyses, we found that medication-dose
in patients modulated fMRI response in the midbrain at the time of feedback, but only in the Loss condition. This finding suggests that pharmacological blockade of dopamine may influence valence-specific
feedback-related mechanisms in patients with schizophrenia. Detailed
models are currently being used to examine the impact of medicationstrength and type during response to feedback, anticipation of reward,
and receipt of reward in Gain and Loss conditions.

C105
GENDER DIFFERENCES IN FINANCIAL RISK-TAKING Deena Girgis1, Vlad
B Papa2, Cary R Savage2, Keith W Chauvin1, Laura E Martin2; 1University of
Kansas, 2University of Kansas Medical Center — Previous
neuroimaging

studies have shown that risk-seeking decisions activate reward processing brain regions such as the nucleus accumbens whereas risk-averse
studies activate emotional brain regions such as the anterior insula. Little
research has been done to specifically examine differences between men
and women in these reward processing brain regions. The current study
examined gender differences in risk-taking behaviors using questionnaires and a financial decision-making functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) task. This task involved choosing between a stock and a
bond. The probability of payout was given for both options. Trials distinguished risk-averse and risk-seeking decisions by varying the expected
values of the stock and bond. Preliminary behavioral results show that
while men make more recreationally-risky decisions by having strong
responses to sample question such as likeliness to “take a weekend skydiving class” (p=.07), women make more socially-risky decisions by
exhibiting strong responses to items such as likeliness to “reveal a
friend’s secret to someone else” (p<.05). In addition, men engage in more
approach behaviors (p<.05). In the financial risk-taking task, men made
more risky decisions compared to women (chose the stock when the
bond had a higher expected value; p<.05). These preliminary results suggest that there are gender differences in risk-taking behaviors. In addition to behavioral data, fMRI results will be presented describing gender
differences in brain activation associated with making risky decisions.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

C106
MACHINE LEARNING OF SOCIAL DECISION-MAKING: AN FMRI STUDY OF
THE ULTIMATUM GAME Filippo Rossi1, Luke Chang1, Ian Fasel1, Alan

Sanfey2; 1University of Arizona, 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behavior, Radboud University — Social decision-making is a complex process with multiple sources of (conflicting) motivations at play, such as
monetary interest and emotions. Suppose for instance that you are bargaining with someone and you receive a monetary offer that you consider insufficient: you may refuse it, even if it means loosing money. The
Ultimatum Game (UG) is an economic game that mimics this scenario.
Experimental evidence shows that players are guided by multiple motivations, and that they experience visceral reactions, such as disgust and
anger, when playing the game. To better understand the role of these
motivations, we used machine learning techniques to analyze BOLD signals from UG-players. First, we used statistical feature selection to
extract a subset of 45 informative voxels. We then trained Support Vector
Machines to recognize the pattern of activations that predict participants’ decisions. Both feature selection and classification were conducted using leave-one-subject-out cross validation. Classification
performance was significantly better than chance and flat prediction
(accuracy = 63%, p = .037). The feature selection procedure extracted
small clusters of voxels in the right insula, caudate, lateral prefrontal cortex, orbitofrontal cortex, and temporal pole. A few voxels were also
extracted from visual and motor areas. Most likely, complex cognitive
processes such as social decision-making depend on the synergic activity
of multiple brain regions. Our results contribute to the investigation of
the social decision-making network by identifying multi-voxel patterns
of activation that are associated with specific social outcomes.

C107
PROCESSING OF MONETARY FEEDBACK IN ACTIVE AND
OBSERVATIONAL LEARNING IN ASPERGER SYNDROME: RELATIONSHIP
WITH EMPATHY? Christian Bellebaum1, Katja Brodmann1, Patrizia Thoma1;
1Ruhr University Bochum, Germany — Deficits

in reward processing and in
emotional and cognitive aspects of empathy have been hypothesized to
underlie the problems in social interaction observed in autism spectrum
disorders (ASD). Both types of impairments may play an important role
in learning from observed behaviour and feedback in other persons. In
the present study, reward processing in active and observational learning from feedback was compared in ten adults with Asperger Syndrome
(AAS) and twelve age matched healthy control subjects (HC). Associations between stimuli and monetary outcomes were either learned via
active choices or by observing choices and outcomes of a virtual other
person. Outcome processing was assessed with event-related potentials,
focusing on the feedback-related negativity (FRN). For the behavioural
data, an overall trend towards better learning performance in HC
emerged, which was mainly driven by group differences in observational learning. Analysis of the FRN corroborated previous findings with
respect to enhanced amplitudes for negative than positive feedback and
for active vs. observational learning. In addition, FRN amplitude was
generally reduced in AAS, irrespective of learning (active or observational) and feedback type (monetary reward or punishment). This finding adds to recent evidence of reduced reward system recruitment
during reward processing in ASD and additionally shows that the reduction is comparable for feedback given for one’s own behaviour and for
feedback given to an observed person. However, FRN amplitude correlated with empathic concern only in AAS in observational learning, suggesting that the mechanisms responsible for FRN amplitude reduction
may differ for active and observational learning.

101

Poster Session C — Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

C108
DAT1, DRD4, MAOA, STIN2, AND 5HTTLPR DO NOT ALTER ECONOMIC
PREFERENCES FOR RISK, LOSS AVERSION, OR STRATEGIC USE

O'Dhaniel Mullette-gillman1,2, Edward McLaurin1, Kelly Schiabor1, Athy
Robinson1, Elizabeth Cirulli1, David Goldstein1, Michael Platt1, Pate Skene1,
Scott Huettel1; 1Duke University, 2National University of Singapore — Using a
test-replication split-sample design we examined how genetic variability
in the dopaminergic and serotonergic systems may account for individual variability in economic preferences (total sample N~1400). Our independent phenotypes – risk preference, loss aversion, and strategic use –
were derived from incentive-compatible economic tasks. Our genetic
polymorphisms were five variable number of tandem repeats (VNTRs)
from the dopaminergic and serotonergic systems: DAT1 (40bp VNTR),
DRD4 (48bp VNTR), MAOA (uVNTR), and 5HTTLPR (long/short) and
Stin2 on the SLC6A4 gene. Each VNTR has previously been reported to
modulate economic preferences with effect sizes of up to 20%. However,
prior studies have typically used fewer than 300 participants, which represent very small sample sizes for behavioral genetics work. Our first
sample (N ~700) found no relationships between risk preferences and
these polymorphisms, contrary to prior reports. Rather, we found evidence suggesting that DAT1 accounted for ~2% of loss aversion. In the
second, replication sample (N ~700 new participants) we found no relationships between loss aversion and DAT1, nor between any of the phenotypes and the five VNTRs (all p>0.05, and effect sizes less than 0.3%).
Thus, we conclude that these genes individually make very small contributions to economic preferences, consistent with the idea that such preferences reflect the collective activity of a large number of genes. Our
results indicate that examination of gene-decision relationships in small
samples, in contrast, could lead to overestimation of potential effect
sizes.

C109
LOADED REELS: NEAR-MISS OUTCOMES DURING GAMBLING DISTORT
FRONTAL-CORTICAL REWARD PROCESSING MECHANISM Scott

Oberg1, Matthew Tata1; 1University of Lethbridge — Electronic

gambling
games (EGMs) are extremely popular and account for billions of dollars
in gambling revenue. When players receive feedback concerning the outcome of their bets, that feedback is often more complex than a simple
win/lose. Such games commonly feature an artificially high occurrence
of “near-misses”. In such reward processing tasks, the frontal cortex integrates outcomes of behavioural choices over time. We tested how the
occurrence of near-misses distorts this integration process. In our paradigm, derived from the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT), the player repeatedly chose between bets with a negative long-run expected value
(disadvantageous), or a positive long-run expected value (advantageous). As in the IGT, players who learned the task biased their bet
choices toward the advantageous bet over time. Feedback on the task
consisted of three coloured “reels” combined that displayed one of three
options: a win (all reels the same colour), a near-miss (first two reels the
same colour), or a full miss (all reels different). Increasing near miss rates
above chance caused players to choose the disadvantageous bet more
often than when near misses occurred at chance levels. These findings
suggest that near misses distort a player’s ability to accurately identify
the risk associated with the game. To further investigate this distortion,
we recorded the Event-Related Potential associated with wins, losses
and near-misses. The feedback-related negativity associated with nearmisses was distorted relative to full losses suggesting that frontal-cortex
mechanisms of reward processing are disrupted by the elevated nearmiss outcomes that are common in EGMs.

C110
TEMPORAL CHARACTERISTICS OF DECISION-MAKING IN A DELAYDISCOUNTING TASK: AN EEG TIME-FREQUENCY PERSPECTIVE. Uku

Vainik1,2, Andero Uusberg1, Jüri Allik1; 1University of Tartu, Estonia, 2Montreal
Neurological Institute — Delay discounting (DD) portrays impulsive decision-making. Here, we used EEG to study changes in brain activity over

102

time before the actual decision in a DD task. Forty-six university students chose between smaller-immediate and larger-later rewards
(reward size: 1-61 vs 62 euros, delays: 0 vs 2,4,10 weeks, avg. response
time: 3s) and EEG was simultaneously acquired from 32 electrodes. The
analysis of event-related potentials replicated previously reported differences in P2, N2 and P3 amplitudes. A time-frequency analysis of the first
1000 ms post stimulus revealed that theta frequency (4-8 Hz) and alpha
frequency (8-13 Hz) levels systematically varied across conditions. In
particular, higher theta levels during the first 250 ms post stimulus predicted the choice of an immediate reward. Alpha levels increased
between 250-1000 ms post stimulus as the delays to larger-later rewards
increased, but only when the immediate reward was ultimately chosen.
These results suggest that: a) very fast theta-related processes might ultimately determine the preference for a smaller-sooner reward; b) alpha is
related to information processing about the delayed reward. Cortical
theta and cortical alpha signals have been hypothesized to reflect limbic
and cortical activity respectively. The present findings thus mirror
known limbic-cortical activation patterns seen in fMRI studies of DD,
with higher limbic activity predicting the choice of an immediate
reward, and cortical activity varying according to delay information.
Our results provide insight into the time course of these processes, suggesting that the limbic activity occurs before delay-related cortical activity. Therefore, fast limbic signals might determine impulsive decisions.

C111
MODULATION OF VENTRAL STRIATAL ACTIVITY BY SUBJECTIVE
COGNITIVE EFFORT. Ekaterina Dobryakova1, Elizabeth Tricomi1; 1Rutgers
University, The State University of New Jersey — Goal-directed behavior is
driven by reward desirability and by amount of effort required to obtain
the goal. Previous neuroimaging work points to a role of the ventral striatum (VS) in coding for reward value, but it is unclear how cognitive
effort required to achieve a goal may influence subjective reward value
and activity in the VS. Effort-discounting theory states that humans prefer low effort actions that result in high reward; this theory predicts
decreased VS activity for rewards acquired with more effort. However,
contrast theory states that an outcome of a more effortful action would
be preferred due to a greater contrast between the aversive action and
the rewarding nature of the outcome; this theory predicts increased VS
activity for rewards acquired with more effort. To test these alternative
hypotheses, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) as
participants engaged in feedback-based learning that required low (LE)
and high cognitive effort (HE) to obtain positive feedback while the
objective amount of information provided by feedback remained constant. No significant difference in accuracy was observed between the
effort conditions but all participants indicated that the HE condition was
more difficult. Increased VS activation was associated with feedback presented during the HE condition relative to the LE condition, when controlling for activation from corresponding control conditions for which
feedback was random, rather than based on performance. These results
suggest that increased cognitive effort produces corresponding increases
in VS activity, in line with the predictions made by contrast theory.

C112
PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF IMPAIRED DECISION MAKING
AMONG OLDER ADULTS Georgina Moreno1, Bryan Koestner1, Kenneth

Manzel1, David Warren1, Kristin Decorrevont1, Natalie Denburg1; 1University of
Iowa — Previous work in our laboratory has found evidence to support
the hypothesis that some seemingly healthy older adults have deficits in
real-world judgement and decision making abilities. Denburg et al.
(2007) demonstrated that a subset of older adults (approximately 3540%) perform disadvantageously on the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT), an
ecologically valid laboratory task of decision making task. This study
found that IGT performance predicted susceptibility to the influence of
deceptive advertising. That is, impaired decision makers were more vulnerable to deceptive advertising than unimpaired decision makers. In
the current study, we sought to further investigate the psychophysiological correlates of defective decision making among healthy older adults

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session C
through the use of an eye tracking apparatus. Eye movements were
recorded as participants were exposed to advertisements on a computer
screen with deceptive and non-deceptive claims drawn from cases
deemed problematic by the Federal Trade Commission. After viewing of
advertisements, a questionnaire was administered examining participants’ comprehension of claims and purchase intentions and subjects
were classified as either being deceived or not deceived. We found IGT
performance to be positively correlated with comprehension of claims.
Additionally, unimpaired decision makers were less likely to be
deceived than impaired decision makers. Furthermore, older adults that
evidenced being deceived spent more time in key regions of interest and
demonstrated more fixations in key regions of interest while viewing
deceptive advertisements. This research begins to identify a neuroscientific explanation as to why some older adults have a heightened vulnerability to falling prey to advertisement fraud.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

103

Poster Session D

Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

ATTENTION: Nonspatial
D1
ELECTRICAL NETWORK CORRELATES AND PREDICTORS OF
RESPONSIVENESS TO REPETITIVE THETA BURST MAGNETIC
STIMULATION (RTBS) Sviatlana Dubovik1, Radek Ptak1, Armin Schnider1,

Adrian Guggisberg1; 1Division of Neurorehabilitation University Hospital of
Geneva, Switzerland — Despite the emerging number of therapeutic rTBS

applications, the percent of responders remains moderate [1]. rTBS is
able to induce transitory neglect-like visual exploration behavior in
healthy participants when applied to the right posterior parietal cortex
(PPC) [2]. This ongoing study aims to understand the electrophysiological network differences associated with responsiveness to rTBS. Six
young healthy subjects underwent three sessions of inhibitory (30 Hz
bursts at 10Hz) rTBS of the right PPC, the frontal eye field (FEF), or sham
stimulation. Before and after stimulation, visual exploration of images
was recorded with an eye tracking device, and resting-state EEG recordings were obtained. The neural oscillations at each grey matter voxel
were reconstructed using an adaptive spatial filter. The functional connectivity (FC) of each voxel with the rest of the brain was calculated and
correlated with left-sided visual exploration. Alpha-band FC in the right
PPC was linearly correlated with left-sided visual exploration. rTBS
induced an increase of FC in the stimulated area at 10 Hz and in the left
PPC at 20, and 30 Hz, which correlated with the induced neglect effect.
Greater FC in the right PPC before stimulation was a reliable predictor
for the expected rTBS effect. Behavioral effects of rTBS are associated
with changes in electrical network interactions and can be predicted by
FC states before stimulation. Thus, FC analyses based on EEG might
help optimize therapeutic rTBS in individual patients.

D2
PAYING ATTENTION TO TIME Janice Snyder1, Anjan Chatterjee2; 1University

of British Columbia, 2University of Pennsylvania — Deploying attention to
time optimizes behaviour by allowing us to anticipate events. Directing
attention to a temporal interval when an impending target will occur
confers a processing advantage as measured by decreases in reaction
time (RT) and increases in accuracy. At present, we do not know if the
right hemisphere (RH) or the left hemisphere (LH) is biased to take
advantage of sub-second temporal cues in predicting the onset of future
events. The contribution of each hemisphere to temporal attention was
examined in two tasks in patients with diverse RH (n=10) and LH (n=13)
lesions and compared to the performance of age-matched controls. The
first task measured the ability to discriminate between short and long
cue durations (300 and 900 ms, respectively). The second task provided a
measure of temporal attention using a modified Posner-type cuing task
with cue duration (300 or 900 ms) accurately predicting (i.e., 80% valid)
target onset time and assessing cue benefits (i.e., facilitation effects:
invalid long RT – valid short RT). Cue discrimination was equivalent for
RH and LH lesions (81 and 72%, respectively) but reduced relative to the
age-matched controls (97%). Facilitation effects were equivalent for LH

104

lesions and age-matched control (51 and 48 ms, respectively) but compromised for RH lesions (7 ms). Interestingly, despite equivalent cue discrimination for RH and LH lesions, for RH lesions, cue discrimination
was positively correlated with facilitation. These results suggest that RH
damage affects people's ability to discriminate sub-second durations and
to use this information to anticipate events.

D3
CATEGORY-BASED ATTENTION CHANGES THE NEURAL REPRESENTATION
OF NATURAL SCENE CATEGORY Audrey Lustig1,2, Eamon Caddigan1,2, Li

Fei-Fei3, Diane Beck1,2; 1University of Illinois, 2Beckman Institute, 3Stanford
University — Visual discrimination can be improved by attending to spatial locations, simple features, and objects. Can humans also use a more
complex template to improve discrimination between categories of natural scenes? Previous work suggests that natural scene discrimination is
unimpeded by dual task conditions (Li et al., 2002); however, more
recent work shows that scene recognition is impaired under dual-task
conditions if the subjects are not expecting a scene (Cohen et al. , 2011).
These results suggest that scene recognition benefits from top-down
expectation. In the current study, we used MVPA to investigate whether
searching for a scene category changes the neural representation of that
scene category. Subjects viewed blocks of images from four scene categories (beaches, cities, highways and mountains) and counted the number
of images from a target category for each run. Although mean activation
in PPA was similar when a category was a target versus non-target,
decoding accuracy differed as a function of whether the category was a
target or non-target. Specifically, decoding accuracy for beaches
improved when beaches were the target category, whereas decoding
accuracy for mountains was lower when mountains were the target category. Surprisingly, searching for mountains increased the likelihood that
a mountain was classified as a beach, and searching for highways
increased the likelihood that a highway was classified as a city. These
results suggest that, for some scene categories, expectation improves the
representation of that category, whereas for other scene categories,
expectation may cause the representation to become too restrictive.

D4
POST-PERCEPTUAL PROCESSING OF TASK-IRRELEVANT INFORMATION
IS RELATED TO PERFORMANCE DURING THE ATTENTIONAL BLINK.
James Elliott1, Barry Giesbrecht1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara —

Our ability to attend to relevant information is both spatially and temporally limited. One example of the temporal limitation is the attentional
blink (AB), which is a decrease in identification accuracy of the second of
two targets (T1 and T2) presented 200-500 ms apart. Interestingly, previous studies have found that presenting task irrelevant visual and auditory information concurrently with T2 during the AB attenuates the
performance impairment. Here we examined the neural correlates of this
attenuation of the AB by measuring the neural response to a task-irrelevant probe (white circle) presented above T2 on half the trials. Behavioral performance was higher on probe-present trials, particularly
during the AB. Additionally, there was a main effect of T2-lag on the
peak latency of the probe-elicited P3 ERP, such that the latency during

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session D
the AB (m=485 ms, SEM = 11.03 ms) was later than outside the AB (m =
434 ms, SEM = 9.4 ms; p <.05). The mean amplitude of the probe-evoked
P3 was positively correlated with the increase in behavioral performance
during the AB (r = .33, p < .05). The behavioral results suggest that the
increase in performance caused by the concurrently presented probe was
more robust when attention is susceptible to failure. Furthermore, the
ERP results suggest that the performance improvement may be a result
of the post-perceptual processing of the probe, which could act as a cue
and thereby facilitate the processing of T2.

cortical networks, including the cingulo-opercular network, which is
important for attentional control. Under-recruitment of this region during incongruent trials in girls may suggest weaker attentional control
over emotionally salient stimuli in the presence of task-irrelevant stimuli. Thus, disruptions in emotional inhibition and regulation could confer vulnerability for the emergence of psychiatric symptoms in
adolescent girls.

D7
RE-ENVISIONING EMOTIONAL REAPPRAISAL: A NOVEL TASK FOR
EXPLORING COGNITIVE CONTROL OF EMOTION Larissa Borofsky1, Darby

D5
EFFECTS OF LATERALIZATION ON THE ATTENTIONAL BLINK FOR
Grabowecky1,
EMOTIONAL AND NON-EMOTIONAL STIMULI. Marcia

Saxbe1, Jonas Kaplan1, Xiao-Fei Yang1, Gayla Margolin1; 1University of
Southern California — The present study uses a novel approach to explore

Emotional events can attract and capture attention, and emotional faces
are particularly salient emotional stimuli. Faces, emotional or not, may
also be preferentially processed in the right hemisphere. We used a lateralized attentional blink paradigm to investigate whether presentation of
emotional faces to the left or right hemisphere differed in attentional
blink magnitude. Three different male faces expressing neutral, happy or
angry expressions were targets. One upright face target was neutral and
the second emotional, or both were neutral, while distractors were
selected from a different set of neutral inverted faces. A second group
performed a lateralized version of a standard attention blink task with
upright letters as targets and inverted letters as distractors. We hypothesized that letters, as linguistic stimuli, might be preferentially processed
in the left hemisphere. Stimuli for both tasks were presented centered at
3.72º from the fixation point on the left or the right. Participants were
pre-cued about the stimulus location, and we verified fixation throughout each trial with an eye-tracker, terminating any trial where the eyes
deviated vertically or horizontally more than ±2.14º from the fixation
point. We found that the magnitude of the attentional blink was reduced
for left-visual-field/right hemisphere presentations (LVF/RH) for both
face and letter stimuli, suggesting that the reduction in blink magnitude
for LVF/RH was not due to specialization for faces. It is possible that the
right hemisphere is better at processing rapid stimuli, or is better at discriminating upright and inverted stimuli than is the left hemisphere.

the behavioral and neural correlates of emotional reappraisal in adolescence. Emotional reappraisal is a cognitive strategy for regulating emotions where an initial emotional reaction is consciously reevaluated and
changed. Difficulties with reappraisal are associated with interpersonal
problems and decreased well-being. Previous studies of emotional reappraisal have used an extensive training method for eliciting reappraisals.
Although this approach has been found effective with adults, it is time
consuming and may be problematic with adolescents who have less cognitive maturity. This study uses a novel “prompted reappraisal” task in
which participants observe emotional images and then view captions
that either maintain or change the emotional interpretation of a scene.
This task requires only brief training (to familiarize the subject with the
task) and reduces the cognitive demands on the subject. This task may
also help dissociate two important components of reappraisal, because it
targets the ability to disengage from an emotion, but does not require the
participant to generate a novel appraisal. The pilot sample included 14
youth (6 female), ages 15 to 18. Behavioral results indicate that the task
successfully manipulated participants’ emotional reactions to the stimuli. In addition, brain regions showing relative signal increases during
the reappraisal conditions included the medial prefrontal cortex and
regions showing decreased signal included the insula, consistent with
prior evidence from standard reappraisal tasks. Taken together, these
results indicate that this novel task may contribute an important new
approach to research on reappraisal.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions

D8
PERSUASION IS CHARACTERIZED BY SIMULTANEOUS LIMBIC AND
PREFRONTAL ACTIVATION Ian Ramsay1, Marco Yzer2, Monica Luciana1,

Laura Ortega1, Chika Nwosu1, Satoru Suzuki1; 1Northwestern University —

D6
GENDER DIFFERENCES IN THE NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF EMOTIONAL
CONFLICT DURING ADOLESCENCE Anita Cservenka1, Madison L. Stroup1,

Khadiya J. Chinnarath1, Bonnie J. Nagel1; 1Oregon Health & Science
University — Adolescence is a developmental period characterized by
heightened emotional reactivity and immature top-down executive control, which may underlie vulnerabilities associated with the emergence
of psychiatric disorders during this time. In particular, gender differences in brain functioning may contribute to gender-specific vulnerabilities to psychopathology seen during adolescence. Thus, the goal of the
current study was to investigate adolescent gender differences in brain
functioning during functional magnetic resonance imaging of an emotional processing task requiring inhibitory control (Etkin at al., 2006).
During the task, participants were required to indicate the emotion of
facial expressions while disregarding emotion-congruent and incongruent words printed across the faces. In order to examine gender differences in emotional inhibition, 28 age-matched participants were divided
into adolescent girls (n=16) and boys (n=12) (mean age=13.37±.31). No
gender differences in task performance were present. Using an analysis
of covariance, covarying for pubertal status, we found that girls had
greater brain activity in the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC)/precuneus
during correct congruent vs. incongruent trials compared to boys
(p<0.05, voxel/clusterwise corrected). On average, girls showed significantly weaker activity in the PCC/precuneus during incongruent trials,
a distinction not seen in boys. The precuneus/PCC is a major hub for

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Kathleen Vohs3, Angus MacDonald1; 1Department of Psychology, University of
Minnesota, 2School of Journalism and Mass Communication, University of
Minnesota, 3Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota — Theo-

ries of health message communication posit that both affective and executive processes are important for successful behavior change. However,
it remains unclear how the brain networks responsible for these processes cooperate while viewing persuasive messages. In this study, 65
adolescents (ages 15 to 19) made real-time affective appraisals in
response to 10 anti-drug public service announcements (PSAs) previously found to be strongly convincing, 10 found to be weakly convincing, and 10 non-drug related advertisements, during an fMRI scan.
Results showed that while both strong and weak anti-drug PSAs elicited
arousal-related brain activity in limbic (amygdala, nucleus accumbens,
OFC) and medial prefrontal brain regions, strong compared to weak
anti-drug PSAs elicited arousal-related activity in lateral prefrontal cortical regions associated with control (IFG, MFG). A functional connectivity
analysis also showed greater functional co-activation between amygdala
and the lateral prefrontal cortex during strong compared to weak antidrug PSAs. These findings suggest that strongly persuasive messages
elicit increased simultaneous activation in brain regions responsible for
emotional arousal and executive control.

105

Poster Session D — Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

D9
EXECUTIVE CONTROL OF EMOTIONAL MEMORY: AFFECTIVE MNEMONIC
SELECTION AND INHIBITION Crystal Reeck1, Kevin S. LaBar1; 1Duke
University — The flexible nature of memory enables it to conform to an
organism’s goals in order to promote adaptive behavior. During
retrieval, executive control of memory is vital to ensuring appropriate,
goal-relevant memories are selected and that inappropriate, competing
memories are inhibited. This suppression results in enduring impairment of the inhibited mnemonic representation, and the selection processes result in lasting enhancement of practiced memories. Although
many aspects of the processes by which this selection and inhibition
occur have been illuminated, it remains unclear whether these same processes are modulated by the affective content of the memories being targeted. To investigate the effects of executive control processes on
affective mnemonic representations, a retrieval-induced forgetting paradigm was adapted to include both affectively negative and neutral
words. Participants encoded neutral cue words and affectively negative
or neutral associates. Following initial encoding, participants selectively
retrieved a subset of these associates multiple times. During this retrieval
practice phase numerous executive processes mobilize to enable the
selection of the specific memory cued and inhibit the retrieval of competing memories. The consequences of these executive processes were
examined on a final memory test in which recall for all studied associates
was probed. Behavioral analyses indicated that both affectively neutral
and negative mnemonic representations experienced similar levels of
enhancement and impairment following selective retrieval, demonstrating the susceptibility of affectively salient memories to executive control
processes. Prefrontal control regions likely support these mnemonic control processes, although affect may modulate the neural mechanisms
supporting executive control in memory.

D10
WHEN MY ERRORS ARE YOUR PAIN: EFFECTS OF AGENCY ON PAIN
EMPATHY Leonie Koban1,2, Corrado Corradi-Dell'Acqua1,2, Patrik

Vuilleumier1,2; 1Neuroscience Center, University of Geneva, 2Swiss Center for
Affective Sciences — A growing body of evidence suggests that humans’
ability to empathize with others’ pain is instantiated in those neural
structures, such as the anterior cingulate (ACC) and insular (AI) cortex,
which are involved in the direct experience of pain. On the other hand
individuals might, deliberately or not, cause pain to others, but the question of how this causal agency influences the neural underpinnings of
pain empathy has not been addressed yet. In an event-related fMRI
experiment, participants played a visual judgment task in turns with a
friend placed outside the scanner. Errors always led to monetary losses
to both players but, in half of the erroneous trials, an additional painful
stimulation was applied to the friend. This allowed to investigate the
neural underpinnings of self- vs. other-generated errors (factor:
AGENCY) which, in turn, might yield to vicarious experience of a painful vs. painless heat (factor: PAIN). Behaviorally, self-caused painful
errors were associated with increased guilt and higher pain ratings than
other-caused painful errors. Functional imaging results showed, consistently with previous studies, a main effect for PAIN, with enhanced
activity in ACC and AI for painful (rather than painless) errors. Critically, these regions were also associated with a significant
PAIN*AGENCY interaction, reflecting increased pain-related activations
when errors were caused by oneself. We provide unprecedented evidence of top-down influences of agency on empathy which might be
well suited to study abnormal empathic or moral emotions in clinical
populations such as psychopathy and depression.

D11
GENERATING BROAD SEMANTIC ASSOCIATIONS INCREASES POSITIVE
MOOD AND ACTIVATES THE RIGHT PREFRONTAL CORTEX Tad Brunye1,2,

Stephanie Gagnon1,2, Caroline Mahoney1,2, Holly Taylor1; 1Tufts University,
U.S. Army NSRDEC — Recent theory proposes a reciprocal relationship

2

between cortical networks linking mood and associative processes [Bar,

106

M. (2009). Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13, 456-463.]. Though several
studies demonstrate that positive mood can increase the breadth of associative processing, we tested the reciprocal prediction: that associative
processing should increase positive mood. Three experiments tested this
prediction. Study 1 measured mood change as a function of associative
strength between cues and generated free associates; the generation of
relatively broad associates, but not the valence of the produced associate,
predicted more positive moods. Study 2 measured mood change as a
function of generating associates within narrow versus broad word contexts; results indicated more positive moods in response to the relatively
broad contexts. Finally, Study 3 used functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) to monitor prefrontal cortical activation during an association task designed to elicit word associations in response to broad versus
narrow contexts. Results indicated right versus left hemisphere prefrontal activation in response to generating words in broad versus narrow
contexts, respectively. Overall, our findings carry implications for the
reciprocal relationship between the prefrontal cortex and medial temporal lobe, and may hold promise for enhancing positive mood in depression and other clinical and applied contexts.

D12
YOUTH WITH DISRUPTIVE BEHAVIOR DISORDERS AND CALLOUSUNEMOTIONAL TRAITS SHOW IMPAIRED NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF
EXPECTED VALUE Stuart White1, Katherine Fowler2, Stephen Sinclair1,

Daniel Pine1, James Blair1; 1National Institute of Mental Health/NIH, 2Centers
for Disease Control — Background: In previous work, we have shown that
youth with Disruptive Behavior Disorders (DBD: Conduct Disorder and
Oppositional Defiant Disorder) and callous-unemotional (CU: reduced
guilt and empathy) traits show impaired decision-making that is coupled with dysfunctional responding within the amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC; Finger et al., 2008). However, this work has not
distinguished between dysfunction during decision-making vs. feedback, nor has it examined decision-making with respect to environmental reinforcements (e.g., appetitive stimuli, physical threats, or
contamination threats). Methods: Using a novel affective decision-making paradigm, fMRIs were conducted on15 youth with DBD+CU and 15
matched controls. Results: Regions showing a diagnosis by choice by
emotion interaction included right orbital frontal cortex, right middle
frontal gyrus, two areas in the right insula, left cingulate cortex, left caudate and thalamus. When making poor decisions (choosing to open disgust/threat doors, choosing not to open positive doors), healthy controls
showed increased activation relative to DBD+CU youth. Contrary to predictions, dysfunction during feedback was not observed. Conclusions:
Youth with DBD+CU traits do not appear to be generating the same
warning signaling that the healthy youth do when choosing to make
poor decisions. These data support previous suggestions that the neural
representation of expected value is disrupted in youth with DBD+CU.
Disclosures: None.

D13
THE FRACTAL DIVIDE - WHEN COMPLEXITY MATTERS: AFFECTIVE &
COGNITIVE RESPONSES TO MUSIC Sherri Novis1, Patrick CM Wong1;
1Northwestern University — Based

on cross-disciplinary work, we designed
a series of experiments to test the hypothesis that the effects of optimal
musical complexity can be measured across higher order systems, such
as perception, emotion, and cognition. Specifically, we predicted that
when the perception of melodicity peaks (optimal complexity), emotion
and memory will peak as well. In addition, we predicted the optimal
complexity effect would remain stable, while the effects of non-optimal
complexity would be sensitive to repeated listening. In two experiments,
we used fractal (1/f^B ) tone sequences to compare the effects of objective complexity (fractal value B) on user ratings of perception (subjective
complexity and melodicity), emotion (preference and mood) and cognition (memory), while also controlling for the effects of timbre (piano and
violin) and item-specific pitch patterns (seqA and seqB). We then
repeated the procedure five times within a 10-day period (session 1-5).
Results demonstrated all measures peaked when fractal values were

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session D
moderately complex, and those peaks remained stable throughout
repeated exposure. Most notably, mood and memory reached unsurpassed peaks after a single exposure and all significant sensitivities to
repeated exposure occurred outside of the optimal fractal value range.
Findings support the hypothesis that the CNS demonstrates a domain
general sensitivity to a particular range of acoustic complexity, and that
sensitivity contributes to the perception of music and concurrent emotional and cognitive responses. Results are discussed in terms of the universal appeal of music, and a potential evolutionary adaptation for
acquisition of important sound structures.

D14
THE INFLUENCE OF PSYCHOPATHIC TRAITS ON THE ULTIMATUM TASK

Sarah Brislin1, Stuart White1, Kayla Pope1, Stephen Sinclair1, R.J.R. Blair1;
1
Unit on Affective Cognitive Neuroscience, National Institue of Mental Health,
NIH — Background: Previous research has shown increased anterior
insula responses to unfair offers during social interactions (Sanfey et al.,
2003) and increased striatal activation when punishing unfair actors
(Quervian et al., 2004). The current study examined the impact of psychopathic traits on these responses. Methods: Healthy adults completed
a Ultimatum task during fMRI scanning. In this task, the participant
played with a computer “partner.” The partner offered splits of a common pot of money with the participant. The offers were either an even
split or varying degrees of unfair offer. Participants could accept the
offer or choose to punish the other player at a cost to themselves which
increased with the amount of punishment. Results: Increasingly unfair
offers were associated with significantly increased responses within
bilateral anterior insula, dorsomedial prefrontal cortex and bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Increased allocations of punishment to the
other were associated with increased activity within the caudate but
decreased activity within ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Conclusions:
Consistent with previous work, increasingly unfair offers were associated with increasing bilateral insula activation and increasing punishment of unfair offers was associated with increasing caudate activity.
The modulation of the presence of increasing psychopathic traits on
these responses will be discussed. References: Sanfey. A.G., Rillinget al
(2003). Science, 300, 1755-1758. De Quervian, D.J.F., et al (2004). Science,
305, 1254-1258.

D15
EARLY VISUAL PERCEPTION IS SHAPED BY ATTENTION CONTROL AND
AFFECTIVE STATE: EVIDENCE FROM PSYCHOPHYSICS AND ERPS
Valentina Rossi1, Gilles Pourtois1; 1Ghent University — Recent neurophysio-

logical findings suggest that not only selective attention, but also affective state may gate early sensory processing in human V1. In a series of
behavioral and ERP studies we tested (i) whether early gain control
effects may be associated with a perceptual change in the spatial encoding of the stimulus; (ii) whether attention vs. emotion control mechanisms lead to comparable changes in perception. Healthy participants
were tested using a dual task, enabling a parametric modulation of perceptual load for the primary task at fixation, while accuracy for the spatial encoding of visual stimuli shown at different locations in the upper
visual field (UVF) was measured (secondary task). Results show a
decrease of accuracy (i.e. regression toward the perceived mean location
in the UVF) when either load at fixation increases (Experiment 1) or state
anxiety was transiently enhanced (Experiment 2). Control analyses confirmed that these effects were not explained by differential eye movements towards the UVF. Hence, attention and affect lead to similar
changes in visuo-spatial perceptual abilities. Additional ERP results
focusing on the striate C1 component (generated in V1) corroborate the
assumption that attention and affective state both contribute to an early
gating of sensory processing. Altogether, these findings suggest that
load and affect-dependent modulations of the C1 may reflect a change in
the spatial encoding of the stimulus during early sensory processing in
V1. These results are discussed against the notion of concurrent attentional and emotional control mechanisms exerting modulatory effects in
V1 early on following stimulus onset.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Other
D16
PASS ME THE BALL! AN FMRI STUDY ON THE NEURAL BASIS OF ACTION
UNDERSTANDING Federica Riva1,2, Brent Vander Wyk1, Kevin Pelphrey1;
1

Yale University, 2University of Milano-Bicocca, Italy — Unlike many previous

studies of action perception, the aim of this study was to investigate
action processing employing a more naturalistic, interactive paradigm.
The fMRI experiment consisted of a balltossing game in which participants viewed video-clips of two players, one of which either asked for a
ball (bid) or performed a simple up-and-down arm motion (control),
either toward the participant (toward) or toward each other (away). Participants pressed a button to throw the ball to a player of their choice
whenever a toward-condition was presented. Comparison of the bidtoward with the motion-toward condition displayed activation in the
right STS (Superior Temporal Sulcus), confirming previous findings on
the role of this region in action comprehension (Vander Wyk, 2009). Conversely, no significant differences were discovered between the awayconditions, showing the importance of participating in the action. The
interaction of the two main factors (direction and action type) resulted in
activation of the right Precentral Gyrus (BA6), an area belonging to the
putative MNS (Mirror Neuron System) (Keysers, 2010), also involved in
action processing. Lastly, the default-mode network, a set of regions
usually less active with high demand tasks (Mason,2007), was unexpectedly more de-activated in the motion-toward than in the bid-toward
condition. We suggest simple motion perception requires greater mental
load to respond since it does not imply a request. The greater activation
in STS and Precentral Gyrus in response to the bid-toward condition
provides evidence of the importance of employing naturalistic paradigms in the study of social processes like action understanding.

D17
NICOTINE DECREASED ACTIVATION IN THE BRAIN REGIONS INVOLVED IN
Dumas1,
EMOTIONAL PROCESSING IN NON-SMOKING ADULTS Julie

Kelly Carstens1, Alexandra Potter1; 1University of Vermont — Nicotine

has
been implicated in mood regulation. Additionally, a primary motivator
of tobacco use is the alleviation of negative affect. However, little is
known about how nicotine regulates emotional processing in the brain.
This study examined the effects of nicotine administration on the brain
circuitry involved in emotional processing in normal, healthy, nonsmoking adults using functional MRI. Brain activation was examined during
the viewing of neutral, positive, and negatively-valenced images while
subjects made pleasantness ratings of each picture on two study days.
One day subjects wore a 7 mg nicotine patch for 45 minutes and the
other day participants wore a matching placebo patch. During the viewing of neutral emotional images, nicotine modulated a broad network of
brain regions. Specifically, compared to placebo, nicotine increased activation in the precuneus, parahippocampal gyrus, and occipital lobe, but
decreased activation in the anterior cingulate, precentral gyrus, and middle frontal gyrus. Nicotine’s modulation of brain regions was different
when subjects made pleasant and unpleasant ratings for the pictures.
Specifically, nicotine decreased activation in the posterior cingulate and
amygdala for pleasant and unpleasant pictures relative to neutrallyrated pictures. These data suggested that nicotinic stimulation caused a
modification in the neural circuitry involved the viewing of visually
complex pictures and in particular modulated in the posterior cingulate
which has been shown to be involved in processing emotional information. These data suggest a model of emotional neurobiology that is sensitive to nicotinic stimulation.

D18
THINKING IN PATTERNS: USING MULTI-VOXEL PATTERN ANALYSES TO
FIND NEURAL CORRELATES OF MORAL JUDGMENT IN NEUROTYPICAL
AND ASD POPULATIONS Jorie Koster-Hale1, Rebecca Saxe1, Liane Young2;

1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Boston College — Actions
are
judged morally wrong if the actor intended to cause harm, but not if the

107

Poster Session D — Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
same outcome was caused accidentally. This difference between intentional and accidental harm depends on thinking about another person’s
thoughts, a cognitive function associated with a specific and selective
group of brain regions (the ‘Theory of Mind network’), and especially
one region, the right temporo-parietal junction (RTPJ). Prior research has
found that (i) interfering with activity in the RTPJ, via transcranial magnetic stimulation, can shift moral judgments away from reliance on
beliefs (Young et al 2010), and (ii) high-functioning individuals with
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) rely significantly less on beliefs, for
moral judgments, than matched neurotypical (NT) control participants
(Moran et al 2011). Puzzlingly, however, the average response in Theory
of Mind regions is not different for intentional versus accidental harmful
actions, in NT or ASD participants. Using Multi-Voxel Pattern Analyses
(MVPA), we find that RTPJ – and not other regions in the Theory of
Mind network – shows sensitivity in the pattern, but not magnitude, of
response to the difference between intentional and accidental Harms.
Second, we find that individual differences in pattern classification predict individual differences in behavior: individuals with more discriminable neural patterns showed a larger difference in moral judgments of
accidental versus intentional harms. Finally, we find that the difference
between intentional and accidental harms is not encoded in the voxelwise pattern in participants with ASD, mirroring their moral judgments.

D19
DISSOCIATIVE REDUCTION OF INTRINSIC PREFRONTAL-STRIATAL
CONNECTIVITY IN APATHETIC AND DEPRESSIVE STATE Shuhei
Yamaguchi1, Chizuko Hamada1, Keiichi Onoda1; 1Shimane University — Apa-

thy is defined as reduced motivation to engage in activities, and often
occurs in various neurological and psychiatric disorders. Depression is
also observed commonly in those diseases, and shares some psychiatric
features with apathy. However, it is not well understood what kind of
neural mechanisms differentially underlie apathy and depression. We
studied the difference in resting-state network connectivity measured by
functional MRI between apathetic and depressive state in seventy-four
healthy subjects. Apathetic and depressive states were assessed using
the self-rating apathy scale and Zung’s depression scale, respectively.
Using the independent component analysis we identified brain networks
involving the striatum at first. Patterns of resting-state brain connectivity
between striatum and other brain regions were extracted as functions of
apathy and depression. Namely, modulation of connectivity by apathy
was analyzed using the depression score as a covariate, and the apathy
score was used for the analysis of depression. We found differential
reductions of neural connectivity of the striatum with several regions of
the prefrontal cortex by apathy and depression. Apathy score was
inversely correlated with the strength of striatal connectivity with anterior part of the cingulate cortex and lateral orbitofrontal cortex, whereas
depression score showed negative correlation with the connectivity with
the middle prefrontal gyrus and dorsal part of medial prefrontal cortex.
These results indicate that apathy was related to decrease of neural connectivity in ventro-medial prefrontal and striate network. This network
is distinct from the dorsal-lateral prefrontal and striate network, whose
impairment is associated with depressive state.

D20
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF EMOTION REGULATION IN
PRESCHOOLERS: AN EXAMINATION OF THE EFFECTS OF SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS Kathleen Kelsey1, Nicolas Chevalier2, Sandra Wiebe3,

Kimberly Andrews Espy1,4; 1University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 2University of
Colorado-Boulder, 3University of Alberta, 4University of Oregon — Children’s
ability to regulate their emotions in response to the environment is a key
developmental process required for both scholastic and interpersonal
success. Disparities in cognitive control, highly involved in emotion regulation, are common among low SES children but research addressing
underlying neural deficits is sparse. The goal of the present study was to
examine differences in neurophsyiological response to frustration using
Event Related Potentials (ERPs) across high and low SES children. Thirty
children (M=5.66 years; SD=0.26), 43% of whom qualified for free/

108

reduced price lunch, completed a task designed to induce frustration
through negative feedback on 50% of trials despite accurate performance
(i.e. rigged). A spatial-temporal Principle Components Analysis revealed
13 spatial and 12 temporal factors accounting for 91% of the variance in
ERPs to feedback. A negative going late slow wave at fronto-central
leads differed as a function of SES, F(1,28)=15.77, p=0005. A significant
neural differentiation between fair and rigged trials was present for high
SES children t(1,16)=4.11, p=.0008 but not for low SES children
t(1,12)=1.54, n.s. Although the negativity was observed only for rigged
trials among high SES children, low SES children demonstrated the same
negative deflection for both trial types. Findings from the present study
suggest children from high and low SES backgrounds differ in their neural response to stress. Implications of neurophysiological differences will
be discussed in terms of cognitive and neural efficiency.

D21
ALLELE SPECIFIC DNA METHYLATION OF OXYTOCIN RECEPTOR GENE
PREDICTS BRAIN RESPONSE TO AMBIGUOUS SOCIAL STIMULI Allison

Jack1, Jessica J. Connelly1, James P. Morris1; 1University of Virginia — Oxyto-

cin plays an important role in a variety of social perceptual and affiliative processes. A common single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
variant in the oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR), rs2254298 (G>A), has been
associated with differences in social phenotype and neural endophenotype in both typical and clinical populations. DNA methylation in the
first intron of OXTR is increased in autism spectrum disorder, a well
known neurodevelopmental condition involving social phenotype.
Given these data and the hypothesis that complex disease is a manifestation of extreme typical phenotype, we predicted that assessing the methylation profile of OXTR in the context of rs2254298 in typicals would
allow for a more robust characterization of individual differences in
social perception. Forty-two healthy adults participated in an fMRI
paradgim using classic Heider and Simmel animations in which geometric shapes move and interact in ways that imply animacy. OXTR methylation and rs2254298 genotype interacted to predict participants’
response to these ambiguous social stimuli in a number of brain regions
important for mentalizing, including superior temporal sulcus, temporal
pole, and paracingulate. In particular, carriers of the G allele with greater
methylation demonstrated a more effortful, less efficient response to
these stimuli. Previously, the GG type has been implicated as at risk for a
variety of negative social outcomes, including the development of
autism spectrum conditions. However, our data suggest that it is not
purely the genotype that confers risk in social-perceptual and mentalizing processes, but the interaction of the genotype with degree of OXTR
methylation

D22
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS IN RESPONSE TO EMOTIONAL FACES
AMONG INDIVIDUALS WITH DIFFERING POLITICAL ATTITUDES John
Garza1, Karl Giuseffi1, Kevin Smith1, John Hibbing1, Kimberly Andrews Espy1,2;
1
University of Nebraska, Lincoln, 2University of Oregon — Recent studies have

found that individuals who hold differing political attitudes (i.e., conservative vs. liberal) can also differ in basic social cognitive processing. For
example, emotionally ambiguous face stimuli are rated as displaying
threatening emotions more frequently among Republican sympathizers
(Vigil, 2010), and gaze cue effects are attenuated among those with conservative ideologies relative to their liberal counterparts (Dodd, Hibbing,
& Smith, 2011). We utilized ERP to explore the electrophysiological analogues of these potential differences in emotional face processing. Conservative and liberal leaning participants performed an emotion
discrimination task while EEG was recorded. Specifically, participants
made a forced choice button-box response of angry, disgust, fearful, or
happy response to faces expressing these four emotions in addition to
neutral faces. In general, early visual components discriminated among
the different emotions and neutral facial expressions. The N1 amplitude
was more negative in response to negative emotions relative to happy
and neutral, and the latency was earlier to happy faces compared to all
other expressions. Preliminary analyses comparing political ideologies

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session D
revealed that the latency of the P2 in response to fearful faces was later
for conservatives relative to liberals, while it was later for liberal individuals in response to disgust faces. A late (600 msec), post-stimulus offset
positivity located over posterior regions of the scalp discriminated
between the political ideologies in response to disgust faces, such that
the peak amplitude was greater for conservatives relative to liberals.
These results are explored further with continuous measures of political
ideology and implications are discussed.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development &
aging
D24
THERAPEUTIC POTENTIAL OF ESTRADIOL IN ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE:
RESULTS OF A PLACEBO-CONTROLLED, DOUBLE-BLIND, PARALLELGROUP DESIGN, INTERVENTION TRIAL Whitney Wharton1, Laura Baker2,

Carey Gleason1, Maritza Dowling1, Jodi Barnet1, Sterling Johnson1, Cynthia
Carlsson1, Suzanne Craft2, Sanjay Asthana1; 1University of Wisconsin Madison,
Alzheimer's disease Research Center, 2University of Washington, School of
Medicine, Seattle, Alzheimer's disease Research Center — We aimed to conduct a placebo-controlled, double-blind, parallel-group design intervention study to evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of hormone therapy (HT)
in postmenopausal women with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease
(AD). The trial was designed to evaluate the dose-dependent effects of
transdermal 17-? estradiol Provera©, unopposed and opposed with
medroxyprogesterone (MPA), for 12 months in 43 postmenopausal
women with AD. Participants were assessed using cognitive and mood
measures at baseline, months 1, 3, 6, and 12 of treatment and eight weeks
post treatment (month 15). The dropout rate was 48.8% across 12
months. As a result of the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) and anticipated increased attrition, the protocol was modified such that analyses
would be conducted at time points where attrition was less than 30%.
Sensitivity analyses concluded that results are robust and reliable up to
month 3 of treatment. Results show that 3 months of HT, particularly
opposed HT, elicits cognitive benefits across multiple cognitive domains,
including visual recent memory, verbal memory, semantic memory and
language in postmenopausal women with AD. Moreover, some benefits
correlate to increases in estrogen levels. Though there were no differences in mood between opposed vs. unopposed HT groups, participants
in the overall treatment group (any HT) exhibited a subjective worsening
of mood compared to participants in the placebo group. Results indicate
that short-term transdermal estradiol administration enhances aspects of
memory in women with AD. Furthermore, cognitive benefits were
observed even in the presence of subtle mood complaints.

D25
GENETIC VARIATION MODULATES THE EFFECT OF EXECUTIVE ATTENTION
TRAINING IN PRESCHOOL CHILDREN M Rosario Rueda1, Lina M.
Cómbita1, Pedro M. Paz-Alonso2, J. Paul Pozuelos1, Alicia Abundis1;
Universidad de Granada, 2BCBL — Recent research has provided evidence

1

that genetic variation is associated with brain structure and function as
well as people's cognitive skills. Also, allelic variants of DA-related
genes interact with environmental variables to predict aspects of behavior related to self-regulation. We tested Gene x Environmental interactions in the context of an intervention to improve executive control in a
group (n=96) of preschoolers. Children were randomly assigned to
receive either 8-sessions of computer-based attention training or an
equally long control intervention. Genotypes on various DA-related
genes (DRD4, DAT1 and COMT) were obtained for each participant. The
effect of intervention was evaluated in a set of measures including working memory span, crystallized and fluid intelligence, attention (child
ANT task), and emotion-regulation tasks. Intervention was found to produce a significant increase on fluid intelligence. However, this effect was
modulated by genetic variation on the DAT1 and COMT genes. The
effect of training was significant only for children carrying the 10-repeat

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

variation of the DAT1 gene. Likewise, improvement on fluid intelligence
was significantly larger for children carrying the Met variation of the
COMT gene. Our data are consistent with previous research showing
that particular genetic variations make the individual more susceptible
to the influence of experience. Interestingly, variations showing the
greater susceptibility to intervention are those associated to higher risk
for pathologies involving attention and executive control. Susceptibility
to experience provides an opportunity to promote attention control and
self-regulation by means of appropriate educational interventions.

D26
ENHANCED EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING SKILLS IN CHILDREN AND
ADULTS WITH MUSICAL TRAINING Jennifer Zuk1, Christopher Benjamin1,

Arnold Kenyon1, Nadine Gaab1,2,3; 1Laboratories of Cognitive Neuroscience,
Children's Hospital Boston, 2Harvard Medical School, 3Harvard Graduate
School of Education — Executive functions (EF) are cognitive capacities
that allow for purposeful, self-regulated behavior. EF skills strongly correlate with academic abilities and have been shown to be more indicative
of school readiness in children than measures of intelligence. Several
extracurricular activities have been shown to improve EF skills. To date,
the relationship between the extracurricular musical training and EF
ability remains unclear. Musical training has been linked to greater academic skills, such as reading ability. Thus, we hypothesized that EF is
one of the mechanisms that facilitates the connection between musical
training and academic achievement. 27 children and 30 adults with and
without extensive musical training were assessed on a standardized battery of EF measures (D-KEFS). No differences in age, IQ, or socio-economic status were observed between the groups. Adult musicians
compared to nonmusicians showed better performance on Backward
Digit Span and Verbal Fluency. Children with musical training showed
better performance on Inhibition, Verbal Fluency and Rule Switching
compared to nonmusicians. Additionally, neural correlates of EF (rule
representation and task-switching) were examined with fMRI. Children
with musical training compared to nonmusicians demonstrate significantly greater activation in prefrontal cortices (preSMA/SMA) during
the EF task. Overall we conclude that children and adults with musical
training show enhanced EF skills, and children further show enhanced
brain activity in bilateral prefrontal cortices during an EF task. These
results support our working hypothesis that musical training may support or facilitate the development and maintenance of EF skills which
then could lead to improved academic abilities.

D27
RELATING BEHAVIORAL AND ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL INDICES OF
RESPONSE INHIBITION AND ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT IN YOUNG
CHILDREN: A DEVELOPMENTAL ERP STUDY Jennie K. Grammer1, Melisa

Carrasco1, William Gehring1, Frederick Morrison1; 1University of Michigan —

Evidence for relations between children’s executive functions (EF) and
academic achievement has accumulated steadily in recent years. For
example, one component of EF – response inhibition – has been identified as a unique predictor of math achievement and literacy in kindergarten. Although there is also a growing literature describing the
electrophysiological correlates of the development of response inhibition
using event-related potentials (ERPs), and error related negativity (ERN)
more specifically, little is known about linkages between these indices of
EF and children’s achievement. In this presentation, findings from a
school-based investigation, including measures of academic achievement and ERP data drawn from a Go/No-Go task collected in the elementary school setting, will be presented. Results from a preliminary
sample of 32 pre-Kindergarten, Kindergarten, and First-Grade children
(mean age = 75.6 months), revealed the presence of the ERN on error trials in the Go/No-Go task. Considering the linkages between the ERN
and behavioral measures within task, relations were identified between
?ERN (the difference between amplitude on error and correct trials) and
children’s accuracy (r = .37, p < .05). In addition, correlations were also
found between literacy performance and ?ERN (r = -.55, p < .05). In con-

109

Poster Session D — Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
trast, behavioral measures including accuracy on the Go/No-Go task
were linked to children’s math achievement (r = -.44, p < .05). These and
other trends in the relations between behavioral and electrophysiological
indices of EF and achievement will be discussed.

D28
IN VIVO 1H MR SPECTROSCOPY IN YOUNG ADULTS WITH MARIJUANA
DEPENDENCE Monica Luciana1, Ryan Muetzel1, Malgorzata Marjan'ska1,

Mary Petrosko1, Paul Collins1, Edward Auerbach1, Romain Valabrègue2, Kelvin
Lim1; 1University of Minnesota, 2CRICM (CENIR), Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière —

Adolescence is a sensitive period of brain development within which
substance use can have devastating consequences. For instance, adolescent marijuana use has been associated with adverse behavioral and
physiological effects. Yet, relatively little is known about how marijuana
impacts brain metabolism. Using MR-spectroscopy directed at the striatal region, we examined major metabolites in daily users versus controls with a focus on glutamate. Twenty-seven marijuana users (11F,
mean age 19.5 years) and 26 non-using controls (16F, mean age 19.3
years) were studied. Inclusion criteria for users consisted of 5 days per
week of reported use, and use initiation before age 17. Participants completed neurocognitive testing and MR spectroscopy on a 3 tesla MRI system. MR-spectra were obtained in the right basal ganglia using a single
voxel and were processed using both in-house and commercially available software. Estimates of metabolite concentrations were quantified
relative to total creatine for glutamate+glutamine (Glx), total choline,
myo-inositol, and N-acetylaspartate. Users had limited psychopathology, outside of substance use disorders, as assessed by in-person clinical
interviews. Users showed significantly lower Glx/tCr compared to controls, independent of age, sex, and alcohol use. Sex interacted with this
pattern. Female users had lower estimated concentrations of Glx/tCr
than female controls and male users. No other group differences were
found. These data are consistent with the literature in suggesting that
heavy early-onset marijuana use is associated with abnormalities in excitatory neurotransmitter signaling systems implicated in addiction and
further suggest that striatal dysfunction, particularly in females, should
be a target of further investigation.

D29
EFFECTIVE NEURAL MARKERS FOR WORKING MEMORY DECLINE:
DIFFERENTIATIONS BETWEEN MCI AND NORMAL OLDER ADULTS Juan

Li1, Jing Yu1, Lucas Broster2, Charles Smith3,4,5, Gregory Jicha3,4, Yang
Jiang2,4,5; 1Key laboratory of Mental Health, Institute of Psychology , Chinese
Academy of Sciences, 2Department of Behavioral Science, University of
Kentucky College of Medicine, 3Department of Neurology, University of
Kentucky College of Medicine, 4Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of
Kentucky College of Medicine, 5Magnetic Resonance Imaging and
Spectroscopy Center — Introduction:To determine whether a match-to-

sample ERP is an effective neural marker for differentiating Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) from normal older adults. Methods: Eighteen
Normal, 16 MCI and 13 Dementia subjects were studied with a match-tosample task using event-related potentials (ERPs), in which at the beginning of each trial subjects were required to memorize a sample object
and then determined whether each of 5 serially presented objects was
the same or different from the sample (“match/non-match”). Results:
Though dementia patients performed much worse and slower compared
to normal and MCI subjects (ps< .05), the later two groups did not differ
significantly in terms of behavioral performance. On the right hemisphere match items evoked larger P3, a working memory processing
index, than non-match ones. The amplitudes of this positive effect were
equivalent in all three groups (p>.05). However, at left hemisphere, a
reversed positive pattern was observed in both MCI and dementia
groups in that non-match items evoked larger positivity, though this
effect did not reach significance in dementia patients. ROC analyses by
combing these left & right positive effects provided an 87.5% sensitivity
and a 72.2% specificity for identifying MCI from normals. Conclusions:
Match-to-sample ERP is an effective neural marker for differentiating

110

MCI from normal older adults even with preserved task performance.
MCI brain may involve more processing/regions to compensate their
reduced efficiency of dedicated circuits so that they behaved like normal
older adults. The compensatory plasticity was reduced in dementia
patients who therefore showed more frank cognitive loss.

D30
RATES OF AGE-RELATED COGNITIVE DECLINE AND TRAINING
IMPROVEMENT DEPEND ON TASK MODALITY: BASELINE AND TRAINING
EFFECTS ACROSS THE LIFESPAN IN A SAMPLE OF OVER 20,000
INDIVIDUALS TRAINING IN FOUR DISTINCT COGNITIVE DOMAINS
Kacey Ballard1, Ben Katz1, Michael Scanlon1; 1Lumos Labs, Inc. — As

agerelated cognitive decline affects millions of adults world-wide, targeted
cognitive training programs offer new potential for treatment. Existing
research shows that the rate of decline depends on task modality: e.g.
processing speed and memory span decline early, while verbal fluency
and crystallized intelligence remain preserved. However, little is known
about how cognitive training improves performance across different
domains or how training-related improvements change throughout the
lifespan. Aims: The present study investigated (1) whether training can
lead to improvements on cognitive tasks throughout the lifespan, and (2)
how task modality affects training-related improvements in performance. Methods: We examined baseline performance and trainingrelated improvements in four cognitive domains: working memory,
short-term spatial memory span, arithmetic, and verbal fluency, within
samples of 20,000 - 80,000 adults ages 15 to 75. Participants trained on an
exercise at least 25 times using free online software on Lumosity.com.
Results: Results showed that while baseline performance in working
memory and spatial memory span declined with age after the teens,
arithmetic and verbal fluency remained robust through the thirties and
forties. Adults of all ages showed significant improvement on all tasks
after training. However, older adults improved more on arithmetic
while younger adults improved more on spatial memory span. Discussion: These results demonstrate that while all adults experience significant improvement after training, training confers different levels of
improvement depending on age and the modality trained. Implications
for training-related transfer of benefits will be discussed.

D31
LOWER EEG INTER-TRIAL PHASE COHERENCE IS RELATED TO HIGHER
REACTION TIME VARIABILITY ACROSS THE LIFE SPAN Goran

Papenberg1, Dorothea Hämmerer1, Viktor Müller1, Ulman Lindenberger1, ShuChen Li1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin — Greater
intraindividual trial-to-trial reaction time (RT) variability is associated
with lower behavioral performance and longitudinal cognitive decline in
old age. Across the life span, intraindividual RT variability decreases
from childhood to adolescence and increases from young adulthood to
old age (e.g., Li et al., 2004). Neural correlates of performance variability
have only recently attracted research attention (e.g., MacDonald et al.,
2006). Across four age groups, we analyzed event-related delta and theta
oscillations assessed during a variant of the continuous performance
task entailing the monitoring of NoGo vs. Go cues and inhibition. Consistent with previous findings (Müller et al., 2009), we observed an
increase in delta/theta inter-trial phase coherence (ITPC) from childhood to adulthood. To focus on brain activities underlying the monitoring of response conflict rather than activities implicating motor
responses, we examined the relationship between performance variability and delta/theta ITPC in the NoGo condition. We consistently found
that lower delta/theta ITPC in the NoGo condition was associated with
higher trial-to-trial RT variability across the lifespan in children (age 9–
11, n = 35), adolescents (age 13–16, n = 43), younger adults (age 20–28, n
= 46), and older adults (age 66–76, n = 47). In contrast, delta/theta ITPC
was unrelated to mean reaction time in all age groups. These data
together with neurocomputational theories (e.g., Li, Lindenberger, &
Sikström, 2001) suggest that mechanisms affecting the signal-to-noise

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session D
ratio of neural information processing may contribute to individual and
age differences in performance variability.

D32
DEVELOPMENTAL DIFFERENCES IN CONFLICT PROCESSING AND TASKSWITCHING IN SCHOOL-AGED CHILDREN Ayzit O. Doydum1, Bruce D.

McCandliss1; 1Vanderbilt University — Executive

functions (EFs) are
domain-general processes involved in controlling one’s focus, thinking
flexibly, and inhibiting impulsive behaviors; however, whether these
components are unitary or disparate is still under debate. Functional
neuroimaging work indicates neural dissociations between conflict processing and task-set representation and maintenance (MacDonald, 2000;
Fassbender, et al., 2004), but investigating how these process develop in
children may provide novel insights into potential dissociations between
these two neural systems. The present study used computer-based tasks
to investigate two forms of EF, conflict processing and task-switching, in
a cross-sectional sample of 202 children enrolled in kindergarten
through third grade, a period when EFs are dynamically developing
(White, 1965; Best et al., 2009). Children engaged in a child-adapted
Flanker task (Rueda et al., 2004) and a task-switching game on a touchscreen computer, and reaction time (RT) and accuracy served as dependent measures. Conflict processing improved with grade level, as captured by decreasing RT conflict scores (p<.05), with the largest
improvement observed between kindergarten and first grade. Taskswitching also improved marked by decreases in switch cost in the accuracy domain (p<.05). Most importantly, performance on these two tasks
was not significantly correlated after controlling for age and overall RT
(p>.1), suggesting that conflict processing and task-switching are possibly dissociable components of EF developing during the school-aged
years.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working memory
D33
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN WM CAPACITY MODULATE THE EFFECT OF
TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION TO PARIETAL
CORTEX Kevin Jones1, Marian Berryhill1; 1University of Nevada, Reno — The
nature of parietal activations in working memory (WM) remains poorly
understood. We previously reported that posterior parietal damage
impaired WM probed by recognition but not recall (Berryhill et al., 2008).
We replicated this unexpected pattern in healthy young adults using
cathodal transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) of the posterior
parietal cortex (P4) prior to WM task performance (Berryhill et al., 2010).
However, Tseng and colleagues (2011) reported improvements in a more
challenging WM task after anodal tDCS to posterior parietal cortex.
Here, we tested whether these conflicting results were modulated by
WM task difficulty and participants’ WM capacity. In Experiment 1, we
applied cathodal and anodal tDCS to the parietal cortex and tested participants on both WM tasks in a within-subject design. The effect of tDCS
was modulated by task difficulty and WM capacity. When the WM task
was more difficult, tDCS improved WM performance in high WM capacity participants and impaired performance in the low WM capacity. No
effect of tDCS was observed in the easier WM task. Experiment 2 was
designed to test whether these effects were due to differences in WM
task or task difficulty. We modulated difficulty by varying set size (4, 6, 8
items) in a single WM task. Anodal tDCS to the parietal cortex improved
performance when the set size was 4, but there was no tDCS benefit
when set size exceeded WM capacity. These findings provide important
evidence indicating that individual differences and task demands can
reveal complementary tDCS effects.

D34
DEACTIVATION OF ITEMS IN WORKING MEMORY CAN WEAKEN LONGTERM MEMORY Jarrod Lewis-Peacock1, Kenneth Norman1; 1Princeton
University — How does shifting attention away from an item in working
memory affect subsequent retention of that item? Neurally, the removal
of attention has been shown to deactivate the representation of the unat-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

tended item (Lewis-Peacock et al., in press). The nonmonotonic plasticity
hypothesis (Newman & Norman, 2010) predicts that sustained moderate
activation of a neural representation will lead to weakening of that representation. Therefore, if the neural deactivation process is relatively
slow (such that the unattended representation lingers in a moderately
active state), this should lead to more forgetting than if the deactivation
is relatively fast. To test this prediction, we designed a fMRI experiment
to assess whether the rate of neural deactivation correlates with subsequent remembering. Each trial began with the presentation of two target
pictures (one face and one scene). Following a brief delay, a cue
appeared indicating which one of the targets would be the focus of an
upcoming short-term recognition test. On a random 1/3 of the trials, a
switch cue appeared at the end of the delay indicating that the previously uncued target would be tested on this trial (after an additional
delay). Multivariate pattern analysis of the fMRI data was used to track
the time course of deactivation for the uncued target item. Finally, these
neural measures were correlated with behavioral performance on a surprise recognition test at the end of the experiment. Preliminary results
are consistent with our prediction: items that were deactivated more
slowly were less well remembered.

D35
DAT1 POLYMORPHISMS ARE LINKED TO TRAINING INDUCED PLASTICITY
IN HEALTHY 4-YEAR OLD CHILDREN Stina Söderqvist1,2, Sissela Bergman

Nutley1,2, Myriam Peyrard-Janvid1, Hans Mattsson1, Keith Humphreys1, Juha
Kere1,3, Torkel Klingberg1,2; 1Karolinska Institutet, 2Stockholm Brain Institute,
3University of Helsinki — Cognitive deficits and particularly deficits in

working memory (WM) capacity are common features in neuropsychiatric disorders. Understanding the underlying mechanisms through which
WM capacity can be improved is therefore of great importance. Several
lines of research indicate that dopamine plays an important role not only
in WM function but also for improving WM capacity. For example, pharmacological interventions acting on the dopaminergic system, such as
methylphenidate, improve WM performance. In addition, behavioral
interventions for improving WM performance in the form of intensive
computerized training have recently been associated with changes in
dopamine receptor density. These two different means of improving
WM performance, pharmacological and behavioral, are thus associated
with similar biological mechanisms in the brain involving dopaminergic
systems. Data is presented here, showing that variation in the dopamine
transporter gene (DAT1) influences improvements in WM and fluid
intelligence in preschool aged children following cognitive training. Our
results emphasize the importance of the role of dopamine in determining
cognitive plasticity.

D36
NEURAL CORRELATES OF IMPAIRED CONTROL OVER WORKING
MEMORY IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Teal S. Eich1, Derek N. Nee2, Catherine

Insel1, Cara Malapani3, Edward E. Smith1,3; 1Columbia University, 2Indiana
University, 3New York State Psychiatric Institute — We investigated cognitive control deficits in patients with schizophrenia (SCZ), focusing on
inhibitory processes in working memory (WM). We have previously
shown that patients with SCZ demonstrate a selective impairment in
suppressing irrelevant information from WM. Here, we explore the neural underpinnings of this impairment. While being scanned with fMRI,
healthy controls (HC) and patients with SCZ performed a WM task in
which a memory-set consisting of 2 red and 2 blue words was presented.
This was followed by a brief delay, after which participants were given a
cue to remember only the red or blue words and suppress the other two
words from WM. Participants were then given a test probe that either
matched one of the two target words (Valid), matched a word that was
to-be-suppressed from WM (Lure), or had not been presented (Control).
Compared to HCs, SCZs showed increased activation in the left midVLPFC (BA 45) when responding to Lure as compared to Control
probes. This region has previously been implicated in resolving proactive interference in memory. HCs also showed activation reductions in

111

Poster Session D — Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
left posterior VLPFC (BA 44/6) and other perisylvian regions following
the remember cue, commensurate with appropriately ridding WM of
irrelevant content. In contrast, SCZs did not show perisylvian WMrelated reductions. Collectively, these data suggest that patients with
SCZ fail to efficiently suppress information from WM leading to subsequent difficulties during retrieval.

D37
EFFICIENCY FOLLOWING VISUAL SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY
TRAINING: INCREASES IN DEFAULT MODE AND DECREASES IN FRONTAL
PARIETAL ACTIVATION. Sharona M. Atkins1, Donald J. Bolger1, Michael R.

Dougherty1, Michael F. Bunting1; 1University of Maryland — Working memory is a capacity limited cognitive process involved in the active maintenance and manipulation of task relevant information. Research has
recently suggested that it is possible to improve working memory following adaptive training. We administered 10 hours of either visual-spatial working memory (vsWM) training (n=18), or an active control
training (n=17), to examine the changes in neural activation following
the vsWM training. An assessment battery containing cognitive behavioral tasks and a vsWM training task while undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scanning were administered at pretraining and post-training. Relative to the active control group, participants in the vsWM training group displayed improvements in training
and the behavioral transfer tasks involving visual-spatial executive functions. Training-related changes in the fMRI blood oxygen level dependence (BOLD) contrast for task performance were evident in the highload (5 to 7 stimuli) condition but not the low-load (2 to 4 stimuli) condition, suggesting enhancements to capacity. BOLD contrast differences
between groups comparing post-training and pre-training activity
revealed reduced activation for the vsWM training group in the frontalparietal network bilaterally, and increased activation in regions associated with “the default mode network”. These results lead us to conclude
that vsWM training leads to greater efficiency in the neural activation for
the trained vsWM task.

D38
WORKING MEMORY TRAINING GAINS AND TRANSFER TO OTHER
COGNITIVE FUNCTIONS Kathryn Gigler1, Paul Reber1; 1Northwestern
University — Recent research demonstrating improvements in working
memory (WM) capacity has challenged the idea that WM capacity is an
immutable cognitive trait. Indeed, relatively modest training protocols
have been shown to lead to significant improvement. Because WM is a
core cognitive process, increasing capacity has the potential to enhance
performance on a wide range of cognitive functions. A critical question
is the degree to which gains exhibited on the WM training task transfer
to other cognitive processes. To test for transfer, the CogState cognitive
assessment battery was completed by participants both before and after
10 hours of WM training with a novel training protocol. The CogState
assessment battery includes a collection of tests that measure long-term
memory function, executive function, attention and processing speed.
During training, participants completed 2000 training trials of a visuospatial working memory task. Each trial consists of two phases: the presentation phase, during which participants see a sequence of moving
visual cues and must hold that sequence in WM, and the response phase,
during which participants attempt to replicate the sequence. The training
is adaptive, adjusting the length of presented sequences based on performance in order to keep training near each individual’s WM span. Participants showed reliable improvement in WM span on both the trained
task and a separate, non-trained assessment of visuospatial WM. Significant improvements were also observed on CogState measures of nonverbal long-term memory, attention, and processing speed, indicating
that WM training can produce considerable gains in cognitive functioning beyond merely domain-specific WM improvement.

112

D39
INFLUENCE OF DISTRACTION ON WORKING MEMORY AND PREFRONTAL
CORTEX ACTIVITY IN CHILDREN WITH ADHD Satoshi Tsujimoto1, Akira

Yasumura2, Yushiro Yamashita3, Makiko Kaga2, Masumi Inagaki2; 1Kobe
University, 2National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, 3Kurume University
School of Medicine — Children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) tend to be sensitive to interference and distraction, which is
thought to lead to the disruption of working memory particularly for
visuospatial information. To study the effect of distraction on their working memory and its underlying neural mechanisms, we recruited 20
ADHD children and 16 typically developing control children. They performed a visuospatial working memory task, involving recall of spatial
locations after a delay period with two conditions: the experimental condition required a secondary (distractor) task during the delay period,
whereas the control condition did not have any systematic distraction.
While the children performed the task, we recorded hemodynamic
changes in the lateral prefrontal cortex using a near-infrared spectroscopy imaging. At the behavioral level, ADHD group showed significantly lower performance than the control group (overall correct recall
rate: 74% vs. 87%, p<0.01), and, as expected, ADHD children showed
particularly poor performance in the experimental condition (65% vs.
83% for ADHD and control group, respectively). Furthermore, the performance of ADHD children in the experimental condition was significantly correlated with the score of rating scale for ADHD (r=0.79,
p<0.001). Brain activity also showed between-group differences. In particular, the control group tended to show change in activity during the
delay period more clearly than the ADHD group. Further, the ADHD
group showed tendency to modulate their activity in right prefrontal
cortex compared to the control group. We conclude that these characteristic activity patterns in the prefrontal cortex may underlie the ADHD’s
susceptibility to the distraction.

D40
WORKING MEMORY DEVELOPMENT LINKS MAOA POLYMORPHISM TO
AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR Tim Ziermans1, Iroise Dumontheil1,3, Chantal

Roggeman1, Myriam Peyrard-Janvid1, Hans Matsson1, Juha Kere1,2, Torkel
Klingberg1; 1Karolinska Institutet, Sweden, 2Haartman Institute, University of
Helsinki, Finland, 3University College London, UK — A
developmental

increase in working memory (WM) capacity is an important part of cognitive development and low WM capacity is a risk factor for developing
psychopathology. Brain activity is a promising intermediate phenotype
for linking genes to behavior and for improving our understanding of
the neurobiology of WM development. We investigated gene-brainbehavior relationships by focusing on 18 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in six dopaminergic candidate genes (COMT,
SLC6A3/DAT1, DBH, DRD4, DRD5, MAOA). Visuospatial WM
(VSWM) brain activity, measured with functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), and VSWM capacity were assessed in a longitudinal
study of typically developing children and adolescents. Behavioral problems were evaluated using the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL). One
SNP (rs6609257), located ~ 6.6 kb downstream of the monoamine oxidase A gene (MAOA) on human chromosome X, significantly affected
brain activity in a network of frontal, parietal and occipital regions.
Increased activity in this network, but not in caudate nucleus or anterior
prefrontal regions, was correlated with VSWM capacity, which in turn
predicted externalizing (aggressive / oppositional) symptoms, with
higher WM capacity associated with fewer externalizing symptoms.
There were no direct significant correlations between rs6609257 and
behavioral symptoms. These results suggest a mediating role of brain
activity and WM capacity in linking the MAOA gene to aggressive
behavior during development.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session D

D41
SOURCE LOCALIZATION OF EEG SIGNALS GENERATED DURING
SEQUENCE LEARNING AND EXPECTATION MONITORING Abigail Noyce1,
Robert Sekuler1; 1Brandeis University — To

characterize
the
neural
responses that reflect subjects’ (i) sequence learning, and (ii) detection of
events that deviate from a familiar sequence, we asked subjects to learn
novel visuomotor sequences. In our task, subjects viewed a disk that traversed a quasi-random path comprising five linear motion segments,
and then tried to reproduce the disk’s trajectory from memory. The fidelity of subjects’ imitations improved over four presentations of each such
sequence. A high-density EEG system recorded scalp electrical activity
while subjects observed the disk’s movements. ERPs to disk motion offset (at the pauses between trajectory segments) showed a large decrease
in amplitude from the first presentation to later repetitions; ERPs to
motion onset of each segment showed a smaller decrease. Using
sLORETA and a realistic head model, the EEG signal sources associated
with these changes in ERP amplitude were localized to left-lateralized
fronto-temporal areas, despite the visuospatial nature of our task. During the final presentation of a sequence, we occasionally changed the
direction of one trajectory segment, disconfirming subjects’ expectations
about the disk’s movement. When we compared neural responses to
standard versus deviant sequence items, we found a late, positive-going
ERP component that localized to the cingulate cortex. As this component’s timing and localization matches those produced by response
errors to discrete motor tasks, we propose that the mechanisms that
monitor the validity of sensory expectations are similar to those that
monitor response correctness.

D42
DECODING ATTENDED VS. UNATTENDED INFORMATION IN WORKING
MEMORY Joshua LaRocque1, Bradley R. Postle1; 1University of Wisconsin,
Madison — Many studies have examined delay-period activity associated
with information storage, but most confound information storage with
the focus of attention. A recent fMRI study (Lewis-Peacock et al., in
press) dissociated attention from working memory storage by cuing participants to attend to one of two items being held in working memory.
Information related to the uncued stimulus, assayed by highly sensitive
multivariate pattern analyses (MVPA), dropped to baseline, though participants still were able to respond correctly to a subsequent memory
probe for the uncued item. This finding suggests that delay-period neural activity reflects the focus of attention rather than the contents of
working memory. A possible objection is that fMRI may be insensitive to
the neural signal of an unattended but remembered item. To address this
concern, an EEG study was performed using the same retrospective
cuing design. On each trial, participants remembered two target items
drawn from two of three categories: semantic (a noun), phonological (a
pronounceable nonword), and visual (one target item = two oriented line
segments). MVPA was applied to a time-frequency representation of
EEG data from the pre-cue and post-cue delay periods. Though the
MVPA could decode the categories of both items being remembered in
the pre-cue delay period, the post-cue analyses were only sensitive to the
category of the cued item. These results support the conclusion that
information in working memory but outside the focus of attention is
stored passively, and only information in the focus of attention is
actively maintained.

then (2) search for matched lexical representations in the mental lexicon.
Two groups of right-handed healthy participants performed an eventrelated task, which consisted of four conditions (high-frequency characters, low-frequency characters, pseudo characters, and non-characters),
within a 3T scanner. One group (N=17; 6 males) was asked to judge
whether the visual stimuli were real characters (lexical decision, LD) and
the other group (N=16; 8 males) was instructed to respond whether they
recognized the stimuli (lexical recognition, LR). Both instruction formats
were thought to evoke the 2-step character identification process while
LD engaged more orthographic analysis. Behavioral performance was
significantly different among conditions (p < 0.05). A two-way mixed
factorial analysis (SPM8) revealed significant main effects for instruction
and condition while controlling for behavioral performance (p < 0.001,
uncorrected). Pseudo and non-characters were found to recruit greater
activity in the right fusiform gyrus in LD than LR. Non-characters
showed more activation in the left fusiform gyrus as compared with
high-frequency and low-frequency characters. The bilateral fusiform
gyri activation might be attributed to more demanding orthographic
analysis in LD and sensitive to orthographic irregularity in non-characters. Overall, LD evoked greater activity than LR. The results confirmed
the engagement of the bilateral fusiform gyri in reading Chinese characters, suggesting its contribution to orthographic analysis in detecting
orthographic illegality.

D44
NEURONAL INTERACTIONS FOR WORDS AND PSEUDOWORDS DURING
LEXICAL DECISION Aneta Kielar1, Jennifer Mack1, Aya Meltzer-Asscher1,

Eisha Wali1, Cynthia Thompson1; 1Northwestern University — Previous studies demonstrated that lexical decision to pseudowords, compared to
words, elicits greater activation in the left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG),
reflecting increased phonological processing and lexical search (Heim et
al., 2005), whereas words elicit greater activation in the left angular
gyrus (AG), reflecting semantic processing (Binder et al., 2005). The
present study investigated effects of word type on the neural network
supporting lexical decision using dynamic causal modeling (DCM).
fMRI was used to measure participants’ neural responses during a visual
lexical decision task. Consistent with previous studies, we found stronger activation in the left AG for words and in left BA 44, BA 47, and fusiform gyrus (FG) for pseudowords. The DCM study compared four
models with different connections modulated by word type. All models
contained bidirectional intrinsic connections between all four regions,
with words and pseudowords serving as driving inputs to the FG. In the
best fitting model, pseudowords strengthened the connection from FG to
BA 47, whereas words negatively modulated this connection and that
from BA 47 to BA 44. This model is consistent with the proposal that left
BA 47 guides lexical search, BA 44 supports phonological processing,
and (a portion of) the FG supports initial lexical processing (Hillis et al.,
2005). It further suggests that phonological processing is sensitive to task
demands, and is suppressed once a word is identified (Coltheart et al.,
1993). There were no significant modulatory connections involving the
AG, suggesting that semantic processing is not an integral part of lexical
decision.

D45
AN ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC INVESTIGATION ON THE EFFECTS OF
LATE BILINGUALISM ON NATIVE LANGUAGE PROCESSING Nathaniel

LANGUAGE: Lexicon

Shannon IV1, Sharlene Newman1, Steven Green1, Evguenia Malaia1; 1Indiana
University - Bloomington — This EEG study investigated the effect of late

D43
CHINESE CHARACTER IDENTIFICATION: NEURAL EVIDENCE FOR
ORTHOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS Chiao-Yi Wu1, S.H. Annabel Chen1, Kayako

acquisition of Spanish (L2) on reading native English words. Two groups
of native English participants – one with very limited Spanish experience
and one with extensive experience. The participants performed two lexical decision tasks: an English lexical decision task (ELD), in which the
participants indicated whether a letter string was an English word; and a
General lexical decision task (GLD), in which the participants indicated
whether a letter string was a word in either English or Spanish. Orthographic similarity was also manipulated such that the spellings were
either similar (O+) or dissimilar (O-) across languages. Behavioral results

Matsuo2, Wen-Yih Isaac Tseng2, Chih-Wei Hue2; 1Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore, 2National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan — The current study investigated neural representations underlying Chinese character identification. This is a 2-step process in which readers (1) examine
orthographic legality of visual scripts (i.e. orthographic analysis) and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

113

Poster Session D — Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
demonstrated a faster reaction time to word vs. non-word stimuli in both
groups, with O+ stimuli eliciting fastest RTs. Statistical analysis of the
amplitude and latency of the P2 component revealed significant differences between the processing of O+ vs. O- stimuli in bilinguals. N2
amplitude and latency were affected by language as well as the task in
the monolingual group, but only the task in bilingual group, while P3
amplitude and latency was modulated by task in both groups. The
results suggest that late bilinguals draw on a combined lexicon of both
languages during word recognition (which increases the number of
orthographic neighbors for individual words). The results also appear to
support the Bilingual Interactive Model+, confirming that orthographic
and phonological representations of visually presented words are activated simultaneously for both known languages even in late bilinguals.

D46
COMPETITION
AND
COOPERATION
AMONG
SIMILAR
REPRESENTATIONS: A UNIFIED ACCOUNT OF FACILITATIVE AND
INHIBITORY EFFECTS OF LEXICAL NEIGHBORS Qi Chen1, Dan Mirman1;

1Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute — One of the core principles of how
the mind works is the graded, parallel activation of multiple related or
similar representations. Parallel activation of multiple representations
has been particularly important in the development of theories and models of language processing, where co-activated representations (“neighbors”) have been shown to exhibit both facilitative and inhibitory effects
on word recognition and production. Researchers generally ascribe these
effects to interactive activation and competition, but there is no unified
explanation for why the effects are facilitative in some cases and inhibitory in others. We present a series of simulations of a simple domaingeneral interactive activation and competition model that is broadly consistent with more specialized domain-specific models of lexical processing. The results showed that interactive activation and competition can
indeed account for the complex pattern of reversals. The simulations also
made a novel and counterintuitive prediction, which was tested and confirmed with re-analysis of behavioral data. Critically, the simulations
revealed a core computational principle that determines whether neighbor effects will be facilitative or inhibitory: strongly active neighbors
exert a net inhibitory effect and weakly active neighbors exert a net facilitative effect.

D47
WORD STRESS AND PHONEME PROCESSING IN CONGENITALLY BLIND
ADULTS Ulrike Schild1, Brigitte Roeder1, Claudia Friedrich1; 1University of
Hamburg — It has been shown that blind adults process spoken language
input more efficiently than sighted individuals. Here we tested how
blind individuals process two distinct properties of the spoken language
input, namely word stress and phonemes. Seventeen congenitally blind
adults participated in an auditory fragment priming experiment. German target words were either stressed on their first syllable (e.g., ALter
[Engl. age]; capital letters indicate stress), or on their second syllable
(e.g., alTAR [Engl. altar]). Each target word was either preceded by a
stressed syllable (e.g., ‘AL’) or by an unstressed syllable (e.g., ‘al’). The
overlap in word stress and phonemes between syllable and target word
(e.g. AL-ALter, KOS-ALter, al-ALter, kos-ALter) was independently
manipulated. Both phoneme overlap and stress overlap facilitated lexical
decisions in blind participants. The finding of robust behavioral stress
priming contrasts to previous results with sighted adults, which only
indicated phoneme priming. Event Related Potentials (ERPs) reflected
separate phoneme priming and stress priming in blind participants.
These results are further evidence for independent neural processing
pathways for phonemes and word stress in spoken language comprehension: Evidence for both independent neural processing of phonemes
and word stress has already been obtained in sighted individuals. Thus
it seems that both processing pathways develop independent of the
visual system. However, how efficiently the information about word
stress is used during spoken language comprehension appears to
depend on the specific needs and is thus subject of language experience.

114

D48
NEURAL BASIS OF CROSS-MODAL LEXICAL PROCESSING IN CHINESE

Yuan Deng1, Qiu-yan Wu1, Xuchu Weng2; 1Institute of Psychology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, 2Hangzhou Normal University — Neuroimaging studies suggest that cross-modal lexical processing evokes activations not
only in regions specific to input modality and target modality, but also
those regions responsible for cross-modal conversion. However, the
existence of grapheme-to-phoneme correspondence rules may be a
major confounding variable in the previous studies. Therefore, current
study took advantage of Chinese to exclude this confound. By using
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) technique, current study
aimed to explore 1) the neural basis for cross-modal lexical processing in
Chinese; and 2) to examine the top-down modulation effects of processing level on ventral pathway. Using Chinese single-character words, participants were asked to make two levels of phonological judgments (tone
and vowel) to visually presented words and make two levels orthographic judgments (stroke and structure) to auditorily presented words.
Imaging results showed that visual-based tasks selectively activated the
left superior parietal region; while auditory-based tasks selectively activated the left inferior parietal region. Both tasks evoked similar activation pattern in the left angular gyrus and pre-frontal region.
Surprisingly, level of processing did not show significant modulations
on the activation of two region-of-interests (ROI) in the ventral pathway
that are specific for visual word-forms processing. Current findings suggest that cross-modality lexical processing of Chinese involved both language-specific and language-general brain regions. Dorsal and ventral
parietal regions play different roles in the conversion between orthography and phonology in Chinese. Moreover, the top-down modulation of
processing levels may happen to a higher regions rather than to the ventral pathway during the cross-modal processing.

D49
THE REPRESENTATION OF HOMOPHONES IN THE PRODUCTION LEXICON:
Middleton1,
EVIDENCE FROM PICTURE NAMING IN APHASIA Erica

Myrna Schwartz1; 1Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute — This study uses
data from neurological patients to address a long-standing controversy
regarding how homophones (e.g., bee/be) are represented and retrieved
during spoken word production. Word production is known to be a
multi-stage process, where the selection of a word’s entry from the mental lexicon (lexical-semantic entry) precedes retrieval of its constituent
sounds (lexeme). Homophones (e.g., bee/be) have distinct lexicalsemantic entries, but controversy surrounds whether homophones
access the same lexeme (e.g., /bi/) during word production. Capitalizing on an established finding that a word’s frequency of use in language
primarily localizes to and impacts lexeme (rather than lexical-semantic)
retrieval, the word-frequency inheritance (WFI) effect provided early
support for the shared-lexeme view: low-frequency homophones (e.g.,
bee) were facilitated by their high-frequency homophonic counterparts
(e.g., be) and behaved like high-frequency control words in production
reaction times and accuracy. However, the WFI effect has not always
replicated. In keeping with the WFI effect, we found that that speakers of
aphasia whose naming impairment stemmed from difficulty with lexeme retrieval demonstrated facilitated naming of low-frequency homophones (i.e., homophones behaved like high-frequency rather than lowfrequency control words in accuracy). Furthermore, speakers with aphasia whose naming impairment stemmed from difficulty with lexicalsemantic retrieval showed impaired naming of low-frequency homophones relative to high-frequency control words. The results support the
shared-lexeme view and an interactive approach to word retrieval: facilitated naming of “bee” from the WFI effect can be masked by deleterious
competition with “be” during lexical-semantic retrieval, which is made
possible via interactive activation through a shared lexeme.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session D

D50
BEHAVIORAL AND ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MEASURES OF SENSE
RELATEDNESS EFFECTS IN MONOLINGUAL AND BILINGUAL YOUNG
ADULTS Vanessa Taler1,2, Shanna Kousaie1,2, Chloé Corbeil1,2, Christianne

Laliberté1,2, Jessica Kumar1,2, Rocío López Zunini1,2; 1University of Ottawa,
2
Élisabeth Bruyère Research Institute — Previous research indicates that
words with many related senses (e.g., “class”) are easier to process, eliciting shorter response times (RT) and less neural activation than words
that with few related senses (e.g., ”sword”). However, it remains
unknown whether this “sense relatedness advantage” holds in bilinguals, whose reduced experience in either language relative to matched
monolinguals leads to alterations in the pattern of lexical processing. In
the current investigation, monolingual (n=4) and bilingual (n=5) participants made a lexical decision to words with many or few related senses
while electrophysiological recording took place. Behaviourally, preliminary results revealed a Language Group x Condition interaction
(F(2,14)=4.38, p=.04) demonstrating that bilinguals responded faster to
real words than to pseudowords, irrespective of the number of related
senses, whereas monolinguals did not show a condition effect. The preliminary analysis of electrophysiological results did not reveal any significant differences due to a lack of power. However, inspection of the
N400 time window indicates similar N400 amplitudes for words with
many and few related sense in the bilinguals, whereas the monolinguals
show a larger N400 amplitude in response to words with few relative to
many related senses. These results suggest that, despite similar behavioural performance across conditions, monolinguals benefit from the
greater semantic information available in words with many related
senses. Bilinguals, in contrast, do not appear to benefit from additional
semantic information to the same extent as monolinguals, possibly due
to weaker links between lexical and semantic information in bilinguals’
mental lexicon.

D51
ROLE OF EMOTIONAL INFORMATION IN ACCESSING THE MENTAL
LEXICON: ERP EVIDENCE FROM AFFECTIVE PRIMING Weilin
Shen1,

Nicole Fiori1, Frederic Isel1; 1Paris Descartes University, France — The present
study investigated the role of emotional information in accessing the
mental lexicon by combining affective priming and electroencephalography. Sixteen right-handed native speakers of French completed an evaluative categorization task on target words (i.e. pleasant vs. unpleasant),
which were affectively congruent (sun-MARRIAGE) or not (cancerMARRIAGE) with the preceding prime word. Using event-related brain
potentials (ERPs), the predictions of two alternative theoretical models
of affective priming, i.e. the spreading activation model in semantic network and the response competition model were tested. A larger N200
effect was found in response to the processing of affectively incongruent
trials in comparison with the congruent ones. This component is
assumed to reflect competing responses between the tendency of
response induced by the prime and the expected response for the target.
Critically, we observed a frontal N400, whose amplitude was modulated
by the congruence of emotional valence. Moreover, the N400 effect was
larger for negative target words than for positive ones suggesting that
access was more difficult for negative than for positive words. Furthermore, the observation of a late positive potential (LPP) distributed over
the posterior electrodes was thought to reflect an increased engagement
of attentional resources during the processing of emotionally non-congruent word pairs. Taken together, the present findings suggest that the
access to the mental lexicon could be modulated by emotional information related to words. Our ERP data lend support to a neurocognitive
model of spreading activation in the semantic network including a
mechanism of response competition with respect to the emotional
valence.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

D52
ROLE OF INSULAR CORTEX IN LANGUAGE LATERALIZATION Christine

Chiarello1, David Vazquez1, Adam Felton1, Christiana Leonard2; 1University of
California, Riverside, 2University of Florida, Gainesville — An accumulating
body of evidence suggests the left anterior insular cortex is implicated in
language function. Lesions in this area produce severe deficits in language production (Dronkers, 1996), and functional imaging studies frequently report insular activation for language tasks. Recently, Keller, et
al (2011) provided evidence from a highly selected population (N = 25)
that structural asymmetry of the insula, but not classical language areas,
predicted asymmetry of functional activation during a word generation
task. Here, data from the Biological Substrates for Language Project (N =
200) explored the association of insular asymmetry with divided visual
field measures of visual language processing. Surface area measures
(FreeSurfer v 4.5) of left and right cortex were used to estimate asymmetry of anterior and posterior insular regions, pars triangularis, pars opercularis, and planum temporale. Reliable leftward asymmetries were
observed for the anterior insula, pars triangularis, pars opercularis, and
planum temporale, for both mixed and consistent handers. However, the
anterior insula was the only region whose asymmetry significantly correlated with composite visual field asymmetries. This association was
observed for individuals with consistent hand preferences (N = 103, r =
+.35, p<.001), but not those with mixed hand preferences (N = 97, r =
+.08, p=.45). These data contribute to an emerging consensus that the
anterior insula is an important component of the left hemisphere language network. Further, individual differences in asymmetry of this
region may be more important for functional language lateralization
than asymmetry in classical language areas.

D53
BRAIN ELECTRIC SIGNATURES OF AUDITORY WORD RECOGNITION:
SUCCESS, EFFORT, AND CONFLICT Antje Strauss1, Sonja A. Kotz1, Jonas
Obleser1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences,
Leipzig, Germany — Auditory word recognition is often described as a lin-

ear process of lexical access. Commonly, however, the perceptual evidence is ambiguous (mishearings, slip of the tounges, etc.), and requires
additional compensatory and re-evaluatory processing. We used a lexical decision task in an electroencephalography (EEG) study and manipulated lexico-semantic access by parametrically varying the factor
"wordness": Stimuli were three-syllabic German words ("real"),
pseudowords derived by only exchanging the core vowel in the second
syllable ("recoverable" pseudowords), and pseudowords derived by
scrambling entire syllables ("opaque" pseudowords). While listeners performed the lexical decision very accurately (accuracy for all conditions >
95 %), time-locked potentials (ERPs) at the third syllable revealed successive peak delay and amplitude height of the following negative deflection (N400) dependent on wordness; the N400 response to opaque
pseudowords was strongest and peaked latest. At and after stimulus offset, alpha power (9 -- 13 Hz) was suppressed as a monotonic function of
wordness (real < recoverable < opaque) with stronger suppression indicating less effort in lexico-semantic access. Simultaneously, however,
theta power (3 -- 5 Hz) was most enhanced for recoverable
pseudowords; they closely resemble a word, but also provide contradicting perceptual evidence (the altered vowel). This led to response conflict
and increase in cognitive control. Accordingly, source localisation indicated that theta power changes emerged from the dorsal Anterior Cingulum (dACC). The results show that auditory word comprehension
requires a cascade of evoked (N400) and induced (alpha, theta) brain
processes, which reflect success, effort, and conflict in lexical access.

115

Poster Session D — Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Development &
aging
D54
INTER-INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY IN CRITERION SHIFTING ACROSS THE
LIFESPAN Brian Lopez1, Craig Bennett1, Tyler Santander1, Michael Miller1;

1
University of California, Santa Barbara — A critical aspect of recognition
memory is the integration of available memory evidence and a decision
criterion. Previous work has shown that a wide range of factors can
affect the placement of a decision criterion, including cognitive and personality factors. In this study we attempted to quantify the impact of
aging on criterion placement during episodic recognition. To that end,
we used fMRI to examine recognition behavior and regional brain activity in 30 young adults (25-35 yrs) and 30 elderly subjects (60-75 yrs) during a task involving criterion shifting. Subjects were first asked to encode
150 words for later recognition. The words were then presented alongside new, unobserved words in conditions of high target probability
(70% old, 30% new) and low target probability (30% old, 70% new). Subjects had to decide for each word whether it was a target old word or a
non-target new word. The results demonstrated that target discrimination ability (d-prime) was lower in the elderly group, and that the elderly
group showed increased variability in the degree of criterion shifting
between the two probability conditions. We also found that the elderly
group had significantly increased inter-individual variability in regional
brain activity relative to the young adult group while performing the
task. The results suggest that aging is associated with increased variability in criterion shifting and in the regional brain activity that accompanies such criterion shifts.

D55
THE CONTRIBUTION OF BLOOD SERUM BIOMARKERS TO THE
PREDICTION OF COGNITIVE DECLINE BY FMRI AND APOLIPOPROTEIN-E
IN HEALTHY OLDER ADULTS Kristy A. Nielson1,2, Michael A. Sugarman3,
John L. Woodard3, Michael Seidenberg4, J. Carson Smith5, Sally Durgerian2,
Stephen M. Rao6; 1Marquette University, 2Medical College of Wisconsin,
3Wayne State University, 4Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and
Science, 5University of Maryland, 6Cleveland Clinic — Biomarkers are a

promising approach to the prediction and early intervention of Alzheimer’s disease. We demonstrated that cortical functional MRI (fMRI)
activation during a semantic memory task and apolipoprotein-E ?4 allele
inheritance (APOE?4) effectively predicted cognitive decline after 18months in healthy, asymptomatic elders. Hippocampal volume added
modest prediction, while AD family history and demographics were
ineffective. Previous studies have linked plasma homocysteine (tHcy),
vitamin B12 and creatinine values to cognitive functioning, cortical atrophy, hippocampal atrophy and neuropathology, and vascular integrity.
Here we incorporated total plasma homocysteine (tHcy), B12 and creatinine values into our previous predictive models. Of 78 healthy elders, 27
(34.6%) exhibited significant cognitive decline after 18-months. tHcy, but
not B12 or creatinine, was marginally positively correlated with cortical
semantic memory fMRI activation, particularly in stable participants.
Logistic regression showed that tHcy, when added to APOE?4 and cortical fMRI, was a significant predictor of outcome and strengthened the
already significant model (p = .007; C = .80 and R2 = .37). However, control for B12 and creatinine covariates diminished tHcy as a predictor (p
=.084), though the model was still stronger than without this factor (C =
.78 and R2 = .31). tHcy did not significantly interact with APOE?4, as has
previously been reported. Neither B12 nor creatinine was similarly effective as a predictor. These results suggest that commonly investigated
blood serum biomarkers are at best weakly associated with predicting
age- and dementia-related cognitive decline in healthy, asymptomatic
elders. fMRI and APOE?4 presently provide the best predictive model.

116

D56
EPISODIC MEMORY MEASURES COMPLEMENT STRUCTURAL AND
FUNCTIONAL MRI FOR PREDICTING COGNITIVE DECLINE IN
L.
Woodard1,
Michael
APOLIPOPROTEIN E ?4 CARRIERS John

Seidenberg2, Kristy A. Nielson3,5, Michael A. Sugarman1, J. Carson Smith4,
Sally Durgerian5, Alissa M. Butts3, Melissa A. Lancaster2, Mary K. Foster6,
Nathan C. Hantke3, Monica A. Matthews2, Stephen M. Rao6; 1Wayne State
University, 2Rosalind Franklin University, 3Marquette University, 4University of
Maryland, 5Medical College of Wisconsin, 6The Cleveland Clinic — Apolipo-

protein E (APOE) ?4 allele carriers demonstrate greater risk for cognitive
decline and Alzheimer’s disease than non-carriers. However, factors
associated with risk of decline among APOE ?4 carriers are not wellknown. In this longitudinal study, we investigated whether discrete
aspects of baseline episodic memory performance and structural (sMRI)
and functional (fMRI) magnetic resonance imaging were associated with
cognitive decline in older APOE ?4 carriers and non-carriers. Seventyeight healthy older adults underwent cognitive testing at baseline and
after 18 months, baseline serum APOE genotyping, manually-traced hippocampal volume measurement from sMRI, and task-activated fMRI.
Cognitive decline was defined as a one SD or greater reduction from
baseline on at least one of three cognitive measures at follow-up (Rey
Auditory Verbal Learning Test [AVLT] Delayed Recall and Trials 1-5
Sum, Mattis Dementia Rating Scale-2 Total Score). Declining APOE ?4
carriers (n=14) exhibited reduced hippocampal volume (p<.009) and
fMRI semantic processing activity in cortical (p<.04) and hippocampal
(p<.05) regions relative to stable carriers (n=12). On the AVLT, declining
APOE ?4 carriers showed greater baseline susceptibility to retroactive
interference (p<.006), intertrial forgetting (lost access; p<.001) and recognition false alarms (p<.05) compared to stable carriers. Stable (n=39) noncarriers showed slightly more susceptibility to proactive interference
than declining (n=13) non-carriers (p<.02). Along with sMRI and fMRI,
AVLT measures of rapid forgetting can help to identify APOE ?4 carriers
with elevated risk for cognitive decline. These effects appear to be
largely unique for APOE ?4 carriers, perhaps due to preclinical structural
and functional alterations in structures subserving memory.

D57
ITEM AND ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY FOR NOVEL NATURALISTIC ACTIONS
IN AMNESTIC MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT, OLDER ADULTS, AND
YOUNGER ADULTS David A. Gold1,3, Norman W. Park3, Angela K. Troyer2,3,4,

Kelly J. Murphy2,3,4; 1Joseph and Kathleen Bryan Alzheimer's Disease
Research Center, Duke University Medical Center, 2Baycrest Centre, 3York
University, 4University of Toronto — Most research examining associative
memory has focused on memory for non-naturalistic, laboratory-based
stimuli. We extend current findings by exploring item and associative
memory for novel naturalistic actions (NNA; e.g., how to make an artsand-crafts style project such as a windspeed indicator). Based on previous research using laboratory tasks, a selective decline in memory for
associative information (e.g., was this tool used with this object?) relative
to item information (e.g., was this object presented?) was predicted in
amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) and aging. Individuals with
aMCI (n = 24), age-matched older adults (n = 24), and undergraduates (n
= 32) viewed two 90 second NNA videos. Following a 90 second distractor task, participants completed forced-choice recognition memory tests
of item and associative memory for the NNAs. A mixed ANOVA with
the within-subjects factors of question type (item, associative) and
response type (hits, false alarms), and the between-subjects factor of
group (young, old, aMCI), revealed no significant interaction [F(2, 77) =
0.870, p = .233], contrary to previous findings with other stimuli that
demonstrates older adults, and those with impaired memory, show
selective decline in associative memory. A response type by group interaction confirmed the aMCI group had higher false alarms overall [F(2,
77) = 20.797, p < .001, ?p² = .351], but no differences between younger
and older adults. Further, the three groups did not differ in overall hit
rate. The findings support protected encoding of within-domain associa-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session D
tions and challenge boundaries of associative deficit hypotheses with
more ecologically valid stimuli.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
D58
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN PREFRONTAL AND MEDIAL TEMPORAL
ACTIVATIONS DURING SUCCESSFUL RETRIEVAL Takashi Tsukiura1, Yayoi
Shigemune1, Rui Nouchi2, Toshimune Kambara2, Ryuta Kawashima2; 1Kyoto
University, Japan, 2Tohoku University, Japan — Although previous studies

have demonstrated activations in the lateral prefrontal cortex (lPFC) and
hippocampus during the recollection process, little is known about the
aging effects on these activations. This fMRI study investigated the
effects of aging on neural activations in these regions during the successful recollection of faces. During encoding, young and older female adults
were presented with male faces one by one, and rated the goodness of
impression for each face. During retrieval, the participants were presented with old and new faces, and recognized whether the faces were
previously learned or not. Successful recognition activity for old faces
(SRA-O) or for new faces (SRA-N) was identified by comparing activities
between high- and low-confidence successful recognition for old and
new faces, and the SRA-O and SRA-N contrasts were compared between
young and older adults. The study yielded three main findings. First,
SRA-O in lPFC and the hippocampus was greater for young than for
older adults, whereas the parahippocampal gyrus showed greater SRAO in older adults than in young adults. Second, SRA-N in lPFC and the
hippocampus was greater for young than older adults, but greater SRAN for older adults was not identified in any region. Third, correlations
between lPFC and hippocampal activities were significantly higher in
young adults than in older adults. Taken together, age-related decline in
the recollection process of memory for faces could be modulated by
interactions between lPFC, which is associated with the strategic process,
and the hippocampus, which is associated with the retrieval of memory
details.

D59
FUNCTIONAL-ANATOMIC
CORRELATES
OF
TEST-POTENTIATED
LEARNING Steven M. Nelson1, Kathleen M. Arnold1, Laura M. Najjar1,

Adrian W. Gilmore1, Bridgid Finn1, Kathleen B. McDermott1; 1Washington
University in St. Louis — A growing body of literature suggests that
retrieval practice can enhance long-term retention (for a recent review,
see Roediger & Butler, 2011). In addition, retrieving has also been shown
to have indirect benefits such that the act of taking a test has ramifications for how an individual studies or continues to learn post-test. The
finding that testing can indirectly benefit subsequent study is referred to
as test-potentiated learning (Izawa, 1971). The current experiment
sought to better understand the functional-anatomic correlates of testpotentiated learning using functional MRI. Subjects initially studied
paired-associates, and then either were given a test or restudy opportunity. Additionally, some of the items were not presented during this portion of the experiment. Subjects then simply restudied all of the items in
a final phase. This manipulation determined whether neural activity in
the final study phase was differently modulated as a result of taking a
test as opposed to re-exposure. Regions located in parietal cortex were
among the most robust when contrasting items that were tested vs.
restudied. Though many regions were modulated based on successful
recall, when constraining our search to regions that showed greater
activity for all tested items, a region in posterior inferior parietal lobule
(pIPL) emerged. This region has been implicated in studies of recognition memory as supporting processes related to perceived oldness and
reliably shows old > new effects (Nelson et al., 2010). Thus, testing items
may increase the potency of this signal, which may play a role in supporting long-term retention.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

D60
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE THAT MILD HYPOXIA PATIENTS HAVE
SELECTIVE RECOLLECTION IMPAIRMENTS BUT INTACT FAMILIARITY

Rick Addante1,2, Charan Ranganath1, John Olichney1, Andrew Yonelinas1;
1
University of California - Davis, 2University of Texas - Dallas — In several previous behavioral studies we have identified a group of amnestic patients
that exhibit selective deficits in recollection with preserved familiaritybased recognition, but other behavioral studies have suggested that this
type of patient might exhibit deficits in both recollection and familiarity.
To examine recollection and familiarity processes in these patients, we
recorded ERPs in three amnestic patients and six age matched controls
while they made item recognition and source recognition judgments.
ERP studies of recognition in healthy subjects have indicated that recollection and familiarity are related to a late positive component (LPC) and
an earlier frontal component (FN400), respectively. The current patients
were able to discriminate between old and new items, but were not significantly above chance at making source judgments. Moreover, whereas
control subjects exhibited ERPs indicative of both recollection and familiarity, the patients only exhibited evidence of a familiarity correlate. In
high confidence recognition responses, there was no evidence of recollection-related ERPs (i.e.: LPC), and this was qualified by a significant
interaction of confidence (high vs. low recognition confidence) and
group (patient vs. controls). The results verify that the patients do in fact
exhibit a selective deficit in recollection, and have broad implications for
understanding the cognitive neuroscience of episodic memory.

D61
DECLARATIVE (AWARE) MEMORY DETERMINES DIFFERENTIAL EYE
MOVEMENTS FOR OLD AND NEW SCENES, EVEN WHEN THERE IS NO
EXPECTATION OF MEMORY TESTING Christine N Smith1, Larry R Squire1,2;

1
UCSD, 2Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Diego — Measures of eye
movements indicate that individuals view old and new scenes differently depending on whether the scenes are old (repeated) or new (i.e.,
the repetition effect). This effect depends on hippocampus-dependent,
declarative memory when participants know that memory is being
tested. We explored the nature of this effect during free viewing when
memory is irrelevant. In Experiment 1, participants viewed old and new
scenes before they knew that memory would be tested. Memory was
then tested independently with a subset of the scenes. Different list
lengths and study times yielded three groups that differed in memory
strength: Strong Memory (91% correct, N=20), Moderate Memory (73%
correct, N=23), and Weak Memory (60% correct; N=23). The repetition
effect was observed only in the Strong Memory condition. In Experiment
2, patients with bilateral lesions of the medial temporal lobe were
impaired at remembering scenes in the Strong Memory condition of
Experiment 1. In Experiment 3 (N=50), participants viewed 20 old and 20
new scenes without knowledge of a memory test. Then they viewed the
old and new scenes a second time, making old/new recognition memory
judgments and confidence judgments (1-6 scale; 1=Definitely New,
6=Definitely Old). The repetition effect during free viewing was
observed only when recognition memory judgments were correct and/
or when they were accompanied by high confidence. Thus, differential
viewing of old and new scenes during free viewing reflects declarative
memory. The repetition effect does not reflect an automatic or unconscious effect of recent experience.

D62
MEDIAL
TEMPORAL
LOBE
DAMAGE
AND
ASSOCIATIVE
REINSTATEMENT Melanie Cohn1,2, MaryPat McAndrews1,2; 11Krembil

Neuroscience Centre & Toronto Western Research Institute, 2Department of
Psychology, University of Toronto — Associative memory relies on the integrity of the medial temporal lobes (MTL). We have previously demonstrated that associative reinstatement (i.e., gain in item recognition when
test items are presented in their studied pairings) is reduced in individuals with unilateral temporal excisions that include the hippocampus, surrounding cortices and temporal neocortex. Our goals were to determine

117

Poster Session D — Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
whether associative reinstatement is modulated by the degree of damage
to left temporal regions and whether similar effects are found using
within-domain associations (word-word) and between-domain associations (word-face). These two types of associations have been proposed to
rely on perirhinal and hippocampal regions, respectively. We recruited
individuals with left temporal excision and with temporal lobe epilepsy
(TLE) who have less extensive MTL damage (usually more prominent in
the hippocampus) as well as healthy controls. They studied word-word
and word-face pairs. At test, they were presented with new-new, newold, rearranged and intact pairings and indicated, using a 6-point confidence rating scale, whether the first word of the pair was studied before.
Associative reinstatement scores were derived by subtracting the hit rate
to rearranged pairs from that of intact pairs for both tasks. The reinstatement gain was significantly greater for word-word relative to word-face
associations in controls and TLE, and reinstatement effects for both types
were reduced solely in the excision group. Our findings highlight the
critical dependence of reinstatement on MTL regions (possibly perirhinal
cortex or peririnal-hippocampal interactions). The magnitude difference
across association types may represent greater unitization of withindomain associations relative to between-domains ones.

D63
PROGRESSIVE LOSS OF WHITE MATTER IN FORNIX FROM 5 TO 32
MONTHS AFTER MODERATE TO SEVERE TBI AND ITS DELETERIOUS
EFFECT ON MEMORY Areeba Adnan1, Morris Moscovitch2, Adrian
Crawley3, David Mikulis3, Brenda Collela1, Robin Green1; 1Toronto
Rehabilitation Institute, 2University of Toronto, 3Toronto Western Hospital —

Objectives: (1) To examine, using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI),
whether fornix damage after moderate to severe traumatic brain injury
(TBI) continues to progress sub-acutely; and, (2) To measure the relationship between structural changes in the fornix and recovery of memory
function. Methods: 19 patients with moderate to severe TBI were
assessed using DTI and neuropsychological assessments at 5 and 32
months post injury. Neuropsychological measures included Wechsler
Memory Scale Logical Memory test (WMS-LM), Rey Auditory Verbal
Learning Test (RAVLT) and Rey Visual Design Learning Test (RVDLT).
Control variables included the symbol digit modalities test oral (SDMTO) and Acute Care Length of Stay (ACLOS). DTI measures included fractional anisotropy (FA) values for the column/body, right crux and left
crux of the fornix Results : Paired t-tests showed significant FA reductions from 5 months to 32 months for the column/body (t= 4.259, P<0.05,
Cohen's d= 0.60), right crux (t=4.098, P<0.05, Cohen's d= 0.69) and left
crux of fornix (t=3.197, P<0.05, Cohen's d= 0.56). After controlling for
SDMT-O and ACLOS, change in logical memory was found to be correlated with change in FA of the right crux (Pearson r= 0.707, P<0.05) and
the left crux of the fornix (Pearson r= 0.635, P<0.05). Conclusions : There
is a loss in fornix integrity within the sub-acute stages of TBI, and greater
FA reductions in the right and left crux of the fornix are associated with
poorer verbal memory recovery. Such changes within white matter
tracts may explain the poor cognitive recovery observed in TBI patients.

D64
REORGANISATION OF MEMORY LOAD IN TEMPORAL ASSOCIATION
TRACTS IN MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT Claudia Metzler-Baddeley1,
Hunt2,

Jones1,

Aggleton1,

Bayer3,

Sarah
Derek K
John
Anthony
Michael J.
O'Sullivan1,4; 1Cardiff University Brain Research Institute (CUBRIC), School of
Psychology and Neuroscience and Mental Health Research Institute, Cardiff
University, 2NISCHR CRC, South East Wales Research Network, Cardiff,
3
Cardiff Memory Team, Llandough Hospital, LLandough, Cardiff, 4Department
of Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College , London —
Episodic memory is supported by networks of white matter tracts that
connect temporal with frontal and parietal regions. Degradation of white
matter is increasingly recognised as important feature of memory
changes associated with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) but the precise significance of the specific connections within these networks
remains to be characterised. Furthermore, recent evidence from fMRI

118

studies in MCI suggest that the brain may respond to disease by reorganising the structure and the connections of its memory networks. The
present study employed diffusion-weighted MRI tractography to reconstruct three temporal fasciculi presumed to link components of memory
networks - the fornix, the parahippocampal cingulum, and the uncinate
fasciculus. A group of 25 MCI patients was compared with 20 healthy
controls matched for age, education, and sex. Patients and controls differed significantly in all measures of episodic memory except for familiarity based memory. For the controls, episodic memory was only
associated with changes in fornix microstructure and not with changes
in the other tracts. In contrast, for MCI patients, memory was associated
with the status of the parahippocampal cingulum and the uncinate fasciculus, but not of the fornix. Moreover, familiarity based memory was
specifically associated with variation in parahippocampal cingulum
microstructure. This pattern of dissociations suggests that in the healthy
brain the fornix bares most of the episodic memory load whereas in the
presence of a compromised mediotemporal lobe system, other temporal
association tracts may be recruited to support familiarity based memory
function and to compensate for fornix loss.

D65
EFFECTS OF SLEEP ON MEMORY AND REACTIVITY FOR POSITIVE
EMOTIONAL PICTURES rebecca spencer1, Syndey Adams1, Bengi Baran1;

1
University of Massachusetts, Amherst — Recently we illustrated that negative emotional memories are consolidated over sleep and this is accompanied by preserved emotional reactivity relative to the attenuated
emotional response and reduced memory accuracy observed following
wake. In the present study, we investigated processing of positive emotional stimuli over sleep. Seventy young adults (aged 18-30) were tested
over two sessions separated by 12-hrs with overnight sleep (Sleep group)
or daytime wake (Wake group). In both sessions, participants provided
valence and arousal ratings for IAPS images selected to represent neutral
to positive valence. Sleep enhanced memory for positive images
(F(1,68)=3.76, p=.057) but no such benefit was observed for the interleaved neutral images (F(1,68)=.27, p=.61). Emotional reactivity to positive images was attenuated (towards neutral) over both the sleep and
wake intervals but the magnitude of attenuation tended to be higher in
the Sleep group (F(1,68)=3.09, p=.08). Initial emotionality ratings were
similar across groups, excluding possible circadian effects on performance (all p>.65). There was no significant relationship between memory accuracy and change in emotional reactivity suggesting these two
processes may occur independently (r=.08, p=.7). These results suggest
that sleep may prioritize consolidation of positive memories over neutral
memories presented in the same context. Moreover, the subjective reactivity to emotionally positive stimuli is attenuated by sleep, in contrast to
the protection of the emotional reaction to negative items following
sleep. Collectively, this may reflect an adaptive function of sleep in
maintaining the responsiveness and memory for threatening stimuli and
decreasing the response to items that are not threatening.

D66
IMPLICIT MEMORY PROVIDES PERCEPTUAL AND CONCEPTUAL
INFORMATION FOR EXPLICIT RECOGNITION DECISIONS Philip
Ko1,

Bryant Duda1, Erin Hussey1, Brandon Ally1; 1Vanderbilt University — Recent

evidence suggests that perceptual implicit memory informs explicit recognition decisions. We hypothesized that recognition mediated by
implicit memory, or implicit recognition, could also be based on conceptual information. To examine this hypothesis, participants studied pictures of real-world objects. At test, they viewed studied items, unstudied
items, and exemplars drawn from the same basic-level categories as the
studied items, under very difficult viewing conditions. For each item,
participants reported whether they could identify the item, and then
made an old/new judgment regardless of whether the item could be
identified. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded during test.
Recognition behavior on trials when the items could not be identified
showed a greater number of studied items rated as “old” compared to
the exemplar and unstudied items, confirming perceptually-based

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session D
implicit recognition. Importantly, a greater number of exemplar items
were rated as “old” compared unstudied items, indicating a significant
conceptual contribution to implicit recognition. The ERP results revealed
classic old/new effects in frontal and parietal regions associated with
explicit recognition for the identified items. In contrast, ERPs for unidentified items showed reverse old/new effects over occipital regions. Similar to previous work, topographic differences between studied and
exemplar items revealed a neural correlate associated with perceptual
implicit recognition. Supporting our behavioral results, topographic differences between exemplar and unstudied items demonstrated distinct
activity for conceptual implicit recognition. Together, these behavioral
and ERP results confirmed previous findings of perceptual implicit recognition, but also revealed novel findings indicating that conceptual
information makes an important contribution to implicit recognition.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Semantic
D68
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY OF NAMING BASED ON ODORS VERSUS VISUAL
OBJECTS Robert Hurley1, Marsel Mesulam1, Jay Gottfried1, Jonas Olofsson2;
1

Northwestern University, 2Stockholm University — Healthy adults are able to
name visual objects both quickly and effortlessly, reflecting close cooperation between the ventral visual stream and the left perisylvian language
network. Odor naming depends on interactions with the medial frontotemporal olfactory network, and is subjectively more difficult and objectively less accurate compared to picture naming. The basis for this
discrepancy is currently unknown. We used the event-related potential
(ERP) method to explore the semantic integration of visual and odor
objects with word labels. We hypothesized that odor-based mapping to
words would be distorted relative to visual-based mapping, and that this
distortion would extend beyond perceptual identification to a deeper
stage of semantic association. Fifteen younger adults were presented
with a set of 12 objects from 3 edible and 3 inedible categories. Participants rated pictures of each object as being more familiar than odors,
consistent with a general lack of expertise for odors. Participants were
then presented with odor or picture object primes followed 2 seconds
later by matching, related (from the same category), or unrelated word
probes. Accuracy was lower on matching and related odor trials, suggesting difficulty in assigning labels to similar odors from the same category. We used the event-related potential (ERP) technique to evaluate
the quality of lexical mapping on the remaining trials where participants
responded correctly. N400 potentials were more spatially focal and of
higher amplitude on odor trials compared to picture trials, providing
evidence of qualitative differences in the lexical mapping from each
object modality.

D69
OBSERVED MANIPULATION INDUCES OBJECT REPRESENTATIONS IN
FRONTO-PARIETAL CORTEX Naima Rüther1, Marco Tettamanti2, Stefano

Cappa3, Christian Bellebaum1; 1Ruhr University Bochum, Germany, 2San
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Italy, 3Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Italy —

The factors determining semantic memory organization are still a matter
of debate. Modality-specific theories propose that neural object representations depend on the modalities of object-related experience. For tools,
representations in fronto-parietal cortex would thus be caused by the
involvement of these brain regions during tool manipulation. The aim of
the present study was to elucidate if mere observation of tool manipulation can induce object representations in fronto-parietal brain regions.
Thirty-six novel, manipulable, tool-like objects were created, each serving a particular function. Seventeen participants received object-related
training in three sessions. One set of 12 objects was manipulated by the
experimenter during training, and the subjects observed the manipulation (observed manipulation objects, oMO). Another set of 12 objects was
visually explored by the participants (visually trained objects, VTO), and
the third set of objects was not part of the training (not trained objects,
NTO). Pre- and post-training, subjects’ brain activity was assessed using

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

functional magnetic resonance imaging while they completed a matching task with images of the objects. After training, oMO elicited stronger
activity than NTO in the left inferior parietal lobule and inferior frontal
gyrus including Brodmann Area (BA) 45. In the same inferior frontal
region activity was also higher for oMO than VTO, whereas for VTO vs.
NTO higher activity was found in a more anterior part of the inferior
frontal gyrus (BA 10). The observation of tool manipulation is thus capable of inducing object representations in fronto-parietal brain regions,
which are typically associated with knowledge about active tool use.

D70
MAPPING THE SIMILARITY SPACE OF CONCEPTS IN SENSORIMOTOR
CORTEX Elizabeth Musz1, Eiling Yee1,2, Sharon L. Thompson-Schill1;
1Department

of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, 2Basque Center on
Congition, Brain and Language — How is conceptual information repre-

sented across sensory and motor cortex? Rather than merely demonstrating that retrieving a feature of an object, such as its shape, activates a
relevant sensorimotor region, such as occipitotemporal cortex, we tested
a stronger prediction of sensorimotor theories of concepts, namely that
the similarity of the neural representations of two concepts in a given
region should reflect their similarity on a specific dimension. We measured the magnitude of fMRI-adaptation (our index of neural similarity)
to word pairs that varied according to their similarity on shape (bageltire) and manipulation (key-screwdriver). Degree of shape similarity
was positively correlated with the magnitude of fMRI-adaptation in two
regions involved in visual object recognition (left lingual and fusiform
gyri), whereas degree of manipulation similarity was positively correlated with adaptation in two regions involved in planning and performing object-related actions (left inferior parietal and precentral gyri). That
is, we identified two distinct neural similarity spaces that map onto conceptual similarity in different ways, and these effects confirm the predictions from sensorimotor theories. Surprisingly, we also observed
inverse-adaptation (i.e., more activation) in the same regions: In visual
regions, greater manipulation similarity led to inverse adaptation; and in
action regions, greater shape similarity led to inverse adaptation. We
will discuss the possibility that these inverse-adaptation effects reveal
interactions between conceptual representations, and that these interactions serve to magnify differences in the distinctive features of related
concepts. These findings illustrate the importance of examining neural
similarity for our understanding of conceptual representation.

D71
IMPAIRED BINDING OF PERCEPTUAL INFORMATION WITHIN SEMANTIC
MEMORY IN EARLY-STAGE ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE: BEHAVIORAL
EVIDENCE FOR DISRUPTED FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY Elena Festa1,

Brian Ott1,2, Geoffrey Tremont1,2, William Heindel1; 1Brown University, 2Rhode
Island Hospital — Previous studies have demonstrated impaired sensory

binding associated with corticortical disconnectivity in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Disrupted functional connectivity has also been observed in
resting-state networks of AD patients and patients with mild cognitive
impairment (MCI). Because real objects (particularly living items) are
represented as integrated sets of perceptual features distributed across
distinct cortical areas, the semantic memory impairments observed in
AD may be attributable to the disruption of functional connectivity
within these cortical areas. To examine this issue, healthy controls and
AD/MCI patients were given a Stroop-like task in which they named the
color of pictures of real world living and nonliving objects as quickly as
possible. Objects with strongly associated colors were presented in either
typical (red strawberry) or atypical (yellow strawberry) colors; objects
without strongly associated colors served as neutral stimuli. While both
groups showed reduced accuracy for the typical and atypical stimuli
compared to the neutral stimuli, the patient group showed an additional
reduction in accuracy for the typical living (but not nonliving) stimuli.
The patient group also displayed an additional increase in color naming
latency for the typical living stimuli. Results suggest that binding of distributed object featural representations is disrupted at the earliest stages

119

Poster Session D — Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
of AD, such that access to color features is more difficult for living
objects. These findings not only provide further confirmation of a featural binding deficit associated with the neocortical disconnectivity in
AD, but also provide support for a fundamental distinction between the
stored representations of living and nonliving objects.

D72
I KNOW I'VE SEEN YOU BEFORE: EXAMINING THE BRAIN BASES OF
EPISODIC AND SEMANTIC MEMORY RETRIEVAL USING RECOLLECTION
AND FAMILIARITY Sarah I. Gimbel1, James B. Brewer2, Anat Maril1; 1The

Hebrew University in Jerusalem, 2University of California, San Diego — Episodic and semantic memory retrieval have been well studied, yet only
episodic memory has been subdivided into judgments of recollection/
familiarity. To disambiguate results of studies comparing episodic and
semantic memory, we seek to study judgments of episodic and semantic
item-only memory, free from additional information inherent in unconstrained studied of memory retrieval. We first behaviorally show that
subjects can divide semantic memories into recollection/familiarity
using a new set of stimuli, and that additional information retrieved during semantic recollection is itself semantic in nature. Using fMRI, we
then examine the differences in BOLD activity during judgments of episodic and semantic recollection/familiarity. No differences were found
in cortex or in medial temporal lobe when subjects made episodic and
semantic recollection judgments. However, judgments of episodic and
semantic familiarity showed different networks of activation in cortex
and medial temporal lobe. Using the medial temporal lobe clusters as
seed regions, functional connectivity during episodic and semantic
familiarity differed. While there was no difference in activation when
additional information was retrieved along with the item, without access
to the context necessary for memories to be recollected, episodic and
semantic memory retrieval functionally differentiate in cortex, substructures of the medial temporal lobe, and functional correlation of cortex
with these medial temporal lobe structures. This could be a result of differences in the presence and accessibility of episodic and semantic additional information; episodic items have no schema while semantic items
must have some schema in order to be identified as familiar, even if that
information is inaccessible.

D73
YOU JUMP, I JUMP: NEURAL SENSITIVITY TO ABSTRACT ACTION
SEMANTICS Christine Watson1, Eileen Cardillo1, Bianca Bromberger1,
Anjan Chatterjee1; 1University of Pennsylvania — We used perceptually-rich

photographs of human actions and pared-down drawings of actions to
test the hypothesis that concrete versus more symbolic formats recruit
different representations in the brain. We also tested if activity in sensorimotor cortices responds to the abstract identity of an action across
multiple instances of that action, irrespective of format. Using repetition
suppression functional magnetic resonance imaging, we asked participants to decide if pairs of photographs and drawings referred to the
same or different actions. Items in a pair depicted identical instances of
an action (SAME), different instances of the same action (ALT), or different actions altogether (DIFF). We predicted decreased neural activity for
SAME relative to DIFF trials in perceptual areas and for ALT relative to
DIFF trials in areas coding abstract action identity. In visual motion area
MT, we observed significant suppression for SAME but not ALT trials
relative to DIFF trials. In motor cortex, we observed significant suppression for both SAME and ALT trials relative to DIFF trials. These results
suggest that area MT does not represent abstract action identity but that
different instances of an action may elicit the same embodied motor
response. We also hypothesized that schematic drawings would activate
areas different from, and possibly adjacent to, sensorimotor areas activated by photographs. Partially consistent with this hypothesis, preliminary whole-brain analyses comparing photographs and drawings
indicated photographs more strongly activated bilateral occipital poles.
Drawings more strongly activated right superior parietal cortex, an area
associated with impaired understanding of schematic spatial relations
when damaged.

120

D74
FEATURE DIAGNOSTICITY AFFECTS SEMANTIC REPRESENTATIONS OF
NOVEL AND COMMON OBJECT CATEGORIES Nina S. Hsu1, Margaret L.
Schlichting2, Sharon L. Thompson-Schill1;

2University of Texas at Austin — A

1University

of Pennsylvania,

central principle in sensorimotor theories
of concepts is that categories may differentially rely on some sensorimotor regions over others due to each category’s properties. While there is
evidence for basic predictions of sensorimotor theories, less research
exists about the principles leading to different representations across categories. In two experiments, we explored how feature diagnosticity
affected neural conceptual representations by examining how variation
in diagnosticity of color information affected recruitment of color-sensitive visual areas during conceptual retrieval. In Experiment 1, subjects
were trained to learn that color and shape were necessary features in
novel object representations (similar to limes and lemons), or that shape
alone was a sufficient feature in novel object representations (similar to
stop signs and yield signs, where color is available but not necessary). In
Experiment 2, subjects were asked about categories wherein color is necessary (fruits and vegetables) or not (household items). For both experiments, subjects completed a feature listing task describing the objects,
then performed a shape knowledge retrieval task while undergoing
fMRI. In visual areas involved in color perception, we found greater
activity during the shape retrieval task for color+shape subjects than for
shape subjects. We also found greater activity in these areas during the
task for fruits and vegetables compared to household items. In both
experiments, prioritizing color in the feature listing task correlated with
brain activity in color-sensitive regions during the task. These results
suggest neural correlates for diagnostic features, and that when activating object representations, diagnostic features may be retrieved automatically.

D75
ORDINAL AND CARDINAL PROCESSING OF SYMBOLIC AND NONSYMBOLIC NUMBERS Ian Lyons1, Sian Beilock1; 1University of Chicago —
We investigated neural areas involved in processing ordinal versus cardinal information in symbolic (Arabic numerals) and non-symbolic (dotarrays) numerical stimuli. Behavioral results showed worse performance
with larger numerical distances for both ordinal and cardinal judgments
using non-symbolic stimuli. For symbolic stimuli, this effect was
reversed distance effect on ordinal but not cardinal judgments. Symbolic
ordinal judgments showed greater activation than both symbolic cardinal and non-symbolic ordinal judgments in left posterior supramarginal
gyrus (SMGp), and left dorsal and ventral premotor cortex (PMd, PMv).
Contrasting symbolic ordinal with symbolic cardinal judgments showed
greater activity for the former in left PMd, and the opposite pattern in
right SMGp and angular gyrus (AG). Accessing ordinal information in
numerical symbols appears to operate via a left-lateralized combination
of procedural and retrieval processes; accessing cardinal information in
numerical symbols may rely more on a bilateral retrieval process. Nonsymbolic ordinal judgments showed greater activity than both non-symbolic cardinal and symbolic ordinal judgments in right dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and right IPS. Contrasting non-symbolic ordinal
and non-symbolic cardinal judgments revealed greater activity for the
former in right IPS and right DLPFC. Accessing ordinal information in
non-symbolic numerical stimuli appears to operate by iteratively comparing items in regions known to support cardinal representation of
approximate, analogue magnitudes. Symbolic and non-symbolic representation of numbers may be less similar than previously assumed.
Ordinal processing in particular appears to operate in a fundamentally
different manner for numerical symbols. We propose that symbolic
numbers form a complex associative network; non-symbolic numbers do
not.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session D

D76
CATEGORY LEARNING IN ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE DEPENDS ON THE
MODE OF ACQUISITION: EVIDENCE FOR MULTIPLE CATEGORIZATION
SYSTEMS William Heindel1, Elena Festa1, Kelly Landy2, David Salmon2;

D78
CATEGORY DISSOCIATIONS IN VENTRAL TEMPORAL CORTEX ARE
ASSOCIATED WITH DIFFERENT PATTERNS OF INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY William Dale Stevens1, Michael Henry Tessler1, Kelly Anne

1Brown University, 2University of California, San Diego — Recent

studies suggest that category learning may involve multiple, qualitatively distinct
memory systems, with the relative involvement of each system depending at least in part upon the mode of knowledge acquisition: a) Observational (e.g., paired-associate) learning may primarily engage an explicit
episodic/semantic system mediated by the medial temporal lobe; b)
Trial-by-trial feedback learning may primarily engage a procedural system mediated by the basal ganglia; and c) Incidental learning may primarily engage the perceptual representation system mediated by
sensory cortices. The degree to which patients with Alzheimer’s disease
(AD) demonstrate impaired or intact ability to acquire new categorical
information may therefore critically depend upon the mode of acquisition. To examine this issue, groups of healthy controls and AD patients
were administered three category learning tasks that used the same stimuli but that differed in mode of acquisition. Subjects were trained on
low-distortion exemplars of novel cartoon animal categories, and then
tested on different low-distortion exemplars, high-distortion exemplars,
and prototypes of each category. Despite impaired explicit recall of category features in all three tasks, patients showed differential patterns of
category acquisition across tasks: a) Under feedback conditions, patients
showed intact acquisition of both exemplar and prototype information;
b) Under observational conditions, patients showed intact prototype but
impaired exemplar acquisition; and c) Under incidental conditions,
patients showed greatest impairment on prototype acquisition. Taken
together, these results support the role of multiple memory systems
underlying category learning, and suggest that multiple processes may
contribute to the semantic memory deficits observed in AD.

Barnes1, Alex Martin1; 1National Institutes of Health — The

D77
POSSIBLE CEREBELLAR CONTRIBUTIONS TO SEMANTIC FLUENCY

D79
RAPID HIPPOCAMPAL INDEPENDENCE IN THE DECLARATIVE MEMORY
SYSTEM Steffen Gais1, Melanie Graetsch1, Carolina Roselli1, Stefan

Jerillyn Kent1, Sean C. Matthews1, Michael N. Jones1, Amanda R.
Bolbecker1,2,3, Olga Rass1, Brian F. O'Donnell1,2,3, William P. Hetrick1,2,3;
1
Indiana University Bloomington, 2Indiana University School of Medicine,
3Laure D. Carter Memorial Hospital — Interest in the cerebellum’s contribution to cognition has increased in recent years. Theoretical models of
psychopathology identify the cerebellum as a critical node in a coordinative network regulating cognition and motor function. We hypothesized
that performance on delay eyeblink conditioning (EBC), a cerebellardependent associative learning task, would be correlated with semantic
fluency performance in healthy individuals (n=10) but not in schizophrenic (n=8) and bipolar (n=11) participants, both populations with
documented cerebellar anomalies. Subjects completed EBC and a semantic fluency task. During EBC, an airpuff that elicits an unconditioned
blink response is repeatedly paired with a tone. Subjects develop a conditioned blink response (CR) to the tone that precedes airpuff onset. In
the semantic fluency task, subjects named exemplars from the “animal”
category for one minute. In healthy participants, but neither patient
group, the number of items generated on the semantic fluency task correlated with CR timing (r(8)=-0.71, p=0.02). A computational model of
semantic memory was applied to the semantic fluency data to quantify
the structure of the semantic space formed by each subjects’ exemplars
(i.e., how semantically related successively generated items were to each
other). In controls, CR timing was also marginally significantly related to
the semantic neighborhood density of exemplars produced (i.e., how
many other exemplars exist in a given sub-category of animals) (r(8)=0.63, p=0.05). This relationship between performances on a cerebellarmediated task and semantic fluency in controls supports the hypothesis
that the cerebellum is involved in the coordination of cognitive processes
in individuals with intact cerebella.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

topographical
organization of category-specialized regions in human ventral temporal
cortex is remarkably consistent across individuals. A well-documented
example of this is the functional-anatomic dissociation between processing of animals and tools in lateral and medial regions of the fusiform
gyrus, respectively. Although the determinants of this category-related
brain organization are largely unknown, one recently suggested possibility is that it is driven, in part, by differential connectivity with other
functionally relevant brain areas (Martin, 2006; Mahon & Caramazza,
2011). We hypothesized that the preferential involvement of medial fusiform cortex in the perceptual and conceptual processing of tools is associated with intrinsic functional connectivity (FC) of this region with
other brain regions critical for processing their relevant properties. We
used fMRI and a multi-category functional localizer to identify a toolpreferential region (“tool ROI”) within the medial fusiform cortex of
healthy young adults. We then used these tool ROIs as seeds in wholebrain FC analyses of independent rest-runs in these same participants.
Across participants, the medial fusiform tool ROI showed strong intrinsic FC with other brain regions that are critical for processing different
types of category-specific properties, including regions involved in: 1)
perception of non-biological motion (posterior middle temporal gyrus);
2) storing and/or retrieving “motor programs” (ventral premotor cortex); and 3) visuo-motor transformations necessary for execution of complex hand gestures (inferior parietal lobe). These results are consistent
with the idea that the topographical organization of category-specialized
regions in ventral temporal cortex depends on connectivity with other
domain relevant regions of the brain.

Glasauer1, Virginia Flanagin1; 1LMU Munich — The hippocampus is thought
to be the crucial structure for declarative memory. According to the current standard model, spatial information, object relations or episodic
memories are believed to be stored in the hippocampus, at least for an
extended period of time after initial acquisition. Recent evidence has
questioned this view, suggesting faster consolidation or no consolidation
at all for some forms of memory. The present study looked at brain activity during retrieval of different types of declarative material learned 30
min earlier. The material used were words associated to the previous
word of the list (sequential), words associated to autobiographical events
(episodic), or words linked to locations along a well-known path (spatial). Recall in all three conditions showed common activity in occipitalparietal areas, particularly the left precuneus. The spatial condition additionally employed the retrosplenial cortex and more lateral occipital
areas. Only the episodic condition recruited a network comprising the
lingual and fusiform gyri and the hippocampus. Posterior probabilities
from a Bayesian analysis confirmed this distinction. These findings challenge the concept of independent slow and fast learning systems and
demonstrate the possibility of rapid hippocampal independence in some
forms of episodic memory.

D80
THREAT AS A FEATURE OF SEMANTIC AUDITORY MEMORY Neena Rao1,

Michael Motes1,2, Cliff Calley3, Gail Tillman1, Michael Kraut4, John Hart, Jr.1,2;
1
Center for BrainHealth University of Texas at Dallas, 2University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, 3University of Texas San Antonio Medical
Center, 4John's Hopkins University — A wide range of visual and auditory
stimuli in our environments are processed in our interactions based on
our semantic knowledge of that item. While previous research has identified neural regions that preferentially activate to categories of visual
stimuli (e.g., tools, faces, houses, etc.), little has been done for auditory

121

Poster Session D — Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
stimuli. The present study used fMRI to explore nonverbal and environmental auditory processing of varying categories and features. Stimuli
were grouped in five different categories including (1) humans, (2)
objects, (3) animals, and (4) weapons and musical instruments with two
different features within each category including (1) threatening and (2)
nonthreatening. Scrambled sounds of the stimuli were also used to control for perceptual processing. There were a total of 16 different stimulus
types (e.g., human scrambled threatening, human scrambled nonthreatening, human real threatening, and human real nonthreatening). While
undergoing fMRI scanning, twenty-one right-handed adults (Mean Age
= 21.81, Male = 16) were to indicate if the sound was real or non-real
with a button-press. Behavioral results revealed a main effect of category
on accuracy and reaction time. Within bilateral superior temporal, right
posterior cingulate, right medial frontal, left occipital, and left frontal
there were significant category differences. Additionally, within these
regions, there were multiple significant interactions between category
and feature distinctions where threatening differed for nonthreatening
sounds. These results suggest region-specific preferential activation to
category and feature processing of auditory stimuli.

artificial neural network called a Self-Organizing Map (SOM or Kohonen
network) to identify and sort stable, repeating patterns of activity in time
series data. When applied to simulated intracranial electrophysiological
(multi-neuronal spike trains) data in rats and simulated scalp-recorded
electroencephalographic (EEG) data from humans, this method was able
to reliably identify embedded patterns designed to model previously
observed activity. In tests on real intracranial recording data from auditory cortex of rats, this method successfully identified patterns of activity
associated with auditory stimulation without a priori knowledge of
when that stimulation occurred in time. Applications to real scalprecorded EEG data from humans are currently being tested and will be
presented. Our method is flexible and could be adapted to a variety of
time varying signals like BOLD-activation, ICA component activation, or
time-frequency data from electrophysiological recordings to mine data
for interesting, spontaneously occurring patterns of activity that may be
missed by traditional analysis.

METHODS: Electrophysiology

Ontario Institute of Technology — One promising approach to the study of
electrical signals in the cortex uses neural population models. Such models describe the dynamics of coarse-grained membrane potentials and
synaptic activity. The membrane potential represented in the model is
closely related to the measured electroencephalograph (EEG). One such
model, formulated by Liley et al. (Network, Vol. 13, 2002, 67-113) has
been particularly successful in reproducing alpha and gamma band
activity, response to anaesthetic induction and other physiological
effects. This model takes the form of a system of nonlinear, hyperbolic,
partial differential equations. If we consider the input parameters of the
model to be constant, we obtain a deterministic dynamical system that
can be analysed with the tools of bifurcation analysis. This is a challenging task, owing to the large number of degrees of freedom in discretizations of the model over a cortical slab of several square centimetres with
millimetre-scale resolution. For this reason, all bifurcation analysis published so far on this model has ignored spatial variability of the neural
fields, thereby reducing the model to a small system of ordinary differential equations. On the other hand, the study of simpler population
models has shown that these produce complicated patterns such as travelling waves and pulses (see, e.g., Coombes, Neuroimage, Vol. 52, 731739). We will present the first results of a bifurcation study of the fullfledged, space and time dependent Liley model. In particular, we show
that Hopf bifurcations change into Turing-Hopf bifurcations that spawn
travelling waves and re-evaluate some earlier results.

D81
CLASSIFYING VISUAL PERCEPTION ON A TRIAL-BY-TRIAL BASIS USING
EEG SIGNALS Monica Rosenberg1, Alexandra List2, Aleksandra Sherman2,

Marcia Grabowecky2,3, Satoru Suzuki2,3, Michael Esterman1,4; 1Boston
Attention and Learning Lab, VA Boston Healthcare System, 2Department of
Psychology, Northwestern University, 3Interdepartmental Neuroscience
Program, Northwestern University, 4Boston University School of Medicine —
We investigated the efficacy of multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) for
revealing EEG correlates of visual perception. EEG was recorded with 64
scalp electrodes from four participants as they passively viewed grayscale stimuli varying along four dimensions: location (left or right visual
field), category (face or Gabor), subcategory (male or female faces; high
or low spatial frequency Gabors), and orientation (upright or inverted
faces; horizontal or vertical Gabors). Group-averaged ERPs showed typical temporal shifts and amplitude differences for both contralateral-versus-ipsilateral stimuli and upright-versus-inverted faces. Using linear
support vector machines, we performed MVPA on the same EEG data
with approximately 1-ms precision to see if stimulus differences could be
classified on a trial-by-trial basis. EEG signals occurring at specific time
points (174 ms and 674 ms for left-versus-right classification, 180 ms and
271 ms for face-versus-Gabor classification, and 219 ms for upright-versus-inverted face classification) reliably predicted perceptual differences
with accuracy ranging from 67% to 93%. Importantly, the critical time
points were virtually identical for the four subjects. Although corresponding group-averaged ERPs differentiated a subset of these conditions, MVPA predicted stimuli on an individual subject level, provided
remarkably consistent estimates of the timing of perceptually relevant
neural information on a trial-by-trial basis, and revealed additional time
windows of discrimination accuracy. Thus, MVPA offers a robust complementary approach to ERPs in using EEG data to uncover neural correlates of visual processing.

D82
DETECTION OF PATTERNS OF SPONTANEOUS NEURAL ACTIVITY USING
ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS Dillon Hambrook1, Andrea Gomez-

Palacio-Schjetnan1, Matthew Tata1, Artur Luczak1; 1University of Lethbridge —

Event-related designs are ubiquitous in cognitive neuroscience research,
however real-world sensory input contains sequences of “events” that
are far more complex and dynamic than the typical block of trials
encountered in a neuroscience experiment. Event-related experimental
designs require that we know, with high temporal fidelity, the exact
moment at which a stimulus event might trigger mental activity of interest. This method is poor at making sense of activity that is not timelocked to such a discrete event. We present a method that uses a type of

122

D83
PATTERN FORMATION AND NONLINEAR OSCILLATIONS IN A NEURAL
POPULATION MODEL Lennaert van Veen1, Kevin Green1; 1University of

D84
PROCEDURE FOR OVERCOMING TIME LOCKING VARIABILITY IN LOWCOST EEG SYSTEMS AND DEMONSTRATION ON A REALISTIC HEAD
PHANTOM W. David Hairston1, Solomon Diamond2, David Kynor3,

Christopher Stachowiak1; 1US Army Research Laboratory, Human Research
and Engineering Directorate, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD, 2Thayer School of
Engineering at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, 3Creare, Inc., Hanover, NH — Eventrelated ERP experiments require precise time locking between stimulus
presentation times and the recorded EEG waveforms. While most contemporary EEG systems are precise in time-event recording, variability
can still occur, especially with low-cost solutions, leading to degraded
mean signal quality. One approach to overcome this problem is to utilize
secondary logfiles; however, properly accounting for timing drift and
variance errors remains difficult to implement. Here, we have developed
a procedure for correcting timing drift and variance errors using an algorithm designed to be fairly universal. It works for several different types
of current EEG systems and addresses most common limitations of secondary source data triggers arising from these systems (e.g. binary-only
input, high-variance timing, drift, etc). To evaluate the procedure’s efficacy, we performed tests on an anatomically accurate head “phantom”,
which generates realistic scalp potentials measurable with standard EEG

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session D
systems. Using phantoms is advantageous over other methods (e.g.
using digitally simulated data which lacks realistic errors, or relying on
averaged response from humans). The head phantom provides an accurately known “neurological” source signal in a reliable medium that can
be measured by any EEG system in a realistic manner. It is conductively
analogous to the human head, with multiple layers (brain, skull, scalp),
embedded dipole electrodes, and programmable scalp potential dynamics. Using the phantom, we were able to verify the proposed trigger-correction algorithm to be not only correct for timing jitter and clock drift,
but also provide highly-accurate timing with a relatively low-cost EEG
system that might otherwise be unreliable.

METHODS: Neuroimaging
D85
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI-SEEDED FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY: A NOVEL
APPLICATION OF PROBABILISTIC TRACTOGRAPHY Keith Yoder1, Eric

Porges1, Jean Decety1; 1University of Chicago — Functional magnetic resonance imaging cannot distinguish amongst various subnuclei of the
amygdalae. However, a recent study provided a method for labeling
nuclei within the amygdala utilizing combined structural MRI and diffusion tensor imaging (Saygin et al., Neuroimage 56, 2011). In the current
study, a similar approach was used to identify amygdalar subnuclei in
50 healthy adult participants who underwent fMRI while viewing 10second clips of either violent combat sports or a control condition (with
similar visual content but no injuries or intent to injure). The functional
scan was followed by a T1-weighted structural scan and a diffusion
weighted scan. After correction for eddy currents, diffusion data were
skull-stripped, tensors were fitted and primarily diffusion directions
were calculated using Bayesian estimation. Next, a semi-automated segmentation routine was used to parcellate subjects’ T1 images into cortical
and subcortical regions. Probabilistic diffusion tractography was then
conducted to calculate the likelihood of a connection between each
amygdala voxel and 34 bilateral targets or the brainstem. The resulting
probabilities were normalized, thresholded at 0.1, and binarized. Four
Boolean statements were then used to classify amygdalar voxels as
belonging to lateral, basal, central or medial subnuclei. These classification matrices were smoothed and those voxels that were contiguous with
at least 6 classified voxels were included in a mask for that subnucleus.
Masks identified through this method were used as seed regions for a
functional connectivity analysis of the subjects' fMRI data allowing for a
separation of functional connectivity between respective subnuclei.

D86
TASK-RELATED FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY REVEALS MULTIPLE
SCALES OF COGNITIVE PROCESSING Jane Wang1, Luis Amaral1,2, James
Booth1; 1Northwestern University, 2Howard Hughes Medical Institute — Func-

tional connectivity (FC) has recently emerged as a promising new methodological tool for examining interactions between disparate brain areas.
Combined with event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), which allows for experimental control over sources of inter- and
intra-subject variability, FC can be used to assess the neural correlates of
specific cognitive states. We conduct an fMRI connectivity analysis of 39
subjects (age 9 to 15) participating in a visually presented rhyming judgment task. We characterize links on three separate spatial scales: 1)
within an anatomical region (“within”), 2) inter-regional within the same
functional network (“between”) and 3) inter-regional between functional
networks (“cross”). Our two functional networks are derived from the
group-level lexical minus null and the null minus lexical contrasts,
resulting in 621 similarly sized regions of interest (ROIs) in total. Links
are obtained by cross-correlating average time series from these ROIs
after filtering at two frequency bands (0.008-0.1 Hz and 0.1-0.2 Hz) in
order to assess the impact of frequency on network dynamics. Our
results show that different brain activity patterns emerge as a function of
task accuracy depending on the spatial and temporal scale. We report
three key findings: 1) “between” links increase with accuracy, represent-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

ing global integration, 2) nodes exhibiting “within” link increases with
accuracy (local integration) are those found through graph theoretical
measures to be highly central to the functional network, while noncentral nodes display local segregation, and 3) global integration is prominent at lower frequencies while local segregation is prominent at higher
frequencies.

D87
PRELIMINARY EVIDENCE FOR OBESITY AND ELEVATIONS IN FASTING
INSULIN MEDIATING ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN CORTISOL AWAKENING
RESPONSE AND HIPPOCAMPAL VOLUMES AND FRONTAL ATROPHY

Alexandra Ursache1, William Wedin1, Aziz Tirsi1, Antonio Convit1; 1New York
University School of Medicine — Adolescents with type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM) exhibit deficits in memory and executive functioning, and hippocampal and frontal lobe reductions. In adults with T2DM, hippocampal reductions are associated with alterations in the cortisol awakening
response (CAR) (an indicator of hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA)
axis integrity), but pathways between these abnormalities and diabetes
associated factors are not well understood. Moreover, little is known
about whether brain impairments and HPA axis abnormalities already
exist in adolescents with pre-diabetic conditions such as obesity-associated insulin resistance (IR). Thus, this study first examined whether adolescents with IR exhibit alterations in the CAR, hippocampus, and
frontal lobes and then examined pathways involving HPA axis dysregulation, brain abnormalities, and diabetes associated factors including
Body Mass Index (BMI) and fasting insulin levels. We assessed 39 adolescents with IR and 20 demographically-matched lean adolescents without IR. Adolescents with IR had a blunted CAR, smaller hippocampal
volume, and greater frontal lobe atrophy compared to controls, demonstrating that HPA axis disruptions may occur in subclinical forms of
marked IR prior to development of the diabetic phenotype. Additionally, mediation analyses indicated that blunting of the CAR predicted
higher BMI, which in turn predicted higher fasting insulin levels, which
in turn predicted smaller hippocampal volumes and greater frontal lobe
atrophy. While we cannot make causal claims, results suggest that HPA
dysregulation is not only a result of brain abnormalities, but may also
play a role in metabolic alterations that in turn may cause abnormalities
in brain regions important for memory and executive functioning.

D88
ANALYSIS OF PHASE RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN SINGLE-TRIAL NEURAL
SIGNALS: TOWARDS A PHASE-BASED MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHIC
BRAIN-COMPUTER INTERFACE Matthew Sacchet1,2, Jürgen Mellinger2,

Karsten Rauss2, Ranganatha Sitaram2, Christoph Braun3, Niels Birbaumer2,
Eberhard Fetz4; 1Stanford Neurosciences PhD Program, Stanford School of
Medicine, 2Institute of Medical Psychology and Behavioral Neurobiology,
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 3MEG-Center, University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 4Department of Physiology and Biophysics,
University of Washington — Phase relationships between signals from disparate brain regions have been observed in various attention paradigms.
With the recognized importance of phase in cognitive neuroscience, it
has become apparent that phase-based brain-computer interfaces (BCIs)
may offer improved opportunities for cognitive training. We used two
approaches to phase analysis: magnitude squared coherence (MSC, or
coherence) and phase-locking value (PLV, or synchrony). We assessed
single-trial phase in synthetic and real magnetoencephalograph (MEG)
data. Single-trial variants of coherence (Welch’s averaged, modified periodogram MSC estimation) and synchrony (single-trial PLV) were implemented. We explored three methods of creating test data: white noise
generation, adding varying amounts of Gaussian noise to identical sine
waves, and computing fast Fourier transforms (FFT) of real MEG data,
adding circular noise to the sine (imaginary components), then computing inverse FFT to create phase-scrambled versions of the original data.
The third method proved inferior because creating continuous data from
IFFT data with introduced imaginary noise is difficult to implement
without generating strong phase relationships in the data. The PLV

123

Poster Session D — Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
method of assessing single-trial phase in real MEG and synthetic data
proved to be less effective because artificially high PLVs were found in
white noise comparison datasets (used for statistical analysis). MSC estimates were optimized for data produced from both 10 and 40Hz sine
waves. Future steps include automating optimization for smaller comparison intervals for window, overlap and data lengths, testing MSC and
single-trial PLV against real MEG signals with known phase relationships, and developing better comparison datasets for single-trial PLV
statistical assessment.

D89
EXAMINING CORTICAL FUNCTION AND CONNECTIVITY WITH
CONCURRENT TMS AND EROS Nathan A Parks1, Edward L Maclin1, Kathy

A Low1, Diane M Beck1,2, Monica Fabiani1,2, Gabriele Gratton1,2; 1Beckman
Institute, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2Department of Psychology,
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign — TMS is a powerful method for

non-invasively disrupting cortical activity in the human brain. Concurrent TMS-neuroimaging approaches have demonstrated that TMS pulses
not only activate directly stimulated tissue but also propagate trans-synaptically to interconnected brain regions, thus providing an effective tool
for causally assessing connectivity within cortical networks. However,
the integration of TMS with other neuroimaging technologies introduces
major temporal or spatial limitations when imaging TMS-evoked
responses. Here, we used a near-infrared optical imaging approach with
high spatial and temporal resolution (the event-related optical signal,
EROS) to record neuronal activation in response to a TMS pulse. In one
experiment, we recorded EROS bilaterally from left and right motor
strips during unilateral stimulation of the M1 hand representation. Ipsilateral activation of M1 was apparent within 16 ms of a TMS pulse and
propagated to contralateral M1 within 48 ms. These results demonstrate
that concurrent TMS-EROS can be used to measure cortical connectivity
with unprecedented spatial and temporal precision. In a second experiment, we recorded EROS bilaterally from motor cortex while subjects
performed a cued go/nogo task. Motor evoked potentials elicited by
TMS were indicative of increased corticospinal excitation in the go condition and inhibition in the nogo condition. EROS activations were differentially affected by excitation and inhibition 100 ms prior to the
average Go response time, indicating that EROS can differentiate
between excitatory and inhibitory brain states. These results demonstrate that concurrent TMS-EROS is useful for measuring the dynamics
of cortical connectivity and capable of examining novel questions about
cortical function.

D90
MULTI-VOXEL PATTERN ANALYSIS OF NOUN AND VERB DIFFERENCES IN
VENTRAL TEMPORAL CORTEX Christine Boylan1, John Trueswell1, Sharon
L. Thompson-Schill1; 1University of Pennsylvania — We tested the hypothesis

that predictions about upcoming lexical-syntactic categories give rise to
word form estimates in left ventral temporal cortex (VT). We conducted
multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) in VT when subjects were predicting, but crucially not viewing, nouns and verbs, thus removing any bottom-up information. We used the brain data to classify the prediction of
nouns vs. verbs in both sentence and non-sentence contexts. In Experiment 1, subjects (n=10) viewed low semantic cloze probability sentences
highly selective for either a noun or a verb completion; however, before
the sentence-final word was shown, subjects searched a series of noisy
images for a word to complete the sentence. In Experiment 2, subjects
(n=4) were cued for single noun-typical nouns and verb-typical verbs for
search in noise. Analyzing only those volumes collected when subjects
predicted a word but saw pure noise, we trained and tested a simple
neural network in a leave-one-out 4-fold cross-validation procedure.
Mean classification performance of nouns vs. verbs in sentence contexts
was significantly above chance (mean across subjects: 58%, chance =
50%). In the non-sentence word classifier (experiment 2), a given noun
was more often confused with another noun than with a verb, and viceversa. The sentence-context prediction results suggest that syntactic cues
are sufficient to drive top-down predictions of word form features in VT.

124

The within-category confusability of the individual word predictions
(for which lexical-syntactic category was not necessary to predict the
cued word form) suggests that retrieval of lexical-syntactic category may
be automatic during word prediction.

D91
FRACTIONATING THE DEFAULT NETWORK IN YOUNGER AND OLDER
ADULTS Karen Campbell1,2, Omer Grigg1,2, Cheryl Grady1,2; 1University of
Toronto, 2Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, Toronto, ON — Recent

work
suggests that the default network (DN) consists of a core set of areas,
including medial prefrontal cortex (PFC) and posterior cingulate cortex
(PCC), and at least two subsystems that are brought online when
needed. These include a medial temporal lobe (MTL) subsystem, active
during remembering, and a dorsomedial PFC (dMPFC) subsystem,
active during self-reflective thought. Further, the PCC itself can be subdivided into ventral (vPCC) and dorsal (dPCC) regions that are functionally connected with ventral DN regions and dorsal attention regions,
respectively, depending on rest/task demands. The goal of this study
was to use resting state functional connectivity (FC) to directly compare
the networks involving these four regions and confirm that there are
both common and unique aspects of FC, and to examine age differences
in FC within each of these subsystems. Resting state fMRI data were collected from 31 younger and 24 older adults. Data were analyzed using a
multivariate analysis technique which allows for the direct comparison
of FC in multiple seeds (in this case, the MTL, dMPFC, vPCC, and dPCC
taken from previous studies). We found that nodes within the DN show
both a common network (resembling what is typically referred to as the
DN), as well as distinct connectivity patterns with little overlap between
them. Further, we found that older adults’ FC patterns for each of these
seeds resembled those of younger adults, but they showed weaker FC
overall, suggesting age differences in both core and subsystems of the
DN.

D92
NITRC: NEUROIMAGING INFORMATICS TOOLS AND RESOURCES
CLEARINGHOUSE, A SUCCESSFUL KNOWLEDGE ENVIRONMENT FOR
THE NEUROIMAGING RESEARCHER David
Kennedy1,
Christian
Haselgrove1; 1University of Massachusetts Medical School — We report on a

neuroimaging informatics knowledge environment recently expanded
from MR to PET, EEG, MEG, SPECT, CT and optical neuroimaging tools
and resources: Neuroimaging Informatics Tools and Resources Clearinghouse (NITRC). Funded by the NIH Blueprint for Neuroscience
Research, NIBIB, NIDA, NIMH, and NINDS, NITRC fosters a userfriendly clearinghouse environment for the neuroimaging informatics
community. NITRC’s goal is to support researchers dedicated to enhancing, adopting, distributing, and contributing to the evolution of previously funded neuroimaging analysis tools and resources for broader
community use. Located at www.nitrc.org, NITRC promotes software
tools, workflows, resources, vocabularies, test data, and now, pre-processed, community-generated data sets (1000 Functional Connectomes,
ADHD-200) through its Image Repository (NITRC-IR). NITRC gives
researchers greater and more efficient access to the tools and resources
they need; better categorizing and organizing existing tools and
resources via a controlled vocabulary; facilitating interactions between
researchers and developers through forums, direct email contact, ratings
and reviews; and promoting better use through enhanced documentation. In Summary, NITRC facilitates access to a growing number of neuroimaging tools and resources (~450), and supports (~1 mil. hits monthly
by ~142,750 unique visitors, initiating ~450,000 downloads). NITRC has
established itself as a key resource for the advancement of neuroimaging
research.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session D

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control
D93
DYNAMIC RECONFIGURATION OF HUMAN BRAIN NETWORKS DURING
LEARNING Danielle Bassett1, Nicholas Wymbs2, Mason Porter3,4, Peter

Mucha5,6, Jean Carlson1, Scott Grafton2; 1Complex Systems Group,
Department of Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106,
2Department of Psychology and UCSB Brain Imaging Center, University of
California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, 3Oxford Centre for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics, Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3LB,
United Kingdom, 4Complex Agent-Based Dynamic Networks Complexity
Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 1HP, United Kingdom, 5Carolina
Center for Interdisciplinary Applied Mathematics, Department of
Mathematics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, 6Institute
for Advanced Materials, Nanoscience and Technology, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 — Learning is a complex phenomenon
requiring flexibility of existing brain function and precision in selecting
new functions to drive desired behavior. Selective adaptability is naturally provided by modular structure - system segregation into functional
units - which plays a critical role in evolution, development, and function. From initial training through mastery of a simple motor skill, functional connectivity measurements of brain activity were acquired in an
early learning study over the first 3 days of practice (N=18) and an
extended learning study over the first 30 days of practice (N=20), where
training exposure was manipulated in order to examine temporal scales
of learning. We investigated the role of modularity in human learning by
identifying dynamic changes spanning multiple temporal scales. In both
early and extended learning, functional brain networks display modularity. During extended learning, modular organization is strongest for
sequences that were practiced minimally (Repeated Measures ANOVA:
F(2,30)=12.48, p=0.0001). During early learning, flexibility - which we
measure by the allegiance of nodes to modules - in one experimental session predicts the relative amount of learning in a future session (Pearson
correlation, p<0.01). Together, these two findings suggest that modularity and flexibility are adaptive network traits that correspond to the
rapid performance improvement evident in early learning. Our work
examines modular organization in early and extended learning, and provides a quantitative predictor of learning success. We develop and apply
a dynamic network approach that is broadly applicable to disciplines
where network adaptability is crucial to the understanding of system
performance.

D94
MULTIVOXEL PATTERNS REVEAL FUNCTIONALLY DIFFERENTIATED
Zheng1,
NETWORKS UNDERLYING SPEECH MOTOR CONTROL Zane

Alejandro Vicente-Grabovetsky2,5, Ewen MacDonald1,3, Kevin Munhall1, Rhodri
Cusack2,4, Ingrid Johnsrude1,6; 1Queen's University, Canada, 2Medical
Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, UK, 3Technical University
of Denmark, Denmark, 4University of Western Ontario, Canada, 5Donders
Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Netherlands, 6Linkoping university,
Sweden — Models of speech motor control posit an interactive, distributed network of brain regions supporting their function. An important
component of such control is regulation of articulation when auditory
feedback does not correspond to the intended motor gesture. However,
previous neuroimaging studies have identified only a limited number of
regions involved in this sensorimotor process. Here, by using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and a multi-voxel pattern analysis
(MVPA) framework, we have examined the functional organization
underlying auditory feedback control, when altered and normal speech
feedback are presented both as auditory concomitants of speaking and
during listening. Right angular gyrus, right supplementary motor area,
and bilateral cerebellum were observed to yield consistent neural coding
patterns across altered feedback types, only during production but not
during listening. These regions satisfy criteria for involvement in generation and processing of an error signal, an essential feature of speech

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

motor control. A further assessment of the cortical networks exhibiting
this interaction revealed additional fronto-temporal regions in which
sensitivity to speech depends upon whether the participant is vocalizing
or listening. Our results strongly support the view that functionally differentiable and distributed systems subserve auditory feedback processing, and provide a more comprehensive picture of the neuroanatomical
substrates of speech motor control.

D95
THIS IS YOUR BRAIN ON POWER: ACTIVATING HIGH POWER DECREASES
MOTOR RESONANCE DURING ACTION OBSERVATION Jeremy

Hogeveen1, Michael Inzlicht3, Sukhvinder Obhi1,2; 1Center for Cognitive
Neuroscience, Wilfrid Laurier University, Canada, 2Institute of Cognitive
Neurocience, University College London, UK, 3Department of Psychology,
University of Toronto, Canada — Power refers to the ability to alter the state
of another individual by providing rewards or punishments (Keltner et
al., 2003). There is a tendency for those with power to pay less attention
to the actions of their powerless counterparts (Fiske, 1993), which can be
indexed by a decrease in the amount of nonconsious mimicry (NCM)
they display during social interactions (Cheng & Chartrand, 2003). Here,
we asked whether motor resonance (MR), or the mirroring of observed
actions in the observers’ motor system, is mediating the effect of power
on NCM. Participants wrote a narrative documenting a vivid experience
with, or without, power at the beginning of the experiment in order to
prime high or low power, respectively (Galinsky et al., 2003). Then,
using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) induced motor-evoked
potentials (MEPs), we examined the effect that the power prime had on
subsequent MR during passive action observation. The low power group
displayed a normative level of MR. In contrast, the high power group
showed no MEP facilitation during action observation, suggesting that
feelings of power modulate motor cortical output during action observation. Therefore, decreases in MR sensitivity when an individual has
power could be the mechanism mediating power differentials in social
attention and mimicry. Our results suggest that being in a position of
power modulates the salience of others’ actions to the observers’ motor
system. This has profound implications for the mechanisms underlying
behavioural tendencies during temporary experiences with power, and
the neurobiological differences underlying static power relationships.

D96
BMI-TELEOPERATION OF ANDROIDS CAN TRANSFER THE SENSE OF
BODY OWNERSHIP Maryam Alimardani1,2, Shuichi Nishio2, Hiroshi

Ishiguro1,2; 1Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka University,
2
Advanced Telecommunications Research Institute International (ATR) — Teleoperators of an android robot occasionally experience an illusion of body
ownership transfer as if robot’s body has become part of their own body.
This phenomenon resembles the "rubber hand illusion" in the absence of
tactile feedback and is due to the movement synchronization between
operators and robot. However, it was unknown whether this illusion can
occur when operator’s real motions are eliminated. Our research
explores whether the mind control of an android’s hands through a noninvasive BMI can induce the illusion of ownership toward the android’s
hands, in the absence of both tactile stimulation and proprioceptive feedback from subject’s real hands. We hypothesize that the correlation of
activities in the brain's motor cortex with visual feedback from robot’s
motions can affect operator's self-body perception. Nineteen trained participants wore an EEG electrode cap and performed motor imagery task
while watching the android’s hands through a head-mounted display.
Brain signals were classified and translated into the robot’s left or right
hand motions. Participants experienced different sessions of operation
and at the end of each session, robot’s hand received an injection to measure participant’s reaction to a pain-causing stimulus. Evaluation was
made by questionnaires and skin conductance responses. Both measurement methods confirmed a body ownership transfer when the robot’s
hands moved exclusively in accordance with participant’s intentions.
Through this work we showed that the transfer of body ownership to

125

Poster Session D — Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
teleoperated androids is mainly due to the motion agency and can also
occur in the absence of proprioceptive feedback from operator's muscle
movements.

D97
ACTION UNDERSTANDING IS EXPERIENCE-INDEPENDENT IN INFANCY
AND IS SHAPED BY EXPERIENCE WITH AGE Naznin Virji-Babul1,2, Rose

Ashley1,2, Moiseeva Nadya1,2; 1Dept. of Physical Therapy, University of British
Columbia, 2Child and Family Research Institute, Vancouver, B.C. — The

human mirror neuron system is thought to be the underlying basis of
perception-action coupling involved in action understanding. Numerous
electrophysiological and brain imaging studies support the existence of a
mirror neuron system in adults (Rizzolatti and Craighero, 2004; Iacoboni
et al, 2005; Gallese et al, 2006; Virji-Babul et al, 2010), yet the question of
the origins of the mirror neuron system and how this development is
related to the infant’s own abilities and experiences remains unclear. The
aim of the present study was to characterize the pattern of mu rhythm
modulation in infants and adults, for three types of actions: action that is
developmentally within the motor repertoire of infants, action that is
developmentally not within the motor repertoire of infants and object
motion.Ten infants (4-11 months) and ten adults (20-30 years) participated in this experiment. Videos of 1.5 seconds duration depicting three
different actions: human walking, hand reaching for an object and object
motion (toy car, rolling ball), were prepared. EEG was recorded using
high density HydroCel Geodesic Sensor Nets (EGI, Eugene, OR). We
analyzed the mu rhythm activity for infants (6-9 Hz) and adults (8-13
Hz). Significant EEG desychronization over sensory-motor regions was
observed under all conditions in young infants. In contrast, adults only
showed significant mu desynchronization in response to human reaching and walking motions. These data suggest that infants may be predisposed early in life to understand coherent human and object action and
that this basic perceptual mechanism is honed by sensorimotor experience.

D98
ACTION AND CONSCIOUSNESS: ENTRY INTO AWARENESS FROM
BEHAVIORAL INCLINATIONS AND PERCEPTUAL MOTOR RESONANCE

Shanna Cooper1, Tara C. Dennehy2, Ezequiel Morsella1,3; 1San Francisco State
University, 2University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 3University of California,
San Francisco — While substantial research has examined how attentional
and perceptual processes influence that which enters conscious awareness ('entry,' for short), little research has illuminated how action-related
processes (e.g., activation of action plans) influence entry, even though
neural evidence suggests that conscious awareness is intimately related
to crosstalk between perception and action processing. In a series of
experiments, we examined the influence of 'perceptual resonance' (Studies 1 and 2) and action-related tendencies (e.g., subjective urges and subjective effort; Study 3) on entry. Studies 1 (n = 19) and 2 (n = 33) reveal
that actions (e.g., circular motions) that are isomorphic to a subliminally
presented visual target (e.g., a circular object) may 'release' the target
from masking under certain conditions, t (32) = 1.775, p = .085. This is
explained as a case of 'perceptual resonance'. Building on research showing that entry of action-related urges is associated with the activation of
conflicting action plans, Study 3 (n = 21) revealed that conflict in the
Stroop color naming task is systematically associated with entry of metacognitions of exerted effort, F (3, 54) = 10.694, p < .0001. Together, the
findings are consistent with the hypothesis that action-related entry is
primarily a function of perceptual resonance and of the processing
dynamics associated with action conflict. The potential neural correlates
of action-related entry are reviewed.

D99
CO-LATERALIZATION OF PRAXIS AND SPEECH IN INDIVIDUALS WITH
Vingerhoets1,
TYPICAL AND ATYPICAL LANGUAGE DOMINANCE Guy

Ann-Sofie Alderweireldt1, Pieter Vandemaele1, Qing Cai1, Lise Van der
Haegen1, Marc Brysbaert1, Eric Achten1; 1Ghent University, Belgium — We
determined the neural correlates of word generation and tool use panto-

126

miming in healthy subjects with typical (n=10) or atypical (n=10) language dominance to investigate similarities in activation pattern and
hemispheric specialization between language and praxis. All typical language dominant volunteers also revealed left hemisphere activation during tool use pantomiming in prefrontal, premotor, and posterior parietal
regions. All atypical language dominant participants displayed right
hemisphere activation for tool use. Co-lateralization of the language and
praxis networks was observed on group and individual level, regardless
of the participant’s handedness. Activation maps of the word generation
and tool use pantomiming contrasts displayed overlap in five cortical
regions: supplementary motor area, dorsal and ventral premotor cortex,
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and posterior parietal cortex. Individual
lateralization indices were calculated for each region and revealed significant positive group correlations between .51 and .95 with every other
region within the paradigms. Positive cross-task correlations ranged
between .72 (supplementary motor complex) and .97 (dorsal premotor
cortex) and illustrate that the strength of hemispheric specialization of
one task significantly predicts the side and degree of lateralization of the
other task, suggesting a functional and topographic link between language and praxis. These findings support models that link gestures and
speech to explain the evolution of human language. We argue that the
existence of a common and co-lateralized network underlying the production of complex learned movement, whether it be speech or tool use,
may represent the evolutionary remnant of a neural system out of which
proto-sign and proto-speech co-evolved.

D100
THE NEURAL EFFICIENCY OF ACTION PLANNING: DIFFERENCES IN ERD
BETWEEN HIGH AND LOW WORKING MEMORY GROUPS Lawrence P.

Behmer Jr.1, Lisa R. Fournier1, Sabrina Gonzales1, Jeromy R. Roach1;
1Washington State University — The "Neural efficiency" hypothesis sug-

gests that neural activity is reduced in individuals with greater intelligence, expertise, and/or working memory capacity. Several studies have
been able to demonstrate this phenomena using EEG. For example, highIQ individuals have been shown to demonstrate less alpha/mu-desynchronization (mu-ERD) during cognitively demanding tasks than lowIQ individuals. Young participants showed less alpha/mu-ERD than
seniors during self-initiated movements. EEG research investigating the
mirror neuron phenomena has revealed similar patterns of mu-ERD
when individuals observe not only goal directed actions, but stimuli
associated with a learned motor program. After using the AOSPAN to
segregate individuals into high and low working memory span groups,
we employed EEG to measure mu- and beta-ERD over the Rolandic strip
while they performed a task which required them to hold an action plan
in working memory, made up of a series of learned movements associated with an abstract visual stimulus. We found that both groups
showed significant mu- and beta-ERD while planning their response
during the task. Additionally, low-span participants showed overall
greater mu-ERD than the high-span participants. Finally, low-span participants showed similar levels of mu-ERD in both hemispheres, regardless of which hand they used to plan their response, while high-span
individuals only showed mu-ERD in the hemisphere which was contralateral to their planning hand. We suggest that these increased levels
of mu-ERD in the low-span participants may be an indication of the need
to recruit greater neural resources during sensorimotor tasks which
place a load on working memory systems.

D101
DYSFUNCTIONAL FORWARD MODEL MECHANISMS AND ABERRANT
SENSE OF AGENCY IN OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER Antje

Gentsch1,2, Simone Schütz-Bosbach1, Tanja Endrass2, Norbert Kathmann2;
1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Germany,
2
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany — Patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) lack the experience of action completion and
agency. This subjective experience has been shown to depend on the
integrity of predictions of action outcomes generated by forward models

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session D
of the motor system. Motor predictions are critical for inhibitory gating
of actions and their consequences, and abnormal activity in motor control circuits, including basal ganglia and premotor cortex, has been
found in OCD. This is the first study explicitly investigating forward
model mechanisms in OCD. To test whether inhibitory gating based on
motor predictions is physiologically altered in OCD, we used electroencephalography to measure N1 suppression during active generation and
passive observation of visual feedback in 18 OCD patients and 18
healthy control subjects. Predictability of action feedback was manipulated on the basis of action and external cues, and simultaneous agency
judgments were assessed. OCD patients did not show the typical N1
suppression to actively generated feedback as compared to passively
observed feedback. Moreover, in OCD patients, the N1 was not modulated by additional predictive motor cues as observed in control subjects.
If explicitly asked to report agency experience, enhanced estimations
were found in patients, which correlated with the strength of incompleteness feelings. OCD patients fail to predict and suppress the sensory
consequences of their own actions. The constant mismatch between
expected and actual outcome caused by this forward model dysfunction
may explain the persistent feeling of incompleteness even after properly
executed actions and the obsessed searching for control in these patients.

D102
EFFECTS OF PHYSICAL FITNESS LEVEL ON INTERHEMISPHERIC
COMMUNICATION ACROSS THE LIFESPAN Keith McGregor1,2, Atchar

Sudhyadhom1,2, Nouman Mujahid1, Carolynn Patten1,2, Todd Manini2, Joseph
Nocera1,2, Bruce Crosson1,2; 1Malcom Randall VA Medical Center, 2University
of Florida — Aerobic fitness has been shown to be a buffer against aging
related changes in the human neural system (Erikson et al., 2011; McGregor et al., 2011; Voelcker-Rehage et al., 2010). In the human motor system, recent evidence from neuroimaging and neurophysiological studies
has indicated that aging may be associated with changes in interhemispheric communication (Talelli et al., 2008; Bernard & Seidler, 2011).
However the effects of aging and fitness on such communication in midlife remains unexplored. We tested the effects of aerobic fitness on communication between the right and left primary motor areas using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) on a cross-section of 15 aerobically active and 15 sedentary middle aged (40-60 years) adults. Data from 15 sedentary and 15
aerobically active younger adults (18-25 years) were also acquired for
comparison. Data from BOLD fMRI indicate that even in middle age sedentary individuals show increased bilateral recuitment sensorimotor
areas. Further ipsilateral positive BOLD activity is negatively correlated
with ipsilateral inhibition (ipsilateral silent period) and unimanual
motor performance (reaction time & dexterity).

THINKING: Decision making
D103
BRAIN RESPONSES DURING ANTICIPATION VERSUS OUTCOME IN GAIN
AND LOSS LEARNING IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Jenna M. Reinen1, Catherine

Insel1, Sergio Francis M. Zenisek1, Maggie S. Close1, Daphna Shohamy1, L.
Fredrik Jarskog2, Tor D. Wager3, Jochen Weber1, Edward E. Smith1,4; 1Columbia
University, 2University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 3University of Colorado,
Boulder, 4New York State Psychiatric Institute — Schizophrenia (SZ) is a dis-

ease involving abnormal dopamine signaling and motivational deficits.
These symptoms have been associated with behavioral deficiencies in
reward anticipation but not necessarily the experience of receiving
reward. Furthermore, neuroimaging (fMRI) studies have shown that
patients with SZ have abnormal activation in brain systems supporting
reward learning. However, it is unclear how brain systems underlying
anticipation and experience of reward differentially contribute to abnormal goal-directed and approach behavior. To dissociate the neural bases
of reward learning, anticipation, and outcome in SZ, we tested patients
and controls on a reward-learning task that separates choice, feedback,
and outcome while undergoing fMRI. On each trial, subjects chose

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

between two stimuli which were probabilistically associated with feedback (Correct/Incorrect), and after feedback received reward outcome.
Each subject performed this task in two separate conditions: gain, in
which correct feedback was associated with winning money, and loss, in
which correct feedback was associated with avoiding losing money.
Behavioral results indicated that patients performed worse than controls
in both conditions. Patients were also less likely to use an extended history of feedback to make choices, but more so in the gain than the loss
condition. Finally, imaging results showed decreases in SZ in orbitofrontal cortex and parahippocampal gyrus when making a choice and receiving reward, and these differences between groups were especially
pronounced in the gain but not the loss condition. These results indicate
that there may be abnormal activation in SZ both during the anticipation
of rewards and the experience of receiving reward.

D104
BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN RISK AND
ATTRIBUTE FRAMING William Hedgcock1, Irwin Levin1, Kameko

Halfmann1, Natalie Denburg1; 1University of Iowa — Framing effects occur

when decision makers respond differently to problems that are
described in positive or negative terms despite the fact that the problems
are objectively identical. Several distinctive types of frames have been
defined, yet these framing effects are often treated as a homogenous phenomenon. Two of the most common framing types that have been identified are risk and attribute framing. Risk frames involve a choice between
a risky and a riskless option, and individuals typically have a higher
preference for risky options when the problems are described in negative
terms. In contrast, attribute frames involve evaluations where options
are either risky or riskless and attributes, such as quality, are manipulated. Individuals typically give higher evaluations for options when the
problems are described in positive terms. Here, we conducted a series of
behavioral and functional magnetic resonance imaging studies to investigate processing differences in risk and attribute framing using a within
subject valence manipulation. We found that negative risk framing
increased risk taking, whereas negative attribute framing increased quality seeking. Behaviorally, the two types of framing were not correlated.
Critically, attribute and risk frames activated distinct brain regions.
Attribute framing was associated with regions involved in emotion processing, whereas risk framing was associated with regions related to
numerical processing. We suggest that risk and attribute framing
involve functionally different processes.

D105
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING MEDIATES RISK TAKING IN PARTICIPANTS
AGED 5-YEARS-TO-ADULT David Paulsen1, Michael Platt1, Scott Huettel1,

Elizabeth Brannon1; 1Duke University — Learning from feedback is critical
for adaptive decision-making and dysfunction in feedback-learning
mechanisms has been hypothesized to underlie pathological gambling.
Both learning from negative feedback and risk-aversion develop slowly
with age. We tested the hypothesis that these developmental changes are
related. Participants 5-years-to-adult were administered a reinforcement-learning (RL) task to collect measures of learning from positive
(FBPOS) and negative feedback (FBNEG), and one of two decision-making tasks. The decision-making tasks presented participants with a
choice between a Sure and a Risky option towards collecting coins
(Gains) and/or avoiding losing coins (Losses). In the RL task, age predicted learning from feedback. For Gains, increases in age, FBNEG, and
FBPOS, each decreased the probability of choosing the risky option. In
contrast, for Losses, increases in age and FBNEG increased the probability of choosing the risky option, while increases in FBPOS decreased the
probability of choosing the gamble. Mediation analysis showed that
FBNEG partially mediated the effect of age on choosing a gamble. Our
findings provide support for the idea that risk-aversion for gains and
risk seeking for losses are influenced by sensitivity to negative feedback.
These data are also consistent with different underlying mechanisms for
positive and negative feedback learning, and suggest that the development of these mechanisms contribute to the emergence of adult norma-

127

Poster Session D — Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
tive risk-aversion. In conjunction with data showing a strong connection
between RL and dopamine function, these findings suggest future lines
of research on the relationship between the development of dopamine
function and risk-taking behavior.

D106
THE IMPACT OF TESTOSTERONE ADMINISTRATION ON TRUST, RISK,
BETRAYAL, AND RECIPROCITY. Maarten Boksem1,2, Pranjal Mehta1,2,
Bram van den Bergh1, Veerle van Son2, Alan Sanfey2, Ale Smidts1; 1Rotterdam
School of Management, Erasmus University, 2Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University — Testosterone has been asso-

ciated with increased preferences for risk, while it is also proposed to
play an important role in social interactions. Because trust is often
regarded as ‘social risk’, we examined whether Testosterone differentially affects the decision to trust and the decision to take risks, by comparing a binary-choice Trust Game with a structurally identical, binarychoice Risk Game offering a good or a bad outcome. We elicited subjects’
minimum acceptable probabilities (MAPs) of recieving the good outcome such that they would prefer the gamble to the sure payoff. Of our
49 participants (all females), 24 received Testosterone, while 25 received
Placebo (double blind). In the Testosterone condition, first movers state
higher MAPs in the Trust Game than in situations where nature determines the outcome, while subjects in the Placebo condition showed no
such difference. In addition, subjects completed a series of lottery choices
and played a one-shot Trust Game. The results revealed no difference in
risk-attitude. In contrast, subjects in the Testosterone condition invested
significantly less in their partners as a first-mover in the Trust Game,
while they actually reciprocated more when they played as a secondmover. These results suggest that for subjects with high Testosterone, a
trust-decision entails an additional risk premium to compensate for the
potential costs of trust betrayal, leading to diminished trusting behaviour. At the same time, however, Testosterone enhanced reciprocity of
revealed trust. We suggest that the impact of Testosterone on the drive to
obtain and maintain social status may explain the present findings.

D107
SOCIAL LEARNING OF TRUST Catalina Ratala1,2, Luke Chang3, Aysegul
Cetinkaya2, Alan Sanfey2,4; 1Erasmus Research Institute of Management,
Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, 3University of Arizona,
4Behavioral Science Institute — Trust is the lubricant of social interactions
2Donders

(Zak & Knack, 2001). Daily life often confronts us with the decision of
whether to trust the people, brands and institutions we come in contact
with. As individual experience shows, there is a potential downside
associated with trusting: the risk of being betrayed. Given this constraint, how do we decide whom to trust? Several studies demonstrate
that people rely on information from previous interactions to assess others' trustworthiness: we learn who to trust. However, we also have
strong prejudice about who we should trust. Experimental evidence
shows that there are in-built mechanisms by means of which we automatically evaluate the trustworthiness of interaction partners. The information used to judge trustworthiness is partially encoded in facial
features and emotional expressions. The present study uses fMRI to
investigate the relationship between automatic judgments of trustworthiness and experience-based judgments in a social decision-making
environment (Trust Game). We were able to disentangle the complex
relationship between "first impressions" and learning: while left
amygdala activation correlates with initial trust based on implicit mechanisms of face evaluation, the subsequent learning of trust is strongly
driven by the probability of reciprocation in the latter stages of the interaction, and is reflected by activity of the caudate nucleus.

D108
NEURAL CORRELATES OF CONFLICT WHEN CHOOSING BETWEEN
THINGS WE WANT Amitai Shenhav1, Randy L Buckner1,2,3; 1Harvard

University, 2Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School,
3
Howard Hughes Medical Institute — When studying neural systems
involved in decision conflict, focus is typically on decisions (a) between

128

options of moderate personal significance and/or (b) with correct
responses defined by the experimenter or learned through feedback. As
a result, trials with the greatest conflict in these studies often present the
greatest chance of committing an error and needing to subsequently
learn to correct one’s behavior. We instead explored choice conflict generated by participants’ own preferences over products they cared about
and could actually receive (e.g., cameras, iPods, DVDs). While in the
scanner, participants (N=42) made time-pressured choices between
product pairs that varied in relative subjective value (as measured by an
earlier task). Participants also provided post-scan ratings of each choice
pair, including a surprise opportunity to adjust their previous choices,
with varying degrees of confidence. As expected, participants were more
likely to switch their earlier choices and were less confident in their final
choices when choosing between similarly valued items. Participants
reported substantially greater anxiety when confronted with similarly
high-valued options versus when they chose between dissimilarly or
similarly low-valued options. BOLD activity in the bilateral anterior
insula and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) predicted the likelihood that participants would later switch their choice, and also predicted retrospective ratings of choice-induced anxiety. These results are
broadly consistent with putative roles for ACC and insula in detecting
response conflict and/or risk associated with a decision, and suggest
that this extends to cases in which conflict is driven by personal preference over real potential outcomes.

D109
NEURAL CORRELATES OF CREDIT ASSIGNMENT TO CURRENT AND PAST
Worthy1,
CHOICES IN A DYNAMIC DECISION-MAKING TASK Darrell

Marrissa Gorlick2, Jeanette Mumford2, Akram Bakkour2, Russell Poldrack2, W.
Todd Maddox2; 1Texas A&M University, 2University of Texas at Austin — We

used fMRI and a two-choice dynamic decision-making task to investigate the neural correlates of credit assignment to current and past
choices. Optimal performance on the task involved ignoring the shortterm benefits of one option (the Decreasing option) and instead selecting
the other option (the Increasing option) which had lower short-term payoffs but whose continued choice led to greater long-term cumulative
reward. We tested whether brain activation was parametrically modulated according to the prediction errors from two models. The first
model we used is a standard temporal difference (TD) model which
gives credit for the reward received only to the option chosen on each
trial. The second model, the Credit Assigned to the Previous choices
(CAP) model, assumes that participants assign credit for the reward
received on each trial to the options they chose on previous trials. Thus,
this model assumes that participants expect to be rewarded for their
actions on future trials, rather than immediately. Ten young adults performed the task while in the fMRI scanner. Prediction errors from the
standard TD model, which gave credit only to the option chosen on each
trial, were correlated with bilateral activity in the caudate, putamen, and
lateral OFC. Prediction errors from the CAP model, which gave credit
only to options chosen in the recent past, were correlated with bilateral
activity in the medial OFC. This suggests that the medial OFC plays a
role in evaluating how past actions affect future consequences, in the
form of positive or negative prediction errors.

D110
USING COMPUTATIONAL MODELING TO INVESTIGATE THE NATURE OF
DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES IN HEROIN AND AMPHETAMINE
USERS Jasmin Vassileva1, Woo-Young Ahn2, Georgi Vasilev3, Kiril

Bozgunov3, Ivaylo Raynov3, Rada Naslednikova3, Jerome Busemeyer2;
1
University of Illinois - Chicago, 2Indiana University - Bloomington, 3Bulgarian
Addictions Institute — Although substance dependent individuals (SDIs)
commonly show decision-making deficits, it remains unclear whether
these deficits persist after discontinuation of drug use and whether the
nature of the decision-making processes is the same in users of different
types of drugs. To investigate this question, we used computational
modeling to disentangle the psychological processes involved in deci-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sunday, April 1, 4:00 - 6:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session D
sion-making in a unique sample of relatively “pure” heroin and amphetamine SDIs in Bulgaria. Participants included 169 individuals classified
into one of the following groups: (1) healthy controls without history of
drug dependence (n=60), (2) SDIs with past dependence on heroin
(n=64), (3) SDIs with past dependence on amphetamines (n=45). We
administered the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) and examined both behavioral performance on the task and model parameters derived from computational modeling. Past users of either amphetamines or heroin
performed significantly worse than healthy controls on the IGT. Computational modeling results revealed relatively selective deficits in learning/memory and punishment sensitivity in the two drug using groups
relative to controls. The learning/memory parameter was inversely
related to number of years of drug use in the heroin group but not in the
amphetamine group. Similarly, punishment sensitivity was positively
related to length of abstinence in the heroin group but not in the amphetamine group. Our results indicate that decision-making deficits are longstanding and suggest that these deficits are related to specific drug-using
characteristics in heroin users, whereas other mechanisms may be at
play in amphetamine users.

estimated IQ, and sex ratio. Traditional behavioural measures of performance were examined, as were parameters obtained from formal cognitive models of the IGT and BART. While no significant between-group
differences emerged for IGT performance, participants with ASD made
significantly fewer risky choices on the BART than TYP participants.
Mathematical modeling results for the BART demonstrated that the ASD
group was more consistent in their responses and less sensitive to
rewards than TYP participants. Together, the BART results indicate a
more conservative approach, less exploratory behaviour, and reduced
reward motivation in the ASD group. These data provide additional evidence for a risk-averse decision-making style in ASD. Our findings also
suggest that reported structural and functional brain differences in the
reward systems of individuals with ASD are associated with observable
differences in behavioural performance.

D111
EVOLVING BRAIN ACTIVITY PRIOR TO A CATEGORICAL DECISION
REFLECTS THE STRENGTH OF GRADUALLY ACCUMULATING CHOICE
PROBABILITIES Mark E. Wheeler1, Sarah Woo1, Joshua Tremel1, Tobin

Vijayin1, Amanda Collier1, Elisabeth Ploran2, Tianming Yang3; 1University of
Pittsburgh, 2George Mason University, 3National Institutes of Health — Func-

tional magnetic resonance imaging was used to measure whole-brain
activity during a simple binary decision task in which choices (left vs.
right) were informed by summing a series of learned prior probabilities.
Our aim was to identify brain regions tracking the strength of probabilistic evidence accrued over time. Twenty subjects learned to associate six
geometric shapes with a left- (L) or right-hand (R) response with three
different degrees of evidene strength (weight) per hand: weak, medium,
and strong. At scanned testing, subjects saw a series of four shapes and
made an L or R choice informed by the sum of weights. Trials were
evenly sorted into one of three possible progressions of evidence: rapid
(consistent evidence), gradual (e.g., evidence gradually shifts from R to
L), and switch (e.g., evidence builds rapidly toward R, switches rapidly
to L). Logistic regression indicated that the individual shapes influenced
choice according to the rank-order of their weights. Activity only in premotor areas, including the supplementary motor area, modulated
according to both the response-hand and the progression of evidence
prior to choice, with greater pre-response activity on rapid than switch
trials. In contrast, activity in regions located in frontal and parietal lobes,
as well as pre-supplementary motor area and striatum, did not modulate
according to response hand and was negatively correlated with evidence, increasing most for switch and least for rapid trials. The data suggest that the accumulation of choice probabilities in this bimanual task
occurs at the motor planning stage of decision making.

D112
ATYPICAL DECISION-MAKING IN YOUTH WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM
DISORDER: RISK AVERSION AND REDUCED SENSITIVITY TO REWARD

Shannon Johnson1, Jillian Filliter1, Tim Pleskac2; 1Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Nova Scotia, 2Michigan State University — Recent evidence suggests that
brain reward systems may differ, both structurally and functionally, in
individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD; Schmitz, 2008). Our
previous findings (Johnson et al., 2006) of a risk-averse decision-making
style, characterized by heightened attention to loss, also point to reward
system dysfunction in ASD. In the current study, we used a multimethod, mathematical modeling approach to better understand differences in the processing of positive and negative outcomes in ASD. We
administered a battery of experimental decision-making tasks, including
the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) and the Balloon Analogue Risk Task
(BART) to 28 children and adolescents with ASD and 36 typically developing (TYP) comparison participants. Groups were match based on age,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

129

Poster Session E

Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall

ATTENTION: Other
E1
TESTOSTERONE EXPOSURE, LATERALITY, AND AUTISTIC TRAITS IN
FEMALES Kathleen A. Flannery1, Isaac N. Saidel-Goley1, Ashley A. Motta1,
Erin E. Albiero1; 1Saint Anselm College — Prior research has established that

the 2D:4D ratio can serve as an indirect measure of prenatal testosterone
exposure given that higher levels of testosterone in amniotic fluid samples are correlated with lower 2D:4D ratios. The purpose of this study
was to examine whether the 2D:4D ratio would also be correlated with
sexually dimorphic measures of laterality. Specifically, it was hypothesized that in females, lower 2D:4D ratios would be associated with
greater left hemisphere specialization for language and stronger right
hemisphere specialization for visuospatial attention. According to the
Extreme Male Brain theory (EMB, Baron-Cohen, 2003) higher testosterone levels also contribute to males showing lower levels of emotional
awareness, therefore we predicted that lower 2D:4D ratios would be
associated with sexually dimorphic measures of personality such as
autistic traits. The sample included 33 females who completed a dichotic
listening task, landmark task, Autism-Quotient (AQ) questionnaire, Levels of Emotional Awareness Scale, and handedness questionnaire. Caliper measurements of the 2D:4D ratio (left hand) were significantly
correlated with the landmark task, indicating that higher prenatal testosterone levels were associated with a stronger right hemisphere bias for
visuospatial attention. Autometric measurements of the 2D:4D ratio (left
hand) were significantly correlated with the communication subscale of
the AQ, suggesting that higher levels of prenatal testosterone were associated poorer communication skills. These findings suggest that prenatal
testosterone levels have a masculinizing effect on visuospatial attention
and communication skills in females. This is consistent with established
sex differences in laterality and predictions regarding personality traits
based on EMB theory.

E2
CONTEXT-DEPENDENT MODULATION OF FORCE PRODUCTION IS
DECREASED IN ADULTS WITH ATTENTION-DEFICIT/HYPERACTIVITY
DISORDER (ADHD) Hilary Gomes1, Jared Goldman1, Karin Fisher1, Clara

Moisello1, Felice Ghilardi1, Jeffrey Halperin2; 1City College of New York, 2Mount
Sinai Medical Center — Individuals with ADHD often exhibit increased
variability in reaction times (RT), but little is known about other aspects
of motor control. Force production can be modulated without awareness
to respond appropriately to different contexts: movements to the same
targets are performed with greater force and lower duration in random
choice-RT tasks than in predictable, timed response tasks. Here, we used
three tasks to determine whether in ADHD, implicit context-dependent
force modulation is normal. Ten ADHD subjects (mean age = 24.6) and
13 controls (mean age = 23.3) performed three reaching tasks with fixed
time-constraint responses: a choice-RT task in which targets appeared
randomly (RAN); a timed-response task in which targets appeared in a
predictable counter-clockwise order (CCW); and a sequence-learning

130

task (SEQ), in which targets appeared in a fixed order, and subjects were
explicitly asked to learn the target order and to anticipate target appearance. Moreover, during SEQ, force production indices of anticipatory
movements implicitly shift from reaction to anticipation. Explicit
sequence learning rate was similar in both groups. ADHD showed a
decreased, although not significant, difference between CCW-RAN force
production indices compared to controls (p=0.12). In controls, but not in
ADHD (p > 0.05), force production indices of SEQ anticipatory movements were significantly different from those of movements in RAN (p <
0.01), with a significant net saving in energy. This result suggests that the
implicit ability to optimize and modulate force production during reaching movement in response to changing contexts may be impaired in
ADHD.

E3
INTEGRITY OF MEDIAL VISUOMOTOR PATHWAY PREDICTS BETTER
RECOVERY IN NEGLECT PATIENTS RECEIVING PRISM ADAPTATION
TREATMENT Priyanka Shah1,2, Peii Chen1,2, Kelly Goedert3, Anne Foundas4,

A.M. Barrett1,2; 1Kessler Foundation Research Center, West Orange, New
Jersey, 2University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey (UMDNJ), Newark,
3Seton Hall University, South Orange, New Jersey, 4Louisiana State University,
New Orleans, Louisiana — Objective: To determine whether lesion location
predicts functional recovery in right-hemisphere damaged (RHD)
patients with neglect following prism adaptation therapy (PAT). Background: PAT can produce substantial improvements in spatial neglect.
Our previous studies suggested that PAT improved spatial bias in the
“aiming” motor-exploratory domain, which may be subserved by frontal
cortico-subcortical systems. Therefore, the current study examined
whether frontal lesion involvement determined treatment response to
PAT in post-stroke patients with spatial neglect, using motor-exploratory improvement in the Catherine Bergego Scale (CBS-ME) as the outcome measure. Design/Methods: Lesions of RHD patients (N=21)
receiving PAT were manually mapped from clinical images (CT or MRI)
using MRIcro. Based on the lesion-maps, we extracted information of
frontal vs. no-frontal lesion involvement and conducted a multilevel
modeling analysis (MLM). Results: After controlling for age and lesion
size, MLM revealed that patients with frontal lesions demonstrated better improvement trajectory (n=13) than patients without frontal involvement (n=8). Therefore, we pursued a more detailed analysis on lesionsymptom relationship to elucidate which frontal-subcortical systems
strongly support PAT response. The PAT-responsive group had greater
integrity of 1) subcortical vs. cortical and 2) medial vs. lateral structures.
Conclusions/Relevance: Our results showed that the medial visuomotor
pathway critical for visually-guided movement may support PAT
response. PAT may manipulate the network for visual sensorimotor
adaptation, subserved by the spared thalamus and basal ganglia, which
in turn may improve “aiming” motor-exploratory behaviors related to
spatial neglect. It is still unclear from our preliminary data whether dorsolateral prefrontal regions may account for other performance variables.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session E

E4
GREATER "AIMING" MOTOR-INTENTIONAL BIAS PREDICTS BETTER
RECOVERY OF SPATIAL NEGLECT WITH PRISM ADAPTATION Kelly

Goedert1, Peii Chen2,3, Raymond Boston4, Anna Barrett2,3; 1Seton Hall
University, 2Kessler Foundation Research Center, 3University of Medicine and
Dentistry New Jersey, 4NBC School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania — Spatial neglect is a debilitating disorder in which patients
fail to respond or initiate actions to contralesional stimuli. These patients
often present with deficits in one or more brain-behavior spatial systems:
They may experience spatial deficits affecting stimulus encoding :
"Where", perceptual-attentional deficits. They may also experience deficits in motor preparatory spatial processing: "Aiming", motor-intentional
deficits. We hypothesized that improved functional recovery in neglect
patients undergoing prism adaptation treatment would be better predicted by baseline "Aiming" than "Where" spatial bias. A consecutive
sample of 38 right-brain stroke patients presenting with left spatial
neglect performed two weeks of daily prism adaptation. At baseline we
administered a laboratory assessment of "Where" and "Aiming" bias that
entails fractionating subjects’ error on a computerized line bisection task.
We administered the Catherine Bergego Scale (CBS), which assesses leftright asymmetries in the performance of functional activities such as
grooming and eating, at baseline and weekly thereafter for six weeks.
Even though "Where" bias better predicted baseline CBS, a hierarchical
linear model analysis, controlling for age and status at baseline, found
that subjects with greater "Aiming" bias experienced greater functional
recovery over the 6 week period (linear recovery rate: b = -0.77,SE =
0.29,p = 0.009); the extent of "Where" bias did not predict recovery (b =
0.22,SE = 0.28,p = 0.425). These results are consistent with our own and
others’ work suggesting that prism adaptation may selectively affect
motor-intentional systems. Further, these results demonstrate the relevance of this laboratory assessment of spatial bias to functional recovery.

E5
NEURAL BASES OF DECISION MAKING: AN ACCUMULATOR MODEL OF
STOP SIGNAL PERFORMANCE Sien Hu1, Yuan-chi Tseng2, Alissa Winkler1,
Chiang-shan Li1; 1Yale University, 2Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Institute —

The stop signal task (SST) is widely used to study cognitive control.
However, the mechanisms underlying decision making in the SST was
rarely studied. Here, we developed a leakage accumulator model, modified from Ratcliff’s diffusion model (1978), for a one-choice SST (Li et al.,
2006), in which a go signal instructs participants to quickly respond and
an occasional stop signal instructs participants to withhold the response.
Forty-seven participants completed the SST during functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). We performed multiple regressions on bloodoxygenation-level-dependent (BOLD) signals of go trials against the go
trial reaction time (GORT), drift rate, and threshold, respectively. The
effect size of activity changes for regions of interest were then correlated
with the corresponding parameters. The results showed that activations
in the right insula, thalamus/subthalamic nucleus (STN), right caudate,
and pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA) are positively correlated
with GORT. Drift rate negatively correlated with activations in the right
insula, thalamus/STN, and SMA; threshold positively correlated with
activation in the right caudate. These results revealed distinct regional
activations mediating components in the processes of decision making:
the right anterior insula and thalamus/STN was associated with a lower
drift rate, and the right caudate was associated with a higher threshold,
while all of them positively correlated with GORT. To our knowledge,
this is the first study to investigate the neural processes of decision making in a one-choice SST. The results also identify critical roles of the anterior insula, thalamus/STN, and the caudate in decision making that
involves a speed-accuracy tradeoff.

E6
ALTERATIONS IN MIND WANDERING AFTER DAMAGE TO HUBS OF THE
DEFAULT MODE NETWORK Carissa Philippi1, David Rudrauf2, Daniel
Tranel3; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2University of Iowa, Iowa City —

While in our daily lives mind wandering (MW) can occupy a significant
proportion of our thoughts (e.g., planning a meal while in line at the
store), the neural correlates of MW remain unknown. The default mode
network (DMN), a network of brain regions with high metabolic activity
at ‘rest’ (without an active cognitive task), has been consistently implicated in MW. We sought to test the hypothesis that the medial prefrontal
cortex (mPFC) and inferior parietal lobule (IPL) hubs of the DMN are
critical for MW using a targeted lesion approach. We assessed MW frequency in seven patients with mPFC damage and six patients with IPL
damage using a sustained attention to response task (SART), and a 12item self-report MW subscale of the Imaginal Processes Inventory. Contrary to the hypothesis, mPFC and IPL groups made significantly more
errors on the SART than the comparison groups. For the MW questionnaire, mPFC and IPL groups reported MW significantly less than the
comparison groups. Thus, DMN damage was associated with increased
errors on the SART and decreased awareness of MW. In contrast to our
hypothesis, our findings suggest that the DMN may be critical for the
meta-awareness of MW. Besides the DMN, recent work suggests that the
frontoparietal network (FPN) is also engaged during MW and functions
to shift attention to focus on internal autobiographical thoughts. Thus, it
is possible that damage to the DMN could disrupt the generation of
internal thoughts while sparing the ability of the FPN to shift attentional
focus internally.

E7
BORED TO DEATH: EXPLORING APATHETIC AND AGITATED SUBTYPES OF
BOREDOM PRONENESS. James Danckert1; 1Department of Psychology,
University of Waterloo — Boredom is a common human experience
researched within a broad context including human factors, clinical,
social and personality psychology. Despite this, little work has examined
the cognitive constructs associated with boredom, even in populations
(i.e., traumatic brain injured patients) reporting elevated levels of boredom. Some suggest that lapses in everyday attention (e.g., pouring
orange juice on cereal), or mindlessness, are a precursor to boredom.
Work in our lab demonstrated that boredom represents a unique emotional construct, distinct from depression, apathy and anhedonia. Next,
we showed that when induced into a state of boredom, individuals demonstrate increased heart rate and decreased galvanic skin conductance
levels. This pattern, known as 'directional fractionation', is indicative of
reduced attention associated with the bored state. In addition, boredom
was associated with elevated cortisol levels indicating the experience is
aversive. Finally, in two studies exploring the relationship between boredom and sustained attention we found that performance could be split
based on two distinct types of boredom. First, an apathetic state in which
individuals are unmotivated, is characterised by a preponderance of
attention lapses with improvement seen when external incentives are
added. Second, the agitated state, in which individuals are motivated to
engage in stimulating activities but all attempts to do so fail, is characterised by an insensitivity to errors, and a strong association with hyperactive symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Collectively,
this work highlights the fact that boredom can be characterised in two
distinct ways with each subtype showing a distinct cognitive profile.

E8
INCENTIVE EFFECTS ON BEHAVIOR AND P3 IN A GO/NOGO PARADIGM
WITH LOTTERY-TYPE REWARD David S. Leland1, Catherine L. Reed2, Jacob

L. Bradley1, Paige M. Jablonski1, Kellyn A. Kroner1; 1University of Wisconsin Eau Claire, 2Claremont McKenna College — The P3 is an event-related
potential (ERP) component associated with stimulus evaluation and categorization, typically evoked by stimuli under conditions of selective
attention, low frequency, high task-relevance, and/or high motivational
salience. Prior research investigating the influence of motivation on the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

131

Poster Session E — Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
P3 has focused primarily on cued target detection tasks or decision-making tasks in which P3 is evoked by reward feedback. Participants in these
studies typically earn money based on individual performance. We are
exploring the impact of high and low incentive stimuli on behavioral
performance and P3 amplitude in a 50/50 go/nogo paradigm with no
trial-by-trial cue or feedback stimuli. Participants are entered into a
weighted random drawing for $25/$50 gift cards, to be conducted at the
end of the study, with odds of winning proportional to points earned relative to other participants. Preliminary findings suggest that response
accuracy is greater in high incentive (5 point) than low incentive (2 point)
conditions, although reaction time does not differ. Target ERPs reveal a
centroparietal positive component peaking at ~380ms in both conditions,
but with no significant difference between them. These initial results
suggest that the P3 can be evoked by targets that have the same frequency, task-relevance, and incentive value as nontargets in a paradigm
with delayed, uncertain, and ultimately improbable reward. We speculate that a more powerful incentive manipulation may yield P3 effects
that correspond to behavioral differences and that with such modification this paradigm can help broaden our understanding of the contexts
in which motivation influences cognitive processing.

E9
N-METHYL-D-ASPARTATE RECEPTOR 2B SUBUNIT (GRIN2B) GENE
VARIATION IS ASSOCIATED WITH ALERTING, BUT NOT WITH ORIENTING
AND CONFLICTING IN THE ATTENTION NETWORK TEST Stefanie Schulz1,

Larissa Arning1, Marlies Pinnow1, Jörg T. Epplen1, Christian Beste1; 1RuhrUniversity Bochum, Germany — Appropriate attention levels are pivotal for

cognitive processes, and individual differences in attentional functioning
are related to variations in the interplay of neurotransmitters. The attention network theory reflects attention as a non-homogenous set of separate neural networks: alerting, orienting and conflicting. In the present
study, the role of variation in GRIN2B, which encodes the NR2B subunit
of N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors, was explored with regard
to the regulation of arousal and attention by comparing the efficiency of
the three attentional networks as measured with the Attention Network
Test (ANT). Two synonymous SNPs in GRIN2B, rs1806201 (T888T) and
rs1806191 (H1178H) were genotyped in 324 young Caucasian adults.
Results revealed a highly specific modulatory influence of SNP
rs1806201 on alerting processes with subjects homozygous for the frequent C allele displaying higher alerting network scores as compared to
the other two genotype groups (CT and TT). This effect is due to the fact
that in the no cue condition faster reaction times were evident in participants carrying at least one of the rare T alleles, possibly as a result of
more effective glutamatergic neurotransmission. Another explanation
could be a ceiling effect, meaning that subjects cannot be physically
aroused in excess to a certain level. Altogether, the results show that
variations in GRIN2B have to be taken into consideration when examining attentional processes.

E10
PHASE RESETTING OF DYNAMIC ATTENDING SIGNALS Karl Doron1, Mari

Riess Jones2, Hermann Hinrichs3, Michael Gazzaniga1,4; 1University of
California, Santa Barbara, 2Ohio State University, 3Otto Von Guericke
University of Magdeburg, 4Sage Center for the Study of the Mind — Attention

to events in the natural environment can be controlled by temporal context. An oscillatory process that is capable of entraining to rhythmic
sequences can model the neural and behavioral results observed in some
attention experiments. An important aspect of an entrained oscillator is
its flexibility: it demonstrates a capacity to adjust its period and phase to
changes in the external driving rhythm. These adjustments to external
rate changes can be observed in phase resets of an entrained EEG or
MEG signal. To date, no studies in humans have investigated low frequency entrainment to a rhythmic visual stimulus, nor have phase resets
to temporal perturbations been reported. Here, we report phase resetting
in MEG signals recorded during rhythmical presentations of a lexical
decision task. The phase of the delta band (1-3Hz) and the period of

132

amplitude peaks in the alpha band (8-12Hz) entrain to the stimulus rate
(1.667Hz) and also demonstrate phase shifts to temporal perturbations
(+/- 120ms). These results show that neural oscillations in humans
entrain to rhythmic visual input and further, that their adaptive behavior
conforms to that of a limit-cycle oscillator when a stimulus arrives out of
phase with an expected onset time.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
E11
THE INFLUENCE OF ACUTE STRESS AND PROVOCATION ON AFFECTIVE
PICTURE PROCESSING: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY

Angelika Dierolf1, Julia Fechtner1, John Sollers2, Ewald Naumann1; 1University
of Trier, Germany, 2University of Auckland, New Zealand — Research
has

shown that the stress hormone cortisol is important for the regulation of
social motivational processes. Besides, aggression is a common behavior
which is frequently involved in changes in higher level information processing patterns. However, the influence of the interaction between cortisol and aggression on information processing has been hardly examined,
even though there is some evidence that cortisol plays a crucial role in
the attention to social threat and release of aggressive behavior. Thus,
the aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of acute stress,
the thereby caused cortisol release and provocation on information processing, specifically affective picture processing. 71 healthy subjects were
randomly assigned to the socially evaluated cold pressor test or warm
pressor test (control condition). Half of each group received high or low
levels of provocation during the Taylor Aggression Paradigm. Afterwards, 144 emotional pictures with positive, negative or aggressive content were presented randomly for 2,5s. Throughout the experiment EEG
was recorded and acute levels of salivary cortisol were collected on the
basis of which stressed subjects were divided into cortisol-responders
and -nonresponders. Established effects within the event-related potentials depending on the presented emotion could be replicated. Moreover,
preliminary results indicate that event-related earlier (N200, P200), as
well as later components (P300, slow waves) are complexly influenced
by acute stress, cortisol and provocation, suggesting an effect on various
stages of information processing of socially relevant stimuli. We interpret this as a change in attention and motivational significance due to the
manipulation.

E12
THE INFLUENCE OF ACUTE STRESS AND PROVOCATION ON APPROACH
AVOIDANCE MOTIVATION: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Julia

Fechtner1, Angelika Dierolf1, John Sollers2, Ewald Naumann1; 1University of
Trier, Germany, 2University of Auckland, New Zealand — Animal as well as

human research has shown that cortisol, the endproduct of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, plays a crucial role in the release of
aggressive behavior (Kruk et al., 2004; Böhnke et al., 2010). Nevertheless,
changes in informational processes, such as approach or avoidance tendencies that might contribute to the relation between cortisol and aggression have not yet been a subject of research. Thus, the aim of the present
study was to investigate changes of brain processes while approaching
or avoiding socially relevant stimuli (happy and angry faces) after being
stressed and provoked. It was hypothesized more approach tendencies
after stress induction and subsequent provocation, especially in response
to angry faces. 72 healthy students (half male) performed an approach
avoidance task with happy and angry faces before as well as after
manipulation of acute stress and provocation. Subjects passed either the
socially evaluated cold pressor test or a non-stressful control procedure,
respectively. Provocation was realized by means of the Taylor Aggression Paradigm. Throughout the experiment EEG was recorded. Preliminary results indicate that event-related potentials are influenced by
stress and provocation, resulting in changes of the N1 (100-150ms poststimulus), P2 (150-200ms) and N2 (220-320ms) amplitude. These results

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session E
suggest an influence of stress and provocation on information processing of socially relevant stimuli.

E13
A SMELL IS MORE TO A FACE THAN A FACE TO A SMELL: ASYMMETRIC
VISUO-OLFACTORY INTEGRATION IN PERCEIVING SUBTHRESHOLD
THREAT Lucas Novak1, Wen Li1; 1University of Wisconsin - Madison — Multisensory integration is ubiquitous, facilitating perception beyond the
limit of individual senses and providing special enhancement of weak
sensory inputs. Despite much research in standard object perception,
this mechanism has hardly been examined in emotion literature. Pairing
face and odor stimuli containing minute, subthreshold negative emotion
or neutral emotion combined with functional magnetic resonance imaging, we examined olfactory-visual synergy in threat perception in visual
and olfactory modalities. Participants performed a bimodal discrimination task to paired olfactory and visual stimulus presentation in the MRI
scanner. Both the visual and olfactory stimuli consisted of either neutral
or minimally negative valence, ordinarily indistinguishable from each
other. We found congruency-related improvement in detection of the
subthreshold negative stimulus, primarily shown in improvement of
negative face detection than negative odor detection. MRI results
showed activation of left amygdala and hippocampus for congruent
negative stimulus presentation versus congruent neutral stimulus presentation. Additionally, improvement in facial threat perception was
paralleled by enhanced fusiform response to the minimally fearful faces
in the presence of the weak negative odor versus the neutral odor. This
augmentation was correlated directly with improved fearful face detection. The findings indicate cross-modal integration of affective processing localized to sensory cortex rather than prefrontal structures,
indicating low-level sensory integration rather than higher-level
appraisal of binary threats. Furthermore, the findings highlight an asymmetry of visuo-olfactory synergy in threat perception, aligning with the
unique intimacy between olfaction and emotion and the predominant
role of the visual sense in human perception.

E14
MEMORY FOR NEGATIVE EMOTIONAL STIMULI IS PREDICTED BY PUPIL
DILATION AND ATTENTION-RELATED EYE MOVEMENTS TO SALIENT
FEATURES Cory Inman1, Stephan Hamann1; 1Emory University — Previous
studies have reported that increased narrowing of visual attention during picture encoding, as indexed by greater clustering of eye fixations, is
associated with enhanced episodic memory. Recently, we reported that
this effect was stronger for negative emotional pictures. Here we examined whether enhanced memory for emotional pictures is specifically
related to increased attention to salient affective features, as measured by
increased fixation time to salient features. Eye tracking and pupilometry
were recorded while participants passively viewed positive, negative,
and neutral pictures. After a brief delay, free recall and cued recall were
tested. Attentional focusing on salient picture features was greater for
both negative and positive emotional pictures relative to neutral pictures. Subsequent recall was predicted by increased attention to salient
features, but only for negative pictures. In addition, as expected,
increased emotional arousal at encoding was associated with greater
pupil dilation, and this dilation also predicted subsequent memory for
negative pictures. These findings suggest that the narrowing of visual
attention for affective stimuli partly reflects increased attentional capture
by salient stimulus features, which in turn is associated with richer
encoding and successful subsequent memory. The specificity of the current memory findings to negative emotional stimuli may reflect attentional and memory biases that prioritize the processing of negative
emotional stimuli. Preferential attentional capture by negative emotional
stimuli and enhanced memory is consistent with an adaptive processing
bias towards attending to and remembering potentially survival-relevant stimuli.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

E15
INCREASED GRAY MATTER VOLUME IN THE RIGHT ANGULAR GYRUS OF
Leung1,
LOVING-KINDNESS MEDITATORS OF LOW ANXIETY Mei-Kei

Chetwyn C.H. Chan2, Jing Yin1, Chack-Fan Lee1, Kwok-Fai So1, Tatia M.C. Lee1;
1The University of Hong Kong, 2The Hong Kong Polytechnic University — Medi-

tation is an experiential process that involves the cultivation of a specific
internal or mental state. Previous studies have revealed that long-term
practice of attention-focused meditation is associated with structural
changes in brain regions which support for the cognitive processes of
attentional control during practice. This study employed voxel-based
morphometry to examine gray matter changes of practising loving-kindness meditation (LKM), which is emotion-oriented and involves the cultivation of unconditional love and compassion toward all sentient
beings. A total of twenty-five men were scanned by a 3T MRI scanner.
The meditation experts (n=10) had at least 5 years of experience in LKM
and the matched novice controls (n=15) were naïve to but interested in
meditation. Our results found a higher gray matter volume in the right
angular gyrus (AG) in LKM experts. The specific roles of the right AG in
perspective-taking and cognitive empathy are consistent with the
focuses of LKM. Furthermore, novices had higher anxiety than experts,
and the gray matter volume of their right AG was correlated negatively
with their anxiety. This negative volumetric correlation with anxiety was
absent for the right AG of experts. Therefore, we conclude that the
enlargement in the right AG of LKM experts may serve to counter the
adverse neural effects associated with anxiety. Our findings support for
the use of LKM in therapy to counteract anxiety and promote mental
well-being by providing an important initial clue of neuroplastic change
in gray matter that may be related to the beneficial effect of practising
LKM.

E16
THE EFFECT OF ANTICIPATION ON UNATTENDED EMOTION
PROCESSING Renlai Zhou1,2, Ming Peng1, Alain De Beuckelaer3,4; 1Beijing
Key Lab of Applied Experimental Psychology (School of Psychology,Beijing
Normal University), Beijing, China, 2State Key Laboratory of Cognitive
Neurosciences and Learning (Beijing Normal University), Beijing, China,
3
Department of Personnel Management and Work and Organizational
Psychology and Centre for Social Theory, Ghent University, Belgium, 4Institute
for Management Research, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands —
This study examined the influence of anticipation on emotion processing
in those situations in which emotional information is unattended by asking 17 participants to perform a color stroop task under three conditions.
In the random condition, both the presentation of the facial expression
(fearful or neutral) and congruence between color (red/green) and word
(“red”/”green”) was randomized in every experimental trial. In the regular expression condition, the presentation of faces was predictable (i.e.,
a fearful face was always preceded by two subsequent neutral faces) and
the presentation of faces was random. In the regular congruence condition, congruence between color and word was predictable (i.e., an incongruent trial was always preceded by two subsequent congruent trials)
and the presentation of faces was random. The resulted revealed that,
fearful faces induced larger amplitudes in P2 and P3 components than
neutral faces in the random condition. The same difference was also
observed in the regular expression condition. However, in the regular
congruence condition, fearful faces only induced larger amplitudes in P2
components. The results showed that ERP components related to color
stroop processing (N2, P3, N400) were affected by anticipation,. We concluded that: (a) unattended emotion may be processed both in early (P2)
and late (P3) stages of processing, and (b) type of processing did not
depend on whether or not emotional faces were presented in a predictable sequence. However, emotional faces were not processed in a late
stage of cognitive processing (P3), whenever the congruence of the
word/color combination was predictable

133

Poster Session E — Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall

E17
SEX-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN THE RESPONSE TO ANXIETY-INDUCING
DISTRACTION: AN EVENT-RELATED FMRI INVESTIGATION Alexandru

E19
EMOTION
ENHANCES
NEURAL
PROCESSING
DURING
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL Felicia L. Jackson1, Jennifer

Iordan1, Sanda Dolcos1, Florin Dolcos1; 1University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign — Previous investigations showed that the impact of task-

Strafford Stevens1, Khaliliah Smith2, Patricia J. Bauer1; 1Emory University,
2Agnes Scott College — Event-related potential (ERP) studies of adults

irrelevant anxiety-inducing distraction on working memory (WM) performance was linked to opposite patterns of activation in emotional and
perceptual (bottom-up) vs. cognitive control (top-down) brain regions.
However, little is known about sex-related differences in these
responses. The present study investigated this issue using event-related
fMRI in 30 participants (16 females), who performed a delayed-response
WM task with anxiety-inducing distraction (i.e., angry faces) presented
during the interval between the memoranda and probes. Analysis of
behavioral data showed that women were more sensitive to anxietyinducing distraction, although there were no sex-related differences in
the overall WM performance. Linked to these behavioral findings, analysis of fMRI data revealed sex-related differences in both bottom-up and
top-down effects. Specifically, women showed undifferentiated
amygdala activity in response to both emotional/angry and neutral/
control face distracters, and enhanced activity to emotional distracters in
the subgenual anterior cingulate cortex, whereas men showed increased
activity to emotional distracters in the lateral prefrontal cortex. In addition, women and men showed opposing patterns of co-variation of activity in the medial-temporal lobe memory regions with WM performance
– i.e., negative vs. positive, respectively. Collectively, these findings are
consistent with evidence of enhanced emotional reactivity in women,
contribute to the understanding of sex-related differences in the
response to anxiety-inducing distraction in normal behavior, and have
implications for understanding factors that may influence sex-related
differences in the susceptibility to affective disorders.

often report an “emotion effect”: preferential processing of arousing
stimuli, regardless of valence. In contrast, school-age children devote
additional neural resources to pleasant autobiographical memories, relative to unpleasant and neutral memories. This “happy effect” is
observed at parietal electrodes, consistent with the emotion effect in
adults. Because no study has examined adult ERPs during emotional
autobiographical retrieval, it is unclear whether the difference in processing in children and adults is due to development, or stems from the
nature of the stimuli (i.e., autobiographical events vs. pictures). We
investigated this question by measuring ERPs as 46 young adults (23
female) recalled pleasant, unpleasant, and neutral autobiographical
events. We prompted recall of 25 memories of each valence in response
to neutral concrete nouns (“ball,” “paper” etc). The valence associated
with each word was counterbalanced across participants. During ERP
recording, the words were presented one at a time to cue recall of the
associated memory. ERP amplitudes for negative memories were less
positive-going than for neutral memories: POz- p = .02, laterals (P3, P4,
P7, P8)- p = .01. A similar trend was observed for positive versus neutral
memories. These findings suggest that adults, like children, differentially process positive emotional events and over development come to
differentially process negative events as well. This study illustrates a
novel method for emotion elicitation that capitalizes on the naturalistic
and personal aspects of autobiographical memories while controlling for
perceptual stimulus effects on neural responses.

E18
INVESTIGATING THE CIRCUMPLEX MODEL OF EMOTION: EVENT RELATED
POTENTIALS (ERPS) FOR HIGH AND LOW AROUSAL NEGATIVE
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORIES Theodore Waters1, Felicia Jackson1,

Patricia Bauer1; 1Emory University — Increasing neurological evidence supports the Circumplex model of emotions, demonstrating that differential
neural processing of emotion occurs along two dimensions: arousal
(high/low) and valence (positive/negative). Currently, most fMRI and
ERP studies examining emotion processing utilize IAPS stimuli (internationally normed emotion eliciting photographs), images of emotional
faces, and/or emotion-eliciting words (e.g. Schupp et al., 2000). These
stimuli reliably elicit emotional responses yet they (a) cannot be counterbalanced across conditions (high arousal pictures cannot serve as low
arousal/neutral stimuli), leading to concerns about internal validity; and
(b) lack personal relevance, an important feature in emotion processing,
leading to concerns about external validity. In the present research we
overcame these limitations by using an autobiographical memory cue
word paradigm (recently adapted for ERP; Bauer et al., under review)
that allowed us to counterbalance stimuli and examine personally relevant emotional materials. 50 adults (25 female) described emotional
autobiographical events in response to neutral cue words. The cued
memories were either neutral, low-arousal negative (e.g., sadness, loneliness), or high-arousal negative (e.g., anger, fear). ERPs were recorded
while participants viewed the cue words on a computer and recalled the
emotional events. Females showed emotion effects (i.e. differential processing of high and low arousal vs. neutral memories) at posterior midline sites. In contrast, males demonstrated arousal effects (differential
processing of high and low arousal negative memories) at fronto-lateral
sites. Implications for methodolocial approaches to emotion research
and the circumplex model are discussed.

E20
COGNITIVE FUNCTION AS A MEDIATOR OF IMPULSIVE AGGRESSION
FOLLOWING TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Robin Wellington1, Rebecca

Abbott1, Kristen Dams-O'Connor2; 1St. John's University, 2Mount Sinai School
of Medicine — Introduction: Mild traumatic brain injury is a major public
health concern with the annual incidence estimated at 150 per 100,000
population, accounting for 75% or more of all head injuries (Evans, RW
1993). Potentially, TBIs can result in negative outcomes across all
domains of living. To our knowledge no study has directly investigated
the role of cognition to negative behaviors post injury. Methods: 168 Participants were recruited by Research and Training Center throughout
New York State. An interview assessing a broad range of psychosocial
functioning was developed for the present study, revising and expanding upon the Quality of Life (QOL) and Health Interview (Mount Sinai
School of Medicine, 1994). Results: Linear regression revealed a significant pathway between blows to the head (Blows) and emotionally inappropriate behavior (IEB) (B=1.121, p<.01). Blows was related to cognitive
difficulties (CD) (B=1.630, p<.01), CD and IEB were related, when controlling for Blows (B=.489, p<.01) and the mediated pathway between
Blows and IEB (B=.324, p<.05) was reduced from the original pathway.
The mediation was found to be significant (p<.001; Sobel =5.559). Conclusions: Our results are indicative of the importance of cognitive function to the recovery process in TBI. Not only with respect to primary
cognitive factors such as memory performance but also to the extent that
a key component of cognitive function is to maintain control over impulsive or otherwise inappropriate behavior. Thus, cognitive integrity
appears to mediate the degree of behavioral impulsivity.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional
responding
E21
THE INVOLVEMENT OF ANTERIOR INSULAR CORTEX IN SOCIAL ANXIETY
AND INTEROCEPTIVE SENSIBILITY Yuri Terasawa1,2, Midori Shibata2,3,

Yukio Maehara2,4, Yoshiya Moriguchi1, Satoshi Umeda2; 1National Center of

134

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session E
Neurology and Psychiatry, 2Keio University, 3Hokkaido University, 4Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science — Accessing bodily states underpins
subjective experience of emotion, and the anterior insular cortex is an
essential region for this process. The reactivity in this region during
anticipation closely related with individual’s levels of anxiety. To elucidate this mechanism, we examined the relationship between the activation in the anterior insular cortex and personality traits while
participants evaluate their own emotional and bodily states. In the MRI
scanner, participants were required to answer three types of question
about; emotional state, bodily state and possessions. We presented a sentence as "I'm happy" or "I have a fast pulse", and participants evaluated
and selected appropriateness of the sentence as a description for their
current state from four options. Bodily sensibility score was calculated
using the responses to bodily state condition. Personality traits were
measured using some questionnaires. In the emotion trials, there was
significant correlation between the right anterior insular activation and
scores of neuroticism (r=.46), and social fear (r=.86). Multiple regression
analysis revealed that the activation in left thalamus (somatosensory
region), precuneus and supramarginal gyrus, during emotion trials correlated with bodily sensibility scores (p<.001, uncorrected). To disentangle the relationship between bodily sensibility and anxiety, mediation
analyses were conducted. The result indicated that the right anterior
insular cortex mediates the activation of left thalamus and levels of social
fear (p <.03). Our findings provide direct evidence that high anxiety people tend to be too sensitive to bodily signals, and the greater attention to
our own bodily state possibly contributes to development of anxiety disorder.

E22
DAMAGE TO THE VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX DISRUPTS
NONCONSCIOUS FACIAL MIMICRY Jake Kurczek1, Rupa Gupta1, Melissa

Duff1; 1University of Iowa — When exposed to emotional facial expressions,
participants nonconsciously mimic the expression. This form of covert
mimicry can be observed through facial electromyography (EMG).
Research reveals that the muscle groups associated with the production
of a given expression become more active when viewing that expression
compared to other facial expressions (i.e., greater activity of zygomatic
major when viewing happy expressions compared to angry; greater
activity of corrugator supercilii when viewing angry expressions compared to happy). Similarly, viewing emotional words also causes
increased activity in the facial muscles involved in producing the associated facial expression (i.e., greater activity of zygomatic major when
viewing the word joyous). This nonconscious facial mimicry may contribute to the ability to recognize, understand and empathize with
anothers’ emotions. Impairments in social and emotional functioning are
one of the most pervasive results of damage to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC). Anecdotally, friends and family report that vmPFC
patients lack compassion and empathy. We hypothesized that vmPFC
damage would impair nonconscious facial mimicry. Here, 7 patients
with bilateral vmPFC damage and 7 matched healthy comparison participants were exposed to happy and angry stimuli (facial expressions,
words) while recording facial EMG activity from the corrugator supercilii (angry) and zygomatic major (happy) regions on the left side of the
face. The vmPFC participants’ facial EMG activity did not differ for
happy and angry stimuli supporting the hypothesis that vmPFC damage
impairs nonconscious facial mimicry. This disruption may contribute to
their social/emotional deficits and may inform therapeutic interventions
for social/emotional impairments.

E23
DO ALL THREATS WORK THE SAME WAY? ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
EVIDENCE FOR EARLY DIVERGENCE AND LATER CONVERGENCE IN FEAR
AND DISGUST PROCESSING Elizabeth Krusemark1, Wen Li1; 1University of
Wisconsin — The literature on threat processing is dominated by an
almost exclusive focus on fear, resulting in limited knowledge about
other meaningful threat emotions such as disgust. In two event-related

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

potential (ERP) studies, we compared analysis of fear versus disgust
emotions at early and later processing stages. Study 1 (N=43) examined
early visual response (P1) to images eliciting disgust, fear or neutral
emotion in combination with a visual search task immediately following
images. ERPs indicated enhanced response to fear images and suppressed activity to disgust, relative to neutral images, together with facilitated response time for fear and delayed response for disgust (p’s<.001).
These findings suggest that fear and disgust instigate opposing early
sensory and attentional processes. Study 2 (N=40) concentrated on the
transition from early to later processing, with a special focus on how
threat images modulated visual analysis of a neutral (Greeble) object
presented about 425 ms later. Importantly, P1response to emotion
images replicated effects observed in Study 1. Analysis of P1, N1, waveforms in 200-300 and 300-400 ms intervals at occipital sites in response to
emotional images revealed a progressive trend to converge between fear
and disgust (deviating from neutral). Visual ERPs (P1g and N170) to
Greebles also conformed to a pattern of generalized threat encoding. In
parallel, distance estimation of greebles was equivalent between fear and
disgust trials (more proximal than neutral trials; p’s<.01). Together, these
results highlight the dynamic temporal course of threat processing,
evolving from mandatory sensory classification to later functional convergence to motivate adaptive behavior.

E24
THE PERIPHERAL PHYSIOLOGICAL REACTIONS IN VIEWING TAIWANESE
AFFECTIVE PICTURES Nai-Shing Yen1,2, Chieh-Ning Lee1, Tsung-Han Yang1,

Ching-Hui Chueh1; 1Department of Psychology, National Chengchi University,
Taipei, Taiwan, 2Research Center for Mind, Brain, and Learning, National
Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan — To avoid cultural differences, Taiwanese Affective Pictures System (TAPS) had been developed to understand how Taiwanese respond to affective pictures. The present study
recruited 34 subjects (half male) to judge valence and arousal levels
(assessed by Self-Assessment Manikin) for 96 emotional pictures which
were assigned into positive, erotic, neutral, bloody and negative categories from TAPS while peripheral physiological reactions included Heart
Rate(HR)?Skin Conductance Responses(SCR)?Corrugators and Zygomatic Muscle (EMG) were recorded. The mean heart rates were highest
for bloody and negative pictures (ps < .05), lowest for positive pictures,
with neutral and erotic pictures in between. Bloody pictures also showed
greatest corrugators changes than other categories, while erotic and negative pictures showed no differences with each other, but both significantly larger than neutral and positive pictures (ps < .05). Although
zygomatic muscles changes did not reach significant level, subjects
showed highest zygomatic muscles changes for positive pictures. SCR
increased significantly for erotic and bloody pictures (ps < .05). Interestingly, although erotic pictures were rated as neutral behaviorally, the
patterns of SCR and Corrugators muscles for erotic pictures were similar
to negative pictures. Behavioral comparisons between male and female
subjects suggested no gender differences on levels of valence and
arousal across five categories. Male subjects however had decreased
heart rates than female for neutral and bloody pictures between 0-3 seconds after picture onset. Male subjects also had increased corrugators
muscles than female across all five categorical pictures which were
opposite to what others had found.

E25
THE EXPERIENCE OF AN EMOTIONAL INDIAN SUMMER: RELATIVE VS.
NORMATIVE EMOTIONAL DIFFERENTIATION IN DEPRESSION Mona El-

Hout1, Emre Demiralp1, Renee J. Thompson2, Jutta Mata2, Susanne Jaeggi1,
Martin Buschkuehl1, Lisa Feldman Barrett3,4, Ian H. Gotlib2, John Jonides1;
1
University of Michigan, 2Stanford University, 3Harvard Medical School,
4Northeastern University — People constantly compare things, situations,
and each other. Emotional experiences are no exception. Just like a person appears more appealing when contrasted with a less appealing person, a slightly less unpleasant momentary emotional experience can
stand out in a lengthy epoch of intense sadness or anger. Therefore, it is

135

Poster Session E — Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
important to consider individuals’ emotional experiences “relative” to
their own individual baseline. For instance, an individual with depression who does not experience a pleasant emotional state for a whole
week can have days that are less unpleasant than other days. Just like a
slightly warm day in the dark of winter can feel like summer, slightly
less unpleasant days could have positive connotations. In this study, we
investigated whether the structure of “relatively” pleasant and unpleasant moments of emotional experience were different between depressives and controls. To test this hypothesis, we assessed emotional
experiences of participants in daily life using an ecologically valid weeklong experience sampling protocol. Depression was diagnosed using the
Beck Depression Inventory and structured clinical interviews (SCID).
Our results show that depression is associated with less differentiation
of relatively positive emotional states compared to controls. Implications
for basic and clinical science of emotion research are discussed.

E26
HEADS OR TAILS OR BOTH: EMOTIONAL DIALECTICISM IN
DEPRESSION Leeanne Stickle1, Kerry L. Traub1, Emre Demiralp1, Renee J.

Thompson2, Jutta Mata2, Susanne Jaeggi1, Martin Buschkuehl1, Lisa Feldman
Barrett3,4, Ian H. Gotlib2, John Jonides1; 1University of Michigan, 2Stanford
University, 3Harvard Medical School, 4Northeastern University — Individuals’

emotional experiences are rich and complex. Accordingly, a single emotion adjective rarely suffices to describe all aspects of an episode of subjective experience. Therefore, individuals often use multiple emotion
adjectives to describe how they are feeling at a particular moment in
time. Some adjectives (happy, alert and active) capture pleasant aspects
of the subjective experience while others (sad, anxious and disgusted)
capture the unpleasant aspects. Previous research shows that individuals
vary tremendously in the degree to which they simultaneously use positive and negative emotional adjectives to evaluate and describe their
subjective states. In this study, we used an ecologically valid week-long
experience sampling protocol to assess depressed and healthy participants’ subjective experiences in their daily lives. Participants were asked
to use 4 positive and 7 negative emotion adjectives to rate their momentary emotional state. Depression was diagnosed using structured clinical
interviews (SCID) and the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). Our results
show that depressives are more likely to simultaneously use positive and
negative emotion adjectives when describing their subjective states.
Implications of this finding for the basic science of emotion and clinical
psychology are discussed.

E27
INTERPERSONAL SENSITIVITY AND EMPATHY IN INCARCERATED
PSYCHOPATHS: FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY ANALYSIS Laurie Skelly1,

Kent Kiehl2, Jean Decety1; 1University of Chicago, 2University of New Mexico —

A marked lack of empathy is a hallmark characteristic of psychopathy,
but the brain basis of empathic processing has not yet been directly
investigated in psychopathic individuals. We measured functional connectivity during perception of visual stimuli designed to elicit empathy
for pain, using the amygdala as a seed region. Thirty-eight incarcerated
males classified high (?28) and low (?20) in psychopathy using the Psychopathy Check List - Revised underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging while viewing dynamic stimuli depicting individuals
causing pain to one another. Contrary to expectations, psychopaths
exhibited marginally greater right amygdala activity than incarcerated
controls in response to empathy-eliciting stimuli. Further, functional
connectivity was reversed in the psychopath group in two key regions:
the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) was negatively correlated
with amygdala in controls as expected, but positively correlated in psychopaths; and anterior insula (AIC) was positively correlated with
amygdala in controls, as expected, but negatively correlated in psychopaths. The finding of reversed vmPFC connectivity is anticipated by the
literature, but it is surprising that right amygdala activity was marginally higher in the psychopath group. The AIC, critical for awareness of
one’s own affective states and for sharing the emotional states of others,

136

has heretofore been excluded as a region of interest in psychopathy.
These results impel a more nuanced view of amygdala dysfunction in
psychopathy and a broadening of focus to include additional regions of
interest in targeted investigations of psychopathy, especially the anterior
insula.

E28
COMPARING CORTICAL PROCESSING OF EMOTIONAL FACES, WORDS,
AND GESTURES: AN ERP STUDY Patrik Schoch1, Johanna Kissler1,2;

1University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany, 2University of Bielefeld, Bielefeld,
Germany — Humans are experts at extracting emotional information from

visual media such as faces, words and gestures. Accordingly, many
studies have investigated cortical correlates of emotional stimulus processing within these communicatory channels. The present study
explores similarities and differences in cortical processing of emotional
stimuli across all three communicatory channels. We recorded eventrelated brain potentials (ERPs) while participants viewed single words,
gestures,, and faces with negative, neutral, and positive content. Stimuli
were presented centrally for 150ms in a passive viewing task. Inter-trial
interval was 1000 - 1300ms, preventing the problem of ERP component
overlap that has been present in some previous experiments. For all
types of stimuli, ERPs differed according to emotional content at early
components (P1; N1; and Early Posterior Negativity, EPN). For faces, P1
and EPN were larger for negative stimuli than for neutral ones and N1
was reduced for positive facial expressions compared to neutral and
angry faces. For words, N1 was larger for negative and positive compared to neutral words, resembling an arousal effect. Gestures showed
significant P1 and EPN effects for positive stimuli. In sum, during viewing, emotional content affected early perceptual processing across all
types of media. For biological stimuli, effects appeared already in the P1
window, whereas for symbolic word stimuli emotion effects were only
seen for N1 component. Valence-specific effects were likewise restricted
to biological emotional stimuli, with angry faces eliciting larger cortical
responses than happy or neutral ones. By contrast, positive hand gestures elicited larger effects than negative or neutral ones.

E29
RELATING ANATOMICAL AND SOCIAL CONNECTIVITY: WHITE MATTER
MICROSTRUCTURE PREDICTS EMOTIONAL CONTAGION Carolyn

Parkinson1, Thalia Wheatley1; 1Dartmouth College — Empathy is comprised
of 2 systems: an evolutionarily old emotion contagion system (emotional
empathy; EE) and a cognitive perspective-taking system (cognitive
empathy; CE). Because EE involves rapid, obligatory perception-action
coupling, we hypothesized that higher EE would predict enhanced anatomical connectivity between regions involved in emotion perception
and expression. Diffusion tensor imaging data (DTI) were analyzed
using tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) with fractional anisotropy (FA)
as an index of structural integrity. EE and CE were assessed in 15 participants using the Interpersonal Reactivity Index. EE was associated with
higher FA bilaterally in association fiber tracts linking perception and
emotion-related, and perception- and action-related structures (superior,
inferior and inferior frontal-occipital fasciculi), limbic association fibers,
and the anterior thalamic radiations, which carry reciprocal connections
from limbic structures to frontal cortex. CE was not significantly correlated with FA. Unlike EE, CE may not be strongly associated with FA
because CE may not depend as heavily on rapid neural coupling
between distant regions, and may comprise a less automatic process reliant on more domain-general neural substrates. These results provide a
structural basis for associations between EE and automatic elicitations of
sensory, motor and somatic representations of others’ internal states,
and establish a novel link between anatomical connectivity and social
understanding.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session E

LANGUAGE: Lexicon
E30
ERP
EVIDENCE
FOR
EARLY
MORPHO-ORTHOGRAPHIC
DECOMPOSITION Joanna Morris1, Phillip Holcomb2, Jonathan Grainger3,4;
1

Hampshire College, 2Tufts University, 3University of Provence, 4CNRS — Dual-

route models of complex word recognition propose that there are two
distinct sources of morphological influences on visual word recognition
– sublexical morpho-orthographic segmentation and supralexical morpho-semantic processing. To test this hypothesis, we used the temporal
sensitivity of event related potential recordings to directly examine the
effects produced by the short masked presentation of complex nonwords (formed by the combination a legal stem and legal affix, e.g. huntity, cornity, scanity) on the recognition of semantically transparent complex words (e.g. hunter), semantically opaque pseudocomplex words
(e.g. corner), and simplex words (e.g. scandal). We found a large early
frontal N250 effect for transparent and opaque items but not for simplex
items. Because this component is observed only for the stimuli that have
morpho-orthographic structure (i.e., are composed of a stem and a suffix), we propose that this could be the first clear ERP evidence for morpho-orthographic decomposition.

E31
HOMOPHONE EFFECT IN CHINESE READING AND ITS NEURAL
REPRESENTATION Wen-Jui Kuo1, Ovid Tzeng1; 1Institute of Neuroscience,
National Yang-Ming University — In recent year, the role of phonology to
orthography feedback consistency in visual word recognition has been a
major challenge to the current models for reading. To tackle this issue is
sometime problematic for the alphabetic writing system due to its nature
of the high degree of coupling between grapheme and phoneme. Chinese, as an ideographic writing system, has approximately 1300 syllables
which correspond to around 5000 characters. The pervasive homophony
of Chinese implies the importance of a graphic form for selecting meaning and escaping homophony in reading Chinese. Most importantly,
many Chinese homophone mates can be completely different in their
orthographic patterns which provide a ground for a better understating
of the feedback processing in visual word recognition. The present fMRI
study manipulates the homophone density and character frequency in a
lexical decision task. The reaction time data reveal the homophone density effect in reading low-frequency characters, and this psychological
effect was mirrored in the left inferior temporal-occipital junction which
a brain area emphasized for word from processing. The implication of
how a orthographic form could benefit from the feedback connection
from its homophonic mates will be discussed.

E32
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR STEM ACCESS IN REGULAR
AND IRREGULAR GERMAN PARTICIPLES Eva Smolka1, Veronika Pöhnl1,

Carsten Eulitz1; 1University of Konstanz — This study investigated whether
German participles are decomposed and accessed via their stem or
retrieved as whole words. The German participle formation is of particular interest, since it is concatenative for both regular and irregular verbs
and results from combinations of regular/irregular stems with regular/
irregular suffixes. Unlike previous electrophysiological studies that
applied either violation paradigms or repetition priming to contrast regular and irregular inflection, the present study combined these two
methods. Event-related potentials were measured when regular and
irregular base verbs (werfen, ‘throw’) were primed by (a) their correct
participles (geworfen, ‘thrown’), (b) violated participles that illegally
combined existing stems and participle suffixes (VPs, geworft, gewurft),
and (c) matched unrelated participles (geholfen, ‘helped’). Both regular
and irregular participles facilitated their base. They induced strong left
frontal negativities (LAN) as well as reduced centro-parietal negativities
(N400 modulations) relative to the unrelated participles. Even though
the effects by regular participles were more pronounced than those by
irregular participles, the similarity of the effects argues for the same pro-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

cessing system. Furthermore, both regular and irregular VPs were as
effective as correct participles in facilitating the base verbs, inducing
strong N400 modulations and frontal negativities. This indicates that the
stems in VPs were accessed, regardless of whether they originated from
regular or irregular verbs. These findings strongly argue for a single system that processes both regular and irregular inflection via access to the
stem. Such a single processing model is presented.

E33
LOCALIZING N400 EFFECTS OF PREDICTION WITH SIMULTANEOUS EEGMEG Ellen Lau1,2, Alexandre Gramfort1, Scott Burns1, Nate Delaney-

Busch1,2, Eric Fields1,2, Kristina Fanucci1,2, Phillip Holcomb2, Matti
Hamalainen1, Gina Kuperberg1,2; 1Martinos Center, Massachusetts General
Hospital, 2Tufts University — Previous research has demonstrated a reduction in the N400 response both when the prior context predicts the target
word and when the target word is semantically associated with context
words. In this simultaneous EEG-MEG semantic priming study, we use a
relatedness proportion manipulation in order to isolate N400 modulation due to prediction, and we use MEG source localization to determine
which cortical regions are responsible for this predictive modulation. In
a long-SOA semantic priming design, we varied the proportion of
related prime-target pairs (10% vs. 50%). Previous studies have shown
that increasing relatedness proportion results in increased prediction for
the target based on the prime. Here, ERP results (n=24) replicated these
findings, demonstrating a robust N400 effect for associated targets in the
high proportion condition but not in the low proportion condition. MNE
distributed source solutions were used to localize the N400 effect in the
high proportion condition. A whole-brain spatial clustering analysis of
estimated source strength between 350-450ms showed significant differences in left temporal pole and left anterior STG. Timecourse analyses in
a priori ROIs demonstrated significant differences in left temporal pole
(323-443ms) but also in right IFG (358-460ms). Our results suggest that
the observed N400 effect of prediction stems from differential activity in
left anterior temporal and right inferior frontal regions. The anterior temporal source is consistent with previous intracranial recordings. The
right IFG source may explain the asymmetrical pattern frequently
observed in magnetic field maps of the N400 response.

E34
MASKED ORTHOGRAPHIC AND PHONOLOGICAL PRIMING IN FMRI

Marianna Eddy1, Jonathan Grainger2, Phillip Holcomb3, Stephanie Del Tufo4,
John Gabrieli1; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2CNRS and AixMarseille University, 3Tufts University, 4Haskins Laboratories and University of
Connecticut — Previous studies have shown that visual word recognition

involves activation of not only orthographic representations, but also
phonological representations. Word recognition that relies on orthographic representations is thought to access semantic information
through a direct route that involves coarse-grained orthographic processing, whereas phonologically based word recognition relies more on
fine-grained orthographic processing. In the current study, we used
masked repetition priming and fMRI to examine brain areas involved in
phonological and orthographic processing during visual word recognition. We manipulated the prime-target relationship to either overlap in
phonology using pseudohomophone (PH) primes (brane-BRAIN) or
orthography using transposed letter (TL) primes (barin-BRAIN). Priming effects for each of these conditions was in comparison to control conditions. For the PH priming condition, we observed repetition
suppression in bilateral superior temporal gyri, left pre/postcentral gyri,
and left middle occipital gyrus, whereas the TL priming produced repetition suppression in the left inferior frontal gyrus and left occipito-temporal cortex (visual word form area - VWFA). In addition to the priming
paradigm, we localized a region of interest (ROI) for each individual,
selecting left occipito-temporal clusters that respond more for words
than for objects. While only the TL priming condition produced repetition suppression in the VWFA, we found reading ability, specifically
rapid naming (RAN – letters) and phonemic decoding (TOWRE), was

137

Poster Session E — Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
related to the pattern of PH priming in the functionally localized VWFA
across participants. In addition, TL priming was related to the ability to
read unfamiliar words as measured by the Word Attack (WRMT).

E35
MEG MASKED PRIMING EVIDENCE FOR EARLY FORM-BASED
DECOMPOSITION OF IRREGULAR PAST TENSE VERBS Joseph Fruchter1,

Linnaea Stockall2, Alec Marantz1; 1New York University, 2Queen Mary
University of London — To what extent does morphological structure play
a role in early processing of visually presented English past tense verbs?
Previous masked priming studies have demonstrated effects of obligatory form-based decomposition for genuinely affixed words (teacherTEACH) and pseudo-affixed words (corner-CORN), but not for orthographic controls (brothel-BROTH; Rastle, Davis, & New 2004). Additionally, MEG single word reading studies have demonstrated that the
transition probability from stem to affix modulates an early evoked
response called the M170 (Solomyak & Marantz, 2010 and Lewis,
Solomyak, & Marantz, 2011, for parallel findings for pseudo-affixed
words). Here, utilizing the M170 as a neural index of visual form-based
morphological decomposition, we ask whether the M170 demonstrates
masked priming effects for regular and irregular past tense verbs (following Crepaldi et al., 2010, who obtained behavioral masked priming
results for irregulars). Dual mechanism theories (Pinker & Prince, 1988)
predict a rule-based decomposition for regulars but not for irregulars,
while single mechanism theories (Stockall & Marantz, 2006) predict the
same decomposition for both. MEG data was recorded for 16 subjects
performing a visual masked priming lexical decision task. We obtained
cortically-constrained minimum norm estimates via FreeSurfer and
MNE. Using predefined anatomical regions of interest (ROIs), we found
that activity in the left fusiform ROI was modulated by the masked
priming manipulation for both regular and irregular verbs, during the
time window of the M170. The results support a single mechanism
account of the English past tense, in which even irregulars are decomposed into stems and affixes, prior to lexical access.

E36
USING ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MEASURES TO STUDY LEXICALITY
JUDGMENTS Ruth Ann Atchley1, Nancy Azevedo2, Jonathan Schuster1, Eva

Kehayia2; 1University of Kansas, 2McGill University — The

current electrophysiology (ERP) research demonstrates a novel utilization of the classic
oddball ERP task in order to measure task mediated selective attention
(as reflected by the P3 ERP component) and morpho syntactic analysis
(as reflect by the Left Anterior Negativity, LAN) during lexicality judgments. Testing blocks consist of targets and distractors from distinct lexical categories (i.e. looking for rare Nonwords or pronounceable
Pseudowords (20%) presented among Words and also looking for rare
Words among Nonwords or pronounceable Pseudowords.) In the two
blocks comparing Words and Nonwords, we found robust and statistically reliable P3 and LAN components (p’s <.01). Likewise, when participants were asked to detect Word targets when these were imbedded
with pronounceable Pseudoword distractors (GLORB), we also saw a
reliable P3 and LAN (p’s <.01), though the duration of these components
were longer in time, which likely reflects greater variability in the time it
took participants to make this more challenging lexical decision. In stark
contrast, we did not find a P3 or LAN component when Pseudowords
were the targets among frequent Words, suggesting that the
Pseudowords were word-like enough to avoid obvious detection, and
that the presence of many legal words interfered with morpho syntactic
analysis. These findings suggest that this novel utilization of ERPs for
the study of lexicality judgments in a modified lexical decision task has
experimental utility and is a reliable method for detecting subtle aspects
of lexicality.

138

E37
ELECTROCORTICAL
MARKERS
OF
PHONOLOGICAL
UNDERSPECIFICATION IN THE MENTAL LEXICON: ERPS TO AN AUDITORY
LEXICAL DECISION TASK Noriko Tanigawa1, Ramin Rahni1, Matthew
Moore1, John J. Kim1, Mark W. Geisler1; 1San Francisco State University — The

present study utilizes electrophysiological measures to characterize the
storage and processing of predictable abstract information about speech
sounds in the mental lexicon. Past studies investigated this question by
contrasting the processing of coronals (/n /, /d/) that have alternating
surface forms (e.g., /n/ pronounced as [n] in rain, [m] in rainbow) with
that of non-coronals (/m/, /b/) that do not. Following Friedrich et al.’s
(2006) auditory lexical decision paradigm, monomorphemic English
nouns were selected that had a uniqueness point with a coronal or noncoronal as the first phoneme of the second syllable. A pseudoword was
created from each real word by switching the place of articulation
between coronal and non-coronal (e.g., picnic to *picmic; helmet to *helnet). If the coronal feature is not represented in the mental lexicon, processing place-manipulated inputs will result in mismatch for noncoronals (*helnet) but in no-mismatch for coronals (*picmic) (Lahiri,
1999). Event-related potentials (n = 24) were time-locked to preceding
phoneme’s offset. Predicted asymmetric pseudoword effects emerged in
component-specific manners. P2 amplitude was maximal for the specified match (non-coronal real), suggesting target-focused feature processing (Luck and Hillyard, 1994). N400 amplitude was maximally negative
for mismatches (non-coronal pseudo onsets) and frontally distributed,
suggesting alliterative processing (Praamstra et al., 1993). The posterior
P3 indexing lexical-decision making followed the N400 (Polich, 1985).
Centroid latency was longer for pseudowords than for real words,
demarcating this surface-form processing for uniform lexical-decision
from the earlier abstract phonological processing. The early electrocortical asymmetries occurring before task-related processing begins support
feature underspecification.

E38
FREQUENCY AND DURATION EFFECTS IN MASKED REPETITION
PRIMING Priya Mitra1, Marianna Eddy2, Jonathan Grainger3, Phillip

Holcomb1; 1Tufts University, 2Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 3CNRS
and Aix-Marseille University — Event-related potential (ERP) masked prim-

ing paradigms have demonstrated that automatic word processing is
sensitive to word frequency in ways that cannot be fully elucidated by
behavioral measures. The present study expands upon the effect frequency has on sublexical (N250) and lexico-semantic (N400) stages of
word recognition by manipulating both word frequency and prime
duration. ERPs were recorded in a forward- and backward-masked repetition priming paradigm with 53, 80, and 107 ms primes and a constant
SOA of 120 ms. The influence of word frequency on ERP repetition priming interacted with prime duration in both the N250 and N400 time windows. Previous work suggests that only low-frequency words should
elicit an N250 priming effect when stimulus pairs are presented with a
long SOA, yet here the effect was seen in both frequency conditions
when longer prime durations were introduced to the design. However,
in keeping with previous findings, the low-frequency condition seemed
to elicit more robust N250 priming effects across prime durations. As
expected, both high- and low-frequency words elicited N400 priming
effects, but these effects were larger across prime durations for high-frequency words. Combined with previous research, these findings suggest
high-frequency priming effects are most sensitive to prime duration and
ISI in the N250 time window, where these factors influence whether the
prime and target processing will be integrated or processed as distinct
perceptual events. In the N400 time window, the more sustained activations of semantic representations are affected more by prime duration in
the less efficiently processed low-frequency words.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session E

E40
ERP EVIDENCE FOR DISTINGUISHING BETWEEN ORTHOGRAPHIC/
PHONOLOGICAL AND BALANCED ADULT ENGLISH READERS Valerie

Karuzis1, Joseph Dien1, Melody Berens1, Polly O'Rourke1, Henk Haarmann1;
1University of Maryland - College Park — An ongoing issue in developmental and adult language acquisition is the nature of individual reading
style differences. One proposal (Baron & Strawson, 1976) is that adult
readers can be divided into those relying more on phonology (“Phoenicians”) or on orthography (“Chinese”). A more recent proposal is that
dyslexics can be divided into those suffering deficits in phonology or
orthography (Castles & Coltheart, 1993). These proposals are plausible
under either a dual-route or triangle model approach, but have subjected
to debate. A view not yet explored is the existence of a population relying on both processes in a balanced manner (“Phoenese”) that has a
greater need to integrate divergent outputs from orthography and phonology. In this experiment, we test the proposal (Dien et al., 2008; Dien,
2009) that the Recognition Potential indexes such a mechanism. Participants (n=28) read sentences, presented wordwise, that favored orthographic processing (letter transpositions), phonological processing
(pseudo-homophones), or both (normal). They then indicated which of
two probe words appeared in each sentence. Accuracy rates were not
significantly different between orthographic and phonological conditions (82% versus 80%). The Recognition Potential was significantly
greater for the “Phoenese” (quadratic trend between orthography-phonology accuracy and Recognition Potential amplitude, p=0.0455). These
results help illuminate how orthographic and phonological systems
work together in the reading process, suggest the analysis of three reader
groups (“Chinese”, “Phoenese”, and “Phoenicians”) for reading style
studies, and propose that an additional cognitive skill potentially
present for the “Phoenese” readers could serve as a target for remediation of reading deficits.

LANGUAGE: Other
E41
THE IMPORTANCE OF SUSTAINED FIELDS FOR CORTICAL SPEECH
PROCESSING IN TONAL LANGUAGES Christina Fan1, Xingyu Zhu1, Hans-

Günther Dosch1, Christiane von Stutterheim1, André Rupp1; 1University of
Heidelberg, Germany — In tonal languages such as Chinese, pitch contours
of syllables discriminate lexical meaning at a systematic level, which is
not the case for non-tonal languages such as German. It is still unclear
how such cross-linguistic differences are reflected at the cortical level.
We used 16 natural speech stimuli to investigate the neuromagnetic sustained field (SF) in the auditory cortex of 20 Chinese and 20 German
speakers. Stimuli consisted of vowels (being or not being part of Chinese) and syllables (meaningful or meaningless Chinese words). The SF
of all stimuli was found to be twice as big for the Chinese as compared to
the German subjects. Furthermore, the Chinese group showed larger SF
for meaningful syllables compared to meaningless syllables in Chinese
in contradistinction to the German group. There were no significant SF
differences evoked by vowels whether occurring or not occurring in Chinese. This could be an indicator for the importance of pitch over vowel
quality for the generators of sustained field. In a second experiment we
observed group-specific differences evoked by linguistic and musical
stimuli (French horn). While both stimulus types elicited no significant
SF differences for the Chinese, the SF differed for the German group. The
horn tone evoked comparable SF in both groups, the linguistic stimulus
however elicited significantly smaller signals in the German group.
These cross-linguistic results suggest that the SF reflects an important
process involved in lexical processing at the level of the auditory cortex.

E42
PROCESSING STATISTICS IN NATURAL COMPLEX SOUNDS:
SPECIALIZED SPEECH PROCESSES IN GENERAL AUDITORY AREAS

Pascale Tremblay1,2, Uri Hasson3; 1Université Laval, Département de
réadaptation, 2Centre de Recherche Université Laval Robert-Giffard, 3Center
for Mind & Brain Sciences, Università Degli Studi di Trento — A fundamental
yet poorly understood property of the speech signal is its sophisticated
sequential organization. Indeed, the speech units (syllables, words) are
ordered in time according to complex language-specific constraints, and
manifested in language-specific statistics, such as syllable transition
probabilities (TP). Specifically, syllables with high TP tend to form
words whereas those with lower TPs mark word boundaries. Behavioral
studies have shown that children and adults are sensitive to TP; however, very little is known about the neurocognitive processes underlying
statistical information processing (SIP) – in particular, it is unclear if statistics are computed through domain-general or speech-specialized
mechanisms. The limited available data suggests that the supratemporal
cortex (STC) is involved in SIP. In the present study, 20 participants were
exposed to auditory speech (syllables) and non-speech (bird chirps)
sequences while performing an unrelated visual task. The sequences
ranged from random to highly predictable in three levels (random, semipredictable, highly predictable) according to the TP structure of their elements. Neuroimaging data were acquired using a 4T MRI scanner and
focused on a set of bilateral regions-of-interest covering the entire STC.
Trend analyses characterized the sensitivity of each ROI to the degree of
predictability within speech and non-speech sequences. Results show
that while several parts of STC are sensitive to TP in speech and nonspeech sequences, mid-predictability sequences were associated with the
highest activity for speech sequences, but lowest activity for non-speech
sequences, suggesting domain-sensitive SI mechanisms within general
auditory processing areas.

E43
DO WE USE CONCEPTUAL OR PHONOLOGICAL REPRESENTATIONS FOR
ERROR DETECTION IN SPEECH? Els Severens1, Ilse Tydgat1, Martin

Pickering2, Robert J Hartsuiker1; 1Department of experimental Psychology,
Ghent University, 2Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh — To

detect speech errors, internal speech is compared to intended speech
(Levelt, Roelofs, & Meyers, 1999). However it is unclear whether a conceptual or phonological representation is used to make this comparison.
To investigate this issue, spontaneous speech errors (semantic and phonological) were elicited with a picture-naming task in participants’ second language, while event-related potentials (ERPs) were measured. We
compared error trials (e.g., saying “appl….melon” to a picture of a
melon) with two types of control trials, namely with (a) ‘same picture
controls’, i.e. correct responses to the same picture (e.g. saying “melon”
to melon), and (b) ‘same initial response’, i.e. trials with the same initial
response but in which this initial response was correct (e.g. saying
“apple” to a picture of an apple). In stimulus-locked averages, there was
a negative deflection of semantic errors compared to both control trials
in the 600-700 ms time-window. Mixed errors elicited a (smaller) negative deflection compared to controls in the 700-750 ms time-window.
When comparing phonological errors with controls, there was no negative deflection. Therefore we conclude that it is easier to detect semantic
than phonological errors. Specifically we propose that the monitor uses
phonological rather than conceptual information when comparing internal to intended speech. Error detection is harder when two word forms
are very similar (i.e. phonological errors), but is easier when two word
forms clearly differ, even when the conceptual representations are very
similar (i.e. semantic errors). Levelt, Roelofs, & Meyer (1999). Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 22(1), 1-75

E44
COMPARING DIFFERENT NEURAL MARKERS OF DEVELOPMENTAL
DYSLEXIA AND READING ABILITY Cheng Wang1, Joonkoo Park2,

Agnieszka J. Jasinska1, Joanne F. Carlisle1, Holly K. Craig1, Jing Liu1, Frederick
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

139

Poster Session E — Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
J. Morrison1, Stephanie L. Hensel1, Robert C. Welsh1, Thad A. Polk1; 1University
of Michigan, 2Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University — Previous
neuroimaging studies have identified a number of neural markers that
predict dyslexia and reading ability, but these markers have not been
systematically compared in the same subjects. We recruited 48 participants (aged 16-32 years, with mean of 21.7 years) with a wide range of
reading abilities (from dyslexics to very good readers) and used structural and functional MRI as well as diffusion tensor imaging to measure
a variety of neural markers that have previously been shown to predict
reading ability and dyslexia. We then assessed how the neural markers
predicted diagnosis (dyslexic or not dyslexic) and reading ability as
assessed by the Woodcock-Johnson III Reading Inventory (WJ-III) and
the Test of Word Reading Efficiency (TOWRE). Simple correlation and
multiple regression results indicated that structural markers were better
predictors of reading performance and diagnosis than were functional
markers. In particular, asymmetry in the size of the planum temporale
and gray matter volume in the right pars triangularis were the best predictors of both reading ability and diagnosis, and integrity of the white
matter underlying temporo-parietal cortex was also a good predictor of
diagnosis. Supported by NIH grant R21HD064983 to T.A.P.

E45
FUNCTIONAL INTEGRATION CHANGES IN SECOND LANGUAGE LEARNING
OF A DISTANT LANGUAGE Ladan Ghazi Saidi1,2,4, Vincent Perlbarg3,4,

Guillaume Marrelec1,3,4, Mélani Pélégrini-Issac,3,4, Habib Benali3,4, Ana-Inés
Ansaldo1,2,4; 1Centre de Recherche Institute Gériatrie de Montreal, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada, 2Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada, 3Inserm et
UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR-S 678, Laboratoire d'Imagerie Fonctionnelle, Paris,
France, 4Université de Montréal, Inserm et UPMC Univ Paris 06, LINeM,
Laboratoire International de Neuroimagerie et Modélisation, Montréal,
Canada — We report the learning related changes in functional connectivity observed in a group of Persian (L1) native speakers (N= 12) who were
enrolled in an intensive computerized French lexical-training program,
Participants were tested on a picture-naming task with cognates, noncognates and clangs, administered during fMRI scanning before and
after consolidation of L2 lexical learning. Changes in functional connectivity were characterised at the level of functional Integration (I), which
provides a measure of the global cohesion of a network (Marellec, 2008)
Specifically we focused on the L1 and L2 language processing networks
and the control system (e.g. working memory and cognitive control
areas) as defined by previous literature (Price 2010; Green & Abutalebi,
2007), and in our recent fMRI study on the same cohort (Ghazi Saidi &
Ansaldo, in preparation). In particular, measures of total, within-network and between-network (I) (Marcellec, et al., 2008) were calculated
with NetBrainWork (Perlbarg, 2009). The results show no changes in (I)
across learning phases for L1, whereas for L2 the total, inter and intranetwork (I) decreased, significantly with proficiency improvement. In
line with the literature (Majerus, et al., 2008; Prat, et al., 2007; Dodel, et
al., 2005), this evidence shows that low proficiency in L2 is associated to
enhanced functional connectivity between and within the L1 and L2 language networks and the control system . Further, with proficiency
increase, and decreased processing demands, there is a significant reduction of total, within and between language networks (I) decreases. (242
words) References: Abutalebi, J., and Green, D., (2007), Bilingual language production: The neurocognition of language representation and
control, Journal of Neurolinguistics, 20, (3), 242-275. Dodel, S., Golestani,
N., Pallier, C., ElKouby, V., Le Bihan,D., Poline, J. (2005), ConditionDependent Functional Connectivity: Syntax Networks in Bilinguals,
Philosophical Transactions: Biological Sciences, 360, 1457, pp.921-935
Ghazi Saidi & Ansaldo, in preparation, Majerus S, Belayachi S, De Smedt
B, Leclercq AL, Martinez T, Schmidt C, Weekes B, Maquet P. (2008),
Neural networks for short-term memory for order differentiate high and
low proficiency bilinguals, Neuroimage, 42 (4), pp. 1698-713. Marrelec,
G., Bellec, P., Krainik, A., Duffau, H., Pe´le´grini-Issac, M., Lehe´ricy, S.,
Benali, H., Doyon, J., (2008), Regions, systems, and the brain: Hierarchical measures of functional integration in fMRI, Medical Image Analysis,

140

12, 484–496. Perlbarg, V., Marrelec; G., Bellec; P., Coynel, D., PélégriniIssac, M., Benali, H., (2009), NetBrainWork: a toolbox for studying functional interactions in large-scale brain networks in fMRI. In Proceedings
of the 15th International Conference on Functional Mapping of the
Human Brain, San Francisco, Californie, USA. Prat, C. S., Keller, T. A.,
Just, M. A., (2007), Individual differences in sentence comprehension: a
functional magnetic resonance imaging investigation of syntactic and
lexical processing demands, J Cogn Neurosci, 19 (12), pp. 1950-63. Price,
C., (2010), The anatomy of language: a review of 100 fMRI studies,
Annals Of The New York Academy Of Sciences, Issue: The Year in Cognitive Neuroscience

E46
PROCESSING INTRA-SENTENTIAL AND INTER-SENTENTIAL CODE
SWITCHES IN COMPREHENSION: AN FMRI STUDY Gangyi
Feng1,

Suiping Wang1, Hsuan-Chih Chen2; 1South China Normal University, 2Chinese
University of Hong Kong — Although proficient bilinguals are capable of

switching from one language to another without much apparent difficulty in daily language comprehension, previous studies have shown
that switching between languages activates several extra brain regions
related to cognitive control. However, it is unclear whether processing
code switches at different levels of linguistic structure involves the same
neural substrates. Using the event-related fMRI technique, the current
study investigated the neural correlates of two kinds of code switching
effects (i.e., intra- and inter-sentential) during narrative reading. Intersentential switching refers to a language switch between two successive
sentences, while intra-sentential switching refers to a switch occurred on
a specific word (always a noun) in the middle of a sentence. Forty Chinese-English bilinguals read a story containing the two types of code
switches for comprehension. Consistent with previous studies, our
results showed that switching between two languages activated an
extensive network, including bilateral prefrontal, temporal and subcortical regions. More importantly, we found that processing intra- and intersentential switches produced different patterns of brain activation. Specifically, intra-sentential switches evoked increased BOLD signal
changes in several brain regions in the “control network” and “language
network”, including bilateral dorsal prefrontal cortex, inferior frontal
gyrus, middle temple gyrus, anterior cingulate cortex, inferior parietal
cortex, and precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex. In contrast, inter-sentential switches activated a language related network, including bilateral
frontal and temporal regions. These results suggest that recognizing
and/or unifying two linguistic codes at different levels of linguistic
structure may involve different language selection mechanisms.

E47
ABNORMAL CORTICAL DISTRIBUTION IN RELATION TO NAMING
DEFICITS IN MALES WITH ISOLATED CLEFT OF THE LIP AND/OR
PALATE Ian DeVolder1, Lynn Richman1, Amy Conrad1, Vince Magnotta1, Peg
Nopoulos1; 1University of Iowa — Previous research has shown structural

differences within brains of males with isolated cleft lip and/or palate
(ICLP), along with deficits in naming. It has also been established that
the primary sub-types of ICLP, cleft lip with/without cleft palate (CL/P)
and cleft palate alone (CPO), are etiologically distinct. The current study
aims to find unique neuroanatomical differences between cleft sub-types
and to connect these structural abnormalities with the naming deficits
seen in this population. Male subjects aging from 7 to 17 years participated; 55 were healthy controls, 45 had ICLP (34 CL/P; 11 CPO). Scores
on the Boston Naming Test (BNT) and the Rapid Automatized Naming
(RAN) Tests were collected from all participants. Measures of total cerebral volume and cerebral lobe volumes were also obtained via MRI.
These measures were compared between controls and the two cleft subtypes. After controlling for verbal ability both cleft groups showed naming deficits. The tissue distribution within the cerebrum was uniquely
abnormal for each cleft sub-type: CL/P males showed enlargement of
the temporal lobes, while CPO males showed reduction in the parietal
lobes. For CL/P, temporal lobe enlargement did not correlate with naming deficits. However, in CPO, smaller parietal lobes significantly corre-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session E
lated with worse performance on the BNT (r = .786) and the RAN (r =
.913). This structure/function association was absent in controls. The
results indicate atypical cerebral morphologies that are dependent on
cleft sub-type in males. For CPO, this abnormal tissue distribution
appears to be pathologic and directly correlated with poorer naming
abilities.

E48
GRAMMATICAL ASPECT MODULATING ONLINE COSTS OF LONGDISTANCE DEPENDENCY PROCESSING: NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL
EVIDENCE Martin Paczynski1, Gina Kuperberg1,2; 1Tufts University,
2Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital — Grammatical

aspect can significantly impact several components of language processing, including how quickly information decays within working memory.
In the current study we used Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) to investigate the effect of grammatical aspect on the processing of long-distance
dependencies (LDDs). We fully crossed grammatical aspect of the sentence initial verb (perfective “Mary wondered…”; imperfective “Mary
was wondering…”) with the presence (“…who the businessman…”) or
absence (“…whether the businessman …”) of a LDD. ERPs were
recorded to the embedded verb (“fired”). We found a significant interaction between grammatical aspect and LDD throughout the recording
epoch. Embedded verbs in the perfective condition evoked a greater
anterior negativity within the N100, 400-600ms, and P600 time windows
in the LDD condition compared to the non-LDD condition, consistent
with previous literature. ERPs evoked by embedded verbs in the imperfective condition failed to evoke these early anterior negativities, instead
evoking a robust, broadly distributed P600. Our results demonstrate that
grammatical aspect significantly impacts online sentence processing.
Specifically, it appears to attenuate early costs of long-distance dependency processing, instead inducing later processing costs which may be
associated with the release of information from working-memory.

E49
NEURAL BASES OF METALINGUISTIC AWARENESS AND EARLY READING
ACQUISITION: MOVING BEYOND PHONOLOGICAL PROCESSING. Maria

M. Arredondo1, Kira Mascho1, Alyssa Mastic1, Ka I. Ip1, Lucy Shih-Ju Hsu1,
Sarah Spath1, Neelima Wagley1, Stefanie Younce1, Kathryn Wardin1, Lisa
Thierbach1, Ioulia Kovelman1; 1University of Michigan — Different types of
language knowledge are thought to be critical for reading acquisition in
children. Currently, the field has placed an overwhelming emphasis on
Phonological Awareness: The ability to manipulate the phonological
units of language. Yet, research shows that while Phonological Awareness is necessary, it is “not sufficient for learning to read in English”
(Berninger et al., 2010). Other types of language awareness, especially
Morphological Awareness which is the ability to manipulate the morphemes of language, are found to be equally as important for learning to
read in English and in other languages. Unfortunately, unlike Phonological Awareness, relatively little is known about the learning and brain
bases of Morphological Awareness. QUESTION. What are the neural
bases of Morphological Awareness in elementary school children?
METHOD. Young English speakers (mean age 8, n = 10) completed comparable auditory Morphological and Phonological Awareness tasks and
a control word-matching task in the fMRI. Children also completed language/literacy assessments. RESULTS. Children showed greater activation in left inferior and middle frontal gyri in response to the
Morphological relative to the Phonological Awareness task. CONCLUSION. Morphological Awareness ability is thought to integrate complex
phonological, semantic, and morphosyntactic knowledge—It also takes
longer to develop compared to Phonological Awareness. Our findings
suggest that the protracted developmental growth of Morphological
Awareness might rely on the maturation of the left frontal lobe. The
results offer new insight into the neural as well as learning processes at
the root of reading acquisition and carry implications for understanding
language impairments and dyslexia.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

E50
LONGITUDINAL CHANGE IN MMN AND N400 RESPONSES TO ARABIC
LINGUISTIC FEATURES (OR TO ARABIC PHONEMIC CONTRASTS,
LEXICAL STATUS, AND MORPHOLOGICAL PATTERNS) BY A HERITAGE
AND NON-HERITAGE LEARNER OF ARABIC Reem Khamis-Dakwar1, Karen

Froud2; 1Adelphi University, 2Teachers College, Columbia University — To

investigate the role of prior exposure in adult L2 acquisition, we examine
neural correlates of phonological, lexical, and morphological learning of
L2 Arabic in one heritage learner (P1) and one non-heritage learner (P2).
Both learners participated weekly in a series of EEG experiments during
a 5 week Arabic program, including: 1) MMN elicitation in response to
Arabic consonant contrasts; 2) lexical decision to written Arabic real and
pseudowords; 3) a morphology processing task, requiring identification
of morphological relatedness between written Arabic word pairs sharing
weak or strong root connections, compared to unrelated words. In the
MMN paradigm, latency differences were observed. For P1, MMN was
observed at 100-200 ms from week 1, whereas P2 showed a later negativity (200-300 ms) from week 3. In the lexical decision experiment, P1
showed an N400 response from week 2. P2 showed signs of an N400
response from week 1, but in week 4 a P600 response was apparent. In
the morphology experiment, P1 showed an N400 response to unrelated
word pairs and a positivity in the same time window in response to
weak root connections, from week 1. For P2, N400 was observed in
response to unrelated and weak root pairs only from week 5. These variable brain responses show similarities with previous studies examining
ERP correlates of L2 grammatical learning in adulthood (e.g., McLoughlin, Tanner et al., 2010) and suggests rapid and continued reorganization
in language processing networks as a response to L2 exposure, even in
circumstances of prior exposure.

LANGUAGE: Semantic
E51
INDEPENDENCE OF PRAGMATIC AND LEXICO-SEMANTIC PROCESSING
IN PICTURE-SENTENCE VERIFICATION Stephen Politzer-Ahles1, Xiaoming

Jiang2, Robert Fiorentino1, Xiaolin Zhou2; 1University of Kansas, 2Peking
University — Examining the processing of sentences with quantifiers like

"some" provides an ideal test case for elucidating the neurocognitive
foundations of semantic and pragmatic meaning composition. In sentences like "Some of the students are hard-working", "some" contains
two possible meanings: "at least one" (the inherent, logical meaning) and
"not all" (the pragmatic meaning, generated through an enrichment process that may be context-dependent). Our previous event-related potential research in Mandarin suggests that pragmatic enrichment of the
meaning of "some" occurs rapidly, and is subsequently inhibited when
inconsistent with the context. An open question is how reanalysis of the
pragmatic meaning affects processing downstream. In the present study,
we showed participants pictures in which several characters are interacting with either the same kinds of objects or different objects. These were
followed by correct sentences, sentences in which the object did not
match the objects shown in the picture, sentences in which the quantifier
was pragmatically inconsistent with the context (i.e., "some" after a picture where all characters are doing the same thing), or sentences in
which both the object mismatched and the quantifier was inconsistent.
Cluster-based permutation statistics indicated that object (lexico-semantic) mismatch elicited a classical N400 effect, pragmatic inconsistency
elicited a late negativity on the downstream object, and semantic and
pragmatic inconsistency did not interact. Effects at the quantifier position replicated our previous findings. These results suggest that,
although the pragmatic meaning of the quantifier is computed rapidly,
reanalyzing the pragmatic meaning does not impede lexico-semantic
processing; instead, they unfold in parallel.

141

Poster Session E — Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall

E52
NOUN ANIMACY AND VERBAL TELICITY JOINTLY MODULATE SENTENCE
PROCESSING: AN EEG STUDY Evguenia Malaia1, Sharlene Newman2;
1University of Texas Arlington, 2Indiana University — The

question of how
information from semantic and syntactic modules of the linguistic system is integrated is unresolved. In this EEG study we used the semantic
features of nouns (animacy) and verbs (telicity) to investigate the timeline of syntax-semantics interface processing. EEG data was recorded
while participants read reduced relative clauses (The witness seized by
the agent was in danger) with telic and atelic obligatory transitive verbs,
followed by a comprehension probe. The animacy of the first argument
was also manipulated. Frequency, length, and the co-occurrence probability of target verbs and nouns were matched across conditions. Probe
accuracy was high (> 80% correct) for the 13 participants (7 male). Statistical analysis revealed significant effects of argument animacy on the
amplitude of the right anterior negativity (N2 component) on the first
noun, telicity effects over the central electrode cluster on the first verb,
and a telicity x animacy interaction in latency and amplitude of the P3b
component over the left posterior electrode cluster on the verb in the
matrix clause, with the earliest and least negative deflection for the Animate Telic condition, followed by Animate Atelic, Inanimate Atelic, with
Inanimate Telic condition eliciting the latest and most negative P3b component. The results appear to suggest that the cognitive load of thematic
role assignment in the RRC is modulated by verb and argument semantics, resulting in a gradient distribution of processing difficulty on the
second verb. This is thought to reflect the joint operation of attention and
working memory during syntax-semantics integration.

E53
HEMISPHERIC SPECIALIZATION FOR MEANING PROCESSING IN
METAPHORS Henk Haarmann1, Timothy George1; 1University of Maryland
College Park — Our study tested whether there is a hemispheric advantage for novel metaphors judgment. Marshal and Faust (2008) used a
divided visual paradigm and a signal detection theory (SDT) to address
this question and reported a right hemisphere (RH) advantage. Their
finding is consistent with the claim that the RH is specialized in integrating unrelated word meanings. Other studies found a left hemisphere
(LH) or no hemispheric advantage for this task, but failed to include
SDT-based data analysis. To address this discrepancy, we tested sixtynine right handed university of Maryland students in a divided field
paradigm using a SDT-based analysis. Their task was to judge whether a
word pair was a novel metaphor or unrelated. The second word in each
pair was presented either in the left or right visual field. Participants
were grouped into slow and fast responders. Analysis of variance
(ANOVA) of sensitivity (d’) indicated that there was a LH advantage for
novel metaphor judgment in slow (but not fast) responders. In addition,
the RH had a more liberal response bias (beta) regardless of processing
speed. One interpretation of these results is that when given sufficient
time the LH has a better ability to detect the absence of a meaning relation, which could then be used to discriminate between related (novel
metaphor) and unrelated word pairs. This interpretation and the additional finding of a more liberal response bias for the RH are consistent
with the proposal of greater overlap among word meaning representations in the RH.

E54
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL INDICES OF SEMANTIC PROCESSING IN
CHILDREN WITH IDDM Joseph Hoffman1, Reem Khamis-Dakwar1;

1Adelphi University — Individuals with Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus (IDDM) are at increased risk of hypoglycemia which may contribute
to long-term neurological dysfunction. Effects of insulin treatment on
language processing are not well understood, with behavioral results
across the literature suggesting effects on vocabulary, comprehension,
verbal memory, and verbal intelligence. Neurophysiological studies in
this domain have focused on effects of insulin treatment on attention and
learning. To date, no investigations have used EEG to investigate seman-

142

tic processing in children with IDDM. To evaluate whether poor vocabulary development in children with IDDM is associated with changes in
lexico-semantic processing, we investigated the N400 response from ten
monolingual English-speaking children (aged 7-12 years); five had
received insulin treatment for IDDM for at least 2 years, and five served
as controls. The Word Classes subtest of the CELF-4 was used as a
behavioral measure of semantic knowledge. Participants were then presented with picture-word pairs that were either congruent (the picture
depicted the spoken word) or incongruent (unrelated), and asked to
press a button to indicate congruency. ERPs were derived from 32 channel EEG recordings by averaging and montaging to centro-parietal sensors within each condition. N400 was observed upon grand averaging of
all participants, and amplitude was greater in response to incongruent
word-picture pairs for both control and IDDM groups; however, the
amplitude of the N400 was attenuated in the IDDM group. We propose
that these preliminary findings reveal differences in lexico-semantic processing in children with IDDM who have received insulin treatment for
at least 2 years.

E55
PREDICTIVE NETWORK OF SEMANTIC PROCESSING: A DYNAMIC
CAUSAL MODELING STUDY Fahimeh Mamashli1, Burkhard Maess1, Jonas

Obleser1, Angela D. Friederici1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and
Brain Sciences — Language processing is usually performed rather effortlessly by humans under normal conditions. However, it is a demanding
ability, and it has been demonstrated that high predictability of the
upcoming content can significantly ease the understanding. To investigate such a sophisticated interplay between bottom-up and top-down
processes we set up an experiment varying high and low semantic predictability in sentences. We hypothesize that top-down processes should
be more relevant when processing highly context-restrictive verbs compared to less context-restrictive verbs. Such information transfer direction can be modeled in Dynamic Causal Modeling (DCM) as modulation
of extrinsic backward connections. MEG data was recorded from 21 participants listening to the sentences . Evoked fields were computed for the
onsets of verbs and nouns and the two conditions. For the verbs and
nouns we found significant N400m-like differences between conditions.
Evoked fields were then submitted to a DCM analysis. All tested models
were based on a set of four brain regions of interest in temporal and frontal areas for each hemisphere; plus a deep source (thalamus). All models
were assumed to be hemispherically symmetric. We varied the actual
number of connections and whether either forward or backward or both
connections accounted for the difference between high and low semantic
predictability. Familywise Bayesian model selection demonstrated that
deep sources are not important to this network and backward connections (top-down) are favored when explaining the differences due to
semantic predictability. We take that as evidence for the relevance of top
down processes role in predictive semantic processing.

E56
THE RIGHT HEMISPHERE BREAKS THE RULES: EVENT RELATED
POTENTIALS REVEAL STRONGER ENCODING OF ILLEGAL STRINGS IN THE
Dickson1,
Kara
RIGHT HEMISPHERE THAN THE LEFT Danielle
Federmeier1,2; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2The Beckman
Institute for Advanced Science and Technology — The independent contribu-

tions of the right and left hemispheres to visual word recognition were
examined using event related potentials (ERPs) in a repetition paradigm
with both presentations of items lateralized. Stimuli included words,
pronounceable but meaningless pseudowords, meaningful acronyms,
and meaningless illegal letter strings to fully examine factors of familiarity and orthographic regularity. There is a strong assumption in the literature that the mapping of orthography to semantics is the domain of left
hemisphere (LH). However, first presentation of these items showed
similar effects of orthographic neighborhood size across the hemispheres
such that there was more activation for orthographically regular items
(words, pseudowords) than irregular (acronyms, illegal strings). This

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session E
suggests that semantic information is structured similarly in both hemispheres. There is typically a broad reduction in activity for repeated
items as a function of the extent to which the item was processed for
semantics following first presentation. The current study found that both
hemispheres showed repetition effects for words, pseudowords and
acronyms, which suggests that the RH, like the LH, processes all potentially meaningful items for semantics, regardless of their orthographic
regularity. The RH, but not the LH, had an additional repetition effect
for meaningless orthographically illegal strings. This suggests that RH
processing of these strings is more extensive than LH, and, more
broadly, that downstream processing mechanisms in the hemispheres
are critically different. A follow-up study with lateralized first presentation but identical, centralized second presentation further suggests that
this effect occurs due to differences at encoding.

E57
A THEORETICAL ACCOUNT OF LEXICAL-SEMANTIC NAMING DEFICITS IN
BILINGUAL APHASIA Teresa Gray1, Swathi Kiran1; 1Boston University —
Very little is understood about the neuropsychological deficits in bilingual aphasia. The purpose of this study is to examine the relationship
between lexical and semantic processing in bilingual aphasia, to investigate the role of language proficiency, and to develop a model that provides a framework for understanding language impairment patterns
subsequent to brain damage. In order to examine pre-morbid language
skill and language impairment, 13 Spanish-English bilingual aphasic
subjects completed a language use questionnaire and a battery of formal
tests specifically designed to evaluate receptive and expressive deficits
within the language processing system. We then developed a model of
bilingual language processing, using both the Revised Hierarchical
Model (Kroll & Stewart, 1994) and the Ellis and Young (1988) model of
language processing as supporting schemas. We used our psycholinguistic model of bilingual language processing as a means to frame language deficits in bilingual aphasia. According to our model of bilingual
language processing, lexical input is less impaired than lexical output
with conceptual knowledge generally preserved across subjects. Our
correlations suggest that higher pre-morbid language skills are associated with higher language scores after brain injury. By utilizing a psycholinguistic approach to analyze neuropsychological deficits in
bilingual aphasia, we are able to produce a reliable model that represents
linguistic processing of bilingual language processing.

E58
EXPLORING FACTORS RELATED TO THE NEURAL BASIS OF METAPHOR
1

1

1

1

Elizabeth Fast , Ashley Drew , Elizabeth Miller , Audrey Weil , Gwenda L
Schmidt1; 1Hope College — Studies on the neural basis of metaphor comprehension have produced inconsistent results due to poorly controlled
stimulus sets, and have not often considered the lexical class of the metaphorically used word or the explicitness of the concept expressed. Previous research has primarily focused on metaphors that are nominal
(noun-based) and explicit (stating a clear metaphorical comparison or
mapping). Because nouns and verbs possess different neural substrates,
nominal and predicate metaphors may be processed distinctly. Some
research has been conducted on predicate (verb-based) metaphors but
these metaphors are implicit (the comparison or mapping is not directly
stated). We used a highly controlled stimulus set in an event related
potential (ERP) study to observe the neural uniqueness of metaphor
comprehension (n=18). Experimental stimuli were nominal explicit metaphors (The unexpected divorce was an earthquake) nominal implicit
metaphors (The relationship could not withstand the earthquake) and
implicit predicate metaphors (Over the canvas the paint danced).
Matched literal and anomalous sentences served as controls. The N400
amplitude was larger for metaphors than literal sentences in both the
nominal and predicate conditions. Implicit and explicit nominal metaphors had a marginally significant difference in their N400 amplitude
scalp distributions. Because the stimulus set was controlled on many factors, including sentence familiarity, naturalness and imageability, the
findings support unique neural mechanisms for metaphor processing,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

but not based on lexical class. It may also be that the explicitness of a
metaphoric statement modulates its neural instantiation.

E59
RECRUITMENT OF SEMANTIC NETWORKS FOR SUCCESSFUL OVERT
WORD READING IN CHRONIC APHASIA Sara T. Berentsen1,2, William W.

Graves1, Michael Seidenberg2, Jeffrey R. Binder1; 1Medical College of
Wisconsin, 2Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science — Damage
to perisylvian structures in the left middle cerebral artery territory typically causes phonological processing deficits, typified by phonological
paraphasias and inability to sound out pseudowords. The mechanisms
supporting successful overt word reading in the setting of chronic left
perisylvian phonological system damage are unclear. We hypothesized
that patients recruit undamaged parts of the semantic system to mediate
successful word reading. Event-related fMRI was used to study 24
chronic aphasia patients as they read aloud 72 each of concrete nouns
and matched pseudowords (pronounceable nonwords). Activation maps
for correct and incorrect responses to words and pseudowords were
compared. In separate behavioral testing, patients performed an overt
reading task and a pseudoword rhyme judgment task to characterize
reading ability and phonological deficits. In behavioral tests outside the
scanner, patients showed a pattern of severe phonological impairment,
as demonstrated by a high incidence of phonological paraphasia (56% of
errors on average) in the reading task and severe impairment on the
pseudoword rhyme judgment task (average z-score = -5.26). Successful
compared to unsuccessful word reading activated the angular gyrus
(AG) and posterior cingulate/precuneus bilaterally. Successful compared to unsuccessful pseudoword reading activated the right AG. An
interaction analysis showed that recruitment of the left AG and posterior
cingulate/precuneus bilaterally was specific to successful word reading.
In previous studies, the AG and posterior cingulate cortex have been
strongly linked with semantic processing. Here we show that undamaged regions of the semantic network support successful word reading
after damage to the left perisylvian phonological network.

E60
ERP INFORMATIVE FINDINGS: DISPREFERRED ADJECTIVE ORDERS
ELICIT BRAIN RESPONSES ASSOCIATED WITH LEXICO-SEMANTIC
RATHER THAN SYNTACTIC PROCESSIN Hsu-Wen
Huang1,
Kara

Federmeier1; 1Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Urbana
Champaign — Speakers have strong intuitions about how to sequence

series of adjectives that modify a noun. For example, in English the
phrase “heavy hardback encyclopedia” sounds natural but “hardback
heavy encyclopedia” sounds odd. Linguistic accounts of adjective ordering preferences have postulated a number of grammatical/semantic factors (e.g. informativeness, definiteness, etc) that may play a role in
determining how adjectives are sequenced. One additional factor that
has not been widely considered is the concreteness of the adjectives
being combined. The current study examined this question by systematically crossing order preference and concreteness in phrases consisting of
two adjectives and a noun. Thus, we used phrases like those in prior
studies in which the preferred order has a concrete adjective second
(“exhaustive hardback encyclopedia”), but also phrases in which the
preferred order has a more concrete first adjective (“heavy informative
encyclopedia“). We find that concreteness-related modulations of the
ERP waveform were likely responsible for prior reports of increased positivity to dispreferred orders (interpreted as a P600 -- and thus syntactic - effect). When concreteness is controlled, instead, we find that dispreferred orders are associated with increased N400s to the second adjective
and following noun. This suggests that the processing of adjectives in
dispreferred orders impacts lexico-semantic predictability and the ability
to generate mental images of the referent but does not elicit brain
responses associated with syntactic processing difficulties.

143

Poster Session E — Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
E61
THE INFLUENCE OF UNITIZATION ENCODING ON THE NEURAL
CORRELATES OF ASSOCIATIVE RECOGNITION: EVIDENCE FROM
FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING Regine Bader1, Axel
Mecklinger1, Bertram Opitz1, Wolfgang Reith2; 1Saarland University,
Saarbrücken, Germany, 2Saarland University Hospital, Homburg/Saar,
Germany — Remembering arbitrary associations generally requires recol-

lection, an effortful process controlled by the extended hippocampal system. However, recent research suggests that integration of separate
items into a single configuration (unitization) leads to reduced involvement of recollection during associative recognition and greater reliance
on familiarity mediated by the perirhinal cortex. In line with this unitization account, recognition of compound words (e.g., motor-cycle) as compared to unrelated word pairs was shown to rely more on the perirhinal
cortex and less on the hippocampus. Beyond that, unitization can also be
used as encoding strategy by combining unrelated words into a novel
concept (vegetable bible = a book consulted by hobby gardeners). This
was shown to boost memory performance for patients with hippocampal
lesions compared to word pairs studied as parts of a sentence (sentence
encoding). Employing this paradigm in a functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) study, we explored whether newly formed units elicit
familiarity signals comparable to items with pre-existing representations. To this end, studied pairs reappeared in the same or in reversed
order. After unitization encoding, reversing pairs is assumed to disrupt
the unit but leave familiarity for single words intact. As expected, same
pairs were recognized faster than reversed pairs after unitization but not
after sentence encoding, but we found no familiarity-related modulations for same pairs in the perirhinal cortex. However, compared to sentence encoding, unitization encoding reduced the involvement of the
extended hippocampal system at retrieval. This is the first fMRI evidence
of a reduction in recollection recruitment after single-trial unitization.

E62
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS OF TRUE AND FALSE MEMORY FOR VISUAL
OBJECTS Yolanda Higueras1, Christoph Klein1, Stephan G Boehm1; 1School
of Psychology, Bangor University — One of the most pervasive failures of
memory is remembering events that never occurred. A common way of
inducing false memories is the Deese-Roediger-McDermott paradigm, in
which study lists of words are presented that are semantically or conceptually related to critical ‘lure’ words; when memory for list words is later
tested, the lures are often remembered although they had not been presented. Investigations into the neural underpinnings of false memories
with event-related potentials have shown mixed results; some studies
found that false memories engage the same memory circuits than veridical memories, whereas others found different patterns of neural activity.
Here, we used event-related potentials to investigate whether false and
veridical memories engage similar or different neural networks. We
engaged participants in a visual task similar to the Deese-RoedigerMcDermott paradigm. Participants saw complex images, each of a particular topic (for example, a beach scene); afterwards, memory for individual objects of these scenes was tested by showing old objects from
these scenes together with new objects not presented before and lure
objects not presented before but fitting one of the topics of the study
images. Participants showed good memory for old objects, as well as
considerable false memories for lure objects. Event-related potentials for
old and lure in relation to new objects showed a central positivity
around 300-700 ms, which was larger for old than lure objects. These
results indicate that false remembering engages similar neural networks
than veridical remembering, although these networks are less active for
false than veridical memories.

E63
THE INFLUENCE OF GRADED PERCEPTUAL PREPARATION ON
ENCODING-RELATED PRESTIMULUS ACTIVITY Danying Wang1, Matthias

J Gruber1, Eva M Bauch1, Leun J Otten1; 1University College London — Brain
activity before an event can influence the efficiency with which information is encoded into long-term memory. The functional significance of
such activity is largely unknown. In this study, we varied the amount of
advance information about a visual event to assess how perceptual preparation affects encoding-related prestimulus activity. Electrical brain
activity was recorded from the scalps of 24 healthy adults while they
made size judgments about series of objects. Objects were shown in the
form of a detailed photograph or perceptually impoverished outline. A
cue presented 1.5 s before object onset either gave no advance information about the type of object that would be presented, or signalled the
presentation of an outline or photograph. Perceptual preparation was
expected to increase the more advance information was available. A surprise recognition test was given one day later to probe memory for the
objects. Event-related potentials elicited by cues differed depending on
whether objects were later remembered or forgotten. However, this only
occurred for photographs. Waveforms preceding later remembered photographs were more positive-going over frontal scalp sites. Time-frequency analyses showed that later remembered photographs were also
preceded by a decrease in power in the theta frequency band (4-8 Hz)
over posterior sites. Prestimulus theta activity also differed when the cue
was not informative. Together, the findings suggest that encodingrelated activity before an event is influenced by degree of perceptual
preparation. The more perceptual details are available to guide preparation, the more likely it is that prestimulus activity influences encoding.

E64
RECOLLECTION AND FAMILIARITY SUM TOGETHER: EVIDENCE FROM
ERP Adam Dede1, Jason Arndt1; 1Middlebury College — Debate surrounds
the interaction between familiarity and recollection. Familiarity is the
process responsible for item memory in the absence of detail. Recollection is the process responsible for memory of source details. Two prevailing theories are that recognition is either a result of summed input
from these two processes (additive) or each recognition decision may
reflect information from only one process or the other (process pure).
Many studies comparing these views have not properly considered the
confounding effects of memory strength between recollection and familiarity. In a word-memory study we collected both fine-grained confidence ratings (100-point scale) and source judgments (i.e. which of 4
voices had spoken the word at study). Additionally, ERPs were collected. By matching the confidence of items with source-detail correct
and source-detail incorrect we examined the independent ERP effects of
source memory and memory strength. Results showed that the p600, an
ERP component previously thought to represent recollection, was sensitive to both source memory and memory strength for old items. Specifically, strong source hits and strong misses both showed p600 activation.
Although both item types were different from correct rejections, strong
source hits showed greater activation than strong source misses. However, the p600 was insensitive to source memory when item memory
was weak. Combined, these results indicated that p600 activation was
related to an interaction between source memory, subserved by recollection, and memory strength in the absence of source memory, subserved
by familiarity. Thus, the results support the additive view of familiarity
and recollection interaction.

E65
PHASE-AMPLITUDE COUPLING DURING ENCODING OF EPISODIC
MEMORIES IN THE HUMAN HIPPOCAMPUS Brad Lega1, Joshua Jacobs2,

John Burke1, Ashwini Sharan3, Gordon Baltuch1, Michael Kahana1; 1University
of Pennsylvania, 2Drexel University, 3Thomas Jefferson University — Phaseamplitude coupling (PAC) has been demonstrated in the human cortex
and hippocampus, but its link to episodic memory has not been established. We examine 237 electrodes from 41 intracranial EEG patients

144

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session E
undergoing invasive pre-surgical monitoring. Participants performed
the Free Recall task while iEEG signal was recorded. Using a phase bin
method, we identify significant PAC that is strongest in the slow-theta
band (2.5-5 Hz) in the hippocampus, while it occurs in the 4-10 Hz theta
band in the temporal cortex and 4-8 Hz in the frontal cortex. The strength
of PAC (as measured by effect size) is greater during successful encoding
(.031 vs. .015, t(81) = 3.26, p<.001). Using circular regression, we
extracted a single phase preference value for each electrode that exhibited significant PAC. We then compared the distribution of preferred
phase values across electrodes between successful and unsuccessful
memory encoding, identifying no significant difference (p = 0.33). Phase
preference was concentrated at 180 degrees, as has been previously
reported, as well as 50-100 degrees. Electrodes that exhibited 180 degree
PAC exhibited a significant increase in gamma band power during successful encoding, while those exhibiting 50-100 degree PAC exhibited a
gamma power decrease. This work extends previous effects we have
observed during episodic memory encoding. PAC was strongest for
slow-theta to high gamma band, consistent with our previous results
identifying a power increase in the slow theta band during successful
memory formation, as well as data showing a gamma band power
increase.

E66
LATERAL POSTERIOR PARIETAL ACTIVITY DURING SOURCE
DISCRIMINATION OF MEMORIES OF HIGH AND LOW PERCEPTUAL
VIVIDNESS Danielle King1, Michael Miller1; 1University of California, Santa
Barbara — The parietal old/new effect is the consistent finding that
regions of the lateral posterior parietal cortex (PPC), and particularly the
left lateral PPC, are more active during recognition of previously studied
items compared to correct rejection of new items. In a previous study, we
demonstrated that this effect is source-specific. Recognition of items that
were perceived during encoding elicited a robust, left-lateralized old/
new effect. However, for items that were imagined, there was hardly an
effect in the left PPC, but there was a small effect in the in right PPC, in a
region more anterior to the left hemisphere homologue. It has been suggested that the role of the lateral PPC in recognition memory is to represent the contextual details that pertain to memories of episodic events
(Wagner et al., 2005). Because memories from perception have been
shown to contain more perceptual contextual details than memories
from imagination (Johnson et al., 1993), these results suggest that the left
PPC specifically represents perceptually based contextual details of episodic memories. In the present study, we tested this hypothesis directly
by using fMRI to compare brain activity during a task that required subjects to decide the source of perceived and imagined events, which were
encoded in either a high perceptual vividness or low perceptual vividness condition. The results speak to the nature of the role of the lateral
PPC in recognition memory.

E67
RECOGNITION MEMORY PERFORMANCES IS AFFECTED BY
TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATIONS OVER THE LEFT
POSTERIOR PARIETAL CORTEX Nai-Feng Chen1, Chi-Hung Juan1, Daisy L.
Hung1, Ovid J. –L. Tzeng1,2, Shih-kuen Cheng1; 1National Central University,
Taiwan, 2Academia Sinica, Taiwan — Although functional neuroimaging

studies of episodic memory retrieval consistently found activations over
the left posterior parietal cortex (LPPC), very few neuropsychological or
brain-stimulation studies provide evidence for the causal relationship
between the LPPC and memory retrieval. This study employed the transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) to examine whether LPPC is
necessarily involved in memory retrieval. Anodal and cathodal stimulations are known to increase and decrease neuronal excitability. If LPPC
is necessarily involved in memory retrieval, stimulating this region with
anodal or cathodal should respectively increase or decrease memory performance. Forty-eight university students participated in the main
experiment, with 24 in the sham-anodal group and the others in the
sham-cathodal group. Each participant visited the laboratory twice for

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

two study-test source memory tests. In one visit, all participants received
sham stimulation over the P3 site (of the 10-20 system) for an interval of
10 minutes between study and test. For the other visit, participants in the
sham-anodal group received anodal stimulation and those in the shamcathodal group received cathodal stimulation. Another 48 participants
were recruited for the control experiment, which employed the same
design as the main experiment except that the stimulation site was the
left primary motor cortex (M1).The results showed that the old/new recognition performance was increased after anodal stimulation and
decreased after cathodal stimulation over the LPPC. No such effects
were found in the control experiment where the M1 was stimulated. This
finding therefore provides solid evidence for the causal relationship
between the LPPC and retrieval processes.

E68
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF EXPLICIT AND IMPLICIT
RECOGNITION OF NATURAL SCENES Mathias Weymar1, Nasryn El-

Hinnawi1, Margaret Bradley1; 1University of Florida — Research in the neuroscience of human memory has converged on a distinction between
explicit and implicit forms of memory. In the present study, we investigated the brain dynamics of the mechanisms underlying implicit and
explicit retrieval of natural scenes using high-density event-related
potentials (ERPs). In three separate experiments we tested whether the
ERP old/new effect, an electrophysiological correlate of successful recollective experience, is modulated by hedonic content and task. Participants viewed 36 pictures varying in emotional content (12 unpleasant vs.
12 pleasant vs. 12 neutral). Following encoding, one group performed an
explicit recognition task, in which participants indicated whether a picture had been previously seen (old) or not (new). A second group performed an implicit categorization task (one person vs. more) and a third
group passively viewed old and new pictures without any task. Results
showed that explicit recognition was associated with enhanced centroparietal positivity (500 and 700 ms) for old, compared to new, pictures.
There were no significant old/new differences in the ERPs when old and
new pictures were presented in the person categorization task. During
passive viewing, only emotional pictures showed old/new differences.
The present results suggest that parietal old-new ERPs depend on the
explicit memory task, with no difference when both old and new items
are task-relevant (e.g., implicit). Furthermore, only emotional scenes
show evidence of previous occurrence in ERPs in a no task condition.

E69
THE CONTRIBUTION OF SLEEP STAGE II TO THE CONSOLIDATION OF
EPISODIC MEMORIES Simon Ruch1,2, Oliver Markes1,2, Simone Duss1,2,

Daniel Oppliger1,2, Thomas P. Reber1,2, Thomas Koenig3, Johannes Mathis3,
Corinne Roth3, Katharina Henke1,2; 1Department of Psychology, University of
Bern, Muesmattstrasse 45, 3012 Bern, Switzerland, 2Center for Cognition,
Learning, and Memory, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 3Department of
Psychiatric Neurophysiology, University Hospital of Psychiatry, University of
Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 4Department of Neurology, Inselspital, Bern University
Hospital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland — Various studies suggest
that non-rapid eye movement sleep (NREM), especially the deep sleep
stage slow-wave sleep (SWS), is vital to the consolidation of episodic
memories. Memory consolidation is assumed to benefit from specific
neuronal events occurring during NREM sleep. These events manifest
themselves as sleep spindles and slow-waves in the electroencephalogram of NREM. While insight into the contribution of NREM and SWS
to the consolidation of episodic memories is growing, little is known
about whether and how sleep stage 2 is involved in consolidation processes. Sleep stage 2 (S2) is the other, lighter NREM stage besides SWS.
The current study investigated whether S2 during an afternoon nap contributes to the consolidation of episodic memories. Participants (N=24)
learned associations between faces and cities prior to a brief nap. A cued
recall task was administered before and following the nap to measure
memory retention across sleep. Sleep spindles and slow-wave activity
were recorded during S2 in the nap following episodic learning and in a

145

Poster Session E — Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
control nap. Spindle and slow-wave activity recorded during S2 following learning was correlated with retention. Furthermore, subjects who
displayed an increase in spindle activity and slow-wave activity in S2
during the nap following learning compared to the control nap showed a
better retention of face-city associations. This indicates that not a subject’s average spindle and slow-wave activity, but specifically learninginduced spindle and slow-wave activity supports memory consolidation
in S2.

E70
EMOTIONAL MEMORY IN SCHOOL-AGE CHILDREN Jacqueline

S.
Leventon1, Jennifer Strafford Stevens1, Patricia J. Bauer1; 1Emory University —

Adults demonstrate more robust memory for emotional relative to neutral events (“emotion effect”). In order to investigate the development of
emotional memory processes, we examined children’s encoding and
retrieval of positive, negative, and neutral IAPS images with a combination of behavioral and electrophysiological measures. Children (ages 5-8
years old) came to the lab for two visits, separated by a 24-hour delay. At
session 1, children’s encoding of positive, negative, and neutral images
was measured via event-related potentials (ERPs). At session 2, children’s retrieval of the images was assessed in a recognition paradigm,
measured by ERPs (responses to old vs. new images) and behavioral
responses (hits and misses to old images, correct rejections and false
alarms to new images). At both encoding and retrieval, children demonstrated robust emotion effects in their ERP responses (larger and sustained positive amplitudes to emotional vs. neutral images across
frontal, central, and posterior clusters). Children also demonstrated
robust memory effects in their ERP responses at retrieval (larger and sustained positive amplitudes to old vs. new images across the head). In
their ERP responses, the interaction of emotion and memory was not
observed (no “emotion effect” during retrieval). However, children’s
behavioral responses are suggestive of an emotion effect on memory:
children made significantly more hits to negative vs. neutral images and
significantly more false alarms to positive vs. neutral images. These findings represent the first investigation of the development of the enhancing effect of emotion on memory, and suggest that emotion influences
school-age children’s memory performance.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Other
E71
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL (ERP) EVIDENCE FOR SEPARATE FLUENCY
AND FAMILIARITY PROCESSES DURING RECOGNITION Kevin Zish2,1, P.

Andrew Leynes2; 1Rutgers Center for Cognitive Science, 2The College of New
Jersey — Fluency, the ease of stimulus processing, is increased by prior
exposure or by enhancing stimulus clarity. Although more fluent processing can lead to either real or false sense of familiarity (Whittlesea,
1993), the literature is dominated by studies that separate familiarity and
recollection during recognition. The few Event-Related Potential (ERP)
studies that have focused on the neural correlates of fluency have used
repetition to increase fluency (i.e., repetition fluency). The present study
isolated perceptual fluency effects on ERP activity by manipulating
visual clarity of words during recognition. In Experiment 1, visual clarity
of previously studied and new words was held constant across blocks of
trials, whereas clarity varied randomly across trials in Experiment 2.
Prior studies have identified a frontally located negative ERP occurring
300-500 ms that is more positive for familiar items (i.e., FN400). Similar
to previous fluency ERP studies, the present studies detected a fluency
ERP that was distinct from the FN400 on the basis of time (fluency ERP
peaked earlier 280-400 ms), spatial location (fluency ERP was maximal at
parietal sites), and characteristics (old items were more negative for fluency ERP). Furthermore, the results suggest familiarity was influenced
by visual clarity when it varied randomly across trials but not when it
was constant in blocks. Collectively, the neural measures support emerging theories of memory that posit fluency and familiarity are separate,
but related, cognitive processes.

146

E72
THE RIGHT WAY: THE IMPORTANCE OF HIPPOCAMPAL LATERALIZATION
IN SPATIAL MEMORY PERFORMANCE Jonas Persson1, Jonas Engman1,

Arvid Morell1, Johan Wikström1, Hedvig Söderlund1; 1Uppsala University,
Sweden — Sex differences in spatial memory favoring men have been
well-established in prior research, as has the involvement of the hippocampus in this function. However, little is known of whether this behavioral difference is related to differences in hippocampal activation. Here,
we investigated this question, using a spatial computerized task.
Twenty-four participants (12 men, 12 women, 25.0±3.0 years of age) navigated through virtual mazes and were, upon reaching the end, asked to
point towards the start of the maze. As expected, men were more accurate in their assessments than women. For the functional data the initial
navigating and subsequent pointing phases were analyzed separately,
both revealing activation of the posterior hippocampus in all participants. However, while men displayed right-sided activation during the
navigation phase, women showed bilateral activation. This pattern was
confirmed in an analysis of extracted ROI-data where a sex-laterality
interaction was found. A laterality index of hippocampal activation in
the navigation phase, calculated for each participant, showed a significant relationship with performance where right-lateralized activity was
associated with better performance. Taken together, these findings show
a greater lateralization of the hippocampus during a spatial memory task
in men than in women, which may partly explain the frequently
observed sex-difference in spatial memory.

E73
INVOLVEMENT OF THE HUMAN MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE IN A VISUAL
DISCRIMINATION TASK Robert Lech1,2, Boris Suchan1,2; 1Institute of

Cognitive Neuroscience, Ruhr University Bochum, 2International Graduate
School of Neuroscience, Ruhr University Bochum — Recent research suggests

a role of the human medial temporal lobe (MTL) in the processing of
complex visual stimuli, apart from its established role in long-term
declarative memory processing. The aim of this study is to further elucidate the contributions of different MTL structures to perceptual and
mnemonic processing using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI). Twenty healthy right-handed subjects participated in this study,
each attending two experimental sessions in a 3T magnetic resonance
scanner. In the first task, participants had to discriminate visual stimuli
(faces and scenes) in an oddball paradigm. Three trial unique stimuli
were presented simultaneously to reduce memory demands. In the second task, participants had to encode unfamiliar faces and scenes. One
week later, these stimuli were presented together with distractors and
additional stimuli from the oddball task. The remember-know procedure was employed to assess recognition memory. Imaging data reveals
strong bilateral activity in primary visual areas extending through the
ventral stream into the parahippocampal gyrus and hippocampus for
the visual discrimination task (without explicit memory demands).
Behavioural data suggest that only a small fraction of the stimuli from
this task was encoded incidentally, as opposed to the stimuli that had to
be memorized explicitly in the second task (resulting in perirhinal/hippocampal activity). By minimizing memory demands and controlling for
incidental encoding we could show a significant activation of MTL structures in a visual discrimination task, which points to an involvement
beyond memory processing. Therefore, these results provide further
support for a perceptual-mnemonic theory of the MTL.

E74
A ROLE FOR GAMMA OSCILLATIONS IN THE COORDINATION OF THE
RETRIEVAL OF LEARNED SPATIAL REPRESENTATIONS Raphael

Kaplan1,2,3, Mathilde Bonnefond4, Ole Jensen4, Peter Bandettini2, Neil
Burgess3, Christian Doeller4; 1UCL-NIMH Joint Graduate Partnership Program
in Neuroscience, 2Section on Functional Imaging Methods, Laboratory of Brain
and Cognition, National Institute of Mental Health, 3Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience; University College London, 4Donders Centre for Cognitive

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session E
Neuroimaging, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour; Radboud
University, Nijmegen, Netherlands — High frequency oscillations have been
hypothesized to be important for cognition by carrying out different
local computations and binding information between different brain
regions. Meanwhile, low frequency hippocampal theta oscillations have
a vital role in spatial cognition. Recent models have focused on the relationship between memory performance and cross-frequency interactions
between hippocampal theta and higher frequencies. Based on these
models, we were interested in examining the role of high frequency
gamma activity in coordinating spatial memories prior to retrieval and
how that relates to subsequent retrieval performance and previously
observed hippocampal theta. Using non-invasive whole head Magnetoencephalography (MEG) recordings in healthy volunteers, we analysed high frequency oscillatory activity during a virtual reality spatial
navigation task. Similar to rodent electrophysiology studies, participants
were instructed to navigate and learn object locations within a virtual
environment in a self-directed fashion. To assess subsequent performance, each learning phase had a separate test phase where participants
would be cued by a picture of a previously tested object before navigating to the spot where they thought it was originally located. High and
low gamma power increases during the cue period were found to be predictive of subsequent retrieval performance in anterior and posterior
scalp regions. We also compared performance-related gamma sources
with previously anatomically localized hippocampal theta. Cross-frequency interactions were measured that show that phase-amplitude coupling helps to coordinate the retrieval of spatial information.

E75
REINFORCEMENT
LEARNING
ENHANCES
MNEMONIC
REPRESENTATIONS OF NEUTRAL STIMULI Joseph E. Dunsmoor1, Alex
Martin2, Kevin S. LaBar1; 1Duke University, 2National Institute of Mental
Health — Emotional benefits on declarative memory formation are linked

to a network of brain regions, including the amygdala and hippocampus. In typical emotional memory paradigms, fMRI activity is compared
for subsequently remembered vs. forgotten items as a function of their
inherent emotional properties. However, neutral objects often attain
emotional significance through reinforcement learning and generalization processes. The memory benefits of learned emotional associations
are unclear, since typical conditioning protocols use only one item as a
conditioned stimulus. We developed a novel approach that integrates
fear conditioning and the subsequent memory paradigm to identify how
reinforcement learning promotes successful encoding for items belonging to specific object categories. During fMRI, subjects viewed different
images of animals and tools. Objects from one category were intermittently paired with an electrical shock while the other category was never
reinforced. Twenty-four hours later, subjects completed a surprise recognition memory test. Memory was enhanced for objects from the reinforced versus unreinforced category. FMRI results showed activity in the
hippocampus and midbrain during conditioning predicted enhanced
subsequent memory for objects from the reinforced category relative to
the unreinforced category. Furthermore, conditioning-related activity in
the amygdala correlated with individual differences in these emotional
memory benefits. These findings demonstrate that fear conditioning can
recruit emotional memory systems to yield long-term memory benefits
for neutral stimuli. These results have implications for understanding
how stimuli with no inherently emotional properties can yield long-lasting impressions in memory. Clinical extensions of this research may
reveal mechanistic insights into biased memory representations in affective disorders.

E76
THE CONTRIBUTION OF SLOW-WAVE SLEEP TO THE REORGANIZATION OF
EMOTIONAL MEMORY: AN FMRI STUDY Scott Cairney1, Rebecca Power1,
Simon Durrant2, Penelope Lewis1; 1University of Manchester, UK., 2University
of Lincoln, UK. — Slow wave sleep (SWS) is thought to facilitate a reorga-

nization of declarative memory, whereby retrieval dependency is trans-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

ferred from the hippocampus to the neocortex. We investigated the SWSassociated reorganization of memories that were emotionally positive,
negative or neutral. Sixteen participants undertook two experimental
sessions. In the first (3pm ±1.5 hours), 90 positive, negative and neutral
images were encoded. At 10pm, participants slept overnight and were
monitored with polysomnography. In the second session (~24 hours
after session one), participants encoded another 90 images and then
undertook a recognition test in an MRI scanner for all session one
(remote) and session two (recent) images. There was no difference in
memory performance for remote or recent images, irrespective of
valence. However, the degree of superiority for negative remote (vs.
recent) memory performance was correlated with SWS obtained overnight (r = 0.65, p = 0.006). FMRI region of interest (ROI) analyses showed
a SWS-dependent reduction in hippocampal activity for global remote
(vs. recent) retrieval (p < 0.05 Family-Wise Error corrected). An ROI in
the right amygdala revealed an exclusive SWS-related reduction of activity in this region for negative remote (vs. recent) retrieval. Our findings
provide support for a SWS-dependent shift in declarative retrieval
dependency away from the hippocampus, and demonstrate a reduction
in amygdala activity associated with negative remote retrieval, also
mediated by SWS. As such, SWS may not only drive neural reorganisation, but also prevent the affective tone associated with emotional materials at encoding from resurfacing during their subsequent retrieval.

E77
PHARMACOLOGICAL EFFECTS ON THE TEMPORAL AND OSCILLATORY
DYNAMICS OF NOVELTY PROCESSING Cindy Eckart1, Nico Bunzeck1;
1

University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany —

Dopamine (DA) and acetylcholine (ACh) have long been recognized to
play an important role in novelty processing, but their relationships with
underlying temporal and oscillatory mechanisms still remain unclear. To
further address this issue, we used magnetoencephalography (MEG) in
combination with a task that allowed us to study the neural dynamics of
novelty processing and their interaction with either levodopa (dopamine
precursor) or galantamine (acetylcholinesterase inhibitor). More precisely, subjects were presented with novel and repeated (i.e., familiar)
pictures of scenes and indicated their indoor/outdoor status using button presses. As a main finding, we can show that, in contrast to placebo,
levodopa accelerated neural novelty signals from ~200 ms to <100 ms
after stimulus onset over left temporal sensors. Galantamine, on the
other hand, did not accelerate onset latencies but shifted the topographical representation of the novelty signal from temporal to prefrontal sensors. Within the oscillatory domain, the placebo group revealed
characteristic increases in theta power (5-8 Hz) as a function of stimulus
repetition over central sensors. This effect was reduced by levodopa and
galantamine with a peak at ~160 ms after stimulus onset. Finally, within
the gamma band range (30-50 Hz) power was reduced by stimulus repetition and this effect was modulated by galantamine but not levodopa.
Taken together, our results demonstrate that levodopa and galantamine
differentially modulate the temporal and oscillatory dynamics of neural
novelty processing. As such, our findings conform to and extend previous models of dopaminergic and cholinergic novelty processing

METHODS: Neuroimaging
E78
ACUTE AND DELAYED-ONSET EFFECTS OF HYDROCORTISONE
ADMINISTRATION ON PREFRONTAL GLUTAMATE AND GLUTAMINE

Param Bhardwaj1, Changho Choi2, Peter Seres2, Rawle Carter1, Kathleen
Hegadoren3, Nick Coupland1; 1Psychiatry, 2Biomedical Engineering,
3
Nursing — Clinical research has shown corticosteroid dysregulation in

stress-related psychiatric disorders. Corticosteroids effect cellular excitability, learning, memory, and involve changes in glutamate (Glu) neurotransmission and Glu metabolic cycling with glutamine (Gln). Recent
advancements in proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-MRS)
have allowed for independent measures of Glu and Gln. Glu’s function

147

Poster Session E — Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
as the most abundant excitatory neurotransmitter may provide greater
insight into Glu’s role in psychiatric disorders. Our study in healthy volunteers (n=12) suggested that single intravenous administration of a
high dose of cortisol (hydrocortisone 35mg) rapidly reduced prefrontal
Gln, a result sustained acutely for at least 30 minutes. This may represent
Gln efflux from the astrocyte compartment, caused by consumption of
Gln to maintain neuronal Glu levels in response to glucocorticoid
increases. Subsequent research examines the effects of subacute repeated
hydrocortisone on prefrontal Glu and Gln. Given that preclinical data
indicate corticosteroids induce expression of Gln-synthetase, the astrocytic enzyme catalyzing the Glu to Gln reaction, we predict hydrocortisone will produce a delayed increase in prefrontal Gln and possibly Glu
concentrations. Using 1H-MRS and spectrally-selective refocusing at 3.0
T in a blinded design, subjects were administered hydrocortisone for 3
days at a dosage of 40mg (n=8) or 100mg (n=8) daily. Glu and Gln measures were obtained pre- and post-administration. With chronic hydrocortisone administration, Glu increases in day 3 and returns to normal in
day 4 upon corticosteroid termination. This suggests acute hydrocortisone infusion leads to rapid, non-transcriptional changes in Gln, while
delayed-onset administration leads to genomic alterations in central Glu
concentrations.

E79
INFORMATION REVEALED BY MULTI-VOXEL PATTERN ANALYSIS: WHAT
MAKES A PATTERN? Philip A. Kragel1, R. McKell Carter1, Scott A. Huettel1;
1Duke University — A

central goal of cognitive neuroscience is to understand how the activity of neurons represents information in the brain.
Multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) is a promising analytical tool for
examining the ways in which the activity of neurons can represent cognitive states. The primary advantage of MVPA over standard neuroimaging analysis methods is its capacity to detect information carried across
multiple voxels, rather than individual voxels. This novel methodology
is expanding the way in which patterns of brain activity are characterized. Here, we use a combination of meta-analysis and simulations to
show that while the majority of MVPA studies use linear algorithms,
some sources of pattern information can only be decoded using non-linear approaches. Examining 107 functional magnetic resonance imaging
studies employing MVPA, we identify the algorithms used for classification and inferences made about how information is carried in neuronal
activation patterns. Multivariate linear classifiers (the majority of MVPA
studies, 101 of 107) improve upon standard mass-univariate analysis by
improving sensitivity while providing voxel weights that are easy to
interpret. While linear classifiers can more easily tolerate heterogeneous
relationships between voxels, the patterns they reveal are largely accessible to standard analyses. However, non-linear classifiers (24 of 107, some
use linear and non-linear) allow the identification of pattern information
beyond standard methods. In the end, both types of classifiers can provide additional insight into the information contained in neuroimaging
data. We encourage the use of linear and nonlinear algorithms to identify and interpret signals carried through the interaction of multiple voxels.

E80
THE EXAMINATION OF WHITE MATTER CORRELATES WITH LETTER AND
CATEGORY FLUENCY IN FRONTOTEMPORAL LOBAR DEGENERATION
WITH TWO DIFFUSION TENSOR IMAGING APPROACHES. Jeremy
Strain1, Ramon Diaz-Arrastia3, John Hart1,2, Kyle Womack1,2; 1University of
Texas at Dallas, 2The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas, 3The Center for Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine, Uniformed
Services University for the Health Sciences — Patients with frontotemporal

lobar degeneration (FTLD) exhibit deficits in verbal fluency measures.
Letter fluency with FAS is dependent on frontal lobe function while category fluency is more dependent on dispersed semantic networks. We
investigated the dependence of these two tasks on white matter integrity
in patients with FTLD using a voxel-wise approach as well as a novel
global measure. Subjects: 28 cognitively normal controls (NC), and 28

148

patients with FTLD (Mean age = 63.4, Female/Male = 9/19). Method:
Diffusion Tensor Images (DTI) were processed and analyzed using Tract
Based Spatial Statistics from the brain-imaging program FSL. Effects of
age, gender and global function (MMSE score) were removed before further analyses. Voxel-wise correlations of DTI metrics and verbal fluency
were performed. To measure global white matter impairment, Z-scores
for DTI metrics from all skeletonized voxels were calculated and the
number of voxels with a z-score exceeding 4 were tallied. Spearman correlations between the log transform of this value and verbal fluency
measures were performed. Results: A number of frontal voxels were
found in which fractional anisotropy (FA) or mean diffusivity (MD) correlated with FAS performance (?=0.05 corrected); however, no voxels
had significant correlations with category fluency. Category fluency was
correlated with our global white matter measure. Category and letter fluency correlated with our global white matter measured (?=0.05). Conclusions: The data suggests that semantic processing is a more diffuse
process than letter fluency and likely utilizes several white matter pathways, damage to any of which may result in decreased performance.

E81
THE NEURAL REGULARITY HYPOTHESIS: THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
McDonough1,2,
BOLD ACTIVITY, AGE, HEALTH, AND COGNITION Ian

Andrew Hebrank1,2, Kristen Kennedy1,2, Karen Rodrigue1,2, Denise Park1,2;
1University of Texas at Dallas, 2Center for Vital Longevity — Variability
in

physiological signals (e.g., heartbeat fluctuations) increases in regularity
(or predictability) with age and has been suggested to be a biomarker for
predicting health outcomes. The current experiment explored how regularity in neural activity, as measured by the BOLD signal in fMRI, differs
with age and tested whether this regularity correlated with scores of
health and cognition. In the scanner, 30 young (ages 20-29) and 28
healthy older adults (ages 70-79) made living/non-living judgments to
words. The regularity of the BOLD time series was calculated for each
voxel across the whole brain using an established entropy equation on
physiological time series data. Regularity in the BOLD time series differed with age across various brain regions. Dorsolateral frontal, parietal, and inferior temporal regions decreased in regularity with age
while superior temporal and medial temporal regions increased in regularity with age. Across all ages, increased regularity in dorsolateral
regions and decreased regularity in medial temporal regions were associated with better self-reported health and cognition (executive functioning, fluid intelligence, working memory, processing speed, and longterm memory). Correlations in the opposite direction were found for
measures of crystalized intelligence. Thus, analyzing the regularity of
the BOLD signal serves as novel method to investigate neural activity
and has promise to serve as a biomarker for changes in health and cognition. Regularity in the BOLD signal may represent a correlate of neural
efficiency or stability, which is disrupted in advanced age.

E82
THE ADVANTAGE OF BRIEF FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE
IMAGING ACQUISITION RUNS FOR MULTI-VOXEL PATTERN DETECTION
Marc N Coutanche1, Sharon L Thompson-Schill1; 1University of Pennsylvania —

Investigators are faced with a large variety of options when planning a
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study. One factor, the
runs (or ‘sessions’) in an fMRI scan, are often selected to be long, to minimize across-run signal variation. For studies using multi-voxel pattern
analysis (MVPA), however, employing a large number of short runs
might improve a classifier’s ability to generalize across irrelevant signal
variation and correctly detect condition-driven activity patterns. Our
goal in this study was to directly test this idea. Ten participants were
scanned using both long and short runs containing presentations of four
stimulus categories – faces, places, man-made objects and fruit – in a
blocked 1-back design. We compared MVPA performance using data
from four long versus sixteen short runs. With the quantity of data and
cross-validation structure held constant, MVPA performance was significantly improved using data from the short runs compared to data from
the long runs. Superior classification performance was found across vari-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session E
ations in the classifier employed, feature selection procedure and regions
of interest. Performance improvements were also present in an information brain mapping ‘searchlight’ procedure. These results suggest that
investigators looking to maximize their ability to detect subtle multivoxel patterns might wish to consider employing short fMRI runs.

E83
FIVE-YEAR CHANGES IN BRAIN VOLUME AND EPISODIC MEMORY IN
COGNITIVELY INTACT ELDERS WITH AND WITHOUT AN APOLIPOPROTEIN
?4 ALLELE Monica A. Matthews1, Michael Seidenberg1, John L. Woodard4,

Sally Durgerian2, Kristy A. Nielson2,3, J. Carson Smith5, Melissa A. Lancaster1,
Alissa M. Butts3, Nathan C. Hantke3, Stephen M. Rao6; 1Rosalind Franklin
University of Medicine and Science, 2Medical College of Wisconsin,
3
Marquette University, 4Wayne State University, 5University of Maryland,
6Cleveland Clinic — The apolipoprotein ?4 allele is a risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease. ?4 carriers diagnosed with AD or MCI exhibit an
increased rate of atrophy on MRI relative to non-carriers. Few longitudinal studies have examined the rate of atrophy and cognitive change in
older ?4 carriers who were cognitively intact at study entry. In this study,
structural MRI and episodic memory testing were administered on two
occasions separated by 5 years to 45 cognitively intact older adults, ages
65-90 years, divided into two groups: (1) carriers with one or both ?4 alleles (n=24) and (2) demographically-matched non-carriers (n=21). Longitudinal analysis of whole brain gray matter, whole brain white matter,
and hippocampal volumes were derived from Freesurfer software. Analysis of variance indicated a significant group x time interaction for both
left and right cortical gray matter (p’s < .05; 2% decrease) and left hippocampus (p < .001; 5.6% decrease); right hippocampus showed a marginal effect (p=.086; 4.9 % decrease). In all instances, the ?4 group
showed greater atrophy over the five-year interval than non-carriers.
White matter brain volume significantly decreased over retest interval
(3.5%), but did not differ between groups. Over the same retest interval,
the ?4 group also showed significantly greater decline than non-carriers
on delayed word recall and percent retention on a list-learning task.
These data suggest that the presence of an ?4 allele carries an increased
risk for cortical gray matter and hippocampal atrophy and memory loss
among older participants who were cognitively intact at study entry.

E84
COMBINING MULTIPLE DATASETS TO UNCOVER TASK-COMMON AND
TASK-SPECIFIC NETWORKS UNDERLYING INTEGRATION OF EVIDENCE
USING FMRI-CPCA Katie Lavigne1,2, Paul Metzak1,2, Todd Woodward1,2;
1University

of British Columbia, 2BC Mental Health and Addictions Research

Institute — We investigated functional networks associated with the integration of evidence using event-related functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI). This was achieved by combining data from two studies
using conceptually similar tasks with constrained principal component
analysis for fMRI (fMRI-CPCA). fMRI-CPCA is a multivariate analysis
method combining multiple regression and principal component analysis that allows for the extraction of task-related functional networks.
When applied to conceptually similar tasks from multiple datasets,
fMRI-CPCA can distinguish between functional networks that are common to all tasks and those that are task-specific. 27 healthy participants
completed one of two versions of a perceptual interpretation task, in
which they rated the degree to which a morphed image composed of
two different animals (e.g., cat, fox) appeared to be an image of one animal or the other. Participants were then presented with a second image
of the animals morphed at a different ratio and were asked to re-rate the
images. fMRI-CPCA revealed five functional networks, the largest of
which included bilateral activations in anterior prefrontal regions known
to be involved in evaluating internally-generated information. This network was specifically responsive to integration of disconfirmatory evidence for both versions of the task, suggesting that it was a task-common
functional network associated with disconfirmatory evidence integration, and unrelated to methodological differences between the two tasks

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

(e.g., differences between the timing of the stimuli). Multiple task-specific attention and response networks were also identified.

E85
IDENTIFYING COMPUTABLE FUNCTIONS AND THEIR SPATIOTEMPORAL
DISTRIBUTION IN THE HUMAN BRAIN Andrew Thwaites1,2, Ian Nimmo-

Smith2, Elisabeth Fonteneau1,2, Roy D. Patterson1, Paula Buttery1, William D.
Marslen-Wilson1,2; 1University of Cambridge, 2MRC Cognition and Brain
Sciences Unit, Cambridge — An important goal for cognitive neuroscience

is to identify the specific computations carried out by the human brain
and to relate these to specific spatio-temporal patterns of neural activity.
This can be achieved by testing computationally explicit models of neural functions against spatiotemporally accurate measurements of brain
activity. We report here a new approach that can search representations
of neural activity, captured by combined electro- and magneto-encephalographic (EMEG) whole brain recordings, to determine the neural distribution of appropriately and rigorously defined computational
functions. Focusing on speech comprehension, we show how this technique can locate computational functions relating to two very different
aspects of this complex process: signal based processes related to the
extraction of perceptual features (loudness and pitch) and knowledgebased processes operating on the listener’s representation of words in
their language. Using a combination of signal correlation techniques and
a temporal moving window to search EMEG source space on a searchlight basis, we are able to identify a loudness process running in L and R
planum temporale at lags of 65-70 ms and 75 ms, a pitch process close to
L Heschl’s gyrus at 65 ms and R planum temporale at 85 ms, and a primary set of word-recognition processes running in L and R temporal
lobes at 235-250 ms. These successful applications of the technique demonstrate its potential to map out the computational functions underpinning complex neurocognitive capacities.

E86
DISTINGUISHING FUTURE COGNITIVE DECLINE IN HEALTHY ELDERS
USING TWO METHODS FOR MEASURING HIPPOCAMPAL VOLUMES

Alissa M. Butts1, Kristy A. Nielson1,2, Nathan Hantke1, Melissa Lancaster3,
Michael Seidenberg3, John L. Woodard4, J. Carson Smith5, Monica Matthews3,
Michael A. Sugarman4, Sally Durgerian2, Stephen M. Rao6; 1Marquette
University, 2Medical College of Wisconsin, 3Rosalind Franklin University of
Medicine and Science, 4Wayne State University, 5University of Maryland,
6Cleveland Clinic — Alzheimer’s disease (AD) pathology is thought to
begin years before symptom onset. Hippocampal volume is sensitive to
predicting conversion from MCI to AD. We and others have also shown
that hippocampal volumes can predict future cognitive decline in cognitively intact older adults. The most sensitive methods for measuring hippocampal volumes are unknown. We compared two methods,
automated FreeSurfer (FS) software versus manually traced (MT), to
determine their relative sensitivity to distinguish future cognitive
decline. Seventy-five cognitively intact elders underwent a baseline and
18-month follow-up neuropsychological testing. Participants were classified as Declining (n=27) or Stable (n=48) based on 18-month change
scores on episodic list-learning task and general cognitive functioning
scales. All subjects underwent baseline structural MRI scans. A two-way
ANOVA (group X method) was conducted to determine the relative sensitivity of baseline MT and FS hippocampal volumes in distinguishing
group membership. A significant Group X Method (p=.045) interaction
was observed. Post-hoc analyses indicated that baseline MT hippocampal volumes were significantly smaller in the Declining relative to Stable
group. In contrast, no group differences were observed using the automated FS method. Group differences were not enhanced by examining
left versus right or anterior versus posterior hippocampal volumes. MT
hippocampal volume was superior to FS in differentiating healthy older
participants who subsequently developed cognitive decline from those
who remained stable. These findings suggest that while manual tracings
may be more labor intensive, they provide greater clinical utility than FS
in identifying individuals at greatest risk for cognitive decline.

149

Poster Session E — Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall

E87
PREDICTION OF LONGITUDINAL WHITE MATTER CHANGE IN HEALTHY
ELDERLY INDIVIDUALS Melissa Lancaster1, Sally Durgerian2, Michael

Seidenberg1, John Woodard3, Kristy Nielson2,4, J. Carson Smith5, Monica
Matthews1, Alissa Butts4, Nathan Hantke4, Stephen Rao6; 1Rosalind Franklin
University of Medicine and Science, 2Medical College of Wisconsin, 3Wayne
State University, 4Marquette University, 5University of Maryland, 6Cleveland
Clinic — Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) studies have shown that significant alteration in white matter (WM) integrity differentiates healthy
older adults from persons with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and
Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Most studies, however, have been cross-sectional and have not related longitudinal DTI changes to cognitive
change. Here we report changes in WM integrity and cognition in
healthy older adults over an 18-month interval. Sixty-seven cognitively
intact elders underwent neuropsychological testing and DTI at baseline
and after 18 months. Groups were formed based on change from baseline to follow-up on the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (recall sum
across trials 1-5, delayed recall) and Mattis Dementia Rating Scale-2.
Declining participants (N=21) showed a minimum of 1 SD reduction on
at least one cognitive measure, while Stable participants (N=46) showed
comparable scores at each time point. WM regions-of-interest were
derived from Freesurfer. Hierarchical linear regression was used to predict fractional anisotropy (FA) change in regions frequently identified in
DTI studies of MCI and AD including transentorhinal cortex, temporal
lobe, and posterior cingulate. Groups did not differ at baseline in age,
cognition, FA, or WM volume. After controlling for age and baseline FA,
cognitive status (Declining, Stable) predicted the baseline to 18-month
reduction in FA in the right hippocampal gyrus (p=.004) and left fusiform gyrus (p=.01) with a trend in the left middle temporal gyrus
(p=.06). Future research should examine WM changes in other brain
regions and determine whether DTI diffusivity measures are related to
cognitive decline.

E88
ASSESSING THE TRAIT-LIKE CHARACTERISTICS OF INTRINSIC
CONNECTIVITY Craig Moodie1, Krista Wisner1, Angus MacDonald, III1;

1
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities — The assumption that sharing an
entire genome might bestow twins with analogous neurobiological substrates and congruent cognitive abilities has not yet been examined in
the context of intrinsic connectivity. Even though recent studies have
revealed endogenous functional networks present at rest and during
active states, it remains to be seen to what extent these brain networks
might cohere or vary across individuals according to heritable factors.
This study quantifies morphometric similarities between twins in the
context of task-related activation in order assess whether or not familial
psychometric phenotypes vary in a trait-like fashion. fMRI data from
monozygotic twins participating in the Minnesota Trust Game, hand
imitation and verb generation tasks were collected on a Siemens 3T scanner and processed via the FSL imaging analysis software. Statistical analyses of task-related activation and independent component networks
were then used to generate voxel-wise and intraclass correlations within
and across twin pairs. It was found that functional connectivity was
higher within twin pairs than across all individuals, and that twin group
assignment improved models predicting the relative strength of network
connectivity. Additionally, the observed components in each paradigm
were both task-relevant and analogous to previously established networks. Trait-like networks that lead to morphometric similarities, and
that are associated with task-related brain activation, were discovered
across paradigms and, consequently, it is evident that brain structures
and processes are heritable. Moreover, these results suggest that variations in heritable network dynamics can engender individual differences, and can even be explanatory variables for neuropsychiatric
illnesses.

150

E89
NEUROMETRICS OF INTRINSIC CONNECTIVITY NETWORKS: RETEST
RELIABILITY AND CROSS-VALIDATION USING A META-LEVEL METHOD

Krista Wisner1, Kelvin Lim2, Angus MacDonald III1,2; 1Department of
Psychology, University of Minnesota, 2Department of Psychiatry, University of
Minnesota — Connectivity of the resting brain can be parsed into distinct
networks that closely resemble brain circuits evoked by cognitive tasks
such as visual-spatial processing. Although such empirically-derived
intrinsic connectivity networks (ICNs) have become a popular method
for investigating brain functioning, the relationships between ICNs and
a repertoire of cognitive processes have yet to be examined when also
considering the neurometrics of the ICNs. Using a meta-level independent component analysis (ICA) to generate the most consistent networks, we produced ICNs from three separate datasets collected from
two samples of healthy adults in order to examine the 9 month retest
reliability of ICNs and to test the cross-validation of the findings. Functional implications of ICNs were investigated by correlating ICNs with a
BrainMap meta-analysis of task-based activity networks (Laird, et al.,
JCN, 2011). In each dataset, 17 of the 18 BrainMap networks were represented in ICNs derived from resting-state fMRI. Networks associated
with vision, interoception, language, and the default mode showed the
strongest 3D spatial correlations (3DSC, r ? 0.60) between BrainMap networks and ICNs in all three datasets. Additionally, the retest reliability
was greatest for the interoception, language, inhibition, and default
mode ICNs (3DSC r ? 0.80; Dice Similarity Index ? 0.70). Furthermore,
ICNs associated with the said functions showed the strongest 3DSC (r ?
0.70) between the reliability sample and cross-validation sample. These
findings illustrate the robustness of a large set of ICNs from resting-state
data and demonstrate the neurometric properties that make this
approach practical for studying individual differences.

E90
EXTENSIONS TO THE NEUROSYNTH FRAMEWORK FOR LARGE-SCALE
AUTOMATED SYNTHESIS OF FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING DATA Tal

Yarkoni1, Russell A. Poldrack2, David C. Van Essen3, Tor D. Wager1; 1University
of Colorado Boulder, 2University of Texas at Austin, 3Washington University
School of Medicine — The explosive growth of the human neuroimaging

literature has led to major advances in understanding of human brain
function, but has also made aggregation and synthesis of neuroimaging
findings increasingly difficult. To address this problem, we recently
introduced a highly automated brain mapping framework called NeuroSynth that uses text mining, meta-analysis and machine learning techniques to generate a large database of mappings between neural and
cognitive states (Yarkoni et al, 2011). The NeuroSynth framework can be
used to automatically conduct large-scale, high-quality neuroimaging
meta-analyses, address long-standing inferential problems in the neuroimaging literature (e.g., how to infer cognitive states from distributed
activity patterns), and support accurate ‘decoding’ of broad cognitive
states from brain activity in both entire studies and individual human
subjects. Here we describe new extensions and improvements to this
framework, including (i) a more flexible search and analysis interface
that lets users dynamically define sets of activation coordinates for realtime analysis; (ii) new algorithms for automatically detecting experimental contrasts, sample size, and stereotaxic space information; (iii) topic
modeling-based meta-analysis images to supplement existing termbased images; (iv) preliminary integration with a new stand-alone visualization service that supports user-uploaded images; (v) preliminary
integration with a "Neuroimaging Coordinate Repository" designed to
support manual validation of automatically extracted data; and (vi) a
pilot crowdsourcing interface that lets other researchers annotate and
code existing information in the database. These additional features
extend the functionality of the existing platform by improving usability,
broadening the range of potential applications, and promoting interoperability with other neuroinformatics platforms.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session E

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control
E91
INFORMATION PROCESSING IN THE BRAIN DURING DUAL TASK AND
TASK SWITCHING: A META-ANALYSIS Britta Worringer1, Iring Koch2,3,

Simon Eickhoff4, Claudia Rottschy4,5, Ferdinand Binkofski1; 1Section for
Clinical and Cognitive Neurosciences, Department of Neurology, University
Hospital Aachen, Germany, 2Department of Psychology, RWTH Aachen
University, Germany, 3Department of Psychology, Max Planck Institute for
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences Leipzig, Germany, 4Institute of
Neurosciences and Medicine (INM-2, INM-3), Juelich Research Centre,
Germany, 5Department of Neurology, University Hospital Aachen, Germany —
Although both paradigms task switching and dual task seem to share
common mechanisms regarding the execution of two tasks at the same
time or in close succession, they have been investigated in both psychological and neuroimaging research independently of each other. Notwithstanding, regarding neuroimaging research both approaches have
been consistently focused on frontal areas, which have been hypothesised to create a neuronal bottleneck during the execution of two tasks.
To investigate differences and commonalities in the neural correlates
during the execution of both paradigms we used GingerALE (Activation
Likelihood Estimation) to conduct a coordinate-based meta-analysis of
13 dual task and 18 task switching neuroimaging studies using twochoice reaction tasks. Results show that while task switching evoked
more consistent activation bilaterally in supplementary motor area
(SMA), dual task performance yielded more consistent activation in left
middle and superior frontal areas. A conjunction analysis across dual
task and task switching paradigms indicated significant convergence of
coordinates reported for either task in left superior parietal lobule (SPL),
particularly in areas 7PC and 7A. Results thus support current research
suggesting the coexistence of serial and parallel processes within a
fronto-parietal network and indicate the neuronal bottleneck to be situated in parietal regions during the process of response selection. Furthermore, more consistent activation in SMA during task switching suggests
more demands on updating a task set, while the stronger activation during dual task in left middle and superior frontal areas points to a more
demanding top down process concerning motor planning, organization
and regulation.

E92
RELATIONSHIPS AMONG ACTION PRODUCTION, ACTION RECOGNITION
AND SEMANTICS: INSIGHTS FROM APRAXIA Frank Garcea1, Bradford

Mahon1,2; 1University of Rochester, 2University of Rochester Medical Center —
An important and currently debated issue concerns the nature of the
interfaces that obtain between action production and action recognition
processes, and between sensory/motor information and conceptual
knowledge of actions. Here, we report the performance of a 47 year-old
ischemic stroke patient (Case 1) with fronto-parietal damage and a 31
year-old ischemic stroke patient (Case 2) with left posterior parietal
damage. Both patients were administered an extensive battery of tasks
investigating vision, audition, language, semantic knowledge of actions
and objects, and action production and recognition. Normal healthy controls were also administered the same tests. Case 1 was within the control range for visual, linguistic, and auditory processing but impaired for
production of transitive actions as well as semantic knowledge of
actions. Case 1’s production errors in pantomiming transitive actions,
using objects, and imitating transitive actions were predominantly spatiotemporal (e.g., body-part-as-object, hand and finger misplacements).
While Case 1 was impaired in action production, his recognition of
actions he could not produce and his naming of tools was unaffected.
Furthermore, his semantic knowledge of tools was largely unimpaired.
Case 2’s semantic knowledge of actions was impaired to similar levels as
was Case 1’s; however, her production and recognition of transitive
actions was within the control range. These data suggest that the ability
to recognize actions and objects does not reduce to simulating the motor

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

programs necessary to use those objects, and place important constraints
on neurocognitive theories of action/object recognition.

E93
THE ROLE OF THE PARIETAL OPERCULA IN CODING THE ANATOMICAL
COMPONENT OF IMITATION: A TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION
STUDY. Paola Mengotti1, Raffaella I. Rumiati1, Florian Waszak2, Simone

Schütz-Bosbach3, Luca F. Ticini3; 1SISSA Trieste, Italy, 2Université Paris
Descartes and CNRS, Paris, France, 3Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — Human ability to spontaneously

imitate movements has been described as a special instance of stimulusresponse compatibility. It has been argued that this compatibility has an
anatomical component, whereby the performer moves the same effector
as the model, and a spatial component, whereby the locations at which
the two movements occur is the same. In a recent fMRI study (Mengotti
et al. 2011), we showed that the anatomical component of imitation was
associated with the activity of bilateral parietal opercula (OP4). We predicted that repetitive TMS over this region would disrupt the anatomical
compatibility effect, but not the spatial compatibility. Nineteen righthanded participants underwent TMS stimulation on left and right OP4
while imitating finger movements. A sham condition was included as
control. Video-clips showing left/right hands moving the index/ring
finger were presented. By asking to imitate the movements according to
the anatomical identity (anatomical task) or the spatial position (spatial
task) of the stimulus, we created a compatible condition in which both
types of compatibility were present and an incompatible condition with
only one type of compatibility, according to the task. Post-hoc comparisons (Fisher’s LSD) on the compatible condition vs. the incompatible
condition revealed that, whereas both types of compatibility were
observed in the sham, the anatomical compatibility was not present
when stimulating the right OP4. These results suggest an involvement of
OP4 in coding the anatomical component of imitation and its role in connecting the imitation network to body representations.

E94
ACTION RECOGNITION CORTICAL NETWORK IN THE MACAQUE
MONKEY Hiroaki Ishida1, Toru Yanagawa2, Giacomo Rizzolatti1, Naotaka
Fujii2; 1Brain center for motor and social cognition, IIT, Parma, Italy,
2Laboratory for Adaptive Intelligence, RIKEN BSI, Wako, Japan — A
large

number of studies showed the existence, in both humans and nonhuman primates, of a neural mechanism (mirror mechanism) that
achieves a basic and direct recognition of actions of others. Although
previous neurophysiological studies have taken into account how single
cell or small groups of neurons reflect socially-driven action and perception, functional network of social cognitive mechanism still remains
largely unknown. We recorded neural activity in two Japanese macaque
monkeys by using 128 channels electrocorticogram (ECoG) array that
covered almost all of the lateral cortical surface as well as the medial part
of prefrontal and parietal cortices. The monkey executed a food grasping
or observed the same action done by an experimenter. We compared the
power spectrum of neural activity during grasping period of self or
experimenter with inter-trial interval (ITI). We found the statistically
higher neural activity in premotor cortex, parietal cortex, superior temporal sulcus (STS), supplementary motor area (SMA) and medial prefrontal cortex (area 9) in both self and other’s action relative to the ITI.
Specifically, neural activity in those regions increased during self and
other’s action in low-gamma(25-40 Hz) and high-gamma (55-150 Hz) frequency bands. In conclusion, our result confirms that the parieto-premotor and STS circuit is activated during both action observation and
execution. We interpret the activation of the prefrontal coretex and
SMA/pre-SMA areas during the observation of a grasping-eating action
as related to a proactive inhibitory control.

151

Poster Session E — Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall

E95
YOUR HAND IS MY HAND! BIMANUAL COUPLING EFFECT IN A
SOMATOPARAPHRENIC PATIENT Francesca Garbarini1, L. Pia1, A.

Piedimonte1, M. Rabuffetti2, P. Gindri3, A. Berti1; 1University of Turin,
Don Carlo Gnocchi IRCCS, Milan, 3San Camillo Hospital, Turin —

2Foundation

When people are required to draw circles with one hand while drawing
lines with the other, both the trajectories tend to become ovals (Franz,
2003). Recently, we showed (Garbarini et al. under review) that these
effects occur in both actual bimanual movements and when an active
limb movement is combined with an illusory limb movement (i.e.,
anosognosia for hemiplegia). Those results would support the view that
coupling effects arises from central signals (e.g., sensory predictions)
rather than on actual feedbacks (Franz, 2003). Here we examine whether
coupling effects are present also when an active movement is combined
with a movement performed by another person’s hand, misidentified as
one’s own hand. One right-brain-damaged-patients affected by left
hemiplegia and misidentifications of the experimenter’s hand as his own
hand (somatoparaphrenia), five hemiplegic patients and ten healthy subjects were administered a bimanual circle-line drawing task. Participants
were asked to draw lines with the right hand (baseline) and a) to draw
circles with their own left hand b); to draw circles with their own left
hand passively moved; c) to observe the examiner drew circle with his
left hand positioned in a compatible orientation with respect to the subject’s body. Results showed that, in the crucial c) condition, only in the
patient who misidentified the experimenter’s hand as his own, the lines
produced with the right hand were significantly ovalized in respect to
the baseline (p = 0.0001). These results give interesting new hints regarding the link between body ownership and sense of agency.

E96
FUNCTIONAL ROLE OF PRIMARY MOTOR CORTEX IN MOTOR IMAGERY
MEASURED WITH FMRI AND MEG Hana Burianová1, Paul Sowman1, Lars

Marstaller1, Graciela Tesan1, Anina Rich1, Mark Williams1, Greg Savage1,
Blake Johnson1; 1Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia — Motor imagery

(MI) is an internal rehearsal of a movement without any overt physical
action. Neuroimaging studies have demonstrated that the neural mechanisms of MI substantially overlap with the mechanisms of motor execution (ME). Surprisingly, however, the role of primary motor cortex
(PMC) remains controversial, as many studies have failed to show consistent activations of PMC during MI, a variability that may be largely
due to differences in MI tasks. The objectives of this study were to (1)
design a novel task that reliably invokes MI; and (2) compare PMC activations measured with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
and magnetoencephalography (MEG). Participants heard a sequence of
auditory cues corresponding to the digits of the right or left hand and
responded by raising or lowering the relevant digits, or imagining such
movements. At the end of each cue sequence, the participants decided
whether their own digit configuration was the same or different from a
picture of a hand displayed on the screen. In all participants, fMRI analysis showed PMC activation during MI and ME, and MEG analysis
showed significant beta-band desynchronization in the same PMC
region at a latency of about 500ms from movement or imagery onset.
These results demonstrate that our MI task robustly and reliably activated PMC. This paradigm may thus prove useful in clarifying the precise role of PMC in MI, as well as in examining the functional status of
PMC in patients with motor disorders.

E97
FAVOURITISM IN THE SENSORIMOTOR SYSTEM: HISTORY OF
INTERACTION MODULATES SIMULATION OF AN ANTICIPATED ACTION
Dimitrios Kourtis1, Natalie Sebanz1, Günther Knoblich2; 1Donders Institute for
Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University Netherlands, 2Central
European University, Budapest, Hungary — The ability to anticipate others’
actions is crucial for social interaction. We have recently showed that one
simulates in advance an action performed by an interaction partner and
practically ignores the same action performed by a person that (s)he

152

never interacts with (Kourtis et. al., Biology Letters, 2010). In the present
study we explored the effects of interaction history on action simulation.
The setup comprised of an EEG participant, an interaction partner and
an “outsider” (i.e. a person only performing individual actions). The task
of the EEG participant was to plan and perform an individual action (lifting an object) or a joint action (giving or receiving an object) or to anticipate to observe the same individual action performed by either the
partner or the “outsider”. The EEG participant had the role of the giver
or the receiver in the 1st half of the experiment and the opposite role in
the 2nd half; moreover, the partner in one half became the “outsider” in
the other half (and vice versa). We recorded stronger mu rhythm (8-12
Hz) decrease over sensorimotor cortex before and during the early
stages of the partner’s (individual) action in the 1st half of the experiment, but no difference between the partner’s and “outsider’s” actions in
the 2nd half. These findings strengthen the notion that one’s sensorimotor system favours the actions of an interaction partner over the same
actions performed by an “outsider”; however, this favouritism disappears when the outsider has interacted with the observer in the past.

E98
INTERLIMB COUPLING DUE TO ILLUSORY MOVEMENTS: EVIDENCE
Pia1,
Francesca
FROM ANOSOGNOSIA FOR HEMIPLEGIA Lorenzo

Garbarini1, Lucia Spinazzola2, Maurizio Ferrarin3, Marco Rabuffetti3,
Alessandro Piedimonte1, Jon Driver4, Anna Berti1; 1Psychology Department &
Neuroscience Institute of Turin (NIT), Turin, 2Hospital Company ‘S. Antonio
Abate’, Gallarate (Milan), 3Bioengeneering Center, Foundation ‘Don Carlo
Gnocchi’ IRCCS, Milan, 4Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College
of London, London — In anosognosia for hemiplegia, patients affected by a

complete paresis of the side of the body opposite to the brain lesion may
claim having performed willed actions with the paralyzed limb despite
unambiguous evidence to the contrary. Does this false belief of being
able to move reflects the functioning of the mechanisms that govern normal motor performance? By examining in anosognosic patients the temporal coupling effects known to exist during bimanual movements in
normal subjects, we demonstrated that the illusory movements of the
plegic arm impose to the healthy arm the same constraints that emerge
during actual movements. Our findings strongly suggest that the same
neurocognitive processes subserving movement execution underpin the
‘nonveridical’ experience of willed movements in anosognosic patients.
Additionally, these data support the view that coupling effects depend
on information already within the brain (i.e., a motor representation),
rather than on on-line information from the periphery.

E99
NEURAL REFLECTIONS OF STATISTICAL STRUCTURE IN OBSERVED
ACTIONS Christiane Ahlheim1,2, Waltraud Stadler3,4, Ricarda I. Schubotz1,2;
1Max-Planck-Institute

for Neurological Research, 2Westfälische WilhelmsUniversität Münster, Max-Planck-Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, 4Technische Universität München — The statistical structure of
3

our environment can be used to generate predictions of its future states.
The present functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study aimed
at exploring the neural reflections of humans’ sensitivity to statistical
structure in actions. We developed an arbitrary but naturalistic action
syntax. It consisted of particular transition probabilities (0.25, 0.5, 0.75
and 1.0) between six different elements of a construction toy. This setup
allowed comparison of the neural effects of observing transitions that
did to a larger (probabilities 0.75 and 1.0), or smaller extend (probability
of 0.25) accord to the canonical model. On two successive training days,
15 subjects implicitly learnt the syntax by watching clips of action
sequences. During the fMRI on the third day they were exposed to the
same sequences. Activity increased at points of transitions (grasping
new elements versus manipulation of elements) in the posterior middle
temporal gyrus, anterior intraparietal sulcus and ventral premotor cortex, suggesting an intensified search for memorized action steps or an
intensified matching between memorized and perceived manipulations
at the beginning of a new action step. The parametric effect of transition

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session E
probability yielded enhanced activation for less frequent transitions in
the left posterior middle frontal gyrus and mesial BA6/BA8. We interpret this latter finding as stimulus-informed updating of a situational
model, required when an action step with low probability was encountered. High frequent transitions, on the contrary, activated the mesial BA
9, and area that has been associated with successful prediction or detection of coherence.

E100
ROLE OF GOAL AND MOTOR EXPERTISE DURING THE OBSERVATION OF
FAMILIAR ACTIONS PERFORMED BY UNUSUAL EFFECTORS Irene

Senna1, Nadia Bolognini1,2, Angelo Maravita1; 1University of Milano-Bicocca,
Department of Psychology, Milano, Italy, 2Neuropsychological Laboratory,
IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy — Studies in monkeys and

humans suggest the existence of a neural network responding to both
execution and observation of actions, i.e. the mirror neuron system
(MNS). The MNS activation following action observation is generally
believed to hold a precise somatotopic organization, to be specific for
actions belonging to the observer’s motor repertoire, and to be modulated by individual expertise. The present study sought for motor activation markers witnessing the simulatory coding of the action goal, the
effector (usual or unusual) used to perform a given action and the
observer’s experience relative to the body parts performing the observed
action. In separate sessions, the hand and the foot motor area were stimulated by means of Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS),while participants viewed video-clips depicting grasping or stepping-over-anobject actions performed either with the hand or with the foot. The
results showed increased MEPs recorded from the hand by the observation of hand actions (i.e. grasping and stepping over), and also by the
observation of a grasping action performed by the foot. MEPs recorded
from the foot were only increased by actions performed by the foot.
These results show that action observation (e.g. grasping) induces muscular preactivations in the same effector involved in the observed movement, but also in those muscles that are typically used to execute that
action (i.e. hand muscles), even when that action is performed by an
unusual effector (i.e. the foot).

THINKING: Decision making
E101
THE INFLUENCE OF EPISODIC THOUGHT ON INTERTEMPORAL CHOICE

Alejandro De La Vega1, Jessica Andrews-Hanna1, Marie Banich1; 1University of
Colorado Boulder — Humans show a preference for present rewards over
delayed rewards, a phenomenon known as temporal discounting (TD).
TD, of perennial interest because of its violation of rational economic theory, is associated with poor outcomes such as drug addiction and perhaps even global warming. Recent research has shown that episodic
future thinking can reduce temporal discounting, possibly by modulating subjective valuation processes through imagery-based operations
supported by the medial temporal lobe and connecting structures. Interestingly, a growing body of additional research suggests that episodic
memory and episodic future thought share similar cognitive processes
and neural mechanisms. Given these findings, an immediate question is
whether episodic memory can also reduce temporal discounting. To
investigate this question, we created a behavioral paradigm whereby
participants performed intertemporal choice trials, but each trial was
primed by either a brief period of episodic past thought, episodic future
thought, or a non-episodic imagery control condition. In line with previous findings, participants discounted future rewards compared to
present rewards and showed wide inter-individual variability in their
discounting rates. However, when comparing discounting rates between
the three conditions, results revealed that episodic memory reduced TD
more than episodic future thought and the imagery control condition. In
contrast, no differences in TD were observed between the episodic future
thought condition and the control condition. Given that the episodic past
thought condition was associated with higher self-reported imagery

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

than the episodic future thought condition, these findings suggest that
basic episodic imagery processes might play an important role in modulating intertemporal decision-making.

E102
DECISION MAKING ALTERATIONS IN PEOPLE WITH HIV Sara

Tomlinson1, Christopher Power1, Scot Purdon1, Esther Fujiwara1; 1University of
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada — Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection can lead to impaired neurocognitive functioning; approximately half of individuals infected will experience some neurocognitive
symptoms during the course of their illness. Since the advent of highly
active retroviral therapy (HAART) in the mid 1990s the type and severity
of impairment have evolved. The new profile of HIV neurocognitive
alteration more often implicates executive functions than the subcorticaldementia pattern previously observed. While the severity of impairment
has improved, general prevalence remains unchanged. In the present
study, HAART-treated HIV-seropositive individuals (n=20) and seronegative healthy controls (n=22) underwent neuropsychological testing
including HIV-sensitive standard tests of attention, visuospatial capabilities, psychomotor speed, memory, executive functions and language. A
seropositive-novel task used to assess decision making, the Game of Dice
Task (GDT), was also included. The GDT utilizes explicit, stable rules
and has been shown to co-vary more reliably with executive functions
than other decision making measures (e.g. Iowa Gambling Task - IGT).
The few existing studies of decision making in HIV included more complex populations (e.g., comorbid substance abusers), exclusively used
the IGT and had mixed findings. Results indicate neurocognitive performance consistent with previous studies of HAART-treated HIV-patients;
patients were impaired in tests of executive functions and information
processing speed. Decision making capabilities, as measured by the
GDT, were significantly impaired in the HIV group. Furthermore, GDT
deficits were also related to lower mood in a depression screen. This
study shows that decision making capabilities are significantly altered in
HIV-patients and such deficits relate to mood and executive functions.

E103
RISK TAKING AND TEMPORAL DISCOUNTING IN PARKINSON’S
DISEASE Erin Kendall Braun1, Karin Foerde1, Bernd Figner1,2, Elke Weber1,

Daphna Shohamy1; 1Columbia University, 2University of Amsterdam — Two

factors that are known to substantially affect decisions are the tendency
to take risks and the tendency to prefer immediate outcomes. Previous
research has shown that both risk taking and temporal discounting are
modulated by striatal dopamine, but questions remain about the causal
role of dopamine in these behaviors. Parkinson’s disease is characterized
by a loss of dopaminergic inputs to the striatum, providing a model for
testing the necessity of striatal dopamine in such processes. Here, to better understand the role of dopamine in risk taking and temporal discounting, we tested Parkinson’s disease patients and healthy controls on
two decision making tasks: one that assessed risk taking (the Columbia
Card task) and one that assessed temporal discounting (the Intertemporal Choice task). In the Columbia Card task, we manipulated trial-bytrial the values of gain and loss cards and the probability of loss, and
participants were asked to select a number of cards to maximize winnings. In the Intertemporal Choice task, participants chose between
rewards that would be obtained at different points in time. We found
that Parkinson’s patients made riskier choices than controls. Moreover,
unlike the controls, patients did not learn to decrease their risk taking as
the experiment progressed. On the Intertemporal Choice task, we found
that Parkinson’s patients were more willing than controls to wait longer
for larger rewards. Together with previous animal and human fMRI
research, our results suggest that striatal dopamine contributes to the
risk-related and temporal effects on decision making.

153

Poster Session E — Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall

E104
STRATEGY UPDATING UNDER DIFFERENT REGIMES: KEEPING IT SIMPLE
MAY BE THE BEST WAY Alex Filipowicz1, Elisabeth Stöttinger1, James

Danckert1, Britt Anderson1,2; 1Dept. of Psychology, University of Waterloo,
Canada, 2Centre for Theoretical Neuroscience — We measured normal
adults’ ability to build and update a mental model by using the simple
game Rock, Paper, Scissors (RPS). An important cognitive skill is the
ability to update a mental model when it no longer accurately reflects
environmental information. People with right brain damage (RBD) are
impaired on this type of model updating. We had university undergraduates play a game of RPS against a computer opponent. After a preliminary period of selecting items uniformly, the computer switched to one
of three strategies: “biased” play (computer selects one option 80% of the
time), “one-ahead” (computer chooses item that beats participants’ previous item selection 80% of the time), or “superstitious” (computer
ensures that participants wins 80% of the time). After a predetermined
number of trials the computer again switched strategy; all participants
faced a biased play strategy (using a different item). Our results indicate
that, the “biased” group were more successful than the “one-ahead”
group at learning the computer’s first strategy (only 40% of participants
in the “one-ahead” group understood the strategy compared to 78% of
participants in the “biased” group) and were subsequently quicker at
adapting to the computer’s play when the computer switched to its final
strategy (F(2) = 3.7; p < 0.05). We conclude that the nature, and possibly
the strength of a mental model has a significant influence on the ability
to update that model. The impairment for statistical learning observed
after RBD may explain the impaired ability of people with RBD to
update mental models.

E105
USING THE BALLOON ANALOGUE RISK TASK (BART) TO EXAMINE
NEURAL CORRELATES OF RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR IN ADOLESCENTS

Tracy Riggins1, Kelsey Cacic2, Betty Jo Salmeron2, Pradeep Kurup2, Thomas J.
Ross2, Carl Lejuez1, Maureen Black; 1University of Maryland, College Park,
2National Institute on Drug Abuse, Intramural Research Program, 3University of
Maryland, Baltimore, School of Medicine — Adolescence is characterized by
increased risk-taking behavior. The goal of the current study was to
examine the neural mechanisms underlying decision making during risk
(i.e., contemplation, anticipation, and reward) using a modified version
of the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) during which participants
blow-up virtual balloons. Like real-world situations, risky choices are
rewarded up to a point at which riskier choices result in poorer outcomes. Previous research has shown that riskiness on this task is correlated with established risk-related constructs (sensation seeking/
impulsivity) and risky behaviors (smoking/stealing/sex, Lejuez et al.,
2002). Preliminary behavioral results from 16 adolescents (mean age = 17
years + 1, range = 15-19) reveals considerable variability in behavioral
performance. For example, the average number of pumps per balloon
ranged from 17-68 (mean = 46) and the total number of exploded balloons ranged from 20-44 (mean = 31). After covarying for effects of age,
preliminary fMRI results (n=11) demonstrate that contemplation (thinking about and selecting the number of pumps for a balloon) is associated
with significant activation in left inferior frontal gyrus, bilateral thalamus, bilateral cingulate gyrus, right posterior cingulate, right parahippocampal gyrus, right substantia nigra, and right culmen (p<.05
corrected). Anticipation (waiting for the balloon to inflate) following a
negative outcome (an “explosion” on the previous trial) is characterized
by right insula activation compared to anticipation following a positive
outcome (a previous “win” trial, p<.05 corrected). These findings illustrate differential neural mechanisms associated with contemplation and
anticipation following negative outcomes in a simulated risk-taking task
with adolescents.

E106
RESTING-STATE ANALYSIS OF THE VENTRAL TEGMENTAL AREA AND
SUBSTANTIA NIGRA REVEALS DIFFERENTIAL CONNECTIVITY WITH THE
PREFRONTAL CORTEX Maheen Shermohammed1, Vishnu Murty1, David V.

Smith1, McKell Carter1, Scott Huettel1, R. Alison Adcock1; 1Duke University —

Dopamine neurons of the midbrain have been demonstrated to play an
integral role in a wide variety of cognitive processes, including motor
planning, pursuit of reward, and retention in memory. The dopaminergic midbrain is traditionally divided into the ventral tegmental area
(VTA) and the substantia nigra (SN), two areas that are separate in primates and rodents and known to have distinct projection targets and
play distinct roles in behaviors. However, functional distinctions
between these areas in humans are a subject of debate, and their functional connectivity has yet to be directly contrasted. The current study
used resting-state fMRI to distinguish the functional connectivity patterns of the VTA and SN. Anatomical VTA and SN regions of interest
(ROIs) were drawn on 50 individual subjects, from which 3mm kernels
created at the bilateral centers of mass of each ROI were used as seed
regions for whole-brain connectivity analysis. Group -level analysis
revealed differential patterns of connectivity of the VTA and SN. Specifically, the SN (bilateral) showed greater functional connectivity than the
VTA with the insula and motor cortex (p < 0.05, whole-brain corrected).
The right VTA showed greater functional connectivity than the right SN
with the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (p < 0.05, whole-brain corrected). These results show that the VTA and SN interact with distinct
cortical networks, which in turn suggests dissociable roles for these anatomical regions in dopamine-dependent behaviors in humans.

E107
SELECTIVE REVERSAL LEARNING DEFICIT IN INDIVIDUALS WITH POST
TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER (PTSD), BUT NOT GENERALIZED
ANXIETY DISORDER (GAD) Einat Levy-Gigi1, Mark A. Gluck1, Szabolcs

Keri2,3; 1Rutgers University, Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience,
Newark, USA, 2University of Szeged, Faculty of Medicine, Szeged, Hungary,
3
National Psychiatry Center, Budapest, Hungary — A wide range of neuroimaging studies have demonstrated a diminished MTL activation
and/or reduced hippocampal volume in individuals with PTSD. In a
past study we found that PTSD participants show a hippocampusdependent generalization deficit similar to individuals with amnesic
Mild Cognitive Impairment (aMCI) and mild Alzheimer disease. The
aim of the present study was to test whether this impairment can be specifically attributed to over-generalization of cue or context. 13 PTSD, 17
GAD and 20 healthy controls (HC) participants were tested on a novel
cue-context reversal task. The acquisition phase of the task includes a
discrimination learning procedure in which cards consisting of a cue and
a context predict a specific outcome (reward or punishment). In the subsequent reversal phase, there are two possibilities: (1) the cue is
unchanged but appears in a new context; (2) a new cue is presented in
the original context. The new cards are associated with the opposite outcome relative to the cards in the first phase. Participants must reverse the
original discrimination rule in order to adapt to the new condition. We
found that all groups preformed equally well at the acquisition phase.
Individuals with GAD performed similarly to HC on the reversal phase.
However, individuals with PTSD showed a significant deficit to reverse
from negative to positive feedback. This deficit was particularly strong
in negative context. This deficit may reflect a dysfunction of the ventromedial frontal - amygdala system, explaining why PTSD individuals fail
to reverse aversive context.

E108
DECISION MAKING IN OLDER ADULTS: THE INFLUENCE OF LEARNING ON
A CUED PREDICTION TASK Kendra L. Seaman1, Alissa Forman-Alberti1,

Darlene V. Howard2, James H. Howard, Jr.1,2; 1The Catholic University of
America, 2Georgetown University — Older people are increasingly being

asked to make critical decisions regarding housing, personal finance,
and healthcare, raising questions about the decision-making abilities of

154

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session E
older adults. In this study we use the Triplets Prediction Task (TPT) to
investigate the relationship between learning and decision making in
young and older adults. In the TPT, subjects see two successive visual
cues and then predict which target will follow. Unknown to subjects,
there is a predictive relationship between the first cue and the target
such that each of four cues predicts one of four targets 85 percent of the
time. Participants in both age groups demonstrated learning of the cuetarget relationships through more frequent prediction of the most likely
target for each cue, but young adults were significantly better at this prediction. In addition, only young adults demonstrated skill learning
through faster responses over time. To examine how learning was associated with decision-making strategy, we compared the tendency to
make varied predictions for each cue (exploration) to the tendency to
stay with the same prediction (exploitation). This revealed a significant
change in decision-making strategy over time, with subjects shifting
from an exploratory strategy to an exploitative one as learning progressed. A marginally significant interaction between age and strategy
suggests that this change in strategy is greater for young adults than
older adults. Together, these analyses suggest that deficits in experiential
decision making in older adults are related to deficits in learning.

During the choice period, activity in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex
(VMPFC) positively correlated with the probability of avoiding pain.
These findings are consistent with VMPFC’s role in the representation of
the expected value of outcomes, as well as in the generation of “safety”
signals. In addition, an aversive prediction error signal at the onset of
painful stimulations was observed in the hippocampus, anterior and
mid- cingulate cortex, medial prefrontal cortex and substancia nigra,
suggesting that these regions integrate negative feedback to learn to
avoid unpleasant outcomes. These regions are largely distinct from those
involved in appetitive prediction errors, suggesting that the brain
regions involved in avoidance learning are partially distinct from those
involved in appetitive reinforcement learning.

E109
IMPROVED SELF-CONTROL WITH EXTENDED ABSTINENCE IN
METHAMPHETAMINE DEPENDENCE Catherine Fassbender1, Julie B

Schweitzer1, Kyle J Rutledge1, Stefan Ursu1, Ruth Salo1; 1University California
Davis Medical Center — Impulsivity and diminished self-control are

thought to play important roles in addiction. Delay discounting (DD)
paradigms measure impulsive decision-making relevant to addiction by
presenting a series of choices between an immediate smaller monetary
reward and a delayed, larger monetary reward. Numerous studies have
found that addicted individuals display increased impulsivity (increased
choice of immediate rewards) on DD paradigms. The goal of the current
study was to investigate whether periods of abstinence ameliorated
impulsivity in currently drug abstinent individuals with a history of
methamphetamine (MA) dependence. Participants included 22 individuals with a history of MA dependence and 17 non-substance abusing
controls, with ages ranging from 18 to 48 yrs of age. MA dependent subjects were required to be abstinent for at least 30 days and toxicology
tests were conducted to confirm sobriety. Exclusion criteria included
substance dependence other than MA within the past year and alcohol
abuse/dependence within the past 5 years. Marijuana abuse was permitted in MA users. Controls were not permitted to have any history of substance/alcohol abuse/dependence. MA dependent subjects were
significantly more impulsive than controls (p<0.0001). Correlations
between number of months abstinent and impulsivity revealed that
those participants with longer periods of MA drug abstinence were less
impulsive (r = -0.48, p = 0.03). Dividing participants into short (<1yr) and
long (>1yr) term abstinent revealed that those who were short- term
abstinent were significantly more impulsive (t = 2.37, p = 0.03). These
results suggest improvements in self-control and impulsivity with protracted drug abstinence.

E110
BRAIN SYSTEMS INVOLVED IN LEARNING TO AVOID PAIN Mathieu Roy1,
Daphna Shohamy2, Nathaniel Daw3, Tor Wager1; 1University of Colorado,
Boulder, 2Columbia University, 3New York University — The ability to predict

and avoid potentially aversive outcomes is essential to our capacity to
navigate through life with minimal suffering. While the use of computational methods to study learning has greatly advanced our understanding of appetitive reinforcement learning in humans, surprisingly
relatively little work has taken advantage of these methods to study
aversive or avoidance learning. Here, we used temporal-difference
learning algorithms in combination with functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) to identify the brain regions involved in pain avoidance
learning during a continuous two-alternative probabilistic learning task.
On each trial, participants (n = 22) had to select the alternative that
yielded the lower probability of leading to a painful thermal stimulation.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

155

Poster Session F

Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

ATTENTION: Other
F1
ERP CORRELATES OF SHORT-TERM TRAINING AND SOA IN A DUAL-TASK
PARADIGM Eric Ragusa1, Fae Messier1, Barry Haimson1; 1University of
Massachusetts Dartmouth — Prior research found that when the stimulus
onset asynchrony (SOA) between Task 1 (T1) and Task 2 (T2) is very
brief, the reaction time (RT) to T2 will be longer that it would be in a control condition without the presence of T1. Presumably this delay in processing T2 is due to a bottleneck in processing T1. This brief period of
time has become known as the psychological refractory period (PRP).
However, the RT to T2 is not reduced when the SOA is longer and falls
outside the PRP interval. Other findings have suggested that extensive
training may reduce the dual-task penalty incurred by the PRP, but this
research has not evaluated the electrophysiological correlates of such
training. The current study was designed to evaluate differences in ERP
activity following training in a dual task paradigm with long and short
SOA intervals. Subjects were randomly assigned to a continuous practice
group without feedback or to a group which received a suggested task
strategy with feedback for correct responses during part of the study. A
preliminary analysis of the RT data indicated that both groups showed
practice effects for long and short SOA conditions. Following practice
P300 latency at frontal sites decreased for a short SOA, but increased for
a long SOA. Changes in P300 peak amplitude data were also noted.
These findings suggest that ERP components that precede behavioral
responses may vary with training in different kinds of dual task paradigms.

F2
USE OF VISUAL AND HAPTIC VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENTS TO IMPROVE
ATTENTION IN SEVERE TBI Assaf Y. Dvorkin1,2, Amit Shah3, Milan

Ramaiya3, Felise Zollman1,2, Eric Larson1,2, Nancy Hsu1, Sonia Pacini1, James
L. Patton1,2,3; 1Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, 2Northwestern University,
3
University of Illinois at Chicago — Several studies have demonstrated the
efficacy of emerging technologies such as virtual reality (VR) and robotics as an assessment and intervention tool for a variety of neurological
conditions. However, there is paucity of literature on the use of such
technology in the traumatic brain injury (TBI) population, especially for
attention rehabilitation. We have developed and tested an integrated
VR-robotics paradigm for improving attention in early stages of recovery in severe TBI inpatients. 21 TBI inpatients participated in a 2-day
study, in which they interacted with virtual environments that provided
visual and haptic (sense of touch) feedback during a reaching task. A
robotic device held by the patient’s hand delivered either a “breakthrough” force (similar to popping a balloon), a gentle pulse of force - a
haptic nudge, or no haptic force. Our findings showed that the technology was remarkably well-tolerated by almost all patients. Results further
showed significant improvement with practice, and more surprisingly,
from one day to the next, with a beneficial effect from the haptic cues. 11
new severe TBI inpatients participated in an ongoing 2-week study that

156

included either incremental adjustment of VR task difficulty as patients
improve, or standard attention training. Initial results indicated that
nearly all patients tolerated the treatment by completing the entire protocol, exhibiting an overall improvement in performance. We propose
that interactive VR-robotics attention exercises are well-tolerated and
engaging and that they could be beneficial for inpatients with severe TBI.
The study should provide a guide for future clinical trials.

F3
ATTENTION INFLUENCES THE NEURAL REPRESENTATION OF NATURAL
SCENE CATEGORY Eamon Caddigan1, Audrey Lustig1, Li Fei-Fei2, Diane

Beck1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Stanford University —

Images of natural scenes are quickly and accurately categorized by
human observers, even when visual attention is engaged by a demanding secondary task. Multivoxel pattern analyses (MVPA) have been used
to show the presence of scene category information in scene-selective
cortical areas (such as the parahippocampal place area, or PPA), and that
this information is sensitive to manipulations that influence human
behavior. Recent work has shown that objects in unattended natural
scenes can be identified by patterns of fMRI activity. Here, we used
MVPA to investigate whether spatial attention modulates the neural representation of scene categories. On separate runs, participants either
detected repetitions in a stream of natural scenes or searched at fixation
for predefined color-shape conjunction targets within a stream of small
colored crosses superimposed on the scenes. Because the displays were
identical in both conditions, this manipulation allowed us to measure the
influence of observers' attentional focus on scene category decoding. We
found that decoding accuracy in the PPA was reliably above chance in
both conditions, showing that category information is represented in
scene-selective cortex even when attention is directed elsewhere. However, correct classification rates were significantly higher when participants performed the task requiring attention to scenes. These results
provide additional evidence that category information can be extracted
from scene images under conditions of limited attention, but show an
influence of attention on the perception of natural scenes.

F4
LOOKING AT FACES GUIDES SOCIAL PERCEPTION Julia Boggia1, Jelena

Ristic1; 1McGill University — Faces play an important role in social cognition. Here we addressed the question of the role of face perception in
segmentation of dynamic social information. Participants were asked to
view a short movie clip and to segment it into ‘social units’ or ‘nonsocial
units’ by pressing a key on the keyboard. This task results in a pattern of
‘breakpoints’ (e.g., Newtson & Enquist, 1976; Zacks et al., 2001), which
reveal behavioral markers of the boundaries of the perceptual units and
index the underlying perceptual parsing processes. We recorded the
number of each participant’s key presses and measured their eye movements using a remote infrared eye tracker. Our data revealed that the
pattern of breakpoints and associated eye movements differed across the
two instructional groups in three important ways. First, the group that
received the instructions to segment the clip into social units showed
higher inter-subject response agreement. Second, ‘social’ perceptual

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session F
units relative to ‘nonsocial’ units, contained significantly more images of
close up faces. Finally, the patterns of eye movements differed across the
two groups. Surprisingly, participants looked longer at faces when they
performed ‘nonsocial’ relative to ‘social’ unit segmentations. Together
these data indicate that the basic unit marking procedure reveals important properties of social perception and strongly suggest that faces convey key information needed for parsing and understanding of dynamic
and complex social events.

F5
A GRAPH THEORETIC APPROACH TO NETWORK-LEVEL FUNCTIONAL
BRAIN MAPPING: SYSTEMATIC DIFFERENCES IN FUNCTIONAL
ARCHITECTURE OF THE ATTENTION NETWORK ARE LINKED TO SPECIFIC
PATTERNS OF STRATEGIC ATTENTIONAL CONTROL. Christine M. Tipper1,

Dani S. Bassett1, Mason A. Porter2, Elissa Aminoff3, Arianne Johnson1, Amy
Frithsen1, Michael Datko4, Michael B. Miller1, Scott T. Grafon1; 1University of
California, Santa Barbara, 2University of Oxford, 3Carnegie Mellon University,
4University of California, San Diego — A brain network distributed through-

out frontal and parietal cortex mediates the strategic control of attention.
How this network carries out various processes that comprise the attention system remains unclear, owing in part to tremendous variability in
how multiple attentional processes are engaged between individuals,
over time, and across tasks. The present study leveraged this variability
using a graph-theoretic approach to identify links between systematic
differences in the functional architecture of the attention network and
individual differences of performance on a challenging strategic attentional control task. While undergoing fMRI, 115 participants discriminated bilateral stimulus displays for the presence or absence of a target.
A pre-cue provided two pieces of information: the likelihood of the target’s presence and its likely location. Participants varied in how they utilized this information and whether they updated control strategies
dynamically based on changing contingencies. Time-varying BOLD
activity was extracted from 51 regions defining the attention network,
and a functional brain graph was constructed for each scanning run by
correlating BOLD activity between each node pair. Modularity maximization algorithms identified functional modules within the attention network that varied systematically across individuals. Individuals sharing a
similar modular structure were grouped using a data-driven clustering
method, revealing four distinct attention network architectures. Each of
these network structures was linked to a specific pattern of behavioral
performance, varying in both strategic flexibility and perceptual sensitivity. The results demonstrate the utility of this data-driven approach
for explaining differences in cognition with respect to the functionality
of underlying complex brain networks.

F6
PERCEPTUAL LEARNING FACILITATED BY EXOGENOUS ATTENTION AND
DYNAMICS OF ACTIVATIONS IN EARLY VISUAL AREAS Penelope

Papalambros1, Ikuko Mukai1, Masaki Fukunaga2, John E. Ingeholm1, Leslie G.
Ungerleider1; 1National Institute of Mental Health, 2Osaka University — Perceptual learning is the phenomenon in which repeated experience with
visual stimuli results in improvements in perception of these stimuli.
Our previous psychophysical results (Mukai et al., 2011) suggested that
both exogenous attention and endogenous attention facilitate perceptual
learning, but that these two types of attention may be mediated by different neural mechanisms. To explore the neural mechanisms by which
exogenous attention affects perceptual learning we conducted an fMRI
study. During training, subjects (n=14) were cued exogenously to allocate three different levels of attention (attended, divided-attended and
unattended) to four different stimulus locations and indicate the orientation of a Gabor patch. Subjects underwent fMRI sessions before and after
training to compare changes in BOLD signals to passively viewed Gabor
patches, as did controls (n=8) who had no training. We replicated the
behavioral results obtained in Mukai et al. (2011): A significant reduction
in contrast thresholds for the attended (p=0.005), but not for dividedattended or unattended locations, even though accuracy increased dur-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

ing training for the attended (p=5.0x10-4) and divided-attended
(p=6.5x10-6) locations. The fMRI results of a paired t-test on group ROI
data revealed significantly greater activation during post-training than
during pre-training sessions for the attended location (p=0.034). On the
other hand, no significant changes were found in the fMRI data for the
divided-attended or unattended locations, or for control subjects
(p>0.05). The results suggest that enhanced behavior at attended locations correlate with increased activation in the early visual areas responsible for the stimulus processing.

F7
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS REVEAL THE EFFECTS OF ATTENTION ON
EMOTICONS PROCESSING Shichun Guo1, Shimin Fu1; 1Tsinghua
University — Emoticons consist of punctuations and English letters and
similar to faces, have simple facial expressions. Previous studies have
shown that attention may modulate the processing of faces, but only few
studies have been conducted to investigate whether the processing of
emoticons can be modulated by attention. In the present study, Eventrelated potentials (ERPs) were recorded when participants performed an
orientation discrimination task in a central cueing paradigm. Emoticons
were presented to the left or right visual field. Prior to the onset of the
emoticons, a central cue was presented. The cue predicted the location of
subsequent emoticons in 75% of trials. Participants were required to
respond to the orientation (upright or inverted) of the designated targets
(20% of total trials) in each block. Behavioral data show that participants
responded faster to valid relative to invalid trials. ERP results show that
valid trials elicited a larger P1 (100-140 ms) and smaller P2 (204-256 ms)
and smaller P3 (324-378 ms) relative to the invalid trials. An inversion
effect of emoticons was observed at 156-166 ms for valid trials, but not
for invalid trials. Results suggest that emoticons show inversion effect at
approximately 160 ms when attended, and attention can modulate the
process of emoticons at an early processing stage, approximately 120 ms
after stimulus onset.

F8
CUE REACTIVITY TO DRUG IMAGES IN RECREATIONAL STIMULANT
USERS: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS STUDY John Erik Vanston1,

Natalie Ceballos1, Schepis Ty1, Reiko Graham1; 1Health Psychophysiology Lab,
Department of Psychology, Texas State University — The ability for drugrelated cues to capture attention in drug-dependent individuals has been
well-documented. In contrast, cue reactivity in recreational users
requires elucidation. We examined the neurophysiological correlates of
stimulant-related attentional processes among recreational stimulant
users using a 3-stimulus oddball paradigm. Participants (N = 20, 9 males
and 11 females, mean age = 20.1) completed two versions of the task: one
where they responded to stimulant targets (respond to stimulant pictures, ignore other objects or nonsense shapes) and another where they
responded to object targets, while event-related potentials were measured. Task order was counterbalanced across participants. Analyses
focused on the parietal P300, which was maximal approximately 350-450
ms after stimulus onset. P300 amplitudes were larger for stimulant
images and targets. These main effects were mediated by a target by condition interaction. Post hoc analyses revealed no significant difference
between object targets and drug non-targets in the object condition, suggesting that drug images captured attention, regardless of target status.
In addition, enhanced amplitudes as a function of target status were
larger for drugs than for objects. Overall, results suggest that drug
images capture attention via the synergistic interaction of controlled and
automatic processes. Further research is required to determine whether
cue reactivity in the form of enhanced P300 amplitudes to stimulant
images is the result of learning via cultural influences, drug attitudes or
experience.

157

Poster Session F — Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

F9
RESTING STATE EEG OSCILLATORY POWER DIFFERENCES IN ADHD
COLLEGE STUDENTS AND THEIR PEERS Steven Woltering1, Jessica Jung1,
Zhongxu Liu1, Rosemary Tannock1; 1University of Toronto — Attention-defi-

cit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children is characterized by elevated levels of slow oscillatory activity and reduced fast oscillatory
activity in resting-state electroencephalogram (EEG). In adults with
ADHD, resting-state EEG findings are scarce and inconsistent. The
present study examined adult college students with ADHD, and a comparison group in a resting-state condition. Twenty adults with ADHD
and 16 control adults are currently analyzed for the study. The EEG
results confirmed the hypothesis that reduced levels of relative alpha
power, and increased levels of relative theta power, were associated with
ADHD. No group differences were found for relative beta power. These
findings demonstrate similar neural signatures in adults and children,
confirming oscillatory power in theta and alpha bands as biomarkers for
ADHD throughout development.

F10
LEFT SPATIAL NEGLECT PATIENTS ALSO NEGLECT THE LEFT (PAST) SIDE
OF TIME Arnaud Saj1, Orly Fuhrman2, Patrik Vuilleumier1, Lera Boroditsky2;
1

Department of Neurology and Neurosciences, University Hospital of Geneva,
University of Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department of Psychology, Stanford
University — Previous research suggests people construct mental timelines to represent and reason about time. However, are spatial representations truly necessary for representing events in time? Our results show
for the first time that deficits in spatial representation (as a function of
left hemi-spatial neglect) also result in deficits in representing events
along the mental timeline. Specifically, we show that patients with left
hemi-spatial neglect have difficulty representing events that are associated with the past and thus fall to the left on the mental time-line. These
results demonstrate that representations of space and time share neural
underpinnings and that representations of time have specific spatial
properties (e.g., a left and a right side). Further, it appears that intact spatial representations are necessary for at least some types of temporal reasoning.

ATTENTION: Spatial
F11
ERP MANIFESTATIONS OF KNOWLEDGE-BASED ATTENTION-SPREADING:
EFFECTS OF LEXICALITY ON ATTENTIONAL SELECTION Yasuko

Okumura1,

Kasai1,

Takeya1,

Murohashi1; 1Hokkaido

Tetsuko
Ryuji
Harumitsu
University — Attention spreads across two stimuli with perceptual group-

ing factors like connectedness, which can be observed as reduced lateralized spatial attention effects in event-related potentials (ERPs). In this
study, ERP manifestations of knowledge-based attention-spreading
were explored using Hiragana letter strings. ERPs were recorded from
12 native Japanese speakers. Stimuli were Japanese words, nonwords,
and reversed words, consisted of four characters aligned horizontally
across the left and right hemifields. Participants were instructed to
attend either left or right end of the rapidly presented stimuli and to
detect target characters appearing infrequently at the attended hemifields. ERPs to the standard stimuli at the occipito-temporal electrodes
(PO7, PO8) revealed the greatest attention effects varying among the
stimulus conditions. Modulation of the attention effects was clarified on
difference waves between ERPs for attending to the contralateral and
ipsilateral hemifields, with respect to the hemispheres. In the N1 latency
range (160-210 ms post-stimulus onset), the attention effect for words
was significantly more positive than those for nonwords and reversed
words. It indicates that attention spread from an attended location
toward the opposite side of the stimuli most prominently in words. Furthermore, differential attention effects between words and reversed
words suggest that ordinary spatial arrangement, rather than combination, of characters plays an important role in attentional guidance, since
reversed words are correct in terms of the combination. As a conclusion,

158

we identified attention-spreading based on lexical knowledge, with N1
as its ERP correlate. This finding may be beneficial for to understand
how we integrate letters into words.

F12
AN EXAMINATION OF LONG-TERM MEMORY GUIDANCE OF VISUAL
L.
Rosen1,
SPATIAL ATTENTION TO MULTIPLE LOCATIONS Maya

Stephanie L. Bachewski1, Chantal E. Stern1, David C. Somers1; 1Boston
University — Using a variant of a change-detection task, this experiment
sought to examine whether long-term memory can influence spatial
attention to multiple locations. Twenty-nine participants were trained on
a change-detection flicker paradigm with complex visual scenes that
contained 0, 1, 2, or 3 changes at different spatial locations. During the
test phase, a previously studied scene was presented statically and subjects were instructed to covertly direct their attention to the location(s)
where they remembered a change had occurred during the study phase.
The scene would then reappear, and participants responded with a twoalternative forced choice whether or not they detected a change (Change,
No change). Scenes had a 50% chance of containing a single change. The
changes were those previously studied, except for the images where no
change occurred during the study phase; those changes were necessarily
novel. Results indicate that d’ significantly increased in conditions where
there were studied changes compared to when no change was previously studied. Furthermore, k-score significantly increased in the multiple-change conditions (2 or 3 studied changes) compared with the single
change condition. Together, these findings suggest memory and attentional systems interact such that long-term memory can be used to direct
visual spatial attention to multiple locations based on previous experience. This experiment links studies indicating that people are better at
directing their attention when they have studied a scene (Summerfield et
al., 2006, 2011) and studies demonstrating that people are capable of
attending to multiple locations simultaneously (McMains and Somers,
2004, 2005).

F13
UNEXPECTED SHIFTS OF COVERT SPATIAL ATTENTION ARE LINKED TO A
CHANGE OF FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN KEY REGIONS OF
THE DORSAL AND VENTRAL ATTENTION NETWORKS Jérôme Prado1,2,

Daniel Weissman3; 1Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Laboratoire
sur le Langage, le Cerveau et la Cognition, 2Université de Lyon, 3University of
Michigan — When spatial attention must unexpectedly be directed to a
new location, a ventral attention network that signals the need to reorient spatial attention is thought to dampen activity in a dorsal attention
network that maintains the current attentional focus. However, evidence
to support this view is scarce. To investigate this hypothesis in the
present study, we asked fourteen healthy adults to perform a covert
visual spatial attention task, which involved discriminating the orientation of a letter in the cued visual field (valid trials) or, occasionally, the
uncued visual field (invalid trials), while we recorded their brain activity
using fMRI. Replicating prior work, the ventral attention network was
more highly activated in invalid than in valid trials. Further, as hypothesized, functional connectivity analyses revealed that a change of activity
in the right inferior frontal gyrus, a critical node of the ventral attention
network, was linked to a smaller change of activity in key regions of the
dorsal attention network in invalid than in valid trials. These findings
provide novel support for the view that the ventral attention network
dampens activity in the dorsal attention network during unexpected
shifts of visual spatial attention.

F14
THE EFFECTS OF IGNORED VERSUS FOVEATED CUES UPON INHIBITION
OF RETURN AND EARLY EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL COMPONENTS TO
TARGETS CALLING FOR MANUAL LOCALIZATION RESPONSES Jason

Satel1, Matthew Hilchey1, Ross Story1, Zhiguo Wang2, Raymond Klein1;
1
Dalhousie University, 2Chinese Academy of Sciences — Using 24 different
variations of Posner's cue-target paradigm, Taylor & Klein (2000) discov-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session F
ered two mutually exclusive "flavors" of IOR: When the oculomotor system is inhibited, IOR affects input processes (perception/attention
flavor); when the oculomotor system is not inhibited, IOR affects output
processes (motor flavor). Studies of brain activity with ignored cues and
manual responses to targets (for a review, see Prime & Ward, 2006) have
typically reported that IOR reduces an early, sensory component (P1) of
the brain's response to the target. Since eye movements are discouraged
in these experiments, this P1 reduction might be a reflection of the perception/attention flavor of IOR. If, instead of ignoring the cue, participants make a prosaccade to the cue (and then return to fixation) before
making a manual response to the target, then the motor flavor of IOR
should be generated. In the present study we compared these two conditions while monitoring eye position and recording ERPs to the targets. If
the P1 modulation is related to IOR, there should be no IOR modulation
of the P1 component when the motoric flavor of IOR is generated by a
prosaccade to the cue. Whereas target-elicited P1 reductions were similar, and behavioral IOR significant, in both conditions, behavioral IOR
was significantly larger in the saccade condition. These findings suggest
that either: 1) perceptual/attentional mechanisms of IOR are recruited
whether the oculomotor system is inhibited or activated, or 2) P1 reductions do not provide an accurate reflection of IOR's behavioral manifestation.

F15
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SPONTANEOUS FLUCTUATIONS IN
ATTENTIONAL CONTROL Anthony Sali1, Steven Yantis1; 1Johns Hopkins
University — Spontaneous fluctuations in task engagement are associated
with variation in cognitive flexibility, which is required for shifting task
set. These fluctuations are associated with corresponding changes in
brain activity that can be used to predict moment-by-moment changes in
behavioral performance. We used fMRI to investigate the neural correlates of spontaneous fluctuations in readiness to covertly shift attention
between two peripheral rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) streams.
Participants attended to one of two continuously present streams; following the appearance of a shift or hold cue in the attended stream, they
shifted (or held) attention and responded to a target in the newly (or
still) attended stream. Target detection RT following a shift or hold
served as a behavioral index of fluctuations in attentional flexibility
(readiness to shift attention) or stability (successfully holding attention).
Covert shifts of attention were associated with transient activity within
bilateral medial superior parietal lobule (mSPL) and with retinotopic
modulations of activity within extrastriate cortex. We used linear regression to predict response time on each trial from pretrial BOLD activity.
High pretrial activity within mSPL was associated with fast RTs for shift
trials and slow RTs for hold trials; in contrast, high pretrial activity in
default network structures was associated with fast RTs on hold trials
but slow RTs on shift trials. Individual differences in fluctuating states of
cognitive flexibility provide an index of the control of attention that may
provide some insight into disorders of cognitive control as well as variability in attentional control in healthy individuals.

F16
ATTENTIONAL RESOURCES AND STIMULUS COMPETITION WITHIN AND
ACROSS VISUAL HEMIFIELDS Sabrina Walter1, Cliodhna Quigley1,
Matthias M. Mueller1; 1University of Leipzig — A long-standing controversy

in the field of attention revolves around the question of resource distribution between and within cortical hemispheres. One side favours two
distinct attentional processing systems (different hemifield advantage),
the other supports a common resource for both hemispheres. Earlier
studies demonstrated better performance when attention was split
across visual hemifields than within one hemifield, whereas results
regarding spatial resolution in the upper vs. lower visual field are conflicting. We presented LEDs in each visual quadrant that flickered at different frequencies, thereby eliciting a distinct steady-state visual evoked
potential (SSVEP) in the measured EEG. SSVEPs are robust brain-signals
that oscillate at the same frequency as the driving stimulus and are
amplitude modulated with attention. Subjects attended to two of the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

LEDs, located either within or across hemifields and performed a luminance-matching task at the to-be-attended locations. We found significant attentional modulations of SSVEP amplitude in the “attend-across”
but not in the “attend-within” hemifield conditions. However, we found
no SSVEP amplitude differences in the upper vs. lower visual field comparison. Behavioural data matched electrophysiological findings with
faster reaction times in the “across” situation. Results thus support the
“different hemifield advantage”.

F17
FEATURE SIMILARITY GUIDES SPATIAL ATTENTION REGARDLESS OF
OBJECT UNITY Ryuji Takeya1, Tetsuko Kasai1; 1Hokkaido university — The
visual scene involves various Gestalt principles, which guide attention to
task-irrelevant spatial regions within an object or a group. However, it is
unknown how attention is guided when two principles are combined.
The present study examined the case of connectedness and feature similarity across elements, by using event-related potentials (ERPs). Stimuli
consisted of bilateral two elements (rectangles for standards; rounded
rectangles for targets). Stimulus conditions involved orthogonal combinations of connectedness [connected (C+), unconnected (C-)] and sizesimilarity [similar (S+), dissimilar (S-)]. ERPs were recorded from 10 participants who were covertly attending to one hemifield while ignoring
the other during rapid stimulus presentations. The task was to press a
button for infrequent targets at the attended hemifield. The typical ERP
attention effects (i.e., amplitude enhancement at occipital-temporal electrode sites contralateral to the attended visual fields) were assessed.
Reduced P1 and N1 attention effects (85-115 ms and 130-190 ms poststimulus onset, respectively) were observed for the connected condition
compared to the unconnected condition, regardless of size-similarity.
Reduced N2 attention effect (210-290 ms) was observed for the size-similar condition compared to the size-dissimilar condition, regardless of
connectedness. These results indicate that attention is independently
guided by objects or groups that are defined by different feature dimensions which is similar to the framework of saliency-map model. Furthermore, the result of object-based P1 attention effect was earlier than
previously reported (N1), which suggests that task-difficulty and/or
stimulus-context affect object-based spatial selection.

F18
REDUCED SEVERITY OF SPATIAL NEGLECT WHEN THE RIGHT-SIDED
LESION EXTENDS INTO THE SOMATOSENSORY CORTEX Daniela

Balslev1,2, Hans-Otto Karnath2; 1Center of Neurology, University of Tübingen,
2School of Psychology, University of Copenhagen — Lesions in the right
hemisphere lead often to spatial neglect. Voxel-based lesion behaviour
mapping (VLBM) has identified the inferior parietal, superior and middle temporal as well as inferior frontal areas as being critically involved
with a deficit of spatial orienting in the acute phase of the stroke. A hallmark feature in these patients is a sustained deviation of their eyes to the
right. On the other hand, studies with healthy volunteers have revealed
brain sites that affect the prioritization of the visual space, e.g. the frontal
eye field, intraparietal sulcus or anterior parietal cortex. In particular, in
an eye proprioceptive area in the anterior parietal cortex, a reduction of
excitability induced by repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
(rTMS) shifts perceived eye position towards the center of the orbit and
causes a bias in visual sensitivity in the same direction, e.g. improves
detection in the left vs. right hemifield when the gaze is directed rightwards. Because these brain sites are sometimes co-injured with the critical neglect areas after a middle cerebral artery insult, we investigated
using VLBM whether their lesioning may exert a modulatory effect on
the lateralized orientation bias. In subjects with lesions covering critical
neglect areas we found that milder neglect in the acute stage of the
stroke was correlated with lesions that extended into the anterior parietal cortex (BA1 and 2). Based on previous observations in healthy subjects, the mechanism of this modulatory effect of a reduced
somatosensory processing may be an alteration in the proprioceptively
signaled eye position.

159

Poster Session F — Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

F19
EFFECTS OF TASK DIFFICULTY ON THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN PERFORMANCE AND BRAIN ACTIVITY
DURING A VISUAL SEARCH TASK Eunjoo Kang1, Kwang Ki Kim2;
1Kangwon National University, 2Dongguk University — Our

goal was to identify brain regions associated with individual differences in reaction time
(RT) during a visual search task (VST) that employed one target and
seven distractors in a radial array. Target location, associated with 8 different fingers and keys was reported by pressing the appropriate key.
fMRI data (1.5T, TR = 3s) were obtained from 22 normal right-handed
young individuals during the VST and a sequential-motor task (SMT)
that required the same motor response. Three versions of the VST varied
in difficulty: one efficient, and two inefficient with different degrees of
perceptual difficulty. The easy-efficient VST and the SMT resulted in the
highest accuracy and shortest RT, with no individual differences related
to brain region. The easy-inefficient (intermediate difficulty) VST
resulted in good accuracy, but a longer RT that was positively correlated
with anterior cingulate activity level across individuals. This correlation
may be explained by the known involvement of anterior cingulate in online monitoring: i.e., more intense monitoring prolonged RT. During the
difficult-inefficient (highest difficulty) VST, on average the lowest accuracy was found with the longer RT (mean RT was the same as for the
easy-inefficient task). As for individual differences, however, RT was
negatively correlated with activity level in the left inferior parietal
region. This correlation during the difficult VST, where demands of
attentional resources for perceptional processing was greatest, is possibly related to individual differences in efficiency of spatial action mapping, which is thought to be one role of the inferior parietal cortex
(supported by M10644020002-08N4402-00210).

F20
BIAS IN THE SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF ATTENTION Jing

Feng1, Ian
Spence2; 1Rotman Research Institute, 2University of Toronto — Spatial bias in
performance exists in a variety of cognitive tasks. Such bias has been
attributed to possible bias in the spatial distribution of attention. We
examined whether attention is biased toward certain visual areas using
an Attentional Visual Field task. Participants’ ability to detect a target
among distractors was assessed at various locations across an extended
visual area. Performance in target detection was compared between the
upper half and the lower half of the visual field, as well as between the
left half and the right half. Our data suggest that the spatial distribution
of attention is indeed asymmetrical. In the vertical direction, attention is
biased toward the upper half of the visual field. In the horizontal direction, attention is biased toward either the left half or the right half of the
visual field, and individuals differed in the direction of this bias. Men in
general had a rightward bias while women had a leftward bias. These
findings confirm that bias exists in the spatial distribution of attention,
suggesting that this attentional bias may be a contributing factor to the
bias observed in perceptual and memorial tasks. Further research may
explore the underlying neuropsychological mechanisms of the attentional bias and the individual difference in such bias.

F21
WHEN SPATIOTOPIC AND RETINOTOPIC COORDINATES ARE
DISSOCIATED, IOR IS PRIMARILY SPATIOTOPIC, WHILE P1 REDUCTIONS
ARE PRIMARILY RETINOTOPIC Matthew Hilchey1, Jason Satel1, Zhiguo

Wang2, Ross Story1, Raymond Klein1; 1Dalhousie University, 2Chinese
Academy of Sciences — Although the visual coordinate system is initially
retinotopic, it has long been known that the representation of IOR can be
observed in spatiotopic coordinates when an eye movement is made
between the cue and a target calling for a manual response (Posner &
Cohen, 1984; Maylor & Hockey, 1985). Neuroimaging studies using
event-related potentials (ERPs) have generally revealed that early sensory components (P1) are reduced by IOR (for a review, see Prime &
Ward, 2006). All such studies, to date, have confounded retinotopic and
spatiotopic reference frames. In Experiment 1 we investigated whether

160

the target-elicited P1 component would be modulated by IOR while we
unconfounded these reference frames by interposing an eye movement
between cue and a target calling for a manual response. With seemingly
conflicting results, recent behavioral studies have investigated the frame
of reference for IOR using saccadic responses to targets (Mathot &
Theeuwes, 2010; Pertzov, Zohary & Avidan, 2010). Experiment 2 seeks to
determine whether oculomotor IOR is spatiotopic (Pertzov et al.) or retinotopic (Matthot & Theeuwes) immediately following an intervening
eye movement. In Experiment 1, P1 reductions at the cued location were
greater in retinotopic, than spatiotopic, coordinates even though IOR
showed the reverse pattern. Similar behavioral results (stronger spatiotopic IOR) were obtained in Experiment 2 when probed with eye
movement responses. These results show that immediately after a saccade IOR is coded in spatiotopic coordinates and that the magnitude of
P1 reductions does not provide an accurate reflection of IOR's behavioral
manifestation.

F22
SELECTIVE ATTENTIONAL EFFECTS BASED ON THE PREDICTIVE VALUE OF
A SPATIAL CUE Katherine E. Burnett1, Giovanni d'Avossa1, Ayelet Sapir1;
1

Bangor University, UK — We previously showed that attention could be
selectively oriented to features based on the information provided by a
spatial cue. In a dual-task with a random-dot kinematogram (RDK) in
each quadrant of the screen, participants were asked to discriminate the
direction of moving dots in one RDK and to localize one red dot. An
endogenous spatial pre-cue was 70% valid for the location of only one
target, and we found a validity effect only for the task for which the cue
was informative. The present experiments were designed to investigate
the conditions in which attention does not generalize to all features at the
cued location. Participants reported the direction of translating dots in
one RDK, as in the previous study, but now had to determine whether
the color change of dots across one entire RDK was red or green. An
endogenous spatial pre-cue was 70% valid for the location of one target,
and provided no information about the location of the second target.
Based on our previous findings we expected a validity effect only for the
task for which the pre-cue was informative. We found validity effects for
both tasks, though the magnitude of the effect was seemingly modulated
by the informativeness of the cue. In conclusion, when more than one
target is presented in the cued location, attention selectively biases performance based on the informativeness of the cue.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
F23
ACUTE STRESS IMPAIRS THE COGNITIVE REGULATION OF CONDITIONED
FEAR Candace Raio1, Temidayo Orederu2, Laura Palazzolo1, Elizabeth

Phelps1; 1New York University, 2Hunter College — Cognitive regulation strategies, such as reappraisal, can modify emotional responses to signals in
the environment by deliberately changing the way in which a stimulus
or situation is interpreted. Real-world situations that call for us to exert
such regulatory strategies, however, are often accompanied by stress.
The same neural regions (i.e., dorsolateral and ventromedial prefrontal
cortex) implicated in cognitive regulation are those that are selectively
impaired by stress, suggesting that stress may diminish our ability to
employ such strategies precisely at the time they’re needed most. We
examined this possibility using a fear-conditioning paradigm in which
one conditioned stimulus (CS+) was occasionally paired with a mild
wrist-shock, and another (CS-) was never paired with shock. Skin conductance responses (SCR) were recorded and served as our index of fear
arousal. After conditioning, participants underwent a cognitive restructuring session where they learned to reappraise each CS and reinterpret
the conditioning session in a more positive, less threatening manner. The
next day, participants returned and underwent either an acute stressor
(Stress group) or a control task (No-Stress group) before repeating the
conditioning session from day 1. The efficacy of the stress induction was

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session F
established by observing significant increases in cortisol relative to baseline for the Stress group only. While conditioned responses to each CS
diminished significantly on day 2 in the No-Stress group, responses
within the Stress group showed no such attenuation, suggesting that
stress impairs the ability to deploy cognitive regulation strategies.

F24
THE EFFECTS OF TRAIT ANXIETY AND STATE ANXIETY ON WORKING
MEMORY SYSTEM Xuebing Li1, Pengfei Xu2; 1Key Laboratory of Mental

Health, Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 2State Key
Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal
University — The major aim of the present study is to clarify previous
inconsistent results of the effects of anxiety on spatial and verbal WM
system by ERP technique. Participants were screened using the StateTrait Anxiety Inventory. Sixteen students (scores >46) were invited as
high trait-anxious subjects, and sixteen students (scores<35) were invited
as low trait-anxious subjects. During the experiment, participants were
asked to perform four tasks (spatial 0- back task, spatial 2-back task, verbal 0-back task, and verbal 2-back task) under the fear and neutral emotion states. The emotional states were induced by watching horrible or
documentary film clips before each task. ERP results showed that in low
load 0-back task, there were no group effect or interaction effect between
group and other factors for parietal P300 amplitude. In both groups,
P300 amplitude reduced under the fear state. In high load 2-back task,
there were significant emotion main effect and interaction effect between
group and task type. Further analysis showed that high anxiety group
had reduced P300 in spatial WM task in both emotional states, relative to
low anxiety group. While, such effects were not observed in verbal WM
task in both emotional states. These results suggested that the effects of
anxiety on working memory system were modulated by task load and
memory type. High anxious individual had more severe dysfunction on
spatial WM than verbal WM, which is possibly due to the fact that anxious mood takes up visuospatial attention resource, and the resource is
distinctly demanded in spatial WM.

F25
DEFAULT MODE NETWORK ACTIVITY INVOLVEMENT IN SOCIAL
COGNITION: EMPATHY AND SEX DIFFERENCES. Margot Crossman1, Joe
P. Levy1; 1University of Roehampton — The Default Mode Network (DMN)

comprises a number of cortical and limbic regions that are temporally
correlated at rest and is involved in introspective and self-referential
processes. Altered functional connectivity in DMN has been identified in
psychopathologies such as anxiety and depression and in the autism
spectrum disorders. There is increasing evidence for a role for the DMN
in social cognition and it has been shown that the extent of an individual’s response to another’s pain predicts DMN activity. The current
study was undertaken to determine whether individual differences in
social cognition in the typical population predict DMN activity. DMN
activity was investigated in short resting fMRI scans of 53 healthy individuals using independent component analysis (ICA), a multivariate
data-driven method that extracts statistically independent temporally
coherent networks. Activity in separate DMN regions was correlated
with the interpersonal reactivity index (IRI), a psychometric instrument
consisting of four subscales each of which taps a separate aspect of
empathy. Activation in the right temporoparietal junction positively correlated with the personal distress scale, a measure of anxiety and discomfort resulting from observing another individual’s negative
experience. Results also revealed sex differences within DMN regions,
with females having greater activation in posterior regions (right cingulate and left parahippocampal gyrus) and males greater activation in
frontal areas (right superior and medial frontal gyri and in the left middle frontal gyrus and cingulate gyrus). These results provide further
support for a role of the DMN in social cognition.

F26
NEURAL BASES OF THE URGE TO IMITATE Sugiko Hanawa1, Motoaki
Sugiura1, Takayuki Nozawa2, Hiroshi Hashizume3, Yukihito Yomogida4, Yoritaka

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Akimoto1, Yuka Kotozaki2, Mizuki Ihara2, Ryouichi Yokoyama1, Ryuta
Kawashima1,2,3; 1Department of Functional Brain Imaging, IDAC, Tohoku
University, Sendai, Japan, 2Smart Ageing International Research Center, IDAC,
Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan, 3Division of Developmental Cognitive
Neuroscience, IDAC, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan, 4Tamagawa University
Brain Science Institute, Tokyo, Japan — Imitation is an inherent ability in
humans. Although many studies have focused on human imitation
skills, little research has been carried out on the neural mechanisms of
spontaneous imitation. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), we investigated the neural bases of “the urge to imitate”, which
is closely linked to spontaneous imitation. First of all, we prepared about
200 movie clips of different meaningless hand actions. We created an
inventory for the degree of urge to imitate and identified confounding
factors based on the preparatory experiment of evaluating the impression of movie-clips. In addition to the urge to imitate, three confounding
factors, “familiarity”, “difficulty (to execute)”, and “rhythm”, were identified. We selected 24 movie clips so that the degree of the urge to imitate
was varied. We presented the subjects with the movie clips and the subjects observed and imitated the hand movements during MRI scanning.
We searched for cortical regions where the amplitude of neural response
correlated with the degree of the urge to imitate or with confounding
factors, respectively. We identified these regions and we found the right
cingulate motor area (right CMA) showed a significant correlation with
the urge to imitate without any confounding factors effects under the
imitation condition only (p<0.001, corrected to p<0.05 using the cluster
size) (t=4.02 at peak voxel). Our results show that the right CMA is
indeed crucially involved in the neural mechanism of the urge to imitate.

F27
ACTIVITY IN THE CORRUGATOR SUPERCILII MUSCLE AS A NOVEL INDEX
OF PUNISHMENT-GUIDED COGNITIVE CONTROL Björn R. Lindström1,2,

Isak Berglund Mattsson-Mårn1, Armita Golkar1,2, Andreas Olsson1,2;
1Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden, 2Stockholm Brain Institute — Cognitive control is needed when

mistakes have consequences, especially when such consequences are
potentially harmful. However, little is known about how the consequences of deficient control guide behavior. In the present study, participants performed a two-choice response time task, where error
commissions were expected to be punished by electric shocks. By parametrically and independently vary (1) the expected number of shocks
(safe, low, high) associated with error commissions, and (2) cognitive
control demands (low, high), we show that punishment-guided behavior
is improved relative to safe conditions, especially during high control
demands. We measured rapid event-related activity in the corrugator
supercilii (CS) muscle of the upper face, which is controlled by midcingulate cortex (MCC) and known to be sensitive to negative affect, pain
and cognitive effort. The CS amplitude was predictive of trial-to-trial
behavioral accuracy and uniquely sensitive to the interaction of high
punishment-expectancy and high cognitive control demands. Moreover,
the CS mimicked the hallmark index of performance monitoring, the
Error-Related Negativity (ERN) ERP component, elicited by performance errors. The CS amplitude was enhanced directly after error commissions, particularly during the high punishment-high control
condition. In addition, error-related CS activity was related to compensatory behavioral adjustments, e.g. post-error slowing, and modulated
by individual differences in self-reported anxiety (STAI), both results
which are commonly observed for the ERN. In concordance with the
hypothesis that the MCC integrates negative affect, pain and cognitive
control demands (Shackman et al, 2011), the CS appears to index punishment-guided cognitive control.

F28
LOW AND HIGH SPATIAL FREQUENCY INFORMATION DIFFERENTIALLY
DRIVES FEAR AND DISGUST PROCESSING Yuqi You1, Wen Li1; 1University
of Wisconsin-Madison — Previous research from our lab shows divergent
sensory encoding of individual threat emotions (e.g. fear versus disgust),

161

Poster Session F — Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
followed by functional convergence of these emotions at later stages.
However, the specific neural substrates supporting these operations
remain unclear. We hypothesized that early emotion encoding in the
visual system is primarily driven by low spatial frequency information
through a rapid feedforward sweep of sensory processing, whereas latestage emotion analysis is dominated by high spatial frequency information via a slower cortical feedback route. In this study (N=27), we presented fearful, disgust, and neutral pictures in both low (<3 cycles/
degree) and high (>7 cycles/degree) spatial frequencies followed (after
150 ms) by a simple visual search task. For high spatial frequency pictures, we replicated our earlier study (Krusemark & Li, 2011) using
broadband pictures: search time was slowest after disgust, intermediate
after neutral, and fastest after fearful pictures (F(2,52)=176.49, p<.001). In
contrast, for low spatial frequency pictures, we observed a qualitatively
different pattern. Search time was slowest after neutral, intermediate
after fearful, and fastest after disgust pictures, leading to an overall significant emotion-by-spatial-frequency interaction (F(2,52)=278.66,
p<.001). These behavioral evidence are in line with our hypothesis that
beyond highly specialized processing of individual threat emotions, the
low and high spatial frequency content of visual stimuli preferentially
recruit distinct neural systems, contributing to diverse behavioral profiles. Further evidence is being collected with high-density measures of
brain event-related potentials to elucidate the spatial and temporal properties of these operations.

F29
MAPPING THE MIND: A CONSTRUCTIONIST VIEW ON HOW MENTAL
STATES EMERGE FROM THE BRAIN. Suzanne Oosterwijk1, Kristen A.

Lindquist2, Eric Anderson1, Rebecca Dautoff3, Yoshiya Moriguchi4, Lisa
Feldman Barrett1,3; 1Northeastern University, 2Harvard University, 3Martinos
Center for Biomedical Imaging, 4National Institute of Mental Health, National
Center of Neurology and Psychiatry — Constructionist views on the mind

propose that different mental states (e.g., emotions, thoughts, memories,
perceptions) emerge from the same basic psychological operations.
These psychological operations include core affect, conceptualization,
language and executive attention. In the present study we used fMRI to
examine how brain networks associated with these basic operations contribute to the experience of three different mental states. Participants
were instructed to experience auditory scenarios describing negative
events in three different ways; to focus on bodily sensations; to experience an emotion, or to think about the event in an objective way. A conjunction analysis demonstrated a common involvement across body
focus, emotion and thought of core affective regions (e.g., anterior insular cortex, dorsal anterior cingulate cortex), regions associated with language (e.g., ventrolateral prefrontal cortex) and regions associated with
working memory and cognitive control (e.g., dorsolateral prefrontal cortex). Contrast analyses demonstrated that body focus and emotion had
stronger involvement than thought of several regions associated with
affective salience and interoceptive representation (e.g., insular cortex).
Areas within the default network (medial prefrontal cortex, temporal
lobe, precuneus, pars triangularis) were stronger involved in emotion
and thought compared to body focus, suggesting an important role for
conceptualization when specifying mental content. Overall, the results
show that different mental states involve similar brain regions, associated with basic processes such as conceptualization, language, executive
attention and core affect, albeit with relative differences in strength of
activation. These results enrich our understanding of how different mental states emerge from the brain.

F30
TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF THE EARLY POSTERIOR NEGATIVITY IN
EMOTIONAL VERBS. Marina Palazova1, Werner Sommer1, Annekathrin

Schacht1,2; 1Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 2University of Göttingen — Emotional content impacts visual word processing. However, it is unclear,
whether and how this depends on word class and at which functional
locus this influence occurs. Results by Schacht & Sommer (2009) indicate

162

that the early posterior negativity (EPN) component in event-related
brain potentials (ERPs) to verbs arises later than the EPN to other word
classes. In two experiments ERPs were recorded while subjects decided
on the lexicality of positive, negative or neutral words. To examine the
boundaries of the emotional ERP activation, word class and word frequency (Experiment 1), and word concreteness (Experiment 2) were
manipulated. Results show that EPN onset does not depend on word frequency but on word class and word concreteness. In both experiments,
an EPN only occurred after or at the same time as the lexicality effect,
that is, when ERPs to words and pseudowords start to differ, indicating
that EPN may represent emotion activation at a post-lexical processing
stage.

F31
FUNCTIONAL MRI INVESTIGATION OF THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF
OPPOSING EFFECTS OF EMOTION ON PERCEPTION AND MEMORY
Andrea Shafer1, Dan LaFreniere1, Florin Dolcos2; 1University of Alberta,
2
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — An important question in the

emotion literature concerns the link between immediate effects of emotion on perception/attention and longer-term effects on memory. Evidence from studies investigating the effect of task-irrelevant distraction
presented concurrently with goal-directed tasks shows that manipulations of attentional demand (AD) of the main task influence the impact
of emotional distraction (ED) on perception, However, it is unclear how
these manipulations affect emotional memory (EM) for the distracting
material. This issue was investigated using an orientation discrimination
task with ED, followed by a recognition memory task for the distracters
themselves. Functional MRI data were recorded while 18 participants
discriminated between horizontal and vertical rectangular pictures with
emotional and neutral content, in which AD was manipulated by the difficulty to discriminate between clearly rectangular and close-to-square
rectangular shapes, and by stimulus duration (short/long). Behavioral
analyses showed that while ED was greatest when processing resources
were most available for distraction (AD of the main task was lowest), EM
was highest when processing resources were least available (AD of the
main task was highest). These results suggest dissociable mechanisms
underlying immediate vs. delayed effects of emotion on perception and
memory, respectively, and show that under conditions of limited
resources available during encoding emotional information has privileged access to mechanisms leading to long-term memory. Preliminary
analyses of fMRI data showed that activity in the medial prefrontal cortex and lateral parietal cortex dissociated the effects of ED and EM,
respectively, whereas amygdala activity was common for both immediate and long-term effects of emotion.

F32
STRESS-MEDIATED ALTERATIONS OF CORTICAL ACTIVATION DURING A
COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY TASK John P. Hegarty, II1, Bradley J. Ferguson1,

Nicholas H. Hopkins1, Shawn E. Christ1, David Q. Beversdorf1; 1University of
Missouri, Columbia — The brain mediates the physiological response following perception of psychological stress. Early studies suggest cognitive processing is susceptible to the effects of stress, and performance on
tasks requiring a high degree of cognitive flexibility, specifically within
the semantic network, is impaired by stress. We wish to determine the
cortical mechanisms mediating behavioral changes in the presence of
psychological stress. This was tested utilizing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), TR=2000ms TE=30ms ACPC-aligned slice number=32 at 4 mm3, during presentation of the Compound Remote
Associations (CRA) task in the presence/absence of a psychological
stressor, the Montreal Imaging Stress Task (MIST). Subjects attended two
separate counterbalanced scan sessions (control and stress). Lists of three
words that all form a compound word with a fourth word were presented and subjects were asked to generate the fourth word. CRA presentation was alternated with arithmetic problems with/without time
constraints and with/without performance feedback, based on the Trier
Social Stress Test, as part of the MIST stressor. Preliminary results based
on repeated measures derived activation maps indicate higher activation

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session F
to task without the presence of a stressor in the inferior/dorsomedial
frontal cortex, pre/post central gyri, thalamus, middle temporal/fusiform gyri, inferior parietal cortex, and lateral occipital cortex/occipital
pole with the highest activation showing a rightward laterality. No
regions showed higher activation for the stress condition. These findings
reveal that stress may be altering cortical function through less network
coherence between brain regions. Assessment of network coherence,
functional connectivity, during stress is therefore warranted.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Other
F33
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN ACTIVATION OF TIME PERCEPTION
NETWORKS PREDICTED BY GENOTYPE Martin Wiener1, Yune-Sang Lee1,

Falk Lohoff1, Coslett H.B.1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Research into time
perception and temporal processing networks have recently shifted
attention from where timing occurs in the brain to how these regions are
utilized. Crucially, new evidence suggests that time perception networks
may be differentially engaged, depending on the temporal context.
Recently, we reported that human subjects with genetic polymorphisms
affecting distinct dopamine pathways are differentially impaired on time
perception tasks at different duration ranges. This dissociation in performance suggests that individual differences in functional activation may
be mediated by dopamine availability, as predicted by genotype. In
order to address this hypothesis, we tested human subjects genotyped
for a known polymorphism affecting nigrostriatal dopamine D2 receptors (DRD2/ANKK1-Taq1a: A1+ heterozygotes vs. A1- homozygotes) on
a temporal discrimination task with event-related functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). Timing networks were interrogated by contrasting activation during temporal discrimination with a color discrimination task. When examined as a unitary group, our results revealed
activation in regions commonly associated with timing tasks (basal ganglia, prefrontal cortex). However, when performance was compared
between genotypes, our results revealed that regional patterns of activation could be dissociated; A1+ allele carriers, with putatively normal levels of striatal D2, showed greater activation in the basal ganglia during
temporal discrimination, whereas subjects with low levels of striatal D2
showed greater activation in right prefrontal cortex. These results suggest that A1+ allele carriers utilize a different network to accomplish
temporal discrimination. Furthermore, our results provide support to
the claim that time perception is mediated by multiple overlapping systems.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional
responding
F34
INTRINSIC DYNAMICS OF EMOTION REGULATION NEURAL CIRCUITRY IN
AGGRESSIVE AND OPPOSITIONAL YOUTH Christine L. Cox1, Adriana Di

Martino1, F. Xavier Castellanos1,2, Michael P. Milham2,3, Clare Kelly1; 1Phyllis
Green and Randolph Cowen Institute for Pediatric Neuroscience at the New
York University Child Study Center, NYU Langone Medical Center, 2Nathan S.
Klein Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY, 3Child Mind Institute,
New York, NY — The amygdala and prefrontal cortex are consistently

implicated in emotion regulation and are compromised in disorders
characterized by emotional dysregulation. Youth with severe behavior
disorders, e.g., Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD) and Conduct Disorder, often exhibit disproportionately heightened emotional responses
to frustrating or threatening situations, which can lead to pathological
levels of aggression. Here, we employed resting-state fMRI (R-fMRI) to
examine differences in the intrinsic functional architecture of the brain
associated with ODD. Specifically, we assessed the intrinsic functional
connectivity (iFC) of social-emotional circuitry by quantifying correlated
spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the R-fMRI BOLD signal.
Youth with ADHD+ODD (ADHD+; n=40; 10.4±2.4yrs) were compared

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

to youth with ADHD only (ADHD–; n=64; 10.2±2.6yrs). Typically developing youth (n=67; 11.1±2.5yrs) were included as an additional control
group. We compared iFC associated with left and right amygdala among
groups (Z>2.3, p<0.05, corrected), and examined the relationship
between amygdala iFC and several measures of disruptive behavior
(p<0.05). ADHD+ exhibited stronger negative iFC between the left
amygdala and left ventromedial/orbitofrontal cortex, relative to
ADHD– and controls. iFC between these regions was positively correlated with parent-reported oppositionality (ADHD+: r=0.42, p<0.05;
ADHD-: r=0.30, p<0.05) and emotional lability (ADHD+: r=0.38, p<0.05;
ADHD-: r=0.24, p=0.056) scores. Importantly, a relationship with aggressive behavior was observed only in ADHD+ (ADHD+: r=0.35, p<0.05;
ADHD-: r=0.15, p=0.24). Intrinsic amygdala functional connectivity distinguishes aggressive, oppositional youth from those without ODD
comorbidity, even within youth who share an ADHD diagnosis. Our
results suggest that interventions targeting amygdala functions and circuitry may be particularly efficacious in this population.

F35
EXAGGERATED AUTONOMIC RESPONSES DURING EMOTIONAL
PROCESSING AND VULNERABILITY TO ANXIETY IN PATIENTS WITH
POSTURAL TACHYCARDIA SYNDROME Satoshi Umeda1, Neil Harrison2,

Marcus Gray3, Christopher Mathias4, Hugo Critchley2; 1Keio University,
2University of Sussex, 3Monash University, 4University College London — Emo-

tional processes are closely coupled to autonomic bodily responses. Neural centres for the control of autonomic bodily responses are implicated
as substrates for normal and pathological emotions. This relationship
may underlie constitutional vulnerabilities to affective disorders. Exaggerated patterns of autonomic responsivity can enhance the expression
of panic or anxiety symptoms. Patients with postural tachycardia syndrome (PoTS) are characterized by abnormal autonomic responses. PoTS
patients are overrepresented across stress-sensitive psychosomatic and
neuropsychiatric disorders and experience symptoms that overlap with
anxiety disorders. We combined emotional challenges with autonomic
psychophysiology and functional brain imaging to test the prediction
that PoTS patients show abnormal autonomic reactivity to emotional
challenges through brain regions implicated in anxiety. Participants
underwent fMRI with simultaneous heart rate recording while processing picture stimuli spanning five emotional categories. Physiologically,
PoTS patients showed exaggerated heart rate responses to stimulus presentations, independent of emotional type. At the neural level, PoTS
patients showed greater deactivation of ventromedial prefrontal cortex
to stimuli and enhanced activity within precuneus, middle temporal
gyrus and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, compared to controls. The
change in ventromedial prefrontal activity was related to the magnitude
of heart rate change, while activity within globus pallidus and putamen
correlated positively with state anxiety score. The degree of functional
coupling between these frontal and striatal regions was further predicted
by the magnitude of expressed anxiety. Our findings endorse the view
that PoTS patients are constitutionally vulnerable to anxiety symptoms
through the central generation and control of exaggerated autonomic
reactions to external affective challenges.

F36
THE EMOTIONAL PICTURE PROCESSING OF OPTIMISTIC AND
PESSIMISTIC PERSONS: AN ERP STUDY TsungHan Yang1, NaiShing

Yen1,2, ChingHui Chueh1, HuaFu He1, Cong Chen1, ShuAn Liao1; 1National
Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Research Center for Mind, Brain, and
Learning, National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan — Many studies indi-

cated the characteristics of optimistic and pessimistic persons would
influence their interpretation and emotional outcomes when they faced
life events. Marchall (1992) and Chang (1996) found that optimism was
positively related to positive emotion, and pessimism was positively
related to negative emotions. However, whether the processing of central-nervous system of optimistic and pessimistic persons is different is
unknown. The aim of our study is to examine the brain processes when

163

Poster Session F — Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
optimistic and pessimistic people view the emotional pictures. We
adopted the Extended Life Orientation Test (Chang, Maydeu-Olivares, &
D’Zurilla, 1997) as trait measures, dividing eight participants into optimistic and pessimistic categories. Then we used 132 emotional pictures
from TAIWAN Affective Pictures System (TAPS), and measured their
event-related potentials (ERP) when participants passively viewed these
emotional pictures. These pictures were divided into positive (mean=
7.11), erotic (mean=4.84), general-neutral (mean=5.14), and negative
(mean=3.11) categories. From the subjective arousal ratings, there were
significant higher arousal scores for pessimistic than for optimistic persons in both positive and negative pictorial conditions. In subjective
valence ratings, although there were not significant, the pessimistic participants would rate the positive pictures more positively and negative
pictures more negatively than in optimistic ones. For ERP components,
we analyzed the late positive potential (LPP) as an emotion -processing
index. During 300-400ms and 400-800ms, the optimistic persons had
larger LPP in Pz than in pessimistic ones, but pessimistic ones had larger
responses in Fz and Cz. It seemed the optimistic and pessimistic persons
have different emotional- processing nature.

F37
THE EFFECTS OF TINNITUS ON EMOTIONAL PROCESSING Jake

Thompson1, Fatima Husain1; 1University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign — The
aim of the study was to determine differences in the engagement of the
emotional processing network in individuals with tinnitus relative to
those without tinnitus. Our hypothesis was that tinnitus causes an
impaired emotional response to affective auditory stimuli. Previous
research has shown that an impaired limbic-auditory link influences the
syndrome of tinnitus. Therefore, any disruption in the limbic system
should be reflected in emotional processing. We conducted a functional
MRI (fMRI) study using a 3T Siemens Magnetom Allegra MRI head-only
scanner. Participants with or without tinnitus rated stimuli from the
International Affective Digital Sounds (IADS) database as (a) pleasant
(e.g., people laughing), (b) unpleasant (e.g., people fighting), or (c) neutral sounds (e.g., footsteps). Preliminary results showed that individuals
with tinnitus responded more to the neutral sounds relative to the pleasant and unpleasant stimuli with extensive activations in the medial temporal gyrus, the inferior frontal gyrus, and medial temporal gyrus
Preliminary results showed that non-tinnitus controls show greater
response in limbic regions including the anterior cingulate, parahippocampal gyrus, cingulate gyrus for the pleasant and unpleasant stimuli relative to neutral sounds. Participants with tinnitus also exhibited greater
frontal involvement for the pleasant and unpleasant stimuli compared to
neutral stimuli. Increased frontal involvement suggests more top down
control in individuals with tinnitus than in individuals without tinnitus.
A larger study is being conducted to confirm the preliminary results.

F38
DEPRESSION AND ALEXITHYMIA DO NOT EXERT A CUMULATIVE EFFECT
ON RECENT PAIN SEVERITY Maran Y. Hernandez Rodriguez1, Janelle N.

Beadle2, Sergio Paradiso2; 1University of Puerto Rico, 2University of Iowa —

INTRODUCTION. Depression and poor ability to perceive personal
emotions and bodily sensations (alexithymia) are associated with pain.
Depression and alexithymia are related but the extent to which their cooccurrence has additive effects on pain is not known. METHODS. Participants were 49 patients with depression (DSM-IV-TR, 2000) and 103 participants without current depression (i.e., 36 healthy volunteers and 67
with history of depression, in remission), average age was 52 years (SD=
17.9). Depression was assessed using the SCID (First et al., 2002);
alexithymia using the 20-item Toronto Alexithymia Scale (Taylor,1992);
pain severity over the last 24 hours using The Brief Pain Inventory (score
range 1-10; McCaffery,1999). Participants were categorized into low
(scores <61, N= 123) and high alexithymia (scores ?61, N= 29) groups.
RESULTS. ANOVA with depression (present/absent) and alexithymia
(high/low) as independent variables and pain as a dependent variable
revealed a significant depression effect [F(1,148)=1.6, p<0.01], and
depression by alexithymia interaction [F(1,148)=4.6, p<0.05]. Pain was

164

most severe among patients with current depression without
alexithymia (M= 2.91,SD= 2.76), and individuals with alexithymia without current depression (M= 2.76, SD= 2.40). DISCUSSION. Pain associated with depression and alexithymia was mild to moderate.
Alexithymia and depression did not result in additive effects on pain
severity. In depression, pain is believed to result from effects of sad
mood (i.e., state) altering perception of bodily sensations, whereas in
alexithymia poor perception of bodily sensations is a trait feature. Further research including measurement of on-line pain experience should
investigate interactions between state and trait emotion processing alterations.

F39
LOOKING FOR THE SILVER LINING: AN FMRI STUDY ON REWARD
RESPONSIVENESS AND PERSONALITY TRAITS Sarah
Henderson1,

Catherine J. Norris1; 1Dartmouth College — Why are some individuals so
motivated by rewards whereas others are relatively immune? Although
we know a great deal about how the brain processes rewards, far less is
understood about how personality factors influence reward responsiveness. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, participants completed a monetary gambling task and then viewed pleasant and
unpleasant pictures. Participants also completed surveys to assess personality traits. We conducted a whole-brain t-test to determine areas
more responsive to monetary rewards versus pleasant pictures, and then
extracted beta weights to correlate with personality traits. Consistent
with previous research using gambling tasks, several regions were more
responsive to monetary wins, including bilateral caudate, DMPFC (BA
10), and posterior insula. In each of these regions, higher scores on positive personality traits (e.g., agreeableness, openness, subjective wellbeing, optimism, positive activation) and lower scores on negative personality traits (e.g., anxiety, loneliness) correlated with less neural activation to rewarding gambling outcomes. We also found regions that were
more responsive to pleasant pictures than monetary rewards, including
bilateral visual cortex and the right DLPFC (BA 9). Again, higher scores
on positive traits (e.g., optimism, PA) and lower scores on negative traits
(e.g., loneliness, avoidance orientation) correlated with less neural activation to pleasant pictures. Overall, this pattern suggests that negatively-oriented individuals are more responsive to secondary rewards in
regions that process emotion, reward, and attention. This greater responsiveness could suggest that negatively-oriented individuals are more
reliant on external rewards to impact mood than individuals who are
happier and more satisfied with their life.

F40
CORTICAL THINNING IN PSYCHOPATHY Martina Ly1, Gregory Kirk1,

Joseph P. Newman1, Kent A. Kiehl2,3, Michael Koenigs1; 1University of
Wisconsin, Madison, 2The MIND Research Network, 3University of New
Mexico — Psychopathy is a complex personality disorder characterized
by interpersonal, affective and behavioral traits such as callousness,
impulsivity, irresponsibility, glibness, lack of empathy and guilt, and
poor behavioral control (Hare, 2003). In addition, this disorder is
strongly associated with a high risk for substance abuse and criminal
behavior. Lesion and imaging studies implicate frontal and temporal
brain regions, specifically the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, superior
temporal gyrus and paralimbic areas such as the amygdala, anterior cingulate cortex, and insula (Blair, 2008; Kiehl, 2006). However, the neuropathological basis of the disorder is not yet clear. We assessed
psychopathy with the Psychopathy Checklist-Revised Version (PCL-R)
in a sample of adult male prisoners (n=21 psychopathic inmates, n=31
non-psychopathic inmates) and utilized a surface-based whole brain
analysis to detect cortical thickness differences. Relative to non-psychopaths, psychopaths exhibited significantly thinner cortex in a number of
regions, including left insula and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, bilateral precentral gyrus, bilateral anterior temporal cortex, and right inferior frontal gyrus. These neurostructural differences were not due to
differences in age, IQ, or substance abuse. These results suggest that psychopathy is associated with a distinct pattern of cortical thinning, partic-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session F
ularly in areas with important roles in emotional processing and social
cognition.

F41
INDEPENDENCE AS A BUFFER FOR EMOTIONAL DISTRESS: THE EFFECTS
OF SELF-CONSTRUAL STYLE ON MPFC AND AMYGDALA FUNCTION

Lisa Hechtman1, Ahmad Hariri2, Tokiko Harada3, Yoko Mano1, Norihiro
Sadato4, Todd Parrish1, Tetsuya Iidaka3, Joan Chiao1; 1Northwestern
University, 2Duke University, 3Nagoya University, 4National Institute for
Physiological Sciences — Several researchers have found that Asian participants, relative to Westerners, report greater levels of emotional distress.
Both independent self-construal style and self-enhancing bias in Westerners have been shown to uniquely contribute to this difference, while
ethnicity per se does not. In line with a theory of independence as a protective factor against emotional distress, we have previously demonstrated that independent self-construal predicts decreased amygdala
reactivity in response to negative emotional stimuli. In the present study,
we attempt to identify additional psychological mechanisms by which
individualism could serve as a buffer against emotional reactivity. Specifically, we primed 24 bicultural Asian Americans with individualistic
or collectivistic values, and then had participants perform an emotional
task during fMRI scanning. Whole brain regression analyses revealed
that participants who focused on interdependence showed stronger dorsal MPFC activation in response to negative emotional stimuli relative to
neutral geometric shapes (control). Given dorsal MPFC’s involvement in
appraisal and evaluation of emotional stimuli, we interpret this activity—along with decreased amygdala activity—as a shift away from an
automatic focus on negative external stimuli towards a potentially less
reactive emotional state.

F42
HEIGHTENED SKIN CONDUCTANCE RESPONSE TO ANIMATE, AROUSING
VISUAL STIMULI RENDERED UNCONSCIOUS USING INTEROCULAR
SUPPRESSION Nicholas Root1, Laura Case1, V.S. Ramachandran1;
1University of California, San Diego — To

what extent can we identify and
react to emotionally arousing stimuli that we do not consciously perceive? Sympathetic nervous arousal as measured by galvanic skin
response (GSR) is heightened to consciously perceived arousing images,
but no study thus far has demonstrated physiological correlates of
unconscious arousal in the neurotypical population. Visual suppression
techniques can prevent a visual stimulus from reaching consciousness
while leaving some unconscious visual processing intact, allowing
researchers to present arousing images without the subject’s awareness.
Individuals with snake or spider phobias show a heightened galvanic
skin response (GSR) to backward-masked images of the objects they fear.
How specific is the GSR response to emotionally arousing images, and
does it occur only in individuals with heightened emotional responses
such as phobias? To address this question, we measured subjects’ GSR
during conscious and unconscious image presentations. Emotionally
arousing and neutral images were presented in random order and
depicted both animate and inanimate entities. The animacy dimension
allowed us to distinguish between animals, which humans could have
evolved to automatically and unconsciously detect, and man-made
objects, to which a fear response could reflect only learning across the
lifetime. We found a heightened GSR to suppressed images of arousing,
animate objects, suggesting that sympathetic responses to manmade
threats requires conscious awareness of the threat. We hope to confirm
this result by testing subjects with phobias to manmade objects (e.g., needles). If our hypothesis is true, we would expect to see no heightened
GSR to suppressed images of their phobia.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working memory
F43
EFFECT OF LEFT SUPRAMARGINAL GYRUS TMS ON WORKING MEMORY
INTERACTS WITH VERBAL COGNITIVE STYLE David J.M. Kraemer1, Roy H.

Hamilton1, Samuel B. Messing1, Jennifer H. DeSantis1, Sharon L. ThompsonSchill1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Tasks are often solvable via numerous alternative strategies. One reliable individual difference is selfreported preference for using visual or verbal information to complete a
task -- e.g., when recalling a previously seen picture, some tend to rely
on visual memory, while others focus on retrieving a verbal label. These
separable preferences, termed visual and verbal cognitive styles, correlate with reasoning in visual and verbal domains. Recent neuroimaging
evidence (Kraemer et al., 2009 JNeuroscience) linked cognitive styles to
separate task strategies associated with distinct brain regions. Putatively
corresponding with the labeling strategy, left supramarginal gyrus
(SMG) activity correlated with the verbal cognitive style, particularly
during a visual task. Relating to the visual imagery strategy, right fusiform gyrus activity during a verbal task correlated with visual cognitive
style. Here, we use transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to target left
SMG specifically to test the hypothesis that activity in this region supports the use of a verbal strategy associated with the verbal cognitive
style. First, we used the prior functional MRI paradigm with a new
group of participants to localize SMG activity on an individual basis.
Next, these functional peaks were chosen as targets for TMS, which was
applied during the visual and verbal conditions of the same similarityjudgment task. SMG stimulation caused a decline in performance during
the condition requiring conversion from pictorial image to verbal label.
The magnitude of this effect was predicted by individuals’ level of verbal cognitive style, supporting the hypothesized role of left SMG in the
verbal labeling strategy.

F44
THE INFLUENCE OF MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE DAMAGE ON CAPACITY
AND PRECISION IN VISUAL WORKING MEMORY weiwei
zhang1,2,

Andrew Yonelinas1,2; 1Department of Psychology, University of California,
Davis, 2Center for Mind & Brain, University of California, Davis — Visual

working memory (VWM) is generally thought to be preserved in
patients with medial temporal lobes (MTL) damage, but recent studies
have indicated that these patients can exhibit deficits in VWM under
some conditions. However, the specific functional roles that the MTL
play in VWM is not yet clear. In the present study we used a color recall
task in which observers attempted to reproduce one of the colors they
saw a second earlier using a continuous color wheel. We tested perception and VWM in amnesics (i.e., hypoxic, temporal lobectomy and posterior cerebral artery infarct patients) and controls. A quantitative model
was applied to the distributions of color recall responses to extract two
independent measures of VWM: capacity and precision. Our results
indicated that the amnesics exhibited impairments in VWM that arose
because of reductions in both capacity and resolution. Moreover, there
was evidence that the nature of the deficits depended on the patient etiology. The VWM impairments were not caused by perceptual deficits
because the MTL patients showed normal performance on perceptual
control tasks. Taken together, the results have provided novel evidence
for the relationship between MTL and different aspects of working memory.

F45
THE EFFECTS OF 10 HZ RTMS ON SUSTAINED VISUAL ATTENTION AND
VISUAL SHORT-TERM MEMORY Stephen M. Emrich1, Jeffrey S. Johnson1,

David W. Sutterer1, Bradley R. Postle1; 1University of Wisconsin - Madison —
Recently, an increasing number of studies have revealed that low-frequency oscillations may play a critical role in the maintenance of information in visual short-term memory (VSTM). This relationship has been
further established through the use of high-frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), as stimulating areas critical to VSTM

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

165

Poster Session F — Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
retention at frequencies associated with short-term maintenance (~10
Hz) produces changes in delay-period alpha-band activity that are correlated with changes in memory performance. It is possible, however, that
this relationship could reflect changes in sustained attention, rather than
changes in VSTM maintenance. In the present study, we examined the
effects of 10 Hz rTMS on VSTM performance, as well as on a perceptually and procedurally similar attention task with no mnemonic component. In the memory task, participants had to maintain the colors and
locations of four items over a 1,600 ms delay period. In the attention task,
the colors remained present in the display, and participants had to monitor the items for small changes in brightness. On half of the trials of both
tasks, a 1 second train of 10 Hz rTMS was applied to the inferior intraparietal sulcus (IPS), an area associated with both VWM maintenance
and attentional selection. While the VWM task and attention task exhibited dramatically different patterns of activity (alpha-band power
increased during the delay period of the VSTM task, but decreased during the attention task), across both tasks rTMS-related changes in performance were positively correlated with rTMS-related changes in alphaband power, suggesting a common underlying mechanism.

F46
CORTICAL AND STRIATAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO WORKING MEMORY:
EVIDENCE FOR DISSOCIATED ROLES DURING UPDATING AND
INTERFERENCE CONTROL Alan Ceaser1, Deanna Barch1; 1Washington
University in St. Louis — Computational models have proposed that the
basal ganglia interact with the cortex to control the flow of information
during working memory processing (e.g. Hazy et al., 2007). They suggest
that the dorsal striatum is responsible for sending updating signals that
release regions of the frontal and parietal cortex from recurrent maintenance processing and that during interference control tonic inhibition of
cortical regions may help to protect stored information in the cortex. This
suggests somewhat differing roles for cortical and subcortical activity
during working memory updating and interference control. We
designed a novel task to test this idea. During the task we temporally isolate task encoding of a memory set, updating of this memory set, maintenance when presented with distractors, and simple maintenance. We
scanned 16 subjects using slow event related fMRI and compared time
course activity between trial conditions and between regions demonstrating a significant effect of trial type. We found that for regions in the
frontal and parietal cortex activity was significantly greater during
updating when compared to interference control, and activity for interference control was significantly greater than simple maintenance during the post update cue delay. In the caudate, putamen, and thalamus,
however, activity associated with updating was significantly greater
than interference control activity and simple maintenance activity, but
we found no differences between interference control activity and simple
maintenance activity. Our results are discussed in the context of the relevance of corticostriatal interactions during working memory and the
implications for clinical populations like schizophrenia.

F47
FRONTAL-PARIETAL NETWORK DIFFERENCES FOR ITEM AND CATEGORY
WORKING MEMORY Javier Gomez-Lavin1, Kurt Braunlich2, Carol Seger2;

1The College of Charleston, 2Colorado State University — Via fMRI, we compared activity related to working memory for specific faces to activity
related to working memory for the category labels of these faces. Before
scanning, participants were trained, via trial and error, to categorize 16
faces into two class sections (“A” and “B”). In the scanner, each trial
began with the presentation of one of three cues: “Remember the Specific
Face”, “Remember the Category” or “Watch Passively.” A face was then
presented for 1 TR, and was followed by a 9-second delay. On “Specific
Face” cue trials, a second face was then presented and participants were
asked to indicate whether it was a “match” or “mismatch” to the first.
Similarly, on “Category” cue trials, a second face was presented, and
participants were asked to indicate whether this second stimulus
matched the category of the first. For both Category and Specific Face
cue trials, we found activity in frontal areas, the intraparietal sulcus, and

166

the body of the caudate. Although largely recruiting similar brain bases,
we found greater activity in medial parietal areas and the thalamus during Category cue trials than during Specific Face cue trials. Conversely,
we found greater activity in high-level visual cortical regions and the
middle frontal gyrus during Specific Face cue trials than during the Category cue trials. We also found differences in the time course of the
BOLD response in frontal and parietal regions of interest.

F48
FLEXIBLE CONTROL OF RELEVANT AND IRRELEVANT SPATIAL
INFORMATION REPRESENTATIONS IN WORKING MEMORY Chui Luen

Vera Hau1, Hoi-Chung Leung1; 1Stony Brook University, SUNY — Many parts of

the prefrontal and posterior parietal cortexes show sustained activity
during short-term maintenance of visual and visuospatial information
and their activity increases with increasing mnemonic demands. To this
date, it remains unclear what kind of task information is represented in
the sustained activity. In two experiments, we investigated the neural
processing of visuospatial working memory using event-related potentials (ERPs) under different task conditions. We used a delayed recognition task with a cue presented during the delay period indicating only a
subset of the initially memorized spatial locations remained relevant for
the later recognition test, whereas the other subset was deemed no
longer relevant. In the first experiment, we focused on examining the
neural representations of post-cue transient activity by manipulating the
selection or no selection of specific items in working memory. In the second experiment, we focused on examining the neural representations of
post-cue sustained activity by manipulating the number of relevant and
no-longer-relevant items. Our ERP data revealed that the post-cue transient activity (between 380-500 ms and 500-700 ms) differentiated
between the different cue conditions whereas the post-cue sustained
activity (between 900-2500 ms) was mainly modulated by the number of
relevant items. Neural activity during the response phase was also modulated by the cue conditions, reflecting a more efficient memory search
among the updated, smaller set of memorized items. In sum, our observations suggest that the neural representations during the delay period
reflect both task context and memory content.

F49
GROUPING BENEFITS IN VISUAL WORKING MEMORY ARE DISRUPTED
BY TDCS TO PARIETAL CORTEX Dwight Peterson1, Marian Berryhill1;

1University of Nevada, Reno — The Gestalt principle of perceptual grouping
via physical connectedness improves visual working memory (VWM)
accuracy. This performance benefit is thought to rely on neurons in the
superior intraparietal sulcus (IPS) (Xu & Chun, 2009). In Experiment 1,
we sought to replicate the behavioral effect (Xu & Chun, 2007, 2009).
Only participants with high VWM capacity showed the grouping benefit. Participants with low VWM capacity showed no grouping benefit. In
Experiment 2, we tested the importance of IPS involvement. We tested
VWM performance in an independent sample of high VWM capacity
participants with and without cathodal (suppressive) transcranial direct
current stimulation (tDCS) to the IPS. Prior to VWM task performance,
participants received cathodal tDCS to electrode site P4 (corresponding
to the right superior parietal lobe) and sham tDCS during separate
experimental sessions. As predicted by the behavioral results, normal
IPS function was necessary for grouping effects to benefit VWM. The
results showed a VWM grouping benefit in the sham condition, but this
effect was suppressed after cathodal tDCS to the IPS. In summary, the
results from Experiment 1 show that individual differences in VWM
capacity interacts with the ability to take advantage of Gestalt grouping
in VWM. Experiment 2 used tDCS to confirm the involvement of the IPS
in mediating Gestalt grouping benefits in VWM.

F50
BRAIN ACTIVITY RELATED TO HIERARCHICAL REPRESENTATION OF
TEMPORAL ORDER INFORMATION IN WORKING MEMORY Brooke

Roberts1, Charan Ranganath1; 1University of California, Davis — Maintaining

items in an appropriate sequence during working memory is important

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session F
for many daily activities; however, remarkably little is known about the
neural basis of temporal working memory. The prefrontal cortex (PFC)
plays a critical role in cognitive function, and may be functionally organized in a hierarchical manner, characterized by a rostro-caudal gradient. The purpose of this study was to test if temporal information is
encoded and maintained in the same regions as item-specific information, and if there is a hierarchical representation of temporal information
in the PFC. Participants were scanned during 3 task conditions (Item,
Group, and Position), each requiring active maintenance of four images.
Trials began with an instruction slide indicating condition, followed by
two groups of two kaleidoscope images presented sequentially. Following a delay period, a probe was presented. On Item trials, subjects indicated if the probe was studied in that trial. For Group trials, subjects
indicated if the probe was presented in group 1 or 2. For Position trials,
subjects indicated whether the probe was presented first or second
within its group. Relative to Item, Group and Position trials placed
heavier demands on temporal order maintenance. Initial analyses indicate that lateral PFC and posterior parietal activation was enhanced during the delay period of temporal compared to item trials. Further
analyses will focus on whether Position trials, which involve 2 levels of
hierarchical temporal information, are characterized by enhanced activity in more rostral prefrontal regions compared to Group trials, which
involve only 1 level in the hierarchy.

F52
NORMATIVE SHIFTS OF CORTICAL MECHANISMS OF ENCODING
CONTRIBUTE TO ADULT AGE DIFFERENCES IN VISUAL-SPATIAL
WORKING MEMORY Viola Störmer1, Shu-Chen Li1, Hauke R. Heekeren1,2,

Ulman Lindenberger1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin,
Germany, 2Department of Psychology and Education, Freie Universität Berlin,
Berlin, Germany — Most previous studies investigating the cortical mecha-

nisms underlying adult age differences in working memory (WM)
capacity have focused on the maintenance phase. However, recent agecomparative evidence suggests that older adults’ WM deficits may
partly arise from impairments during encoding. Thus far, adult age differences in the relations between encoding and visual-spatial WM performance have not been assessed. To fill this gap, we used
electroencephalography to track neural activity in the distinct phases of
encoding and maintenance while younger and older adults performed a
visual-spatial WM task. Relative to younger adults, older adults showed
lower WM capacity and also less neural modulation during the retention
interval (CDA component), consistent with previous findings. Moreover,
we found age effects during encoding: Younger adults showed selective
focusing of attention onto target items (N2pc component), whereas older
adults mostly lacked this attentional focus, but showed modulations of
initial stimulus processing (N1 component). The magnitude of the modulation of initial stimulus processing (N1) predicted WM capacity in
older but not in younger adults, and the magnitude of the attentional
focus (N2pc) predicted WM capacity in younger adults. These results
suggest that there is a normative shift in the mechanisms used during
WM encoding that contributes to adult age differences of visual-spatial
WM.

F53
RESTING-STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN PRODROMAL
HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE Stephen Rao1, Katherine Koenig1, Mark Lowe1,

Jian Lin1, Deborah Harrington2, Dawei Liu3, Ken Sakaie1, Jane Paulsen3;
Cleveland Clinic, 2UCSD, 3University of Iowa — Individuals in the prodro-

1

mal phase of Huntington disease (prHD) show abnormal brain activation patterns on task-activated fMRI in the absence of changes on
neuropsychological testing and structural brain imaging. Functional
connectivity MRI (fcMRI), measured from low-frequency fluctuations in
the blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) timeseries during rest, has the
potential to identify disruptions in intrinsic brain connectivity in early
prodromal stages of HD. To date, no study has evaluated whether fcMRI
is sensitive to disease progression and therefore, could serve as a biom-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

arker for future HD therapeutic trials. The current study obtained taskactivated and resting-state BOLD imaging in 16 gene-positive and 8
gene-negative participants. The gene positive group was subdivided into
two groups: 8 close to diagnosis of manifest HD (CLOSE) and 8 far from
diagnosis (FAR) based on age and CAG repeat size. Activation data from
a time discrimination task (Rao et al., Nature Neuroscience, 2001) was
used to identify seeds (left insula, right SMA) for the fcMRI analyses.
Functional connectivity maps based on temporal correlations between
regions were created for each individual. ANOVAs demonstrated that
connectivity strength was highest in the gene-negative group, intermediate in the FAR group, and lowest in the CLOSE group. Progressively
weaker connectivity as individuals approached diagnosis was found
between the left insula and the anterior cingulate, posterior cingulate,
and bilateral thalami and between the right SMA and the right insula
and left putamen. This report is the first to demonstrate that resting-state
fcMRI may be a sensitive biomarker of disease progression in prHD.

F54
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY MODULATE
FRONTAL CORTICAL ACTIVITY WHILE LISTENING TO SPEECH IN NOISE

Örjan Dahlström1, Ingrid Johnsrude1, Mary Rudner1, Stefan Stenfelt1, Jerker
Rönnberg1; 1Linnaeus Centre HEAD, Linköping University, Sweden — Many

studies have demonstrated that the posterior part of the left inferior frontal gyrus (pLIFG; partes triangularis and opercularis) is recruited when
speech becomes difficult to understand (Rodd et al, 2011). However,
much is still unclear about how this region participates in speech comprehension. Here, we examine whether individual differences in working-memory (WM) capacity (as measured using the reading-span task:
Daneman & Carpenter, 1980) modulate activity in this region when listeners are attempting to understand speech in noise. Twenty-seven participants heard sentences in noise at five different intelligibility levels
(30, 50, 70, 80 and 90% correct), in the silent gaps between scans in a
sparse imaging procedure (TR=10sec, TA=3sec). SNRs yielding target
intelligibility levels were individually defined before scanning using an
adaptive procedure and standardized sentences (Hagerman & Kinnefors, 1995). Clear speech, noise only and silence were also scanned. Both
pLIFG and left posterior superior temporal sulcus regions were significantly more active (p<.05 whole-brain corrected for multiple comparisons (FWE)) when speech was hard to understand (degraded) compared
to when it was clear or impossible to understand (noise only), consistent
with other work. The pLIFG cluster (79 voxels; t=7.78; -44, 25, 19) was
used as an ROI within which to examine whether the relationship
between intelligibility and activity is modulated by WM capacity. Compared to the low-WM group (median split on reading-span data), the
high-WM group showed a stronger linear relationship between intelligibility and activation (t=3.30, p=0.030, FWE-corrected). These results suggest that pLIFG subserves processes related to WM.

F55
HOW TO OVERCOME RARE AND TEMPORARY CHANGES IN FAMILIAR
EVENTS BY REORIENTATION Anne B. Kühn1, Ricarda I. Schubotz1,2; 1Max
Planck Institute for Neurological Research, 2WWU Münster — Changes

in
familiar events call for fast updating of either expectation or the “internal
model”. The aim of the present functional MRI study was to investigate
neural correlates of this updating process after breaches of expectancy.
Subjects learned visually presented 24-digit stimulus sequences. During
fMRI, these sequences were presented cyclically and isochronously.
Omissions of different size (1 digit, 3, 6 or 12 digits) unexpectedly
occurred without disturbance of the isochronous presentation. Subjects
were required to indicate omissions by key press and to reorientate
within the presented stimulus sequence at the same time. A parametric
analysis of omission size permitted to disentangle activation of reorientation and that of omission detection. A parametric analysis of increasing
distances between omissions further allowed exploration of the BOLD
effect of initiating reorientation. We found the precuneus (Brodmann
Area [BA] 7/31), posterior parietal areas along the intraparietal sulcus
(BA 7), and the dorsal premotor cortex close to the superior frontal sul-

167

Poster Session F — Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
cus (BA 6/8) to be activated by the analysis of omission size. The size of
omissions and the degree of activation correlated positively. Further, the
analysis of the distances between omissions revealed higher activation
levels of anterior ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (aVLPFC, BA 47) and
pregenual anterior cingulate cortex (ACC, BA 32) the more rarely omissions occurred. Results demonstrate that a fronto-parietal network mediates the updating of the internal model of an event when expectation is
violated. The aVLPFC and pregenual ACC seem to trigger this reorientation in case of situations that make strongly accustomed behavior inappropriate.

F56
CHARACTERIZING MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE CONTRIBUTIONS TO
RELATIONAL MEMORY OVER SHORT DELAYS Liz
Race1,
Margaret
1,2

1 1

Keane , Mieke Verfaellie ; Boston University School of Medicine & VA
Boston Healthcare System, 2Wellesley College — Short-term memory (STM)
traditionally has been viewed as independent of the medial temporal
lobes (MTL). However, recent studies have reported MTL activity, and
disrupted performance with MTL damage, during STM tasks that
require relational memory. While these results suggest that the MTL
supports relational STM, an alternative interpretation is that MTL
involvement in STM tasks reflects long-term memory (LTM) demands.
Shrager et al. (2008) suggested that dependence on STM in short-delay
recognition tasks can be operationalized with reference to effects of distraction in controls, on the assumption that STM, but not LTM, is sensitive to distraction. They showed that distraction had minimal effect on
performance of a short-delay face memory task, but significantly
reduced performance of an equivalent name memory task. Thus, it was
argued that face memory depends on LTM, whereas name memory
reflects the operation of STM. Importantly, amnesic patients were
impaired on the former but not the latter task. Here we challenge the
assumption of intact STM in amnesia by highlighting ambiguities in
using distraction to operationalize the contribution of STM. We hypothesize that when performance on a short-delay face memory task relies on
maintaining relational information, (a) control performance will be disrupted with distraction that specifically targets relational memory and
(b) amnesic patients with MTL damage will be impaired at this task.
Study results confirmed these hypotheses and indicated MTL involvement in relational STM. Further, intact performance in a patient with
restricted hippocampal damage suggests that MTL cortex may be particularly critical for relational STM.

F57
WORKING MEMORY AND AMNESIA: THE ROLE OF STIMULUS NOVELTY
Nathan Rose1,2, Rosanna Olson1,2, Fergus Craik1,2, Shayna Rosenbaum1,3;
1Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest, 2University of Toronto, 3York
University — Despite the traditional view that damage to the hippocam-

pus and/or surrounding areas of the medial temporal lobe (MTL) does
not impair short-term or working memory (WM), recent research has
shown MTL amnesics to be impaired on WM tasks that require maintaining a small amount of information over brief retention intervals (e.g.,
maintenance of a single face for one second). However, the types of tasks
that have demonstrated WM impairments in amnesia tend to have
involved novel stimuli. We hypothesized that WM may be impaired in
amnesia for tasks that require maintaining novel information, but may
be preserved for more familiar material, particularly if the material can
be easily rehearsed. To test this hypothesis, patient HC, a 22-year-old
developmental amnesic with relatively preserved semantic memory and
20 age and education matched controls performed a delayed match-tosample task that required maintaining a single famous or non-famous
face for 1-8 seconds, digit span and reading span tasks, and a modified
Brown-Peterson task that required maintaining a single high- or low-frequency word or a non-word for 4-8 seconds. HC’s performance was
impaired for non-famous faces but preserved for famous faces, impaired
for the reading span task but preserved for digit span, and it was
impaired for non-words and unfamiliar low-frequency words but preserved for familiar words. These results support the hypothesis that an

168

intact hippocampus is necessary for maintaining a single novel stimulus
in WM. However, stimulus familiarity and rehearsal support WM via
cortical regions independent of the MTL.

LANGUAGE: Other
F58
NEURAL CORRELATES OF MORPHOLOGICAL AWARENESS IN BILINGUAL
CHINESE-ENGLISH CHILDREN: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF CROSSLINGUISTIC READING ACQUISITION. Ka I Ip1, Lucy Shih-Ju Hsu1, Jie

Chen1, Maria M. Arredondo1, Kira Mascho1, Lydia Su1, Twila Z. Tardif1, Ioulia
Kovelman1; 1University of Michigan — Research in alphabetic languages

(e.g., English) has consistently shown that Phonological Awareness, the
ability to manipulate phonemic units of language, strongly predicts successful reading acquisition. In contrast, research with non-alphabetical
languages (e.g., Chinese) suggests that Morphological Awareness, the
ability to manipulate the morphological units of language, might better
predict reading success and dyslexia (McBride-Chang et al., 2011).
Despite these cross-linguistic differences, there are critical similarities
between Morphological and Phonological Awareness as both are forms
of metalinguistic awareness that require segmentation and manipulation
of word parts. HYPOTHESIS. Similar neural mechanisms might underlie
children’s morphological and phonological awareness abilities in Chinese and English. METHOD. In this fMRI study, Chinese-English bilingual children (ages 7-12) performed auditory Morphological Awareness
tasks in two languages. RESULTS. Participants showed overlapping activation between their two languages in left inferior, middle frontal and
posterior temporal regions, regions also known to be important for Phonological Awareness processing. Moreover, participants’ performance
on Morphological Awareness tasks in Chinese and in English correlated
with their reading proficiency in these languages. CONCLUSIONS. The
findings suggest that common neural and learning mechanisms underlie
reading acquisition across different orthographies. This key common
learning component might consist of children’s sensitivity to the suprasegmental aspects of the linguistic stream (e.g., syllables and morphemes, as supported by left IFG and STG), as well as their ability to
manipulate those parts (as supported by left MFG)– a hypothesis we
continue to examine. Our findings carry implications for better understanding of reading acquisition and dyslexia across different orthographies.

F59
BILINGUAL ENHANCEMENTS IN SOUND PROCESSING RELATE TO
EXECUTIVE FUNCTION ADVANTAGES Jennifer Krizman1, Viorica Marian1,

Anthony Shook1, Nina Kraus1; 1Northwestern University — The experience of

being bilingual appears to result in enhancements in executive functions,
such as inhibitory control. How these advantages in cognitive function
shape the underlying neural processing of sensory stimuli is relatively
unknown. To assess the relationship between executive function and
neural processing, auditory brainstem responses, cortical evoked
responses, and behavioral measures of auditory processing and executive function were obtained in 60 adolescents of varying second language proficiency, matched on IQ and socioeconomic status. Bilinguals,
when listening to the syllable ‘da’ presented in six-talker background
babble, demonstrated more robust encoding of the stimulus compared to
monolinguals. At the neural level, encoding of the spectral amplitude of
the fundamental frequency (F0), a feature known to underlie pitch perception and grouping of auditory objects, was more robust in bilinguals
compared to monolinguals. Behaviorally, bilinguals showed enhanced
temporal processing of non-linguistic sounds (in a backward masking
task). Cognitive advantages were seen in bilinguals in both auditory and
visual domains (sustained, focused attention), relative to monolinguals.
Sustained attention ability and temporal processing performance correlated with neural encoding of F0, suggesting a relationship between
enhanced executive function and the strength of stimulus representation.
The present findings suggest an enhancement for bilinguals in the neural

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session F
processing of specific sound elements that relate to auditory perception
and cognitive abilities. The data support the view that bilingual experience shapes how the auditory system processes behaviorally-relevant
sounds.

F60
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN RHYTHM PERCEPTION AND READING AND
LANGUAGE ACQUISITION IN BILINGUAL CHILDREN. Neelima Wagley1,2,

Alyssa Mastic2, Ka Ip2, Lucy Hsu2, Xiaohong Wang2, Jie Chen2, Zhenqi Guan2,
Kira Mascho2, Sarah Spath2, Stefanie Younce2, Twila Tardif2, Ioulia Kovelman2;
1Michigan State University, 2University of Michigan — Behavioral and neuroimaging evidence suggests children’s sensitivity to slow rhythmic
modulations might be a key index of their developing language and
reading capabilities. It is proposed that this sensitivity might underlie
children’s ability to acquire and map sounds onto their language’s orthographic symbols. Reading acquisition research shows that sensitivity to
slow rhythmic modulations correlates with phonological awareness and
reading proficiency (Goswami, 2010). Further research in language
acquisition shows that infants’ babbling consists of producing rhythmically alternating syllables at frequencies of about 1.5 Hz (Petitto, 2001).
Neuroimaging evidence supports this sensitivity as seen by a greater
activation in Wernicke’s area to 1.5 Hz relative to other frequencies
(Kovelman et al., 2010). We hypothesized that children with language
and reading impairments should perform worse on rhythmic sensitivity
tasks than typically developing children, regardless of bilingual status.
Thirteen typically developing bilinguals and 8 language and reading
impaired monolinguals were tested. Participants listened and tapped to
beeps of three frequencies (0.5, 1.5, and 3.0 Hz), and completed phonological awareness and short-term memory tasks. Results showed bilingual children tapped with significantly greater accuracy at all
frequencies compared to language and reading impaired children. In
children with language and reading impairments, phonological ability
significantly correlated with rhythmic sensitivity at 1.5 and 3.0 Hz. As
corroborated by the results, sensitivity to slow rhythmic modulations
may underlie successful language acquisition. Tasks of rhythmic sensitivity are non-linguistic and could therefore help identify children with
language and reading impairments across orthographies, regardless of
language proficiency or bilingual status.

F61
MULTIPLICATION ENGAGES PHONOLOGICAL NETWORKS IN BROCA’S
AREA DIFFERENTLY FOR DEAF SIGNERS AND HEARING NON-SIGNERS

Josefine Andin1, Örjan Dahlström1, Peter Fransson2, Jerker Rönnberg1, Mary
Rudner1; 1Linköping University, 2Karolinska Institute — In hearing individuals, multiplication relies mainly on the phonological loop while subtraction relies on the visuo-spatial sketchpad (VSSP; Lee & Kang, 2002).
Little is known about arithmetic neural networks in deaf signers (DS).
Since DS often perform worse than hearing non-signers (NH) on arithmetic in general and multiplication in particular (Traxler, 2000), we
hypothesized that there are strategic differences between how groups
recruit the phonological loop in multiplication, but not in subtraction,
leading to differential activation of phonological processing areas in left
inferior frontal gyrus (Broca’s area). We investigated this using a blocked
fMRI-design in which nine DS and 17 HN matched on age, gender, education and non-verbal intelligence (Raven & Raven, 1998) were tested on
tasks of multiplication, subtraction and phonology (rhyme). The contrasts rhyme versus multiplication and rhyme versus subtraction were
examined across groups within the region of interest defined by a probability map of Broca’s area (Amunts, 1999). We observed a significant
interaction between task (multiplication and rhyme) and group (F =
12.64, p = .034, FWE-corrected), where the HN showed higher activation
for rhyme than for multiplication (T = 4.55, p = .001, FWE-corrected)
whereas there were no differences in activations between tasks for DS.
For subtraction versus rhyme no interaction with group was found.
These results suggest that there are differences between DS and HN in
the phonology dependent neural networks in Broca’s area used during

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

multiplication, which may be part of the explanation for poorer performance in deaf individuals.

F62
EARLY VERBAL TRACES ACTIVATED DURING SIZE COMPARISON. Elena

Salillas1, Paulo Barraza1, Manuel Carreiras1,2; 1Basque Center on Cognition
Brain and Language. San Sebastian, Spain, 2IKERBASQUE. Basque foundation
for Science. Bilbao, Spain — It is debated whether quantity representation
contains verbal information. We used Basque-Spanish bilingualism as a
window in the detection of brain signatures of numerical verbal forms,
when language is not necessary for the task. Two groups of balanced
bilinguals who learned first math concepts in Spanish or Basque (LLMS
/ LLMB) performed a comparison between two digits while EEG was
recorded. Basque language retains the base-20 system for naming some
numbers (56 verbal form in Basque is “berrogeita hamasei”, implying
number words for 40 (berrogeita), 10 (hama) and 6 (sei). Other numbers
imply the decimal system as in Spanish (46 verbal form both for Basque
and Spanish is “berrogeita sei”, containing the number words for 40
(berrogeita/cuarenta) and 6 (sei/seis). Two types of digit pairs to be
compared in size were presented (Common pairs: 46 – 40 and Basque
pairs: 56-40). Analysis of EEG phase synchrony to the presentation of the
second digit showed synchronization in the gamma and beta bands for
the Basque pairs in the LLMB group and only synchronization in the
beta band for the Common pairs. LLMS group showed synchronization
in beta for both pairs of digits. Analysis of the regional distribution in
each of these bands showed large scale synchronization over left frontoparietal electrodes pairs for the gamma band effect, while bilateral synchronization over posterior-parietal electrodes pairs appeared for the
beta gamma effect. Gamma band effect suggests access to the base-20
system by the LLMB group while comparing numbers, a verbal trace
originated in childhood.

F63
LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION INTERRUPTED: ERP AND FMRI
REFLECTIONS OF REPRESENTATIONAL CONFLICTS AND WORD
DEGRADATION Nan van de Meerendonk1, Dorothee J. Chwilla1, Shirley-Ann

Rueschemeyer2, Herman H.J. Kolk1; 1Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, 2York University, UK — ‘Representa-

tional conflicts’ between an expected and observed linguistic element
indicate the possibility of an error. According to the monitoring theory of
language perception such conflicts signal the need for control adjustments: attention is biased towards the unexpected element, leading to
reprocessing of the input. However, other cognitively demanding inputs
can also interrupt comprehension and signal that control adjustments
are needed. The present study investigated whether, next to representational conflicts, a lack of bottom-up information due to visual degradation also elicits a monitoring response. First, the ERP response to two
conflict conditions (syntactic agreement and plausibility violations) and
a degradation condition were compared. Previous studies consistently
found that representational conflicts elicit a P600 effect. Hence, the question was whether this would generalize to degraded words embedded
within sentences. The results indicated that degraded words elicited a
central-posterior positivity between 300-800 msec. We propose that a
general monitoring process which evaluates the demands for control
underlies the positivities elicited by representational conflicts and visual
degradation. Second, an fMRI experiment was conducted with a focus
on the left inferior frontal gyrus (lIFG), which has been implicated in
general conflict resolution. Participants saw the same conditions as in the
ERP experiment, and subsequently performed a Stroop task. The results
showed that both the conflict and degradation conditions increased activation in the lIFG region that was selected based on the Stroop task. We
propose that the lIFG biases attention not only to resolve conflicts, but
also to compensate for a lack of bottom-up information.

169

Poster Session F — Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

F64
A HIERARCHY OF INTERNAL FORWARD MODELS IN SPEECH
PRODUCTION Kayoko Okada1, William Matchin1, Sara Alshara1, Gregory
Hickok1; 1University of California, Irvine — Recent models of speech motor

control argue that motor commands generate forward predictions of the
auditory consequences of those commands. Here we explore the possibility that such predictions are generated in a hierarchy of internal forward models. Recent psycholinguistic work has provided evidence that
higher-level lexical and lower-level phonemic speech errors occur in
inner speech but dissociate in imagined vs. silently articulated speech.
Lexical effects are found in both conditions but phonemic effects are only
found during articulation, suggesting a hierarchical organization. If forward predictions are generated at each of these levels, we should find
more activity in some portions of auditory cortex during silently articulated speech compared to imagined speech because predictions are
being generated from multiple levels, even though neither condition
involves any auditory input. This is precisely what we observed in an
fMRI experiment in which subjects were visually presented with a
sequence of words that they were asked to reproduce in sync with a
visual metronome. On each trial, they were cued to either silently articulate the sequence or to imagine the sequence without overt movements.
As expected, we found more activation in primary somatosensory-motor
cortex as well as other motor areas during the overt articulation condition, but we also found increased activation in secondary auditory cortex
in the dorsal superior temporal gyrus. We suggest that this reflects forward predictions from a hierarchy of internal models.

F65
TEMPORAL RESOLUTION OF SENSORY OSCILLATORY ACTIVITY IN
CHILDREN WITH A LANGUAGE-LEARNING IMPAIRMENT IS IMPROVED BY
COMPUTERIZED AUDIO-VISUAL TRAINING Sabine Heim1, Jennifer
Thomas Friedman1, Andreas Keil2, Naseem Choudhury1, April A. Benasich1;
1
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 2University of Florida — Speech

processing requires exquisite temporal resolution in the central nervous
system, at high spectral accuracy. Children with language-learning
impairment (LLI) have consistently shown difficulty with tasks requiring such precise, rapid processing. Remedies based on neural plasticity
assume that the temporal precision of neural coding can be improved by
intense training schedules, such as the computerized audio-visual training Fast ForWord-Language (Registered Trademark, FFW). Here, we
examined the extent to which FFW training affects early oscillatory
responses in auditory cortex, using combined source modelling and
time-frequency analysis of the human electroencephalogram (EEG).
Twenty-one (6-9 year-old) children diagnosed with LLI received FFW for
an average of 32 days. Before and after training children completed
behavioral and EEG assessment. Twelve children with typical language
development were also tested twice, with no intervention given. In the
EEG sessions, children listened passively or actively to pairs of brief
tones presented with short (70-ms) interstimulus intervals. During the
first visit, we found reduced amplitude and phase-locking of early (45-75
ms) oscillations in the gamma-band range (29-52 Hz), specifically in the
LLI group, for the second stimulus of the tone pair. Amplitude reduction
for the second tone was no longer evident at the second visit, although
LLI children still exhibited attenuated phase-locking. Behaviorally,
improvements on standardized measures of language were observed in
the LLI group after completion of FFW. Our findings suggest that poor
sensory integration in LLI is ameliorated after training, while the temporal organization of the oscillatory response is still altered.

F66
ON THE ROLE OF THE DORSAL AUDITORY STREAM: SYLLABLE ONSET
COMPLEXITY IN SPEECH PRODUCTION. Isabelle Deschamps1,2, Shari
Baum1,2, Vincent Gracco1,2,3; 1School of Communication Sciences and
Disorders, McGill University, Montreal, Canada, 2Centre for Research on Brain,

170

Language and Music, McGill University, Montreal, Canada, 3Haskins
Laboratories — Clusters of neural activation surrounding the left superior
temporal plane and in the vicinity of the parietal-temporal junction have
been reported both for speech production and speech perception. These
findings have been interpreted as suggesting that this region is involved
in the processing of sensorimotor information associated with articulatory representations. However, because these clusters of activation
encompass more than one distinct anatomical region, the specific contribution of each of these regions during speech production remains
unclear. The objective of this study was two-fold: to investigate the role
of (1) stimulus presentation modality and (2) phonological complexity
on anatomically distinct cortical regions located along the superior temporal plane during speech production. To this aim, we used both visual
and auditory pseudowords that varied in phonological complexity. Subjects had to repeat the pseudowords as they were heard or seen. Data
were acquired on a 3T Siemens Trio MR scanner. A clustered sparse volume temporal acquisition paradigm was used in order to eliminate
movement artifacts. Preliminary whole-group analyses demonstrate an
increase in activation for phonologically complex stimuli presented in
the auditory (but not the visual) modality in left hemisphere regions
including the planum temporale, superior temporal gyrus, parietal operculum, precentral gyrus and supramarginal gyrus (see figure 1). Our
results demonstrate that specific regions located along the posterior
superior temporal plane are sensitive to increases in phonological complexity when stimuli are presented in the auditory, but not the visual,
modality, supporting a more fine-grained representation of sensorimotor processing along the posterior superior temporal plane.

F67
BILINGUALISM AND EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS: ERP EVIDENCE FROM A
STROOP TEST Karin Heidlmayr1, Sylvain Moutier1, Barbara Hemforth1,

Frédéric Isel1; 1Paris Descartes University, France — Executive

functions
have been shown to gain a benefit in their efficacy from activity-dependent training. In the present study, we investigated whether the
increased capacity of bilinguals to manage inhibition due to code switching has an effect on conflict detection and resolution. To approach this
question, the classic Stroop test constitutes a critical test as two competing processes, i.e. a highly automatic linguistic process (reading) and a
controlled process (colour naming), are simultaneously involved. Two
event-related potential (ERP) experiments were designed. In Experiment
1, 12 highly proficient successive French-German bilingual adults and in
Experiment 2, 14 monolingual adults, native speakers of French, were
recruited. Participants performed a manual version of the Stroop test.
Beside the habitual congruent, incongruent and neutral experimental
conditions a highly conflictual negative priming condition was included.
As usually found, behavioural data showed a reduced Stroop effect in
bilinguals compared to monolinguals. ERP data revealed an increased
negativity in the incongruent compared to the congruent condition in the
time window 350-600 ms at centro-parietal electrodes (N400 effect).
Moreover, the negative priming condition was associated with an N200
effect in the time window 150-300 ms at parietal electrodes for monolinguals. Taken together, the present data reinforce the idea that multiple
language use improves efficacy in resolving cognitive conflict. This benefit of bilingualism seems to show especially in conditions involving
high conflict. These findings lend support to psycholinguistic models of
bilingual language processing postulating a higher-order level of control
being exerted on linguistic as well as on non-linguistic domains.

LANGUAGE: Semantic
F68
THE DYNAMICS OF BRAIN ACTIVATION IN SEMANTIC INTEGRATION: A
STUDY COMBINING ERP AND EVENT-RELATED OPTICAL SIGNALS Jian

Huang1, Suiping Wang1, Shiwei Jia2, Mingxiang Wu3, Hsuan-Chih Chen4;
1
Department of Psychology, South China Normal University, Guangzhou,
China, 2Shandong Normal University, Jinan, China, 3Department of Radiology,
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session F
Shenzhen People’s Hospital, Shenzhen, China, 4Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong S.A.R., China — The neural basis of integrative processes
in sentence comprehension has attracted much attention in psycholinguistic research. Both left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) and left anterior
temporal lobe (LATL) have typically been associated with such integrative processes. However, the specific functions of the two brain regions
remain unclear, especially for LATL whose activation signals are not easily detected in fMRI scans. In the present study, we used the EventRelated Optical Signal (EROS) technique (Gratton et al., 1995) that has
both high temporal (less than 100ms) and spatial resolution (5-10mm) to
examine the dynamics of brain activation in these regions for semantic
integration in sentence reading. Fifteen participants read 300 sentences
word-by-word and made a semantic judgment at the end of each sentence. The EROS responses were recorded simultaneously with ERPs
time-locked to the sentence-final target words of high or low expectation
based on the prior sentential context. The ERP results replicated previous findings, showing N400 and P600 amplitudes modulated by the
expectation levels of targets. The EROS results revealed activation in
LIFG, left superior/middle temporal gyrus (LS/MTG), and left middle
frontal gyrus (LMFG) in the N400 and P600 time windows. More importantly, the activations in LATL differentiated between the low and high
expectation conditions in a relatively early time window (from 192 to 256
ms). These results suggest that two different brain pathways may be
involved in semantic integration, one from LS/MTG to LIFG/LMFG for
slower and long-lasting integration, and the other at LATL for automatic
and more rapid integration.

F69
WAIT A SECOND: ELIMINATING THE “SEMANTIC ILLUSION” IN ROLEREVERSED SENTENCES Wing-Yee Chow1, Colin Phillips1, Suiping Wang2;
1University of Maryland College Park, 2South China Normal University — A

number of recent findings have shown that the ERP N400 effect, normally a sensitive measure of semantic processing, is unaffected by the
blatant semantic anomalies in 'role-reversed' sentences, e.g., "The thief
arrested the cop". These apparent "semantic illusions" have been taken as
evidence for a processing architecture in which online semantic interpretation can proceed independently from syntactic information (Kim &
Osterhout, 2005; Kolk et al., 2003; Kuperberg, 2007). We instead attribute
these effects to time needed for the processor to use sentence meanings
to generate expectations for upcoming words. This predicts that simply
by increasing the time between a verb and its arguments should cause
the N400 to reappear. We tested this using the subject-BA-object-verb
construction in Mandarin Chinese. We compared effects of role-reversals
when the verb immediately follows its arguments (Short Distance: [yesterday afternoon]-cop-BA-thief-arrest) vs. when they are further apart
(Long Distance: cop-BA-thief-[yesterday afternoon]-arrest). We found
that role-reversals elicit a significant P600 effect in both cases, but a significant N400 effect was observed only in the Long Distance conditions.
This suggests that when the verb appears just 600ms after the nouns
(Short Distance conditions) the processor has insufficient time to generate expectations for the verb, but that 1800ms (Long Distance Conditions) is sufficient. This within-experiment contrast challenges the
independent semantic interpretation hypothesis, and instead supports
the view that the processor reliably uses a verb's arguments to generate
expectations for the verb, provided that sufficient time is available.

F70
THE EFFECT OF BILINGUALISM ON LEXICAL AMBIGUITY RESOLUTION IN
YOUNG ADULTS: EVIDENCE FROM BEHAVIOR AND EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS Shanna Kousaie1, Christianne Laliberté2, Jessica Kumar2,
Rocío López Zunini1,2, Vanessa Taler1,2; 1Élisabeth Bruyère Research Institute,
University of Ottawa — Research suggests that bilinguals outperform

2

monolinguals on tasks of attentional control (i.e., Stroop, Simon, and
flanker tasks). This advantage is hypothesized to originate from more
efficient inhibitory control in bilinguals resulting from the constant management of two languages. Inhibitory control is also important for the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

resolution of ambiguous words (homonyms; e.g., “bank”, meaning
“financial institution” or “river’s edge”). We examined whether bilingualism affects lexical ambiguity processing. Monolinguals (n=4) and
bilinguals (n=5) read sentences biasing the reading of a terminal homonym towards the dominant or subordinate meaning while electrophysiological recording took place (e.g., She worked behind the counter at the
BANK). They judged the relatedness of target words that were either
related to the contextually appropriate or inappropriate meaning of the
homonym, or unrelated items. Preliminary results indicate a trend in
response time (RT) toward a Language Group x Trial Type interaction
(F(2,14)=4.26, p=.06): in bilinguals, RT differed for all three trial types,
with fastest responses to contextually appropriate targets and slowest to
unrelated targets, while monolinguals showed no effect of target type.
Electrophysiologically, a Language Group x Trial Type x Site interaction
(F(8,56)=3.79, p=.01) showed that in all midline electrodes bilinguals
demonstrated a difference in N400 amplitude for all target types; unrelated targets elicited the largest amplitude N400, and targets related to
the homonym’s dominant meaning the smallest. Monolinguals showed a
larger amplitude N400 for unrelated targets relative to targets related to
either meaning, which did not differ. These results indicate differences
between monolinguals and bilinguals in lexical ambiguity processing.

F71
AEROBIC FITNESS AND SEMANTIC PROCESSING DURING SENTENCE
READING IN 9-10 YEAR OLD CHILDREN. Mark Scudder1, Lauren Raine1,

Artur Direito2, Jeremy Boyd1, Kara Federmeier1, Charles Hillman1; 1University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The
Netherlands — Evidence suggests that aerobic fitness is beneficial to

aspects of cognition involving attention and memory; however, language processing remains relatively unexplored. The N400 is an ERP
component that reflects the brain’s response to potentially meaningful
stimuli, and can be elicited by words during reading. As such, the N400
is commonly used as an index of semantic processing that is particularly
sensitive to violations in context. PURPOSE: To investigate the relation
of aerobic fitness on semantic language processing (N400) in 9-10 year
old children. METHODS: Higher- (> 70th percentile) and lower- (< 30th
percentile) fitness groups were formed based on participant’s respective
VO2 max percentiles. Neuroelectric measures were recorded while participants read 160 sentences, with half of the sentences containing either
a semantic or syntactic violation. Participants indicated if a sentence contained a violation via a button press. The N400 for target words was
compared across the 3 sentence types. RESULTS: Behavioral results
revealed a trend in which higher-fit participants were more accurate and
took less time deciding if sentences contained violations. Neuroelectric
findings replicated previous work demonstrating that N400 amplitude is
larger for semantically anomalous words, and indicated that N400
amplitude was larger and peaked slightly earlier in the higher-fit group
relative to the lower-fit group across all three sentence types. CONCLUSION: Findings from this study extend a large body of research suggesting that aerobic fitness is beneficial to cognition, and extend the area of
research to semantic language processing, which may have implications
for aspects of scholastic achievement.

F72
NEURAL CORRELATES OF METRIC AND SEMANTIC EXPECTANCY

Kathrin Rothermich1,2, Sonja A. Kotz2; 1BRAMS, Université de Montréal,
Canada, 2Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences,
Leipzig, Germany — During speech perception listeners make use of different temporal and rhythmic cues while processing lexical information. In
stress-timed languages speech rhythm is mainly constituted of alternating stressed and unstressed syllables (called ‘meter’). This prominent
pattern leads to perceptual regularity and allows anticipating upcoming
stressed syllables in the speech stream. This anticipation, in turn, influences the integration of future words into sentence context (Rothermich
et al., in press). The goal of the present functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) study was to explore the neural correlates of metric and

171

Poster Session F — Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
semantic expectancies. More specifically, we examined the nature of the
relationship of these two forms of expectancies in an auditory sentence
context. Furthermore, we studied how attention to task influences
semantic and metric processing and how it may lead to activation of
dedicated brain networks. Our results in both tasks show that regular
meter facilitates semantic as well as metric processing in fronto-temporal
areas. In addition, the metric task accentuates activation of sensorimotor
areas (such as basal ganglia, pre-SMA, thalamus, and insula) in speech
perception. Also, anatomically distinct areas in the left IFG respond to
semantic and metric expectancy, displaying a rostral-caudal gradient in
the prefrontal cortex. Implications of our findings are discussed within a
subcortico-cortical speech processing framework (Kotz & Schwartze,
2010).

F73
GENDER DIFFERENCES IN INTERHEMISPHERIC ERP SYNCHRONY FOR
NON-LITERAL LANGUAGE (“JOKES”) PROCESSING Paul Moes1, Elissa

Lier1, William Medendorp1; 1Calvin College — Coulson and colleagues (e.g.,
Coulson & Williams, 2004) have shown hemisphere asymmetries of
Event Related Potentials (ERP) for joke-sentence endings that involve a
semantic frame-shift. These studies point to right frontal dominance in
processing verbal humor, but few studies have examined individual differences using this paradigm. In addition, no studies have examined the
extent to which hemispheres synchronize activity when processing language. Given the greater bilateral representation of literal language processing in some females (Vikingstad et al., 2000) we hypothesized that
females would show reduced left-right hemisphere asymmetry for the
N400 component of the ERP wave in response to joke endings. In addition, we hypothesized that females would show greater left-right ERP
synchrony for the 300-500 msec. latency segment of the ERP wave.
Visual half-field presentations were used to display three types of singleword sentence endings: 1) “Joke” ending (unexpected meaning; low
probability), 2) “non-joke” ending (expected meaning; low probability),
or 3) “filler” ending (expected meaning; high probability). Primary measures were N400 amplitude, and individual-participant “lead-pair” (i.e.,
left-right pairs) cross-correlation coefficients (e.g., over the 300-500 msec.
span). Gender differences in asymmetry were found, but mostly for literal-expected sentence endings. However, females showed significantly
greater synchrony between left-right lead pairs across conditions. In
addition, females showed greater left-right synchrony for RVF/LH trials
with filler endings, but greater synchrony for LVF/RH trials with nonjoke and joke endings; males showed the reverse pattern. Results point
to gender differences in asymmetry and synchrony, but also suggest that
asymmetry and synchrony represent independent measurement constructs.

F74
IN SEARCH OF MEANING: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE OF
SEMANTIC PROCESSING IN THE CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES

Padmapriya Kandhadai1, Edward W. Wlotko2, Laura Giffin2, Kara D.
Federmeier2; 1University of British Columbia, 2University of Illinois — In a set
of event-related potential studies, we examined the neural bases of hemispheric differences in semantic representation and activation by varying
the type of semantic relation, the strength of relation and the lateralization of semantic context. Participants saw strongly and weakly related
prime-target pairs that were either associated (strong: stray-cat, weak:
attend-show) or categorically related (strong: church-mosque, weak:
temple-school), or unrelated to each other (sum-stage). In a visual halffield design, central primes were followed by lateralized targets in
experiment 1 whereas primes and targets were both lateralized in experiment 2. Participants made delayed semantic judgments between primes
and targets. Target N400 activation showed greater semantic priming
with central primes than with lateral primes. Whereas both strongly and
weakly related pairs were facilitated in both left and right hemispheres
(LH and RH) with central primes, only strongly related pairs were facilitated in both hemispheres with lateral primes. There was a LH benefit
for strong associates with central primes but no hemispheric differences

172

emerged with lateral primes. Across both studies, contrary to existing
theories, weak categorically related pairs were facilitated more in the LH
than in the RH. Finally, the results also show that LH but not RH N400
facilitation for weakly related information was correlated with the participants’ behavioral judgments. Thus both hemispheres are able to activate associative and categorically related information but the LH might
be better able to utilize the context to activate weakly related information
leading to better explicit meaning apprehension even with weak contextual support.

F75
NEURAL CORRELATES OF TREATMENT EFFECTS ON ABSTRACT AND
CONCRETE WORDS IN APHASIA: A PILOT STUDY Chaleece Sandberg1,

Swathi Kiran1; 1Boston University — Persons with aphasia who are trained
to generate abstract words in a specific context improve not only on the
trained abstract items, but also on untrained concrete items in the same
context (Kiran, Sandberg, & Abbott, 2009). It is unknown what the
underlying mechanisms for this type of generalization are and if dissociable neural correlates of abstract and concrete word processing
(Binder, Desai, Graves, & Conant, 2009) is a factor. The current study
examined the neural activation patterns of abstract and concrete word
processing in three persons with aphasia (1 female) before and after a
word retrieval treatment for abstract words within a specific context
(e.g., hospital). During both (pre- and post-treatment) fMRI scans, participants completed two different tasks specifically designed to elicit
abstract and concrete word processing. All three participants improved
on the trained abstract items and two of the three participants also
showed generalization to untrained concrete words in the same context.
Additionally, all three participants showed increased activation from
pre- to post-treatment for both abstract and concrete words in left hemisphere language areas such as inferior frontal gyrus and middle temporal gyrus. This is in the face of relatively large and varying lesions.
Nevertheless, subtle individual differences emerge among participants,
between tasks, and between abstract and concrete words. These tentative
results suggest that in general, success in treatment (including generalization from abstract to concrete words) is related to increased left hemisphere activation for both abstract and concrete words from pre- to posttreatment.

F76
STRENGTH OF NEGATION AND LICENSING NEGATIVE POLARITY ITEMS:
AN ERP STUDY Ming Xiang1, Anastasia Giannakidou1, Steve SanPietro1,

Julian Grove1; 1University of Chicago — Negative polarity items (NPI) such

as "ever" and "any" are known to be subject to particular semantic and
pragmatic licensing conditions, but the exact nature of the licensing condition is still under debate. Using ERP recording, the current study compared 4 grammatical licensing conditions with one unlicensed condition
(Item=150, Subj=33). Following a context sentence “War and Peace was
such a long novel.”, participants saw one of the five conditions: a/b/c.
“No/Few/Only Russian literature students could ever finish it.”;
d.“Russian literature students were glad they could ever finish it.”; and
e. “Russian literature students could ever finish it.”. On the critical word,
the unlicensed condition (e) showed a larger posterior P600 (between
400-600ms) compared to the licensor "no" (a) and "only" (c) (ps<.05), but
not relative to the licensor "few" (b) and emotive factives such as "glad"
(d)(ps>.1) At the sentence final word, however, (e) showed a larger
extended positivity (400-1000ms) compared to all 4 grammatical conditions (ps<.05). In an offline rating study (subj=19, on a 1-5 scale), all 4
grammatical conditions received significant higher ratings than the
ungrammatical (e) (ps<.01). We conclude that (i). the licensing is carried
out in a two-stage process: an early stage of grammatical computations
and a late stage of pragmatic assessment; (ii). the critical feature that is
being computed in both stages is the negativity of the licensing environment rather than the logical downward entailment (DE) property, contrary to the long-held assumption (since Ladusaw 1979) that DE is a
fundamental semantic property underlying NPI licensing.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session F

F77
EFFECTS OF SEMANTIC CONTEXT ON THE SYNTACTIC AND SEMANTIC
P600 Alexis Cook1, Martin Paczynski1, Gina Kuperberg1,2; 1Tufts University,

F79
ASSESSING RECOLLECTION AND FAMILIARITY OF SIMILAR LURES IN A
VISUAL PATTERN SEPARATION TASK Michael Yassa1, Jennifer Kim1;

P600
event-related potential (ERP) is thought to reflect continued analysis in
response to syntactically ill-formed propositions (e.g. “the ladies would
curtseys…”) and sometimes to semantically highly implausible/impossible propositions (e.g. “the trumpets would curtsey…”). We have
hypothesized that it is enhanced when anomalous propositions conflict
with alternative competing representations. We examined the role of
context in generating such competing representations by examining
ERPs to violated verbs in two experiments. In Experiment 1, the anomalies were presented without context while in Experiment 2, they were
preceded by a semantically constraining context (e.g. “In front of the
Queen of England…”). In both experiments, we observed robust P600
effects to both syntactic and semantic anomalies (relative to non-violated
verbs, e.g. “the ladies would curtsey”). Both syntactic and semantic P600
effects, however, were significantly larger in Experiment 2 (with context)
than Experiment 1 (no context). In addition, an N400 effect was evoked
to both syntactic and semantic violations in Experiment 1 but not Experiment 2. We suggest that a constraining semantic context biases towards
the generation of an alternative semantic representation, possibly
through prediction, and that the enhanced P600 reflected the additional
costs required to override this representation in order to arrive at the correct (anomalous) interpretation of the input. More generally, these findings provide further evidence for highly dynamic interactions between
semantic and syntactic processing during sentence comprehension.

1Johns Hopkins University — Whether

the hippocampus is selectively
involved in recollection or supports both recollection and familiarity is
subject to much debate. Recent proposals have suggested that recollection may be dependent on hippocampal pattern separation, while familiarity may rely more on computing a global match. In order to
investigate the potential relationship between recollection-mediated recognition memory and pattern separation, we crossed a commonly used
design to test recollection and familiarity (the Remember/Know paradigm) with a visual object recognition task that uses similar lures. Subjects (n=49) classified pictures as “old”, “similar”, or “new” based on the
objects seen during study. In addition, after each response, participants
were asked to indicate if they Remember (R) or just Know (K) that
they’ve seen the stimulus before. As expected, we found that R
responses were higher than K for items labeled “similar”. Surprisingly,
however, we also found that R responses were higher on false alarms
(similar items labeled “old”), suggesting that recollection is just as frequent for false memories that do not engage pattern separation. When
we categorized lures according to their mnemonic similarity, we found
that R responses increased as a function of dissimilarity for “similar”
responses” and increased as a function of similarity for “old” responses.
Together, these results suggest that recollection is dissociable from pattern separation, and that, at least to the extent that the R/K procedure is
a valid test of recollection and familiarity, false alarms to critical lures are
not simply driven by familiarity responses.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic

F80
INTACT CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF SPATIALLY COHERENT
MENTAL IMAGES IN MEMORY-IMPAIRED PATIENTS WITH HIPPOCAMPAL
LESIONS. Soyun Kim1, Grégoire Borst2, William Thompson3, Ramona

2Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital — The

F78
THE FUNCTIONAL IMPORTANCE OF FMRI RESTING STATE
CONNECTIVITY Cornelia McCormick1,2, Maher Quraan1, Melanie Cohn1,3,
Valiante2,4,

McAndrews1,2,3; 1Krembil

Taufik
Mary Pat
Neuroscience Center &
Toronto Western Research Institute, 2Institute of Medical Sciences, University
of Toronto, 3Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, 4Department of
Neurosurgery, University of Toronto — Emerging research supports the utility of resting-state connectivity (RSC) in distinguishing between healthy
individuals and patients with neurological and/or psychiatric diseases.
However, the functional importance of RSC remains unclear. Temporal
lobe epilepsy (TLE) can be used to address this issue because it causes
focal damage to the hippocampus (HC), a component of the default network, and functional impairment of episodic memory. Here, we examined resting-state fMRI of 19 controls and 38 patients with TLE (20 right,
18 left), using a seed in the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) to identify
patterns of connectivity with the medial temporal regions in each hemisphere. First, we found symmetrical PCC-HC connectivity in controls
whereas patients with TLE showed reduced connectivity to the damaged
HC and increased connectivity to the contralateral HC. Second, to examine the functional importance of RSC, we correlated material-specific
memory measures with PCC-HC connectivity. In controls, verbal memory increased with PCC-LHC connectivity, whereas non-verbal memory
increased with PCC-RHC connectivity. TLE patients, who showed material-specific memory impairments (verbal for LTLE, non-verbal for
RTLE), nonetheless demonstrated a similar pattern: connectivity to the
damaged HC correlated positively with relevant memory performance.
Third, in a subgroup (8 LTLE, 10 RTLE), we correlated pre-surgical connectivity with post-surgical memory change. In both groups, stronger
connectivity to the damaged (and subsequently removed) HC predicted
greater decline in relevant memory performance. Interestingly, stronger
connectivity to the contralateral HC predicted better memory outcomes.
These findings reveal the potential power of RSC to assess functional
integrity of cognitive systems.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Hopkins4,5, Stephen Kosslyn6, Larry Squire1,7; 1University of California, San
Diego, 2Université Paris Descartes - Sorbonne Paris Cité, France, 3Harvard
University, 4Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 5Intermountain Medical
Center, Murray, Utah, 6Stanford University, 7Veterans Affairs Healthcare
System, San Diego — We evaluated the proposal that the hippocampus is

necessary for constructing a spatially coherent mental image. We implemented two spatial mental imagery tasks that required participants to
construct, maintain, and operate on a spatial mental image. The first task
involved mental paper folding, and the second task required participants to hold images of objects in mind while deciding whether an arrow
was or was not pointing in the direction of an object’s prior location. The
arrowhead could be any of three distances from that location. In the
mental folding task, response times typically increase with each additional fold; in the arrow task, response times typically increase with
greater distance to scan from the arrow to the object. In both tasks,
patients with circumscribed hippocampal lesions performed as well as
controls. Moreover, the response times of patient and control groups
increased with more folds or greater distances to scan, implying that participants were using mental imagery to perform each task. The results
suggest that the hippocampus is not needed to construct, maintain, or
operate on at least some kinds of spatial mental images.

F81
FAMILIARITY MEMORY IS MULTIPLY DETERMINED: EVIDENCE FROM
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL ANALYSES OF LETTER FLUENCY Heather D.
Lucas1, Ken A. Paller1; 1Northwestern University — The neural mechanisms

that underlie familiarity are frequently investigated, but a consensus
understanding has been elusive. The extent to which familiarity shares
sources with implicit memory phenomena is one current topic of debate.
By some accounts, familiarity is tied specifically to conceptual implicit
memory, given that familiarity and conceptual priming are influenced
similarly by many manipulations and exhibit similar neural correlates.
However, less attention has been paid to the fact that familiarity can also
be driven by perceptual factors and thus might relate to perceptual

173

Poster Session F — Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
implicit memory in some circumstances. Here we examined neural correlates of familiarity during recognition testing using a procedure
whereby fluency for words was enhanced at the letter level (Alan Parkin
and colleagues, 2001). Studied and unstudied words were derived either
from two separate letter pools or a single letter pool (“letter-segregated”
and “unsegregated” conditions, respectively) in a within-subjects contrast. As predicted, recognition accuracy was higher in the letter-segregated relative to the unsegregated condition. ERP analyses revealed
typical parietal old-new effects from 500-700 ms in both conditions.
Additional parietal-occipital old-new effects from 300-500 ms were
present in the letter-segregated condition only. These effects continued
through 500-700 ms and remained topographically dissociable from
those in the unsegregated condition. In conjunction with other evidence,
these findings show that familiarity is a multiply determined phenomenon that can arise from a variety of neurocognitive sources. Conceptual
versus perceptual contributions to familiarity vary across testing circumstances, and both must be accounted for in conceptualizations of recognition memory and its neural basis.

F82
THE SPATIOTEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF SOURCE RECOLLECTION Zara

Bergstrom1, Richard Henson2, Jon Simons1; 1University of Cambridge, 2MRC
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge — fMRI research suggests
that different frontal and parietal regions support strategic processes
that are engaged at different stages of recollection, from pre-retrieval
processing of a cue to post-retrieval maintenance or evaluation of
retrieved information. Whereas some of these regions respond in a content-general way, other regions are sensitive to the type of information
being recollected. However, because fMRI has low temporal resolution,
it cannot distinguish component processes at the time-scale at which recollection occurs. We therefore combined fMRI with source localisation of
EEG/MEG—which has excellent temporal resolution—in order to investigate the spatiotemporal neural dynamics of recollection. fMRI and
EEG/MEG data was collected from the same participants while they
retrieved two different types of source information. These source recollection conditions were contrasted and compared against a common
semantic retrieval control condition. For content-general recollection,
results from both modalities converged in showing the strongest activations in parietal cortex. According to the EEG/MEG time-course, this
activation was reliable at a post-recollection stage. Content-specific
source recollection increased fMRI and EEG/MEG activation in the left
lateral PFC, and EEG/MEG again suggested that this region was
recruited at a post-retrieval stage. The results show remarkable consistency between regions identified with fMRI and EEG/MEG, and the
combination of methods provide novel evidence of how these regions
interact over time to support source recollection. The results suggest that
although left lateral PFC and posterior parietal cortex may have different
functional roles during recollection, both regions are involved in postretrieval processing.

F83
PROSPECTIVE MEMORY IN AGE GROUPS 18-29 AND 80+ WITH THE
MEMORY FOR INTENTIONS TEST (MIST) Sarah Raskin1, Navneet Kaur1,

Sarah Isaac1, Dana Estefan1, Ginger Mills1, David Correll1; 1Trinity College —

The purpose of this study was to compare the prospective memory of
healthy adults in different age groups. The Memory for Intentions Test
(MIST) was administered, a laboratory measure of prospective memory.
This test includes both event-cued and time-cued items as well as a 24hour delay item. We hypothesized that older subjects would perform
better than younger subjects on the delayed task but that the younger
people would perform better on laboratory tasks. This hypothesis was
based on the age paradox, the tendency of older people to perform better
on real world tasks and younger people to perform better on laboratory
tasks. The data demonstrated no significant difference between the performance of people who are 18-29 and the people who are 80+ years on
the delayed prospective memory task, as the age paradox would predict.
However, younger people scored better on the MIST overall and made

174

fewer errors. This suggests that the age paradox may only apply in conditions where individuals are able to use compensatory strategies.

F84
STRONGER TOGETHER THAN APART: IMPROVING MEMORY THROUGH
UNITIZATION. Jamie Murray1, David I Donaldson1; 1University of Stirling —
Episodic memory retrieval can be enhanced by ‘unitization’ - the encoding of multiple separate items as a single holistic stimulus. Unitization
can even alleviate recognition deficits experienced by individuals with
selective memory impairments, resulting in increased familiarity during
retrieval. Here we investigate the effectiveness of interactive imagery as
a strategy for encouraging unitization. Studies of associative recognition
memory have previously shown that interactive imagery (imagining the
concepts together) encourages unitization of related word pairs (e.g.,
traffic-jam or fountain-pen). The present study asked whether interactive
imagery also encourages unitization of novel associations formed
between un-related word pairs (e.g. butterfly-glasses or wolf-butler), ruling out the contribution of pre-experimental unitization. During an associative recognition task participants encoded un-related word pairs,
either by creating mental images of each word separately, or by imagining the words interacting together. Behavioural results revealed that
intact word pairs were recognized faster and more accurately when
encoded using interactive compared to item imagery. Event-Related
Potentials (ERPs) recorded at test allowed the neural correlates of familiarity (the 300-500ms bilateral mid-frontal old/new effect) and recollection (the 500-800ms left parietal old/new effect) to be examined. ERP
results demonstrated an increase in the magnitude of familiarity for
word pairs remembered using interactive imagery but not item imagery.
By contrast, recollection did not differ following item and interactive
encoding. The present data provides further evidence that unitization
selectively enhances familiarity and, moreover, suggests that interactive
imagery is an effective technique for creating unitized representations
even when to-be-remembered stimuli are novel un-related associations.

F85
EARLY DEVELOPMENT OF EPISODIC MEMORY IS NECESSARY FOR
THEORY OF MIND ONLY UNDER SOME CONDITIONS: EVIDENCE FROM
DEVELOPMENTAL AMNESIA Jennifer S. Rabin1, Anna Braverman1, Donald

T. Stuss2,3,4, R. Shayna Rosenbaum1,2; 1York University, 2Rotman Research
Institute, 3University of Toronto, 4Ontario Brain Institute — Remembering
one’s own past experiences in episodic memory (EM) and inferring other
people’s current mental experiences by having a theory of mind (ToM)
are closely related in terms of the brain regions that they recruit and their
co-emergence in early development. Findings of intact ToM in individuals with adult-onset amnesia who have impaired EM have called into
question the causal nature of this relationship; still unknown is whether
the normal development of one is necessary for the normal development
of the other. To examine this possibility, we conducted a comprehensive
assessment of ToM integrity in a developmental amnesic person (H.C.)
who never developed normal EM due to bilateral hippocampal damage
sustained early in life but who nonetheless can form semantic memories.
H.C. performed as control participants did on all standard tests of ToM,
whether the mental state inference involved detecting a false belief, faux
pas, or intent that was sarcastic, empathic, or deceptive in nature. Reliance on facial expression, intonation, or motion cues to infer others’
minds was similarly inconsequential to her performance. One exception
was impaired performance on a novel, naturalistic test that involved
imagining others’ thoughts and feelings in response to photographs of
familiar and unfamiliar individuals experiencing everyday situations.
The results suggest that in amnesia, performance on laboratory-based
tests of ToM may be achieved via the patients’ intact semantic memory.
In contrast, ToM as it occurs in the real world may depend on the development of detailed episodic representations or the processes shared
between EM and ToM.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session F

F86
MEDIAL TEMPORAL SCLEROSIS MODULATES THE NEURAL SIGNATURE
OF EPISODIC MEMORY IN PATIENTS WITH TEMPORAL LOBE EPILEPSY
Marie St-Laurent1,2,3, Morris Moscovitch1,3, Mary Pat McAndrews1,2;
1
University of Toronto, Canada, 2Toronto Western Research Institute and
Krembil Neuroscience Center, Canada, 3Rotman Research Institute, Toronto,
Canada — Mesial temporal sclerosis (MTS) is commonly observed in indi-

viduals who suffer from medial temporal lobe epilepsy (mTLE). MTS
affects the integrity of hippocampal tissue, a structure known to play a
role in long-term memory; however, the mechanisms through which
MTS affects memory are not well understood. Our goal was to assess
how the presence of MTS modulates the neural correlates of memory
tasks known to engage the hippocampus at retrieval. We tested individuals with right-lateralized TLE on a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) task in which individuals retrieved episodic memories with
(autobiographical events) and without (laboratory events) personal relevance. We used FreeSurfer, an automated brain segmentation software,
to quantify hippocampal volume asymmetry, which is a marker of MTS.
Then, we conducted a multivariate analysis (Partial Least Squares) that
assessed global patterns of brain activation correlating with MTS within
our memory tasks. Greater right MTS was associated with poor modulation of task-relevant activity in the right hemisphere. Specifically, we
observed reduced activation in several regions typically engaged during
episodic memory retrieval (including the hippocampus, posterior cingulate cortex and angular gyrus) and reduced de-activation in regions typically ‘turned down’ during retrieval relative to our baseline condition
(including the lingual gyrus and middle frontal gyrus). Further, greater
atrophy correlated positively with magnitude of activation in left-lateralized regions typically engaged in retrieval such as the angular and inferior frontal gyri. Our results provide brain-wide neural mechanisms
through which focal damage to the medial temporal lobe can disrupt the
recollection of memory episodes.

F87
QUALITATIVELY DISTINCT MEMORY PROCESSES DURING THE COURSE
OF AN EPISODIC RETRIEVAL TASK Lucy Sykes1, Lisa Evans1, Damian

Cruse1, Edward Wilding1; 1Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre
investigated
(CUBRIC), School of Psychology, Cardiff University — We
changes in neural activity over the course of a memory retrieval task,
assuming that the demands placed on monitoring the contents of
retrieval would increase as the numbers of stimuli to which memory
judgments were required also increased. Participants first studied words
in one of two colours. Studied and new words were then presented in a
neutral colour. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were acquired while people made old/new and then study colour judgments to the test words.
The differences between ERPs associated with correct judgments to new
words (correct rejections) and correct colour judgments to old words
were compared for the first and the second halves of the retrieval task.
These ERP old/new effects differed qualitatively from approximately
1000ms post-stimulus, indicating that not entirely the same retrieval processes were operating in support of accurate memory judgments over
the retrieval task. The absence of evidence for this change in another
experiment where auditory rather than visual contexts were used at
study suggests the outcome is not simply an effect of time on task. It is
possible that the effects specific to the second half of the retrieval task
index additional processes engaged as the demands placed on distinguishing between similar memory representations increase. Irrespective
of the accuracy of this account, the findings indicate there are circumstances where making functional inferences about patterns of neural
activity in brain imaging experiments based on data averaged over the
entirety of retrieval tasks might lead to inaccurate functional characterisations.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition
F88
NEURAL PLASTICITY OF AUDITORY-VOCAL INTEGRATION FOLLOWING
SHORT-TERM PITCH TRAINING Hanjun Liu1, Zhaocong Chen1, Francis

Wong2, Peng Liu1, Dongfeng Huang1; 1Department of Rehabilitation Medicine,
The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, P. R. China,
510080, 2Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders,
Northwestern University, Evanston, U.S.A., 60208 — Speech perception and
production are tightly coupled, and both skills activate many overlapping regions of the brain. Neural mechanisms underlying auditory-vocal
integration, however, are poorly understood. By examining the cortical
responses to pitch errors in auditory feedback during vocalization following short-term pitch training, the present study was to address how
perceptual learning of vocal pitch cues can alter the neural processing of
auditory-vocal integration. Within a five-day perceptual training, native
Mandarin-speaking adults learned to identify English pseudosyllables
superimposed with five lexical pitch patterns of Thai language. At the
time course of before, immediately after, and one week after training,
both the experimental and the control subjects participated in a vocalization experiment, where they heard their voice pitch in auditory feedback
shifted briefly and randomly during a sustained vocalization, and we
measured the cortical responses to these pitch perturbations. Following
training, the experimental subjects’ perception to lexical pitch patterns
was significantly improved as reflected by increased accuracy in differentiating the five lexical tones after training. Their cortical responses to
pitch perturbation in voice auditory feedback were significantly larger
after the pitch training than before training, and this training-induced
enhancement even existed a week after the training. These findings demonstrate a neural plasticity in the auditory-vocal integration following
perceptual speech learning, suggesting that our brain can effectively
adjust the mechanisms underlying voice motor control as it gets exposed
to dynamic changes in speech perception.

F89
WORKING MEMORY RELATES TO NEURAL TIMING IN OLDER ADULTS

Travis White-Schwoch1, Samira Anderson1, Alexandra Parbery-Clark1, Nina
Kraus1; 1Northwestern University — Successful speech perception relies on
the accurate neural encoding of sound. Delays in neural timing can
account for a wide array of auditory processing deficits. One population
at risk for these deficits is older adults; aging results in decreased neural
synchrony, increased neural recovery time, and a reduction in inhibitory
neurotransmitters —all important factors for precise neural encoding.
What’s more, cognitive abilities such as attention, working memory, and
overall executive function decline with age. Here, we investigated the
relationship between cognitive ability—specifically, auditory working
memory—and neural precision in older adults. Subjects comprised a
group of older adults (? 60 years old) with normal hearing who were
tested on cognitive measures of auditory working memory and neural
measures of speech encoding. Working memory related to neural timing, such that individuals with higher working memory capacities had
earlier neural response timing. As such, these results suggest that the
age-related declines in memory may be associated with deficits in temporal resolution. These findings contribute to our understanding of the
cognitive and neural implications of aging and have consequences for
potential remediation strategies. This work is supported by a NRSA
Institutional Training Grant (T32 DC009399-01A10) and the NIH (R01
DC01510).

F90
THE EFFECT OF EEG ALPHA PHASE ON AUDITORY EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS Adam J. Culbreth1, Molly A. Erickson1, William P. Hetrick1;
1Indiana University-Bloomington — Optimal

stimulus encoding is dependent upon the nervous system’s state of preparation. For instance, it has
been shown that perception of simple stimuli, such as tones and lights, is
dependent upon the phase of prestimulus alpha in the EEG at the

175

Poster Session F — Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
moment of stimulus onset (Lindsley, 1952). Despite a large body of
research, however, studies rarely consider the brain’s prestimulus state
when interpreting results, such as the meaning and modulation of eventrelated potential (ERP) waveforms. The present project determined the
influence of alpha phase at stimulus onset on the amplitude of the P50,
N100 and P200 ERPs produced by the first stimulus (S1) of a dual-click
sensory gating paradigm. Specifically, it was hypothesized that the ERP
amplitudes would be larger for stimuli that onset on a descending phase
of the alpha waveform. Two clicks were presented binaurally (500 ms
ISI), with a 7-11 inter-trial interval. Trials were divided according to
whether S1 onset occurred on the ascending or descending portion of the
alpha waveform. The results of this study supported the hypothesis; the
amplitudes of all three indices (P50, N100, P200) were significantly larger
when S1 onset occurred on a descending phase of alpha compared to the
ascending phase of alpha. Such findings have important implications for
interpretation of the relative contribution of S1 in the use of the dualclick paradigm.

F91
AUDITORY NON-SPEECH SKILLS PREDICT INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN
ADAPTATION TO DEGRADED SPEECH Julia Erb1, Molly Henry1, Frank
Eisner2,

Obleser1; 1Max

Jonas
Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics,
Nijmegen, Netherlands — Noise-vocoded speech is a spectrally highly
degraded signal but it preserves the temporal envelope of speech. Listeners vary considerably in their ability to adapt to this degraded speech
signal. Here, we hypothesized that individual differences in adaptation
to vocoded speech could be predicted by non-speech auditory, cognitive,
and neuroanatomical factors. We tested eighteen normal-hearing participants in a short-term vocoded speech learning paradigm (listening to
100 4-band-vocoded sentences). Non-speech auditory skills were
assessed using an amplitude modulation (AM) rate discrimination
experiment, where modulation rates were centered on the speech-relevant rate of 4Hz. Working memory capacities were evaluated, and structural brain scans were examined for anatomical predictors of vocoded
speech learning using voxel-based morphometry. Interestingly, listeners
who learned faster to understand degraded speech showed smaller just
noticeable difference thresholds in the AM rate discrimination task. Forward digit span also correlated positively with the ability to adapt to
degraded speech. Anatomical brain scans revealed that faster learners
had increased volume in the left thalamus (pulvinar). These results suggest that adaptation to vocoded speech benefits from individual AM rate
discrimination skills as both listening situations require the use of envelope cues in the auditory signal. Remarkably, this ability to adjust to
degraded speech is reflected anatomically in an increased volume in a
part of the thalamus which is strongly connected to the auditory and
prefrontal cortex. In summary, individual auditory skills that are not
speech-specific and left thalamus gray matter volume predict best how
fast a listener adapts to degraded speech.

F92
BEHAVIORALLY RELEVANT TRAINING-INDUCED PLASTIC CHANGES IN
AUDITORY SPATIAL REPRESENTATIONS Ayse At1, Lucas Spierer1,4, Micah

1
M.
Murray1,2,3,5,
Stephanie
Clarke1;
Neuropsychology
and
Neurorehabilitation Service, Clinical Neurosciences Department, CHUV,
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Radiology Service, Vaudois
University Hospital Center and University of Lausanne, CH-1011 Lausanne,
Switzerland, 3Electroencephalography Brain Mapping Core, Center for
Biomedical Imaging, CH-1011 Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Neurology Unit,
Medicine Dept, University of Fribourg, Switzerland, 5Department of Hearing
and Speech Sciences, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232 — Training-induced neuroplasticity often co-occurs

with behavioral improvements. However, the direct behavioral relevance of any such neuroplasticity remains unresolved. We addressed
whether plasticity in auditory spatial representations following 4 consecutive days of training differs for positions where performance improved

176

or not. Sixteen participants were trained on an auditory spatial discrimination task indicating whether pairs of right-lateralized sounds were at
the same or at different locations. Two lateralizations resulting in differing difficulty levels were trained, generating a 2x2 within-subject design
with factors of lateralization (easy/difficult) and day of training (1/4).
160-channel electroencephalography was recorded during the training
sessions on the 1st and 4th days. Discrimination sensitivity (as indexed
by d’) improved significantly for the easy, but not the difficult lateralization (significant interaction: F(1,15)=4.66; p<0.05). A time-wise topographic analysis of auditory evoked potentials (AEPs) revealed
significant Day×Position interactions over the 275-295ms post-firstsound onset and 150-175ms post-second-sound onset intervals. These
preliminary findings suggest that mechanisms of training-induced plastic changes differ as a function of the behavioral outcome of training perhaps through the differential involvement of neural circuitry involved in
comparing spatial representations.

F93
JUDGING DIFFERENT TEMPORAL FEATURES OF SOUND DRIVES
SEPARABLE NEURAL TIMING NETWORKS Molly J. Henry1, Merav
Ahissar2, Jonas Obleser1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel — Sub-

second timing is important for the perception and production of speech
and music. However, there is little consensus on the locus of the brain’s
‘internal clock’. In particular, comparing across studies generally means
comparing across both stimuli and tasks simultaneously, making conclusions in this regard difficult. Thus, the current auditory fMRI study carefully contrasted stimulus and task differences during sub-second timing
judgments. To reveal stimulus effects, listeners judged the duration of
sounds that were either amplitude-modulated (around 8 Hz) or unmodulated. To reveal task effects, listeners judged either the duration
(around 500 ms) or amplitude modulation rate of identical amplitude
modulated stimuli. Decisions about both duration and modulation rate
required discrimination of variations on the order of 100 ms. All conditions were matched in terms of difficulty. Stimulus effects included
amplitude-modulated sounds activating right supramarginal gyrus
more than unmodulated sounds, but were generally weaker than task
effects. The task effects speak against a unitary ‘internal clock’ network:
Duration judgments more than modulation judgments activated a number of areas standardly implicated in timing tasks, including supramarginal gyrus, inferior frontal gyrus, and bilateral basal ganglia.
Conversely, modulation judgments were associated with bilateral activations in somatosensory cortex, and bilateral anterior and posterior cingulate. The results suggest that separable brain networks are recruited to
discriminate different temporal features of sound, and thus suggest distributed, feature-dependent timing mechanisms.

F94
PREDICTING SOUNDS: BRAIN RESPONSES TO OMISSIONS OF SELFGENERATED SOUNDS Iria SanMiguel1, Erich Schröger1; 1Leipzig
University — We have sufficient indication that prediction affects the processing of incoming sensory information. Effects of prediction can be
observed, e.g., in an attenuation of sensory responses to self-generated
sounds or in the elicitation of the mismatch negativity to deviant stimuli.
However we still know very little about the form that the underlying
prediction leading to these effects takes in the human brain or whether
different effects of prediction might be achieved through a common neurophysiologic substrate that represents the specific prediction. We
hypothesize that sensory predictions are coded by specific patterns of
pre-activation present in the same neural populations that respond to the
predicted stimulus. To test this hypothesis, we have combined self-generation and regularity extraction into one paradigm to induce a strong,
specific prediction. By randomly omitting a predicted self-generated
auditory stimulus, we have isolated electrophysiological activity associated to the specific prediction. Event-related potentials to omissions of
self-generated sounds resembled responses to the actual sounds in timing and amplitude over temporal sites and localized to auditory cortex

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session F
by means of inverse source modelling. Further, we tested whether omission responses reflect the physical characteristics of the predicted stimulus contrasting omissions of self-generated sounds of extreme high vs.
low frequencies. Omission responses to extreme sound frequencies differed in the relative location of their sources on auditory cortex; again
mimicking responses to the actual presentation of the auditory stimuli.
Alltogether, these results suggest that indeed predictions are coded by at
least partly the same neural populations that respond to the predicted
stimulus.

F95
SENSORY-COGNITIVE INTERACTIONS PREDICT SPEECH-IN-NOISE
PERCEPTION: A STRUCTURAL EQUATION MODELING APPROACH

Samira Anderson1, Alexandra Parbery-Clark1, Travis White-Schwoch1, Nina
Kraus1; 1Northwestern University — Speech-in-noise perception is a complex task which relies on sensory, cognitive, and neural mechanisms.
This sensory-cognitive interaction is especially important for older
adults; age-related declines in sensory function and neural precision lead
to greater reliance on cognitive resources for understanding speech.
Here, we used structural equation modeling to investigate the interactions among sensory, cognitive, and neural processes engaged when listening to speech in noise. We obtained measures of hearing thresholds
and cochlear outer hair cell function, speech-in-noise performance, subcortical speech encoding, and cognitive ability (speed of processing,
memory, and attention) from a group of middle- to older-aged adults
(ages 45 to 79). A three-factor model demonstrated that measures reflecting sensory, cognitive, and neural processing all predicted speech-innoise performance. Neural measures of temporal precision are more
closely related to hearing thresholds and speech-in-noise performance
than are cognitive measures; nevertheless, cognitive ability plays a stronger role when listening to semantically and syntactically complex sentences. As such, our results highlight the neural mechanisms underlying
the reciprocal relationship between sensory and cognitive processes that
are engaged when listening in noise. This work is supported by a NRSA
Institutional Training Grant (T32 DC009399-01A10) and the NIH (R01
DC01510).

F96
DEFINING AUDITORY EXPERTISE USING MUSICIANS Erica R. Knowles1,
Alan C. N. Wong2, Valeriy Shafiro3, Patrick C. M. Wong1; 1Northwestern
University, 2The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 3Rush University — Recogni-

tion of perceptual categories is affected by experience. In the visual
domain, types and degrees of visual experience can lead to visual expertise, which is described through a hierarchical framework of object categorization. This framework consists of three levels: superordinate (e.g.,
animal), basic (e.g., bird), and subordinate (e.g., robin), with subordinate
being the most specific level of categorization. Based on this framework,
visual expertise is defined by the ability to categorize stimuli at the subordinate level as quickly as at the basic level (Tanaka & Taylor, 1991).
This definition of expertise has been fruitful in characterizing types of
visual expertise (Bukach, Gauthier, & Tarr, 2006). In the present study,
we examined whether such a framework can be extended to the auditory
domain by investigating auditory perception in musicians. Musicians
are ideal candidates for initial studies defining auditory expertise due to
their extensive experience with musical sound. Following visual
research, musician and non-musician participants were asked to make
categorical judgments at three levels: Level 1 (animal vs. musical instrument), Level 2 (string vs. brass), and Level 3 (violin vs. cello/horn vs.
trumpet). Musicians were found to be significantly faster at categorizing
stimuli at Level 2 than non-musicians. There was no difference in
response time between the groups at either Level 1 or 3. These results
suggest that perceptual expertise functions under a similar framework
across multiple sensory domains. Future research will consider characterizing auditory expertise outside the area of music, and will consider
perceptual expertise resulting from exposure to multi-sensory objects.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

F97
A MEG STUDY OF MUSIC PROCESSING BY BIMUSICALS: ARE THE
NEURAL ACTIVITY INVOLVING TONAL DISCRIMINATION DIFFERENT
BETWEEN HIGH- AND LOW-PROFICIENT BIMUSICALS? Rie

Matsunaga1, Yukari Asano1, Koichi Yokosawa1, Jun-ichi Abe1; 1Hokkaido
University — Bimusicals appreciate music of two distinct cultures and rely
on the established tonality of each culture to distinguish between the two
music. Our recent magnetoencephalography (MEG) study with ‘Western
music and traditional Japanese music’ bimusicals indicated that differences in the location of neural activation, rather than differences in either
the temporal properties or the strength of this activation, contributed to
bimusicals’ tonal discrimination. However, in that study the bimusicals
were less proficient in traditional Japanese music while they had excellent command of Western music. Thus, our recent findings could be
ascribed to proficiency level. The present study used a similar paradigm
to assess the effect of high and low proficiency of traditional Japanese
music. We used a group of nine high proficient (HP) bimusicals who
have had special training of Japanese music and a group of nine low proficient (LP) bimusicals who have not. Both groups were comparable in
proficiency level of Western music. Early-right-anterior-negativity
(ERAN) elicited by out-of-key tones in Japanese music was significantly
earlier in HP than LP, but those in Western music was not different
between HP and LP. The results indicate that peak latency of ERAN is
modulated by proficiency level. Despite of such proficient effect, the difference in peak latency of ERAN between Western and Japanese music
was not observed in not only LP but also HP. Thus, it is likely that the
temporal properties of neural activity did not contribute to the tonal discrimination between Western and traditional Japanese music.

F98
ATTENUATION OF AUDITORY ERP RESPONSES RESULTS FROM
ACCURATE ACTION-EFFECT PREDICTION. Gethin Hughes1,2, Andrea

Desantis1,2, Florian Waszak1,2; 1Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris
Cité, 2CNRS (Laboratoire Psychologie de la Perception, UMR 8158), Paris —
The auditory N1 event-related potential has previously been observed to
be attenuated to tones that are triggered by human actions. This attenuation is thought to be generated by motor prediction mechanisms and is
considered to be important for agency attribution. The aim of the present
study was to test the degree to which action-effect predictability and prediction accuracy influence N1 attenuation. Participants performed one of
four actions (two with the left- and two with the right-hand) on each trial
that was followed by one of two tones. Two of the actions resulted in
predictable tones (probability of 1 for one tone and 0 for the other tone),
while the other two actions resulted in unpredictable tones (probability
of 0.5 for each tone). In addition, button presses with each hand were
associated with an overall probability of 0.75 for one tone and 0.25 for
the other tone. This meant that even tones that were unpredictable based
on the specific button press were partially predictable based on the overall hand-prediction. We analyzed both the differences between predictable and unpredictable tones, and, within the unpredictable condition,
trials that were congruent or incongruent with the hand-dependent prediction. We observed no significant differences in N1 amplitude between
predictable and unpredictable tones. Congruent tones resulted in significantly attenuated N1 amplitude compared to incongruent tones. These
novel findings suggest that accurate action-effect prediction drives sensory attenuation of auditory stimuli.

THINKING: Development & aging
F99
THE NEURAL DEVELOPMENT OF ARITHMETIC: TASK-DEPENDENT
RECYCLING OF NUMERICAL AND VERBAL MECHANISMS Rachna

Mutreja1, Jérôme Prado1, James R. Booth1; 1Northwestern University — The

neural recycling hypothesis posits that learning arithmetic relies on the
progressive ‘‘recycling’’ of evolutionary older neural circuits dedicated
to magnitude comparison in the intraparietal sulcus (IPS). It has been

177

Poster Session F — Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
suggested, however, that the degree to which IPS mechanisms are recycled depends upon the degree of similarity with the novel task. For
example, IPS mechanisms are more likely to be used when learning
arithmetic concepts that involve number comparison (e.g., single-digit
subtraction) than arithmetic concepts relying on the retrieval of number
facts from verbal memory (e.g., single-digit multiplication). To investigate this issue, we asked typically developing children from ages 8 to 14
to evaluate single-digit subtraction and multiplication problems while in
an fMRI scanner. We found that a region of the right IPS that was localized by a magnitude comparison task was increasingly involved in evaluating subtraction problems with age. Such developmental change,
however, was specific to subtraction problems. First, we observed a
developmental decrease of activity in this IPS region during multiplication problem-solving. Second, with increasing age, multiplication problems were increasingly associated with a region of the left Middle
Temporal Gyrus (MTG) that was localized by a verbal processing task.
Consistent with the recycling hypothesis, these findings suggest that the
neural systems underlying magnitude comparison are recycled during
the acquisition of arithmetic concepts that involve number comparison
(i.e., subtraction). However, acquiring arithmetic concepts that are typically taught by verbal memorization (i.e., multiplication) rather rely on
the brain systems representing verbal semantic knowledge in the left
temporal cortex.

F100
AGE AND GENDER DIFFERENCES IN THE FEEDBACK-RELATED
NEGATIVITY (FRN) IN A SIMPLE GAMBLING TASK. Jill
Grose-Fifer1,2,
Katherine Navarro1,3, Lillian Pena1, Alison Higgins1, Brooke Chiusano1,
Danielle Mascarelli1, Tina Zottoli2,4; 1John Jay College of Criminal Justice,
CUNY, 2The Graduate Center, CUNY, 3Queens College, CUNY, 4Saint Joseph's
College, NY — Risk taking is more pervasive in adolescent males than in

other groups. To investigate whether this increased prevalence might be
related to relative differences in feedback processing, we investigated
the effects of age and gender on the feedback related negativity (FRN).
The EEG was recorded from both adults (25-35 years old) and adolescents (13-17 years old) in a simple monetary gambling task. Participants
selected one of two colored cards that appeared on a computer screen
and then received feedback about their choice. Consistent with previous
studies, the event-related potential elicited by feedback (FRN) was found
be larger to losses than to wins, and was also larger in adolescents compared to adults. However, follow-up ANOVAs indicated that both adult
and adolescent males showed a significant Magnitude (large, small) x
Valence (win, loss) interaction, whereas females did not. Females
showed a clear differentiation between wins and losses of either magnitude, whereas males processed a small win much like a loss. These data
suggest that large rewards might be more reinforcing for males than for
females and therefore, might help to explain why males are more likely
to engage in risk taking in real-world contexts. Furthermore, boys
showed relatively longer latency FRNs to large losses in comparison to
girls. In another study, we have shown that FRN latency correlates with
risk taking on a behavioral gambling task. Therefore, these data suggest
that sensitivity to feedback processing, as evidenced by the FRN, may be
a sensitive predictor of risk taking in adolescents.

F101
THE FUTURE IS NOW: DIFFERENCES BETWEEN ADOLESCENTS AND
ADULTS IN THE NEURAL AND BEHAVIORAL MARKERS OF
INTERTEMPORAL CHOICE EVALUATION Dustin Albert1, Jason Chein2,

Ashley Smith2, Kaitlyn Uckert3, Laurence Steinberg2; 1Duke University, 2Temple
University, 3University of California at Los Angeles — Prior research suggests
that adolescents are drawn to the temptations of immediate rewards to a
greater degree than adults. Dual-process accounts of adolescent decision
making posit that this bias derives from a developmentally normative
imbalance in the neural dynamics underlying adolescent choice behavior, such that immature cognitive control circuitry lacks the processing
efficiency and functional integration to effectively modulate subcortical

178

circuitry exhibiting heightened sensitivity to the approach value of
immediately available rewards. The present study utilized fMRI to
examine differences between middle/late adolescents (N=20, ages 13-21)
and adults (N=20, ages 25-34) in neural activity and choice behavior corresponding to the comparative evaluation of sooner-smaller and largerlater rewards in an intertemporal choice task. Behavioral results confirm
that adolescents are more inclined than adults to sacrifice the added
value of a larger future reward in order to receive a smaller reward
immediately. Furthermore, relative to adults, adolescents evince stronger evaluation-related engagement of brain regions implicated in incentive processing (including bilateral caudate), consistent with a
processing bias favoring the immediate reward properties of choice
stimuli. In addition, adolescents show stronger deactivation of regions
implicated in cognitive control (including anterior cingulate and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex) when evaluating rewards with relatively longer
delays, consistent with a failure to carefully consider the value of future
rewards. Together, results suggest that neurodevelopmental theories of
adolescent decision making would be improved by more explicit modeling of age differences in the neural processes underlying evaluation of
the temporal properties of rewards.

F102
UNDERSTANDING LESS THAN NOTHING: A DEVELOPMENTAL FMRI
STUDY OF NEGATIVE NUMBER COMPARISONS Margaret
Gullick1,

George Wolford1; 1Dartmouth College — Little work has examined our

understanding of counterintuitive quantities like negative numbers,
which reverse the established relationship between digit magnitude and
value, and how this processing develops. This study examined adults’
and children’s responses to negative and positive numbers in a simple
paired comparison task performed during an fMRI session. Adults demonstrated a typical distance effect for negative numbers, with activity in
the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) increasing as comparison distance
decreased; further, adults generally showed more brain activity in the
IPS and caudate for negative number comparisons than for positive.
Fifth-grade children (who had not yet learned about negative numbers
in school) were 83% accurate for negative numbers, but showed a
reversed effect of distance in the IPS for negatives and more parietal and
subcortical activity for positive than negative comparisons. Seventhgrade children (who had at least one year of instruction on negatives)
demonstrated 86% accuracy and an adult-like IPS distance effect for negatives, but still showed more activity parietal lobe for positive than negative pairs. As such, adults demonstrated typical comparison effects for
negative numbers in basic quantity-related brain areas, but also drew on
supplementary areas including the caudate. Children’s pre-instruction
treatment of negative numbers was not adult-like; after a limited amount
of instruction on and practice with negative numbers, children’s neural
comparison effects approached those of adults but were not completely
mature. These changes in response patterns suggest a shift in negative
number understanding, and perhaps flexibility in the mental number
system.

F103
COMMON NEURAL MECHANISMS OF ARITHMETIC IN EDUCATED
ADULTS AND PREVERBAL INFANTS Daniel Hyde1, Kenneth Parreno1,

Elizabeth Spelke1; 1Laboratory for Developmental Studies, Department of
Psychology, Harvard University — Recent work suggests the possibility that
mathematics is not completely culturally constructed, but rather, arises,
in part, from an innately-specified, evolutionarily ancient brain system
for number. To test this possibility we measured event-related brain
potentials of infants and adults to animations devised to portray nonsymbolic arithmetic problems. All subjects watched as two separate
arrays of objects moved sequentially into a box, after which the box was
removed to reveal a test array that was either more or less than the actual
sum of the first two arrays. Adult subjects were asked to judge whether
the test array was more or less than the actual sum. Reaction time
decreased and accuracy increased as the ratio between the test array and
the actual sum became larger. Evoked brain activity (P2p) to the test

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 1:00 - 3:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session F
array over parietal sites peaked around 250 milliseconds after stimulus
onset and was also modulated by ratio between the number of items in
the test array presented and the number of items there should have been
the first two arrays were actually added together. Spontaneous midlatency neural processing (infant P2p/P400) of the animations in infants
also showed modulation of the parietal number system by the ratio
between the total number of items that moved into the box and the
actual number of items shown in the test array. These results suggest
that infants spontaneously engage similar cortical networks to compute
numerical expectations, as do adults actively performing arithmetic.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

179

Poster Session G

Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

ATTENTION: Spatial
G1
DIFFERENTIAL FRONTAL INVOLVEMENT IN SHIFTS OF INTERNAL AND
PERCEPTUAL ATTENTION Ryan Tanoue1, Marian Berryhill1; 1University of
Nevada, Reno — Perceptual attention enhances the processing of items
currently being perceived, while internal attention enhances processing
of items encoded in working memory (WM). In cueing paradigms, a cue
indicates the to-be-probed item either before (pre cueing) or after (retrocueing) the memory display and tests shifts of perceptual and internal
attention, respectively. Both cue types confer similar benefits in accuracy
(pre-: 14-19%, retro-: 11-17%) and neuroimaging data show that they
activate highly overlapping frontoparietal networks (Lepsien & Nobre,
2006). Yet behavioral and neuroimaging differences have been reported
suggesting that these two forms of attention can be disentangled. Here,
we tested the hypothesis that internal attention relies more heavily on
frontal activations than perceptual attention. We applied cathodal transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) to frontal (F4) and parietal (P4)
cortices in separate experimental sessions. We predicted that suppressing frontal cortex would have a significantly greater negative impact on
internal attention than on perceptual attention. Our results confirmed
these predictions. Cathodal tDCS across site (frontal, parietal) and cueing paradigm (pre-, retro-) hindered performance. However, frontal
tDCS had a greater negative impact on the retro-cued trials demonstrating greater influence on internal attention. These results concur with the
neuroimaging data. We suggest that although internal and perceptual
attention are mediated by the same frontoparietal networks, the weight
of contribution of these structures differs, with internal attention relying
more heavily on the frontal cortex.

G2
TOP-DOWN ATTENTION MODULATES THE CUING EFFECTS OF THE
EMOTIONAL FACES Shwu-Lih Huang1, Hung-Ta Chung1, Yu-Chieh Chang1;
1

National Chengchi University — Fast detection of threatening stimuli and
demanding more attentional resources to them were assumed to be helpful for the survival of the individuals. Relevant to this point, this study
investigates the effect of threatening stimuli on attention and how this
effect was modulated by the top-down attentional control using the
cuing task. Participants were recruited from the normal population.
Three kinds of schematic face (angry, happy and neutral face) were
included as the cue. The percentage of valid trials (valid ratio: 75%, 50%,
or 25%) was manipulated to observe the modulation effects of top-down
control. Stimulus-onset-asynchrony (SOA) was also manipulated to
observe the time course of the cuing effects. In Experiment 1, four conditions of SOA include 150, 300, 500, 1000ms. In Experiment 2, long SOA
(500, 750, 1000 or 1250ms) was selected and the procedure of fixation
cross darkened after cuing was introduced to enhance the IOR effect.
From the results of two experiments, valid ratio was found to play an
important role to affect the cuing effects. The higher the valid ratio is, the
larger the validity effect obtained (Experiment 1). Also lower valid ratio

180

enhanced the IOR effect (Experiment 2). For the effect of face emotion,
only in 75% valid ratio condition of the Experiment 2, IOR effect was
found to be different among three face conditions. Compared to the
results of the studies using visual search or dot-probe tasks, we propose
that competing between items is an important factor to reveal the effects
of emotional stimuli.

G3
NUMERICAL REPRESENTATION DIFFERS SYSTEMATICALLY ACCORDING
TO MENTAL ROTATION ABILITY Jacqueline Thompson1, Hans-Christoph

Nuerk2, Korbinian Möller2,3, Tudor Popescu1, Roi Cohen Kadosh1; 1University
of Oxford, 2Eberhard Karls University, Tübingen, Germany, 3Knowledge Media
Research Center, IWM-KMRC, Tübingen, Germany — Mental rotation ability
and number skills have long been seen as bedfellows in the literature
surrounding intelligence, but at what level of numerical cognition does
this connection lie? With 34 participants representing a wide range of
scores on the well-established Vandenberg & Kuse (1978) Mental Rotation Test, our study endeavoured to examine the possible link between
mental rotation abilities and numerical representation. All participants
completed a pen-and-paper mental rotation task, as well as a multi-digit
number magnitude comparison task and a computer number-line estimation task. The numerical magnitude comparison task measured the
compatibility effect (Nuerk et al., 2001), which indicates decomposed
processing of tens and units digits, thus signalling the propensity to hold
multiple number magnitude representations simultaneously; the number-line mapping task, on the other hand, is commonly interpreted as a
measure of the precision of number magnitude representation, and additionally serves as a predictor for future mathematics skills in children
(Booth & Siegler, 2008). We found that mental rotation ability correlated
significantly with both size of the compatibility effect and with number
mapping accuracy. Taken together, these correlations imply that mental
rotation abilities are linked to numerical abilities at the level of number
representation, in particular suggesting that higher mental rotation abilities may be associated with more precise and detailed number representation. These results also provide further evidence to the connection
between spatial and numerical abilities, already well-supported by anatomical and behavioural evidence (Walsh 2003, Hubbard et al., 2005).

G4
BRAIN MECHANISMS OF SOCIAL COGNITION: THE KEY ROLE OF THE
VENTROLATERAL ATTENTION NETWORK Jelena Ristic1, Barry Giesbrecht2;
1

McGill University, 2University of California Santa Barbara — Spatial orienting can be driven either by external events (reflexive attention) or by the
current goals of an individual (voluntary attention). Two cortical networks subserve these processes-the ventrolateral network, which controls reflexive orienting, and the dorsolateral network, which controls
volitional orienting. In the last decade, numerous studies reported that
spatial attention is reflexively shifted in the direction of perceived gaze,
but the relative contributions of the dorsal and ventral attention networks in social orienting remain unclear. We examined the neural
dynamics of social orienting using electroencephalography (EEG) and
Multiple Source Beamformer (MSBF) techniques. Participants viewed
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session G
central uninformative central gaze cues and detected peripheral targets.
Analyses of the ERP data indicated that only individuals who showed
social orienting effects exhibited increased target-evoked responses typically associated with spatial attention (e.g., P1) and larger N170 amplitudes. MSBF analyses indicated that the dissociation in behavioral
performance between individuals who showed the social orienting effect
and those that did not was accompanied by a dissociation between the
two attentional networks. The regions comprising the ventrolateral network were activated in participants who displayed social orienting
while the regions comprising the dorsolateral network were activated in
participants who did not display social orienting. These findings
strongly suggest that the ventrolateral attention network plays a key role
in directing and maintaining social attention.

G5
SHIFTS FROM ENDOGENOUS TO EXOGENOUS ATTENTION ARE
ASSOCIATED WITH MODULATION OF THE P300 COMPONENT Anne

Berry1, Jose Torres1, Ursula Seals1, Melisa Carrasco1, Martin Sarter1, William
Gehring1, Cindy Lustig1; 1University of Michigan, Ann Arbor — Flexible behavior requires shifts between internally driven (endogenous) processing,
and stimulus driven (exogenous) processing. Using a signal-detection
task (the Sustained Attention Task, SAT), we have identified neural signatures of these shifts: frontal cholinergic transients in rodents, and transient BOLD activations of right rostral prefrontal cortex in humans. Here
we report electrophysiological correlates of these shifts and examine
whether their timing may vary for different trial sequences. On each
trial, subjects monitored for a brief signal, and after a cue to respond
indicated its presence or absence. Analyses focused on shifts from ongoing monitoring (correct rejection trials) to signal detection (hit trials).
Trial-sequence specific analyses differentiated hits preceded by correct
rejections (CR-hits) from hits preceded by hits (hit-hits). Specifically, signal-evoked P300 amplitude was larger for CR-hits than hit-hits, reflecting a shift from ongoing processing to stimulus-driven attention and
response. Interestingly, the opposite pattern occurred at the response
cue: Here, P300 amplitude was smaller for CR-hits than for hit-hits. This
decrease suggests fewer attentional resources are necessary at the
response period for signals that direct shifts from endogenous to exogenous processing modes. Further analysis will test whether CR-hits are
associated with enhanced power in the gamma spectrum, as our rodent
studies indicate that gamma power and acetylcholine release increase in
prefrontal cortex for CR-hits relative to hit-hits. Findings from the current study will contribute to a more precise understanding of the neural
mechanisms of processing mode shifts integrating multiple methods and
species.

G6
SIMULTANEOUS EEG/FMRI OF TOP-DOWN ATTENTIONAL CONTROL AND
PRE-TARGET BIASING OF SENSORY CORTEX Jessica Green1, Carsten

Boehler1, Kenneth Roberts1, Ling-chia Chen1, Ruth Krebs1, Allen Song1, Marty
Woldorff1; 1Duke University — Numerous neuroimaging studies of top-

down attentional control have shown activations in frontal and parietal
cortex associated with the cued voluntary shifting of visual attention,
typically accompanied by spatially-specific modulations of activity in
sensory cortex that are thought to reflect biasing of those sensory-processing regions that will process a subsequent expected target. The oftnoted downside of fMRI, however, is its poor temporal resolution, making it difficult to disentangle the set of cognitive processes that occur
during a shift of attention. The high temporal resolution of EEG can help
determine when processes occur, such as showing fronto-parietal control
activity preceding sensory biasing, but with fairly limited neuroanatomical spatial precision. Linking the fMRI and EEG activities has been difficult, typically relying on recordings acquired in separate sessions and
source-modeling estimations of the EEG. Here, we simultaneously
recorded EEG and fMRI activity and examined their single-trial covariation during spatial shifts of attention. Using specific facets of the cue-elicited EEG activity as regressors for the corresponding cue-elicited fMRI
responses, we found slow-wave ERP components that covaried with

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

frontal and parietal fMRI responses during the shifting of attention. In
addition, lateralized posterior modulations of pretarget alpha-band
oscillatory EEG activity covaried with lateralized modulations of occipital fMRI activations. This approach shows great promise in enabling the
linking of different aspects of the high-temporal-resolution EEG to the
corresponding fMRI responses, independent of, and/or in addition to,
any source-modeling analyses, thereby helping to delineate the temporal
cascade of neural activity associated with the top-down attention control
of sensory processing.

G7
ALPHA-BAND OSCILLATIONS DISTINGUISH ENDOGENOUS AND
EXOGENOUS ATTENTIONAL INFLUENCES Sylvia Guillory1, Lisa Payne1,

Robert Sekuler1; 1Brandeis University — Endogenous and exogenous attentional mechanisms differ along several dimensions, suggesting differences in their underlying neural processes. We devised a visual memory
task in which exogenous and endogenous attentional processes might
exert distinct influences, and exploited alpha band oscillations as a
marker of attention. Differences in phase synchrony and alpha band
power at critical points during the task distinguish endogenous and
exogenous attentional influences. Subjects (n=12) performed a visualattention task while EEG signals were recorded using a high-density
electrode system. On each trial, subjects saw two briefly-presented
Gabor stimuli. A visual cue immediately before each Gabor instructed
the subject whether that Gabor should be attended to or ignored. After
seeing both Gabors, the subject reproduced the spatial frequency of the
attended Gabor. Importantly, the presentation of the unpredictable cue
for the first Gabor rendered the cue for the second Gabor redundant.
Consequently, attention to or ignoring that second Gabor could draw on
a strongly endogenous component as subjects would have a reliable
expectation about whether it should be attended or ignored. ? The power
of alpha oscillations recorded from posterior electrodes significantly differed during the presentation of the first and second cues. Specifically,
during a trial’s second cue, there was a relative increase in alpha power,
reflecting attention’s endogenous component. As a subject’s expectation
becomes more dependable, the associated increase in posterior alpha
reflects a reduced dependence upon exogenous, event-driven information, and greater reliance on exogenous information.

G8
MODELING THE INTERACTION BETWEEN DISTRIBUTED SPATIAL
ATTENTION SIGNALS AND GAMMA-BAND STEADY-STATE VISUAL EVOKED
RESPONSES IN SIMULTANOUSLY RECORDED EEG/MEG. Samuel
Thorpe1, Siyi Deng1, Javier Garcia2, Ramesh Srinivasan1; 1University of
California, Irvine, 2University of California, San Diego — Recent studies sug-

gest that spatial attention increases gamma-band (>20 Hz) synchronization in local neural assemblies processing visual stimuli at the attended
location, thereby facilitating binding of information into coherent percepts. Additional studies have shown that deployment of attention to
one side of visual space results in lateralization of band-specific EEG
activity over symmetric parietal, occipital, and motor areas. Our goal
was to determine how these lateralized attention-related signals interact
with local visual populations, which presumably have resonant frequencies in the gamma band. In this study we use frequency tagging methods
to localize gamma-band sensory responses to attended/unattended
visual stimuli recorded using simultaneous EEG/MEG. At the start of
each trial the subject was cued to attend left, right, or switch. The subject
then observed a pair of dynamic stimuli presented in symmetric left/
right visual hemifields, one which flickered at 20 Hz, the other at 30 Hz.
The stimulus in each hemifield consisted of a circular region containing a
field of randomly oriented bars- a novel bar-field was presented on each
flicker cycle. Subjects were asked to detect/ignore targets in the
attended/unattended fields, which were bounded by green/red annuli.
On switching trials these annuli switched colors at random intervals,
prompting the subject to switch attention to the opposite hemifield.
These stimuli evoked responses which localized to occipital areas and
increased in magnitude when attended. We used these data to develop a

181

Poster Session G — Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
statistical model of the interaction between attention-related signals (isolated in response to attentional switches) and the local steady-state
gamma-band response.

G9
THE SPOTLIGHT OF SELECTIVE ATTENTION MAY CONTROL APPARENT
MOTION Yangqing Xu1, Satoru Suzuki1, Steven Franconeri1; 1Northwestern
University — When two stationary objects are presented in succession at
different locations, they can be perceived either as two flickering objects,
or as two objects switching between the two locations (apparent motion).
Previous research suggested a link between apparent motion and attentive tracking (Cavanagh 1992; Verstraten, Cavanagh, & Labianca, 2000;
Verstraten and Ashida, 2005), such that the correspondence problem of
what went where may be determined by the position of spatial selection
over time. We tested this possibility by tracking the position of spatial
selection using an electrophysiological correlate (Contralateral Delay
Activity; Vogel and Machizawa, 2004). Participants were presented with
an ambiguous apparent motion display (6 frames, 3Hz) that included
two objects. The display could be perceived as either vertical oscillations
occurring separately within each visual hemifield, or long-range horizontal motion in which an object appeared to move across the left and
right visual hemifields. When the horizontal motion was perceived,
attention was locked to one of two objects and shifted back and forth as
the selected object appeared alternatively at the two locations. Our
results provide electrophysiological evidence suggesting that the spotlight of selective attention plays an important role both in generating
long-range translational motion and in maintaining the identity of an
object as it moves over space and time.

G10
STIMULUS CONTEXT VIOLATES SPATIAL ATTENTION: EFFECTS OF REGION
COMMONALITY ON ATTENTIONAL SELECTION Yuji Yamada1, Tetsuko

Kasai1, Ryuji Takeya1, Yasuko Okumura1; 1Hokkaido University — Generally,

spatial attention prioritizes the processing of task-relevant information.
However, when attention is directed to one of two stimuli with perceptual grouping factors, it is guided automatically to the other stimulus.
This study examined the case of region commonality, with or without a
bounded region, using event-related potentials (ERPs).Stimulus conditions consisted of two letters, one in each hemifield, which were encircled by an oval (common condition) and by two semiellipses aligned like
Greek x-shape (uncommon condition). ERPs were recorded from 12 participants who were covertly attending to one hemifield while ignoring
the other during rapid stimulus presentations. The task was to detect an
infrequent target letter at the attended hemifield.The typical ERP attention effects (i.e., amplitude enhancement at occipito-temporal electrodes
contralateral to attended visual fields) were assessed. The early and late
P1 attention effects (80-105 ms; 105-130 ms) reduced for the uncommon
condition, compared to the common condition. Especially, the early P1
effect was reversed (i.e., enhanced amplitude at the ipsilateral rather
than contralateral electrode) with respect to the typical P1 attention
effect. The N1 attention effects (150-200 ms) were also reversed for the
both conditions, the extent of which was greater for the common condition.The result of N1 indicates that region commonality guides attention
via the same selection mechanism that has been found in previous studies for connectedness and color similarity. The result of P1 was unexpected, which suggests that there exist some aspects of stimulus
structure that cause an early attentional guidance.

G11
EXPRESSION OF FACILITATION AND SUPPRESSION IN VISUAL SELECTIVE
ATTENTION IN ADHD: AN EVENT RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY Jane

Couperus1, Dylan Furlong1, Katherine Mott1; 1Hampshire College — Research

surrounding selective attention in those with attention deficit disorder
(ADHD) often suggests that it functions similarly to controls (e.g.
Huang-Pollock, et al. 2005) and instead the problems with attention
result from deficits in sustained attention and inhibition (e.g. Barry et al.,
2001). Studies that do suggest deficits, point to deficits in the neurologi-

182

cal mechanisms underlying selective attention such as differences in
facilitation during early visual processing (Perchet et al., 2001). However, these studies have not examined preparatory activity related to
facilitation, nor have they looked at the contributions of suppression in
either preparatory or stimulus processing. Thus this study examined the
functionality of these mechanisms in 30 adults with and without ADHD
using a spatial cueing paradigm. We examined target and distracter processing as a function of the expectancy of distracter presence versus
absence using event related potentials. Participants were cued to the spatial location of a target (100% valid cues) as well as to the presence or
absence of distracters in the opposite hemifield (70% valid cues). Analysis of distracter-present displays for all participants showed that in addition to relative enhancement of the occipital P1 in the hemisphere
contralateral to the target, processing contralateral to distracters was
reduced when a distractor was anticipated compared to when it was not
(appearing stronger at P7/P8 than O1/O2 for those with ADHD). Moreover, distractor related suppression was seen in the preparatory frontal
ADAN component for controls, but only facilitation was seen for those
with ADHD suggesting possible differences in processing mechanisms.

G12
OMISSIONS, SUBSTITUTIONS AND ADDITIONS: NEGLECT DYSLEXIA IN A
WORD READING TASK Roberta Ronchi1,2, Lorella Algeri3, Laura Chiapella3,

Marcello Gallucci1, Maria Simonetta Spada3, Giuseppe Vallar1,2; 1University of
Milano-Bicocca, Department of Psychology, Milano, Italy, 2Neuropsychological
Laboratory, S. Luca Hospital, IRCCS Italian Auxological Istitute, Milano, Italy,
3
Azienda Ospedaliera “Ospedali Riuniti di Bergamo”, Bergamo, Italy —
Neglect dyslexia consists in a reading task disorder, in which neurological patients make errors in the contralesional part of the letter strings.
Some studies investigated the presence and the type of reading neglect
errors, examining their association with other defective manifestations of
unilateral spatial neglect (USN). However no studies have analyzed the
relationship between different productive symptoms in neglect patients.
This experiment investigated the incidence of various forms of reading
errors in patients with USN showing perseverative symptoms in cancellation tests; secondly we verified whether the presence of neglect dyslexia is associated to a more severe USN in conventional tests. Fifty-two
right-brain-damaged neglect patients (27 out of 52 with neglect dyslexia,
12 of them without perseveration and 15 of them with perseveration)
were given target cancellation (letter and star) and word reading tasks.
Results indicated that patients with neglect dyslexia and perseveration
produced more substitution than omission and addition reading errors.
No prevalence of one type of reading error in non-perseverating patients
was found: however the tendency of this group is to produce more omission errors. Finally the neglect dyslexia subgroup showed a more severe
ipsilesional bias in target cancellation tests, supporting the view that a
ipsilateral reading disorder may be present in patients with a greater
attentional deficit. In conclusion, perseveration seems to be mainly associated with substitution errors in patients with neglect dyslexia: as substitution represents an active re-elaboration of the contralesional part of
the verbal target, this error may be considered a “productive” reading
disorder.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
G13
EMOTION, EMTNOOI, EMITOON? -EMOTIONAL DIFFERENTIATION
PRECEDES
WORD-PSEUDOWORD
DIFFERENTIATION
DURING
READING Johanna Kissler1,2, Cornelia Herbert2,3; 1University of Bielefeld,

Bielefeld, Germany, 2University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany, 3University of
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany — During reading the cortical processing of
emotional words differs from the processing of neutral words. The
present study examines the functional stages of visual word processing
where this differentiation occurs. Positive, negative, and neutral nouns

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session G
where intermixed with letter strings and pseudowords and presented in
random sequence to student participants while their EEG was recorded.
The timing and spatial distribution of differences between words,
pseudowords, and letter strings on the one hand and positive, negative,
and neutral words on the other hand was determined. Effects of word
type occurred from 180 ms after stimulus presentation, first differentiating according to word form letter strings and from pseudowords and
words, and then also differing between words and pseudowords, with
effects occurring predominantly over left occipito-temporal regions.
Emotion effects largely followed and paralleled this formal differentiation, starting from about 210 ms after stimulus presentation and differentiating emotionally positive and negative from neutral words over
primarily left occipito-temporal regions. However, specifically for negative words, earlier left occipito-temporal effects also occurred between
110 and 140 ms. Results demonstrate that during reading emotion effects
occur robustly at a lexical processing stage, but that specifically for negative stimuli pre-lexical effect are also found.

G14
THE VOCAL EXPRESSION OF EMOTION: INVOLVEMENT OF THE AFFECT/
MOTOR INTERFACE OF THE BRAIN Michel Belyk1, Steven Brown1;

1McMaster University — Affective prosody is the expression of emotion in
speech. Emotion is encoded by modulation of vocal pitch, loudness and
speech rate. Animal models of emotional vocalizations suggest that separate pathways produce innate/emotional vs. learned/linguistic vocalizations (Jürgens, 2009). Such models posit that pathways originating in
the cingulate cortex are associated with emotional vocalizations whereas
pathways originating in the primary motor cortex are associated with
speech. The analysis of prosody in neuroimaging studies has focused on
perceptual tasks thus far, and there have been virtually no studies of the
production of prosody. We examined this issue with functional MRI by
studying the production of exclamations (e.g., Yay!, Damn!) compared to
a series of control tasks (including producing semantically-neutral
words or vocal sweeps). Beyond showing activation in the motor cortex
and auditory areas, the results revealed the importance of brain areas
that sit at the interface between motor function and emotion, including
1) the anterior insula/frontal operculum, 2) the “motor” and “affective”
divisions of the anterior cingulate cortex, and 3) the dorsal/motor and
ventral/reward divisions of the basal ganglia. Contrary to predictions
generated from animal models, affective prosody might be an intrinsic
component of the speech-production mechanism, rather than an add-on
to it mediated by a separate emotion system. Reference: Jürgens, U.
(2009). The neural control of vocalization in mammals: A review. Journal
of Voice, 23, 1-10.

G15
BRAIN ACTIVITY RELATED TO EMOTIONAL AGENCY CORRELATES
DISPARATELY WITH DIFFERENT POSITIVE REINFORCEMENT TRIALS OF
THE IOWA GAMBLING TASK Matthew Jerram1, Alexandra Hernandez-

Vallant1, David Gansler1; 1Suffolk University — Emotional agency is the
degree to which someone feels capable of acting on the environment in
response to emotion. The Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) was designed to
measure emotional decision-making, related to agency. Two of the four
response choices of the IGT are rewarding, with different schedules;
Deck C rewards at a higher frequency while Deck D rewards at a higher
magnitude. This study examined how brain activity in response to high
agency stimuli is related to performance on IGT reward trials; it was
hypothesized that the reward schedules of Decks C and D would correlate differently with brain activity. Functional MRI (fMRI) was performed on thirteen right-handed men (age range = 20-35) while they
viewed images from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS),
chosen based on normative agency ratings. Participants viewed high and
low agency images in a block design. Participants also completed a computerized version of the IGT. Data were analyzed using Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM8). Contrasts for high-low agency were created
and whole-brain regression analyses were performed in SPM8. A focus
of positive correlation between activation and Deck C was found in the
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

cerebellar tonsil. A focus of positive correlation between activation and
Deck D was found in the posterior cingulate. No negative correlations
were found. Activated regions correlated with high frequency reward
are associated with formation and storage of emotional responses while
regions correlated with high magnitude reward are associated with error
recognition and memory retrieval. These results offer insight into neuralemotional components of reward responses.

G16
EMOTION CONTROL MECHANISMS: SHARED NEURAL ARCHITECTURE
OF SUPPRESSION AND REGULATION Zain Sultan1, Erin Lightman1,

Regina Schmidt2, Eric H. Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2Air
Force Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base — The ability for

humans to actively control their emotions is essential to successful functioning in daily life. Control is achieved through the use of a wide variety of strategies, including suppression and regulation. Both of these
strategies have been extensively studied individually, but their relationship has yet to be investigated within the same experiment. Neuroimaging evidence converges on the involvement of the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (dlPFC) and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) for both of these
emotional control strategies. Additionally, decreased activation in the
amygdala during suppression has also been reported. In the current
study, participants viewed IAPS images under either suppression, regulation, or control instructions. Data indicate that both strategies effectively reduced participants’ emotional response to the IAPS images and
resulted in similar patterns of activity. Specifically, activity increased in
the dlPFC and ACC and decreased in the amygdala. These data indicate
that these seemingly distinct emotional control strategies may be supported by similar underlying cognitive mechanisms and may be supported by more general executive control processes.

G17
EFFECTS OF MEDITATION ON THE TIME COURSE OF NEURAL
CORRELATES OF PAIN PERCEPTION David
Perlman1,2,3,
Richard

Davidson1,2,3, Andrew Schoen2, Antoine Lutz1,3; 1Waisman Laboratory for
Brain Imaging and Behavior, University of Wisconsin–Madison, 2Department of
Psychology, University of Wisconsin–Madison, 3Center for Investigating
Healthy Minds, University of Wisconsin–Madison — A growing body of func-

tional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI) and other research on the
neural correlates of mindfulness meditation, acceptance, and pain perception shows that an intentionally practiced attitude of openness leads
to improvements in the affective response to nociceptive stimuli. We
implemented a novel FMRI paradigm for studying affective chronometry in a large cohort of 109 community participants and 26 meditation
practitioners. A thermal nociceptive stimulus was preceded by a cued
anticipation period and followed by 18 seconds of uninstructed recovery
time. Consistent with previous findings from our lab and others, meditators reported lower pain unpleasantness ratings compared to non-meditators. During the middle epoch of recovery, meditation practitioners
showed greater activity in the anterior insula compared to non-meditators. We also present novel software tools for visualizing time-dependent FMRI data, for investigating affective chronometry.

G18
OSCILLATORY CHANGES IN VISUAL CORTEX DURING EXCITATION AND
INHIBITION OF FEAR CONDITIONING Vladimir Miskovic1, Andreas Keil1;
1

University of Florida — Fear excitation and inhibition have been studied in
humans and non-human animals using conditional discrimination procedures (abbreviated as AX+/BX-). We recorded steady-state visual
evoked potentials using dense–array electroencephalography (EEG),
while participants performed a version of the AX+/BX- task designed to
encourage the elemental processing of conditioned stimuli: Cues A and
X presented together signaled an aversive stimulus (a white noise burst
at 92 dB sound pressure level), while cues B and X predicted the absence
of an aversive outcome. On subsequent trials, A and B cues were paired
to assess the competitive dynamics between learned threat and safety
signals. Additionally, A and C trials were included to control for nov183

Poster Session G — Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
elty-related effects. The conditioned stimuli were Gabor patches luminance modulated at two distinct frequencies in order to separate the
active neural networks in visual cortex. Online assessments revealed that
most participants were able to successfully acquire contingencies associated with the elemental cues. Steady state visual evoked amplitudes
increased following conditioning of both the excitatory (A+) and inhibitory (B-) stimuli. The simultaneous presentation of A and B cues produced relative cortical facilitation at both oscillatory frequencies. The
introduction of an associatively novel element (C) led to competition
with electrocortical processing of the previously conditioned stimulus.
Our study provides additional insight into the brain dynamics associated with learning and responding to signals of danger and safety.

G19
MIND WANDERING ATTENUATES EMOTIONAL PROCESSING Julia Kam1,

Judy Xu1, Tasha Cheong1, Todd C. Handy1; 1University of British Columbia —

Mind wandering has been shown to reduce both cognitive and sensory
level processing of incoming stimuli. However, it is currently unclear
whether mind wandering attenuates emotional processing as well. To
address that question, this study examined whether mind wandering
reduces our empathetic response to painful-looking stimuli using an
experience sampling approach. Participants were presented with photos
of hands in painful and non-painful/neutral situations and asked to
state whether they considered the situation to be painful or not painful,
while event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded. At random intervals, participants were asked to report whether they were on-task or
mind wandering. The ERPs to the photos were then examined as a function of attention state, that is, whether or not they immediately preceded
a report of on-task versus mind wandering. Our data revealed that painful photos were processed to a greater extent than neutral photos during
periods of on-task, which is consistent with previous research. However
this difference was absent during periods of mind wandering. We confirmed this in a second behavioral experiment in which participants
rated the painfulness of the situation in photos on a 5-point scale, and
found that the behavioral ratings for painful vs neutral photos were significantly different during periods of on-task, but not mind wandering.
Taken together, our results provide behavioral and electrophysiological
evidence suggesting that the impact of mind wandering extends to emotional processing such that it reduces our emotional response to painful
stimuli.

G20
DISSOCIABLE NEURAL NETWORKS SUPPORT DISTINCT COMPONENTS
OF AVERSIVE ANTICIPATION Dan Grupe1, Desmond Oathes1,2, Jack

Nitschke1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2Stanford University — The

anticipation of future adversity confers adaptive benefits by engaging
myriad preparatory mechanisms, but when conducted in excess can also
be maladaptive. Specifically, exaggerated anticipation of potential negative events is a central cross-diagnostic feature of all clinical anxiety disorders. Neuroscientiifc investigations have largely treated anticipation
as a unitary process, but we show here in an fMRI study of 42 healthy
adults that distinct phases of aversive anticipation are associated with
dissociable neural mechanisms. Immediate anticipatory activity in
response to a cue predicting aversive pictures was seen in regions associated with threat detection and associative value representation, including the orbitofrontal cortex, amygdala, and pregenual anterior cingulate.
During the subsequent sustained anticipatory period, activation was
observed in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, anterior insula, anterior mid-cingulate (aMCC), and midbrain/periaqueductal gray, regions
associated with anxiety, interoception, and defensive behavior. PPI analysis revealed enhanced aMCC-midbrain coupling specifically during
sustained anticipation of aversive events, suggesting that this preparatory defensive circuit plays a key role in anticipatory processing. Individual differences analyses revealed associations between elevated
anxiety symptoms and early anticipatory activity in the amygdala and
aMCC. These results provide a comprehensive description of dissociable
neural circuitry associated with distinct phases in the anticipation of

184

aversive events. The observed associations between anxiety symptoms
and increased anticipatory activity in these neural circuits, together with
previous reports implicating many of these regions in pathological anxiety, suggest that the implementation of similar models in clinical populations may provide insight into the neurobiological correlates of aberrant
anticipatory activity.

G21
TAKING THE PLUNGE: AN INVESTIGATION OF PLEASANT FEAR AND
Wilson-Mendenhall1,2,
Lisa
OTHER ATYPICAL EMOTIONS Christine

Feldman Barrett1,2, Lawrence Barsalou3; 1Northeastern University,
2Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 3Emory
University — There is incredible variety in human emotions. Fear, for
example, might be experienced when an individual is frantically trying
to escape a blazing fire, rocketing downwards in a rollercoaster car,
warily opening a credit card bill, or stepping out on a first date. We
examined if familiar, atypical instances of an emotion category (e.g.,
pleasant fear of thrill-seeking) are processed differently in large-scale
brain networks than familiar, typical instances of an emotion category
(e.g., unpleasant fear of violent acts). The “default” network identified
during resting state scans has been implicated in many facets of social
cognition, yet the functions of this network remain unclear. We predicted that greater activation would be observed in the default network
when participants imagined experiencing atypical instances of emotions
(as compared to typical instances) due to the increased socioemotional
inference underlying self-projection into the situation. In a novel fMRI
paradigm, participants immersed themselves in an atypical or typical
fear, sadness, or happiness emotion scenario during each trial. As compared to typical instances, greater activation was observed for atypical
instances of the emotions in midline regions of the default network (dorsal medial prefrontal cortex and posterior cingulate) as well as bilateral
temporoparietal junction, left temporal pole, and lateral frontal regions
associated with executive function. No brain region was more active for
typical relative to atypical instances of emotion. Future research is necessary to understand the specific features of atypical emotion instances
(e.g., ambiguity, complexity, etc.) that underlie the heightened activity
observed.

G22
ONCE YOU FEEL IT YOU SEE IT. NEURAL BASES OF CONSCIOUS AND
NON-CONSCIOUS PERCEPTION OF FEARFUL BODILY EXPRESSIONS IN
HEMISPATIAL NEGLECT Marco Tamietto1,2, Franco Cauda2, Katiuscia

Sacco2, Giuliano Geminiani2, Beatrice de Gelder1,3; 1Tilburg University,
University of Torino, 3MGH/MIT/HMS Athinoula A. Martinos Center for
Biomedical Imaging — Fearful bodily expressions modulate spatial atten2

tion and enhance visual awareness in patients with hemispatial neglect,
who often fail to perceive consciously the stimuli in the left-side space.
Here we investigated in a behavioral/fMRI study the neural correlates of
conscious and non-conscious perception of bodily expressions. Instrumental (neutral) e fearful expressions were presented either singly in the
LVF or RVF, or bilaterally with displays containing a right-side neutral
expression paired with either a left-side neutral or fearful expression.
The neural correlates of non-conscious perception were assessed by contrasting bilateral trials with neglected left-side fearful bodies with unilateral trials where only a right-side neutral body was presented (and
detected). The contrast revealed activity in emotion-sensitive areas
(amygdala and vmPFC), perceptive areas (FG, EBA, PCC), in the temporo-parietal junction implicated in attentional shift, and in premotor
areas. Conscious perception in bilateral trials in which a left-side fearful
body was successfully detected was contrasted to the same trials in
which, however, the left-side fearful body was neglected. Results
showed a significant activation of sensory-motor areas, anterior insula
and cerebellum. Our findings show neural processing of non-consciously perceived fearful bodies and suggest a key role of interoception
and sensory-motor processing in visual awareness.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session G

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working memory
G23
PROCESSING SPEED AND VERBAL WORKING MEMORY IN CHILDREN
AND ADULTS: A DEVELOPMENTAL ERP STUDY Melisa Carrasco1, Jennie

K. Grammer2, William J. Gehring2, Frederick J. Morrison2; 1Neurosci. Grad.
Program, Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 2Dept. of Psychology, Univ. of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI — A growing literature has suggested that
improvement in children's working memory (WM) ability follows a systematic developmental progression. Relatively little research has been
done to describe the electrophysiological correlates of development of
WM using event-related potentials (ERPs). The purpose of this study
was to assess age-related differences in the fronto-central negativity
(FCN), an ERP that is responsible for supporting working memory and
manipulation processes, among a group of children ages 5-7 years old.
Specifically, children were asked to attend to a sequence of numbers and
objects. After stimulus presentation, participants were asked to recall the
1st or 2nd object (or number). Preliminary results showed that, in children ages 5-7 years old, there was a trend for a difference in FCN amplitude between the “thinking of the things” (M= 6.486, SD= 35.001) vs.
“thinking of the numbers” condition (M= 28.234, SD= 49.218),
t(10)=2.152, p=0.057; this phenomenon corresponds with participants’
self report of increased task difficulty with respect to the ability to hold
in memory the object representations (vs. the numbers). To our knowledge, this study is the first to isolate the FCN in children this young
using a WM task. In order to place this data within a larger context of
development, a second goal of this study was to determine the mechanistic differences underlying working memory in children and adults
performing the same WM task. Preliminary behavioral and ERP data
from 20 children and 20 adults will be described as part of this presentation.

G24
REDUCED DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX ACTIVATION DURING
ATTENTIONALLY-GUIDED SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY PROCESSING
Maren Strenziok1, Michael Chung1, Pamela Greenwood1, Sophia Santacruz1,
Raja Parasuraman1; 1George Mason University — Functional neuroimaging

studies have shown that visuospatial attention and visual working memory engages overlapping neural networks in dorsolateral prefrontal
(dlPFC) and superior parietal cortex. Thus, activation in these areas
should vary with cue-driven attentional guidance during working memory (WM) tasks, depending on the precision of the cue in guiding spatial
attention. Although target pre-cueing increases the success of target
maintainance in WM, cue-driven brain activation changes during WM
have not been studied. We assessed changes in brain activation during
WM performance under cue-driven attentional guidance and in the presence or absence of distraction. Participants had to remember the location
of target dots for 3s and judge whether a test dot matched target dot
location (target-test-distance: 0°, 2°, or 4°). Targets were preceded by
either no cue or a 500ms circular cue that provided either relatively precise (5.2°) or relatively imprecise (8.1°) attentional guidance. On 50% of
the trials, small distracter circles appeared during the delay. A 3x2 (cue
size x distracter presentation) ANOVA computed on brain activation
changes during the delay revealed lower brain activation in the right
dlPFC when the cue was presented compared to cue absence. Presence
of distracters lead to greater activation in the left insula compared to distracter absence. Finally, the dlPFC, ventral prefrontal, superior temporal,
and occipital cortices were sensitive to the interaction between cue size
and distracter presence. Our results indicate that attentional guidance
reduces the neural cost on WM performance, whereas reorienting associated with distraction during retention reduces the efficiency of brain
function.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

G25
OSCILLATIONS AND MEMORY FOR ORDER: SUPPORT FOR THE THETA/
GAMMA HYPOTHESIS Jeremy Caplan1, Michelle Chan1, Yang Liu1;

1University of Alberta — Theta oscillations, 4-8 Hz rhythms, are thought to
function as reference waves that can store items, represented in faster,
gamma-oscillation cycles, in precise sequences. This phase-coding
hypothesis has mainly been supported for the hippocampal contribution
to rat spatial learning (starting with O'Keefe and Recce, 1993). Two
human EEG studies found theta oscillations linked to order-memory
specifically, both with an individual-differences approach (Caplan and
Glaholt, 2007; Hsieh et al., 2011). We hypothesized that if the theta/
gamma mechanism functions in human memory, then the presence of
theta and gamma during specific study trials should be associated with
fast response times (within-subjects). To directly test memory for order,
one can use the judgement of relative order (JOR) paradigm. Twentyfive participants studied lists of four consonants, each followed by one
JOR probe. A probe was a pair of items from the list, and the target was
the probe-item that had occurred earlier in the list. Using the Better
OSCillation detection method (BOSC; Caplan et al., 2001) which corrects
for coloured-noise bias across frequency and seeks oscillations lasting at
least three cycles, we computed correlations between log-odds-transformed proportion-of-trial measures of oscillations from 1-54 Hz and
response time across correct trials (average of 185 trials/participant).
These correlations (Fisher-transformed) were tested for reliability across
participants. At Pz, overlying parietal areas that have been implicated in
JORs (Marschuetz, 2005), correlations were significantly negative, within
the theta and gamma bands only (p<0.05), suggesting that within-subject
fluctuations in a theta/gamma mechanism exert an immediate influence
on order-memory judgements.

G26
WHITE MATTER MICROSTRUCTURE PREDICTS PERFORMANCE ON A
MODIFIED VERSION OF THE PASAT IN AN ADOLESCENT POPULATION

Jill Waldman1,2, Megan Herting1, Susan Li2, Bonnie Nagel1; 1Oregon Health &
Science University, 2Pacific University — The Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test (PASAT) is a measure of executive functioning that requires
processing speed, inhibition, and working memory. These high-level
functions are subserved by distributed fronto-parietal brain networks.
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is an in vivo imaging technique used to
characterize white matter (WM) microstructure in the brain, with greater
WM integrity relating to improved executive functioning. Given the
complex and functionally integrated nature of the PASAT, we hypothesized that WM microstructure, particularly in connections between frontal and parietal cortices, would be associated with better PASAT
performance. Thus, we examined the relationship between PASAT 3.0
seconds (s) and 2.0s performance and WM microstructure in 88 adolescents (48 girls; mean age=13.2, SD=1.7). DTI and PASAT data were collected, and fractional anisotropy (FA) was used to assess WM integrity.
FA is a DTI outcome that measures restricted water diffusion, with
higher values reflecting greater myelination and intravoxel fiber-tract
coherence. Using Tract Based Spatial Statistics, voxelwise regression
analyses were performed to examine the relationship between PASAT
performance and FA, controlling for age (voxel and clusterwise thresholded, p < .01). We found that PASAT 3.0s performance was positively
correlated with FA in the right posterior superior longitudinal fasciculus
(SLF), and more rapid PASAT 2.0s performance was positively correlated with right central SLF FA. These results suggest that the integrity of
fronto-parietal WM is important for complex executive functioning during adolescence. Given maturation of executive skills and WM across
adolescence, these findings hold potential implications for brain and
behavior relationships during development.

185

Poster Session G — Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

G27
A BEHAVIORAL AND FMRI INVESTIGATION OF THE INFLUENCES OF TASKDEMAND AND STRATEGY ON THE FOCUS OF ATTENTION Alexandra

Morrison1, Andrew R.A. Conway2, Jason M. Chein1; 1Temple University,
2Princeton University — An ongoing debate concerns how many distinct
mental representations can be maintained in the focus of attention. Prior
work indicates superior performance and distinct neural correlates for
the final item presented in a list of items in short-term memory tasks.
This is interpreted as evidence for a single item focus of attention and
contradicts evidence demonstrating a focus of attention of several items.
The current experiments investigate how task-demands and strategy-use
influence correlates of the focus of attention. In an initial behavioral
experiment, performance and self reported strategy were measured in
two tasks (judgment of recency, judgment of primacy), in two domains
(verbal, spatial). Results replicate the recency effects found in earlier
studies, and also, demonstrate a retrieval advantage for the earliest possible probe indicating a primacy effect. Importantly, a larger recency
effect was present in judgment of recency while a larger primacy effect
was present in judgment of primacy. Self reported strategy-use had little
effect on behavioral performance. In a follow-up fMRI experiment, participants completed verbal judgment of primacy and judgment of
recency and were probed about self-report strategy. Analysis compares
retrieval of items presented in different serial positions and reveals that
early and late items differ in engagement of regions associated with both
maintenance and retrieval of information. These patterns are compared
across task and strategy. Together these results inform the hypothesis
that the retrieval advantage of particular items in short-term memory
tasks is influenced by task demands and is not necessarily tied to
recency.

G28
NEURAL CORRELATES OF TASK SWITCHING IN A LARGE COMMUNITY
POPULATION Joey Contreras1, Angelica Bato1, Eliza Congdon1, Katie
Karlsgodt1, Russ Poldrack1, Edythe London1, Robert Bilder1, Fred Sabb1;
1University of California Los Angeles — Cognitive control is defined as the

ability to rapidly and flexibly adjust behavior to changing environmental
demands. This latent faculty is complex and is considered to be multifaceted. Aspects include working memory, attention, and problem solving. One particularly effective way to examine these processes is through
a Task Switch Paradigm. However, alternating between two tasks
impairs performance, as indicated by increased reaction times (RT’s) and
higher error rates. This impaired performance, termed “switch cost,” can
be reduced through advance preparation and better retention of task
instructions. Therefore, we hypothesized that having a highly efficient
working memory would lower switch costs. To test this, sixty participants underwent fMRI analysis on a Siemens 3T Trio as part of the Consortium for Neuropsychiatric Phenomics study. The participants
performed a cued color/shape task-switching paradigm as part of a
larger battery of tests including the Digit-Span and Color-Trail tests.
Data were processed and analyzed with a mixed model using the FSL
suite. Preliminary analyses reveal that a network of regions typically
associated with cognitive control were active during task performance.
Greater activity was seen for Switch Trials compared to Non-Switch Trials in bilateral prefrontal and posterior parietal regions, the basal ganglia, and anterior and poster cingulate. Digit-span performance was
significantly correlated with right prefrontal activity for Switch Trials
minus Non-Switch Trials .. These data suggest that working memory
span is associated with item switching. Further analyses are underway
to examine this association in detail.

G29
STRENGTH OF CORRELATION IN AND BETWEEN RESTING STATE
FUNCTIONAL NETWORKS IS LINEARLY RELATED TO PERFORMANCE ON A
VARIETY OF COGNITIVE TASKS Matthew Magnuson1, Garth Thompson1,

Technology, 2Georgia Institute of Technology, 3Air Force Research Laboratory,
Wright-Patterson — Intrinsic functionally connected brain networks
(FCNs) are spatially distinct brain regions that share a similar functional
signal. Activity in these FCNs can be measured using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). FCNs are thought to facilitate efficient
processing and intercommunication between cooperating brain regions.
In this work the possibility of FCN activity influencing cognitive performance is explored. 16 healthy subjects performed cognitive performance
tasks assessing attention, verbal working memory, spatial working
memory, and a measure of fluid intelligence. 2-9 days after cognitive
performance testing subjects underwent resting state fMRI scanning. The
relationship between cognitive performance scores and the strength of
resting state functional connectivity within the Task Positive Network
(TPN), Default Mode Network (DMN), and the correlation between the
two networks was evaluated. Increased performance on the attention
task was associated with increased DMN/TPN anti-correlation; conversely, increased performance on the verbal working memory and fluid
intelligence tasks was associated with decreased DMN/TPN anti-correlation. These results suggest that inherent organization between FCNs
may facilitate performance on one task while being detrimental to
another. Increased mean connectivity in the DMN was related to
increased performance on the fluid intelligence task, while increased
connectivity with the TPN was indicative of decreased spatial working
memory performance. FCN data collected at rest is significantly related
to a variety of cognitive performance tasks performed days before fMRI
data collection. Furthermore activity in FCNs is a stable and inherent
‘trait’ of functional brain architecture, as opposed to a passing state, that
is meaningful with respect to cognitive ability.

G30
NUMBER/RESOLUTION VS. STIMULUS COMPLEXITY: A UNIFYING
ACCOUNT OF THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF VISUAL WORKING MEMORY
CAPACITY Hillary Schwarb1, Shella D. Keilholz1, R. Andy McKinley2, Lloyd

Tripp2, Eric H. Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2Air Force
Research Laboratory — Since antiquity, philosophers and scientists have

been interested in human memory; today, researchers are still working
to understand its boundaries and architecture. One popular theory of
working memory capacity (WMC) identifies a limit of approximately
four items (Cowan, 2001). Consistent with this theory, neuroimaging
research shows that activity in the intraparietal and intraoccipital sulci
reflects visual WMC and reliably tracks the number of items stored
(Todd & Marois, 2004). This capacity limit is not, however, universally
accepted and some researchers have proposed that visual WMC is
strongly influenced by the complexity of the items stored (Alvarez &
Cavanagh, 2004). Furthermore, storing items of varying complexity
results in distinct patterns of neural activity (Xu & Chun, 2006). Awh,
Barton, and Vogel (2007) have recently proposed a unifying account of
visual WMC suggesting that visual working memory is mediated by two
independent factors: number (number of items stored) and resolution
(amount of detail stored). It seems likely that resolution plays an important role in successful discrimination of complex items. Thus the present
study seeks to directly evaluate the neural relationship between number/resolution and stimulus complexity. Results indicate that superior
and inferior intraparietal sulcus activity tracks capacity estimates both
for measures of number and resolution. Lateral occipital complex activity, however, tracks capacity estimates only for measures of number and
remains uniformly active for measures of resolution. These data suggest
that differential neural activation in the parietal and occipital lobes may
reflect general number and resolution processes responsible for identifying changes among complex stimuli.

Hillary Schwarb2, Brian Roberts2, Wenju Pan1, Andy McKinley3, Lloyd Tripp3,
Eric Schumacher2, Shella Keilholz1; 1Emory University / Georgia Institute of

186

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session G

G31
BUILDING COMPLEX TASK PERFORMANCE: MEASURING UNIQUE
CONTRIBUTIONS TO FLUID INTELLIGENCE FROM A SINGLE
HIERARCHICALLY-NESTED TASK. Kayla Knopp1, Jeremy Reynolds1;
1University of Denver — Recent

neuroimaging and neuropsychological
research has suggested that some cognitive control processes may be
hierarchically organized. However, there has been little investigation of
how these nested control processes may relate to other constructs associated with cognitive control, such as fluid intelligence and working memory span. The current study used a sequential working memory (WM)
paradigm (a modified version of the AX-continuous performance task
called the ½-AX-CPT) in order to investigate this question. In some conditions, this sequential WM paradigm is conceptually equivalent to a
standard AX-CPT, in which a single prior stimulus is needed to determine the appropriate response (e.g. an X following an A is a target).
Other conditions require additional information that must be maintained across multiple trials, in spite of the lower-level information being
updated on each trial (e.g. an X following an A is a target, but only after a
1 has been presented). In addition to manipulating whether this higherlevel information was necessary, we also manipulated whether distractor stimuli occurred within a block of trials or not. Decomposition of performance on this task suggested that these two manipulations were
associated with unique variance in one measure of fluid intelligence
(Ravens Advance Progressive Matrices). The current work builds upon
previous work establishing a link between context maintenance and WM
span, and begins to establish a link between simple hierarchically nested
tasks and better established psychological constructs such as WM span
and fluid intelligence.

G32
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN MENTAL MODEL UPDATING DURING
McQuire1,
Seana
NARRATIVE TEXT COMPREHENSION Marguerite

Coulson1; 1University of California, San Diego — In a series of 4 behavioral

experiments, we investigated the impact of individual differences on
mental model updating during reading of narrative texts. We presented
short narratives that describe a protagonist as being spatially close (associated) or far away (dissociated) from a critical object, “George jogged
home from work. He ‘put on/took off’ his faded ‘sweatshirt’ and
decided to walk over to his girlfriend’s.” Half the experimental trials
were followed by a filler sentence. Every narrative concluded with a sentence that anaphorically refers to the critical object, “He was sorry ‘it’
was torn.” Participants were faster to read the final sentence when the
object was described as being spatially close to the protagonist compared
to when it was farther away (spatial association effect). In Experiments 1
and 2 (n=44 in each) we found the spatial association effect was positively correlated with verbal working memory capacity and mental rotation ability. Experiments 3 and 4 (n=44 in each) used a dual task
paradigm to tax verbal (Experiment 3) and spatial (Experiment 4) working memory during text comprehension. Experiment 3 revealed additive
effects of verbal memory load and spatial association on reading times
for the final sentences. In Experiment 4, the spatial association effect was
larger with high spatial load than low, especially in participants with
smaller spatial working memory capacity. Consistent with grounded
accounts of language comprehension, results suggest that brain systems
for visuo-spatial working memory significantly impact mental model
updating during narrative text comprehension.

LANGUAGE: Other
G33
DISTINCT BRAIN NETWORKS SUPPORT THE EXECUTIVE CONTROL OF
EACH LANGUAGE IN LATE BILINGUALS Leila Chouiter1, Jean-Marie

Annoni1, Lucas Spierer1; 1Neurology Unit, University of Fribourg, Fribourg,
Switzerland — Bilinguals show a remarkable ability to switch between languages depending on contextual demands. The inhibitory hypothesis
suggests that selection of a given language notably involves inhibiting

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

the other unused languages to prevent cross-language interferences.
Current literature on executive control in bilinguals shows that the control of language may involve specific brain networks instead of relying
solely on general cognitive executive mechanisms. However, whether
distinct executive processes control each language remains unknown.
Here, we investigate the spatio-temporal brain mechanisms supporting
intra-lingual inhibition in late bilinguals with a medium-level second
language proficiency. We addressed this question by contrasting electrical neuroimaging analyses of visual evoked potentials (VEPs) recorded
in twelve bilingual individuals during the completion of a bilingual
color-stroop paradigm with Language (First/L1; Second/L2) and Congruency (Congruent; Incongruent) as within-subject factors. Behaviorally, we observed a significant (p>0.05) Language x Congruency
interaction driven by a larger stroop effect for L1 than L2, suggesting an
easier inhibition of L2. At the electrophysiological level, we observed a
significant interaction between factors Language and Congruency 420 to
445ms post-stimulus onset at the topographic level, indicative of the
engagement of distinct configuration of brain networks. Distributed
electrical sources analyses localized these effects within the anterior cingulate and basal ganglia, middle frontal and occipital areas. We interpret
our results in terms of qualitatively distinct executive mechanisms for
the control each language in late bilingual and more generally of partly
segregated anatomo-functional pathways for the processing of languages acquired late in life.

G34
DTI REVEALS ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN WHITE MATTER STRUCTURE AND
READING SKILL IN TYPICAL ADULTS Suzanne Welcome1, Marc Joanisse1;
1University of Western Ontario, Centre for Brain and Mind — We

explored the
hypothesis that because skilled reading requires efficient coordination of
distant cortical regions, variations in white matter integrity can be used
to predict individual differences in reading subskills. Of interest were
relationships between different aspects of reading skills and white matter structure, in typical-reading adults. We used diffusion tensor imaging and probabilistic tractography to investigate the size and integrity of
white matter pathways extending from cortical regions of interest (ROIs)
associated with different reading subskills. We identified ROIs using
both anatomical markers and fMRI localizers. ROIs were identified subjectwise, which retained individual differences in anatomy and avoided
distortions resulting from spatial normalization. Increased tract volume
was associated with increased phonological decoding ability in several
regions including left Heschl’s gyrus and portions of the corpus callosum. Overall, the data suggest that phonological decoding ability is
highest among those with more extensive anatomical connections from
auditory cortex. Similar associations were not observed between these
regions and either non-phonological reading measures or nonverbal IQ,
indicating the specificity of this relationship. Fractional anisotropy in a
separate set of regions was positively correlated with better reading
comprehension and higher nonverbal IQ, including the left angular
gyrus. These findings suggest that individual differences in white matter
structure relate to reading abilities among adults, albeit in a complex
way that respects the multifactorial nature of word recognition. Such
relationships between individual differences in brain connectivity and
individual differences in reading skill may shed additional light on the
neural substrates of reading.

G35
EXPLORATION INTO FEEDBACK AND NON-FEEDBACK BASED LEARNING
IN APHASIA Sofia Vallila1,2, Swathi Kiran2; 1Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 2Boston University — While we have some understanding of

how individuals with post-stroke aphasia relearn language, why some
patients respond to treatment while others do not remains a looming
question in the field of aphasia rehabilitation. Based on previous studies
in normal and brain damaged populations (Knowlton et al., 1994; Davis
et al., 2009; Maddox et al., 2008; Ashby et al., 2002; Filoteo et al., 2005)
that have shown that factors such as training method, feedback and
stimulus characteristics lead to differential engagement of neural sub-

187

Poster Session G — Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
strates, we hypothesize that patient progress with language relearning is
attributable to language processing as well as to underlying cognitive
systems being engaged during learning. To this end, we aimed to
explore learning of novel non-linguistic categories in patients and controls, exploring two training methods hypothesized to engage distinct
memory systems and neural resources. Stimuli for the experiment were
cartoon animals that vary on ten binary features (Zeithamova at al.,
2008) each associated with one of two categories with a fixed probability.
Each participant completed feedback and non-feedback based category
learning paradigms comprised of a training phase and a testing phase.
Data collected from ten patients with aphasia and ten age-matched controls show that controls are equally able to learn following feedback and
non-feedback based instruction. Five out of ten patients showed the ability to learn following at least one method of instruction, suggesting that
learning is in fact affected in aphasia and is an important factor to consider in the field of aphasia rehabilitation.

G36
EFFECTS OF MUSICAL AND LINGUISTIC EXPERIENCE ON THE
PROCESSING OF SPEECH AND NON-SPEECH PITCH: AN EVENT-RELATED
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY Yue Wang1, Yang Zhang2, Angela

Cooper1,3, Mathieu Dovan1; 1Simon Fraser University, 2University of
Minnesota, 3Northwestern University — This study addresses the extent to

which speech processing involves linguistic-specific neural mechanisms
or extends across lower-level sensory and higher-level cognitive processes. We examine speech and non-speech pitch processing by tone and
non-tone language speakers with or without musical training, hypothesizing that, if tonal processing were linguistic-specific, neural sensitivity
for tone in speech would be different for native and non-native tone language speakers, whereas non-speech tone processing would be comparable. Additionally, given that pitch perception is fundamental to both
speech and music, music experience is expected to affect linguistic pitch
processing. Using electroencephalography, Mandarin (tone language)
and English (non-tone language) musicians and non-musicians were
tested in speech (Mandarin tone) and non-speech (hummed tone) conditions. Results showed that, for the non-musicians, the Mandarin group
elicited larger mismatch negativity (MMN) responses in the speech condition than the English group. Additionally, only for the Mandarin
group were the MMNs for non-speech larger than those for speech. For
latency, the Mandarin group showed earlier MMNs than the English
group for both speech and non-speech. However, these differences
became less evident for the musicians, in that the Mandarin and English
musicians exhibited similar results across conditions, approximating the
Mandarin non-musician patterns. The results reveal higher neural sensitivity in Mandarin listeners in both speech and non-speech conditions,
indicating that language experience may lead to automatic transfer
between speech and non-speech pitch processing. On the other hand,
musical pitch experience may facilitate linguistic pitch processing. These
results suggest interconnected brain functions across sensory, linguistic
and cognitive domains.

G37
NEURAL CORRELATES OF LETTER REVERSAL IN CHILDREN AND
ADULTS Li-Wei King1, Marianna Eddy1, Priya Kalra2, Debbie Yee1, Stephanie

Del Tufo3,4, Pawan Sinha1, John Gabrieli1; 1Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 2Harvard Graduate School of Education, 3Haskins Laboratories,
4University of Connecticut — The human object recognition system typically generalizes between objects and their mirror images. Since writing
systems are orientation specific, mirror generalization has to be
unlearned when children learn to read. We investigated the neural correlates of letter reversal in normal reading children (age 5-12) and adults,
specifically in the region in left occipital temporal cortex often called the
visual word form area (VWFA). We localized a region of interest (ROI) in
both groups with a separate localizer, selecting left fusiform clusters that
responded more for words than for objects for each individual. We then
extracted the activation while participants looked at letters and reversed

188

letters from this ROI. We found that the VWFA in children responded
equally to letters and reversed letters, whereas this area responded less
for letters than reversed letters in adults. In addition, we collected eventrelated potentials from a subset of these participants, where we found
the same pattern of sensitivity on the N170 when comparing letters and
reversed letters. Specifically, the N170 amplitude did not differ between
the two manipulations in the children, but did in adults (the N170 amplitude for normally oriented letters was lower than that for mirror
reversed letters). These results show that the unlearning of mirror generalization for letters follows a protracted time-course extending even
beyond early adolescence.

G38
RS-FCMRI BASED CHARACTERIZATION OF LEFT OCCIPITO-TEMPORAL
CORTEX Alecia Vogel1, Alexander Cohen1, Jonathan Power1, Steven

Nelson1, Jessica Church1, Joseph Dubis1, Sarah Ihnen1, Kelly Barnes1, Fran
Miezin1, Bradley Schlaggar1, Steven Petersen1; 1Washington University School
of Medicine — Regions in the left occipito-temporal (OT) cortex are
reported to show separable visual specializations; e.g., for motion (i.e.,
MT+, Tootell et al., 1995) and word-related processing (i.e., putative
visual word form area (pVWFA), Cohen et al., 2004). Our group recently
reported a region in left OT (LOT) with characteristics useful for reading
but not limited to processing letters or words. To explore this issue more
broadly, we defined regions in left OT cortex using fc-Mapping (Cohen
et al., 2008), the relationships between those regions using community
detection algorithms in resting fcMRI, and the function of those communities using the evoked response profiles to several functional tasks. fcMapping demonstrates 18 regions, including regions at the reported
coordinates of LOT, MT+, and the pVWFA. Community detection analysis of the 18 fc-Mapping regions defined 3 major communities: 1) posterior regions showing close mutual fcMRI relationships to other visual
cortical regions, 2) a set that includes LOT, MT+, and the pVWFA, preferentially correlated with the dorsal attention network (Corbetta and
Shulman, 2002), and 3) a group of anterior regions related most closely to
the fronto-parietal control network (Dosenbach et al., 2006, 2007). These
communities show statistically different functional responses to word
and attention-related tasks, demonstrating a broad functional organization in left OT cortex. While there may be separate regions related to
“specialized” word and motion processing and the less specialized processing described in our recent work, such regions have similar functional relationships with control networks, and overlapping evoked
functional properties.

G39
SPANISH HERITAGE LANGUAGE PROCESSING: AN ERP STUDY Harriet

Wood Bowden1, Kara Morgan-Short2, Kim Potowski2, Laura B. Bartlett2;
1University of Tennessee-Knoxville, 2University of Illinois-Chicago — A growing body of research has examined (morpho)syntactic similarities and
differences between heritage languages (those acquired and used in a
minority context), native languages (L1) and second languages (L2; Montrul, 2008). Findings from offline tasks indicate that some linguistic features are more affected than others. However, studies have not
examined heritage language knowledge across linguistic structures and
have not yet examined online processing. The current study aims to further elucidate heritage language knowledge and processing across linguistic domains as revealed by event-related potentials (ERPs). ERPs
were recorded while heritage speakers read Spanish sentences that
included violations of lexical-semantics, syntax (word order), and morphosyntax (gender and number agreement), and indicated the sentences'
acceptability. Heritage speaker data was compared to that of Spanish L2
speakers at low and advanced levels of experience/proficiency, and to
L1 Spanish speakers (Bowden, Sanz, Steinhauer, & Ullman, 2007) . ERP
results suggest that whereas all groups processed lexical-semantic violations similarly (N400s), processing of grammatical structures varied.
Heritage speakers were similar to L1 speakers in their processing of gender and number (LAN+P600s), whereas neither group of L2 speakers
was fully native-like for these structures. Heritage processing of word

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session G
order, on the other hand, was not like L1 (or Advanced L2, who showed
an L1-like pattern). Furthermore, heritage speakers showed a dissociation between their ERP signatures and behavioral performance, which
patterned more with L2 speakers. In sum, heritage speaker linguistic
processing appears to be neither fully L1-like nor L2-like but rather displays some commonalities with both groups.

LANGUAGE: Semantic
G40
NEURAL BASIS OF GIST AND DETAIL PROCESSING: EFFECTS OF NORMAL
AGING Raksha Mudar1, Hsueh-Sheng Chiang2, Michael Motes2, Mandy

Maguire2, Elizabeth Bartz2, John Hart2; 1University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, 2The University of Texas at Dallas — Several behavioral studies
have revealed that memory for abstracted meaning, commonly referred
to as gist, is relatively preserved with normal cognitive aging, in contrast
to memory for details or specific content. Fewer studies, however, have
investigated the effects of aging on the neural basis of gist and detail processing. This study examined processing differences in gist versus
details in normal young (n=17, 20-30 years) and older adults (n=17, 65-80
years) using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Participants
judged whether a given statement corresponded to gist or details conveyed in complex static digital pictures (pretested for consistent gist and
detail judgments) while fMRI data were collected. Each picture was
paired with statements that conveyed congruent gist or described details
that were present in the picture and foil statements that conveyed incongruent gist or described details that were not present. Findings revealed
that in both groups greater activation for the gist condition was observed
primarily in left superior and inferior frontal and left superior and middle temporal regions. Greater activation for details was observed in bilateral superior and inferior parietal regions in young adults. In contrast, in
older adults, greater activation for details was observed primarily in
right superior and inferior parietal regions. In general, older adults had
greater frontal activation during both gist and detail conditions. Overlapping activation patterns in young and old during gist processing, and
differential activation patterns during detail processing, might to an
extent explain behavioral differences observed in memory for gist and
details with aging.

G41
THE ROLE OF INFERIOR FRONTAL GYRUS IN PROCESSING CHINESE
CLASSIFIERS Tai-Li Chou1, Shu-Hui Lee1, Shao-Min Hung1, Hsuan-Chih

Chen2; 1National Taiwan University, 2Chinese University of Hong Kong — The
Chinese classifier system classifies nouns and builds a relation between
the classifier and its corresponding noun. This functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study examined brain activation of Chinese classifiers during reading comprehension. Thirty-four participants read and
perform semantic congruency judgments on congruous, inside-classifier
violated, and outside-classifier violated sentences. The inside-classifier
(IC) and outside-classifier (OC) violations were created by changing the
correct classifier to an inappropriate classifier and a non-classifier,
respectively. The comparison of the IC violation versus the congruent
condition produced greater activation in the mid-ventral region (BA 45)
of the left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), suggesting an on-line search for
coherent semantic information to perform semantic unification. Contrasting different subtypes of IC violation produced greater activation in
the right IFG (BAs 45 and 47), indicating that processing mass/count
classifiers involves distinct brain activations. The OC violation produced
greater activation in the left IFG (BAs 45 and 44), suggesting both semantic and syntactic processing. These results indicate that different parts of
the IFG contribute to syntactic and semantic processing of classifier
phrases in reading Chinese for comprehension.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

G42
TEST-RETEST RELIABILITY OF N400 EFFECTS IN A WORD-PAIR
SEMANTIC PRIMING PARADIGM Michael Kiang1, Iulia Patriciu1, Carolyn

Roy1, Bruce K. Christensen1, Robert B. Zipursky1; 1McMaster University — The
N400 event-related brain potential (ERP) component is a negative voltage deflection elicited by any potentially meaningful stimulus such as a
word or a picture. Its amplitude is reduced (made less negative) by factors facilitating the processing of stimulus meaning - e.g., relatedness of
the eliciting stimulus to a preceding one. This N400 semantic priming
effect has been used as a neurophysiological probe of abnormal processing of semantic relationships in clinical disorders, and has been suggested as a possible biomarker for treatment studies. Further validation
of N400 semantic priming effects as a clinical biomarker requires establishment of their test-retest reliability. We examined test-retest reliability
of N400 semantic priming effects by recording ERPs in 16 healthy individuals while they viewed the same series of related and unrelated
prime-target word pairs in two sessions approximately one week apart
(Time 1 and Time 2). As expected, N400 amplitudes were smaller for
related versus unrelated targets across both sessions. N400 semantic
priming effects (amplitude differences between unrelated and related
targets) were highly correlated across sessions (r=0.85, p<0.0001). However, N400 semantic priming effects were significantly smaller at Time 2
than at Time 1, due to larger N400 amplitudes for related targets at Time
2 than at Time 1. This effect of repeated testing could be due to changes
in motivation. The results suggest that N400 priming effects have high
test-retest reliability, but that their use as a biomarker in treatment studies should take into consideration possible decreases in magnitude with
repeated testing.

G43
THE FUNCTIONAL SOURCE OF THE N400: FACILITATION OF LEXICAL
ACCESS VS POST-LEXICAL INTEGRATION DIFFICULTY. A REPETITIONPRIMING ERP STUDY ON SENTENCE PROCESSING. Jakub Szewczyk1,

Herbert Schriefers2; 1Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland, 2Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen,
Netherlands — Despite the popularity of the N400 component, there are
opposing theories concerning underlying processes. The main point of
contention is whether N400 relies on lexical access being already done
(conceptual integration difficulty), or on the ease of making lexical
access. Participants were visually presented with short stories, that had a
direct object noun in the story-final sentence. In half of trials the noun
was semantically incongruent with the story. Congruity was fully
crossed with repetition priming: all story-final sentences were preceded
by presentation of 4 prime words; in the primed condition, one of the
words was the direct object noun of the upcoming sentence. Participants
were asked to read all sentences, memorize story-final sentences for offline cued-recall test, and temporarily memorize the prime words, for
probe-recognition test. Integration theory predicts N400 for all incongruent words, independent of priming. Pre-lexical theories assume N400s
index word’s preactivation level and predict no N400 for primed incongruent words. Unprimed incongruent words led to a standard N400.
Primed incongruent words led to identical N400 for subjects with low
cue-recall scores (which we interpret as inhibition of context-incongruent primes during processing of story-final sentences); good memorizers
had N400s largely reduced (episodic trace protects against inhibition).
For congruent words, priming led to reduction of N400, resulting from
priming-induced preactivation. Two control experiments show that
none of these are effects of expectation or probe words recognition.
These experiments support theories assuming that the N400 results from
processes leading to lexical access and refine our understanding of attention-memory-language interactions.

189

Poster Session G — Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

G44
(DIS)ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN SPEECH AND GESTURE IN NAMING
SPATIAL RELATIONS Tilbe Goksun1, Matt Lehet1, Katie Malykhina1, Anjan

Chatterjee1; 1The University of Pennsylvania — Speech and gesture are complementary components of an integrated language system (McNeill,
1992). How impaired verbalization of spatial relations relates to gesture
production is not known (Kemmerer et al., 2007). The goal of this study
is to determine if language and gesture deficits co-occur in focal brain
injured patients’ descriptions of spatial relations or if gestures can compensate for language deficits. Patients with left (LHD, n=13) or right
hemisphere damage (RHD, n=11), and elderly controls (n=8) were asked
to name static (e.g., an apple IN a bowl – 24 trials) and dynamic (e.g., a
pen MOVES OVER a box – 28 trials) spatial relations depicted in brief
video clips. The correct use of prepositions in each task and gestures that
represent the spatial relations (e.g., moving the hand in an arc to represent MOVE OVER) were coded. Not surprisingly, patients with LHD
made more errors in naming both static and dynamic prepositions compared to RHD and controls, ps<.035 (errors in static: MLHD=5.3,
MRHD=0.8, Mcontrols=0.8 and errors in dynamic: MLHD=5.8,
MRHD=1.8, Mcontrols=0.1). While naming static relations, LHD patients
produced more spatial gestures than RHD and controls, p=.004
(MLHD=5, MRHD=1.09, Mcontrols=0.75). No difference was found in
dynamic gesture production between LHD and RHD patients
(MLHD=8.7 and MRHD=8). Accuracy in naming negatively correlated
with gesture rates, r=-.44, p=.003. In some cases, patients represented the
correct spatial information only in gesture. These findings suggest that
although speech and gesture are closely linked, gesture production may
compensate for impaired lexical access to prepositions.

G45
SEMANTIC COMPETITION IN TBI PATIENTS Lian Chu1, Fanpei Yang1,

Tracy Luks2, Sara LaHue2, Pratik Mukherjee2; 1National Tsing Hua University,
Hsinchu, Taiwan, 2University of California San Francisco — Research
has

reported that patients with mild traumatic brain injury (TBI) suffer from
impaired verbal memory using measures of neuropsychological testing.
Verbal memory deficits might arise from failure in semantic control. The
present study aims to study the semantic network in TBI patients in
semantic competition. Seven controls (6 males and 1 females, mean
age=31) and fourteen patients (9 males and 5 females, mean age=31) participated in the study. Subjects were asked to decide whether words in a
pair were related, indicating their decision by pressing the buttons. Each
trial contained the first pair as a probe, the second pair as a target, and a
focal point. We had three conditions: consistent, inconsistent, and control. All image processing was performed using SPM5, P<0.005. Two
sample T-test revealed that controls have more activations in metaphors
than patients whereas no voxels survived for the patient>control comparison. The control>patient comparison of inconsistent metaphors and
consistent metaphors (metaphoric competition) revealed significantly
greater involvement in the cingulate and the left middle frontal gyri.
Controls activated the right precentral gyrus for homonymic competition (inconsistent homonym>consistent homonym) and the cingulate
gyrus for metaphoric competition. In contrast, patients did not have any
voxels survived for either contrasts. Our results suggested that controls
involved more self-monitoring and working memory regions to resolve
semantic competition. Overall hypo-activations in multiple regions in
patients suggested disrupted connectivity in semantic networks. Lastly
the metaphoric property is more likely to reveal subtle deficits in semantic memory networks in TBI patients.

G46
THE INFLUENCE OF SEMANTIC PROPERTY AND GRAMMATICAL CLASS
ON MANDARIN SEMANTIC COMPETITION Fanpei Yang1, Dai-Lin Wu1,
Cheng-Te Wang1; 1National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan — Although

research suggested representational differences between metaphoric and
polysemous words, imaging studies have not successfully demonstrated
consistent neural distinctions. We conducted a semantic relatedness

190

judgment task using event-related fMRI. Nine native speakers of Mandarin (7 females, 2 males) were asked to decide whether words in a pair
were related, indicating their decision by pressing buttons. Each trial
contained the first pair as the probe, the second pair as the target, and a
focal point. We had three conditions: consistent, inconsistent and control. Consistent and inconsistent trials contain the same ambiguous
words (e.g., metaphor or polysemy) in the 2nd position. Words in the
first position were either nouns or verbs. In the consistent condition, the
first and the second word pair refer to the same meaning of the ambiguous word. In the inconsistent condition, the second pair refers to a different sense of the polysemy or metaphor. The control condition contained
subsequent pairs of words that do not share a common meaning. Imaging results indicated that the inconsistent vs consistent metaphors activated the inferior parietal lobule regardless of the grammar classes. The
noun-noun inconsistent>consistent metaphors involved the right middle
frontal and middle temporal gyri, whereas the noun-verb pairs activated
the orbitofrontal gyrus. The noun-noun inconsistent>consistent polysemy activated the superior, middle and inferior temporal gyri, while
the noun-verb pairs did not have any survived voxels. These findings
support our hypothesis that words with different semantic properties
are manifested at the neural level and that different grammatical classes
influence ambiguity resolution.

G47
THE USE OF IMPLICIT MEASURES TO ASSESS RECEPTIVE VOCABULARY
KNOWLEDGE IN NORMAL ADULTS AND NORMALLY DEVELOPING
CHILDREN. Ishanti Gangopadhyay1, Kerry Ledoux1, Laura Bosley1, Barry

Gordon1,2; 1The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 2The Johns
Hopkins University — Introduction: An important question about assessing

language comprehension is whether we can use implicit measures to
detect evidence of receptive vocabulary knowledge in the absence of
explicit behavioral responses. In this study we use eye movements
(EMs), pupillary dilation (PD), and event-related potentials (ERPs) as
measures of receptive vocabulary knowledge in two groups – normal
adults and normally developing children. Methods: 20 normal adults
(ages 18 and over) and 20 normally developing children (ages 5-17) were
tested. Participants completed a) a forced choice recognition task (EM
and PD), where four pictures were presented on a computer screen,
along with an auditory token that named one of the pictured objects; and
b) a congruity task (ERP), where single pictures were shown on the computer screen, accompanied by an auditory token that did or did not
match the name of the pictured item. Results: Adults and children
showed similar patterns of results for all three measures. EMs were
faster for pictures that matched the auditory word, but only for known
words. End-of-trial fixations were on the named picture more frequently
for known words. Mean PDs were greater for unknown words than for
known words. Additionally, an N400 congruency effect was observed
for known words, but not for unknown words. Conclusion: The three
measures (EM, PD, ERP) differentiated known from unknown words in
both participant groups. Importantly, these measures could prove to be
useful and valid measures of receptive vocabulary knowledge in the
absence of overt responses.

G48
EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIALS OF SEMANTIC ACCESS AND
MEMORY FOR EMOTIONAL LANGUAGE Daniel J Frost1,2, Kara D

Federmeier1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2University of
California San Diego — Emotional language differs from non-emotional
language in calling to mind positive or negative attributions (valence) of
varying intensities (arousal). Understanding the power of emotional language to shape behavior requires distinguishing the independent contributions of valence and arousal to brain activity associated with
processing words for meaning. The current study examines effects of
valence on semantic access and memory for low arousal words. Electroencephalograms were recorded from 20 (10 female; age=18-21, mean=19)
University of Illinois students as they assessed the applicability of posi-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session G
tive, negative, and neutral words to “UofI students” generally or themselves specifically. Each word was repeated to examine effects of valence
on semantic access and on-line memory. Studies have shown that differences in ERPs across repeated presentations reflect facilitated semantic
access and memory activation, as indexed by the N400 and Late Positive
Complex. Our results show that on first presentation there were no differences due to valence on the N400 or LPC. On second presentation, all
conditions showed increased positivity on the N400 and LPC (i.e., ERP
repetition effect). Critically, the repetition effect was not sensitive to
valence. However, post-hoc analysis revealed that neutral words elicited
a greater frontally-distributed negativity 300–700 ms post-stimulus onset
compared to valenced words, possibly reflecting greater difficulty in
assessing the applicability of neutral words. This frontal difference was
eliminated by repetition. These results suggest that valenced words are
semantically processed and remembered similarly to neutral words, and
previously reported ERP effects of emotion are likely the result of
arousal rather than valence differences.

G49
FRONTAL AND TEMPORAL-LOBE ACTIVATION IN WORD RETRIEVAL IN
PATIENTS WITH TEMPORAL-LOBE EPILEPSY Alexander Barnett1, Mary

Pat McAndrews1; 1University of Toronto — Functional MRI is rapidly becoming a standard clinical tool for identifying language-relevant brain
regions in patients with temporal-lobe epilepsy (TLE) who are being
investigated for surgery for relief of seizures. Activation protocols vary
in the extent to which they are differentially sensitive to anterior versus
posterior language regions and in the extent to which they demonstrate
strong lateralization effects between hemispheres. In this study, we
examined differences in the magnitude of activation in both frontal and
temporal lobes of the dominant hemisphere in patients with TLE as a
function of the activation task. Here, two tasks required word generation
according to cues that provided a great deal of semantic support/constraint (naming to description and sentence completion; NS) and two
that provided relatively little support/constraint (verb generation and
category fluency; VC) . We expected there to be greater engagement of
frontal regions in the latter, as there is more opportunity for response
competition and less semantic richness in the cues. We scanned patients
during each of these tasks and compared activation in predefined frontal
and temporal regions (based on anatomic masks) for task versus fixation
baseline. For patients with both left and right TLE, we found that the VC
tasks showed greater involvement of frontal relative to temporal regions
whereas the NS tasks showed equivalent activation in both regions.
These findings are consistent with theories that suggest frontal regions
may be more important in executive processes supporting semantic
retrieval than semantic access per se.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
G50
DIFFERENT ROUTES OF SEMANTIC ACCESS MODULATE THE INTERPLAY
BETWEEN EPISODIC AND SEMANTIC MEMORIES. Bethany
Coad1,2,

Edward Wilding1,2, David Donaldson3, Andrea Greve4; 1Cardiff University Brain
Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), School of Psychology, Cardiff University,
2
Wales Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience (WICN), 3Psychology, School of
Natural Sciences, University of Stirling, 4Medical Research Council (MRC)
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge; — Episodic and semantic

memories interact dynamically, but how this occurs is largely unknown.
Certain kinds of semantic encoding operations result primarily in
changes to familiarity-based episodic memory judgments. Others, meanwhile, result primarily in changes to recollection-based judgments.
These findings can potentially be reconciled by assuming that stimulusdriven and strategy-driven semantic manipulations evoke different
kinds of interactions with episodic retrieval. The former impact primarily on the process of familiarity, while the latter impact on the process of
recollection. We investigated this possibility in two experiments. In both,
event-related potentials (ERPs) were acquired during the test phases of

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

recognition memory tasks. In the first experiment, participants completed a lexical decision task at study. Memory was superior for words
than for non-words, and an ERP index of familiarity was larger for
words, consistent with the view that (i) stimulus-driven access influences familiarity, and (ii) this process is responsible for the differences in
response accuracy. In the second experiment, words were subjected to
either semantic or non-semantic encoding. Memory at test was superior
following semantic rather than non-semantic encoding. ERP indices of
familiarity at test were invariant across encoding tasks, and an ERP
index of recollection was larger following deep encoding. Overall, the
correspondences between the behavioural and ERP findings indicate
that the route by which semantic information is accessed plays a critical
role in guiding the type of interplay between episodic and semantic
memories.

G51
NEURAL ACTIVITY RELATED TO SELF-INITIATING ELABORATIVE
SEMANTIC ENCODING DURING NON- SEMANTIC ENCODING TRIALS

Colin Hawco1, Jorge L. Armony1, Martin Lepage1; 1Douglas Hospital Research
Center, McGill University, Montreal, Canada — Numerous groups, including
patients with psychosis, Alzheimer’s Disease, or frontal lobe lesions, as
well as healthy aging individuals, show a decrease in the self-initiation
of efficient memory encoding strategies, resulting in reductions in memory performance. In order to better understand the brain regions
involved in elaborative encoding strategies, we performed an fMRI
study in which we controlled for the use of different encoding strategies.
Twenty-three healthy young participants were presented triads of
objects in which either neither, one or both objects in the bottom of the
triad were related to the top object. Participants were given two encoding instructions that required them to indicate the number of semantic
(‘related?’) or physical (‘smaller?’) relationships in the triad. We found
increased reaction time as a function of the number of semantic relationships in the triad for both encoding conditions, indicating that semantic
analysis was still performed for the non-semantic encoding task. We performed a masking conjunction analysis on the fMRI data to find areas
with greater activity for the non-semantic >semantic encoding tasks that
were modulated by increasing semantic relationships during nonsemantic encoding. We found activity in the left dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (DLPFC) and bilaterally in the supramarginal gyrus. We suggest
that the DLPFC is the most likely candidate region for the self-initiation
of elaborative semantic encoding during non-semantic trials, while the
supramarginal activity is likely related to attentional effects. This could
have important implications for understanding neurological changes in
patients who show a deficit in self-initiated memory strategy use.

G52
NEURAL CORRELATES OF EPISODIC COUNTERFACTUAL THINKING

Felipe De Brigard1,2, Donna Rose Addis3, Jaclyn Ford1, Daniel Schacter2, Kelly
Giovanello1; 1UNC, Chapel Hill, 2Harvard University, 3The University of
Auckland — Recent evidence suggests that remembering the past and
imagining what might happen in the future largely depend on the same
core brain network, including medial temporal lobe, posterior cingulate,
medial prefrontal and lateral temporal/parietal cortices. However, the
extent to which this network is also responsible for our capacity to think
about what could have happened in our past, yet did not occur (i.e., episodic counterfactual thinking), is still unknown. To examine this issue,
participants were asked to generate 100 specific autobiographical memories during a pre-scan interview. Ten days later, participants performed
4 tasks while undergoing fMRI: (1) remember an event, (2) imagine a better outcome for an event, (3) imagine a worse outcome for an event, and
(4) imagine another way to get the same outcome. Partial least squares
(PLS) analysis identified a pattern of brain activity across the core network common to episodic memory and episodic counterfactual thinking. PLS also identified two different patterns of brain activity for likely
and unlikely episodic counterfactual thoughts, with the former showing
significant overlap with the regions engaged during episodic recollection. To explore the differential engagement of brain regions during

191

Poster Session G — Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
likely versus unlikely counterfactual thoughts, a parametric modulation
revealed that activation of areas such as the middle frontal gyrus, the
parahippocampal gyrus, and the hippocampus was modulated by the
subjective likelihood of counterfactual simulations. These results suggest
that episodic counterfactual thinking engages the core network, and that
the subjective likelihood of our counterfactual thoughts modulates the
engagement of different regions within this network.

G53
DISSOCIATION OF RECOLLECTION-RELATED NEURAL ACTIVITY IN
VENTRAL LATERAL PARIETAL CORTEX Sarah Yu1, Jeffrey Johnson2,

Michael Rugg1; 1Center for Vital Longevity and School of Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas, 2Department of Psychological
Sciences, University of Missouri — fMRI studies of recognition memory

have reported enhanced activity in two regions of ventral lateral parietal
cortex—the angular gyrus and temporo-parietal junction (TPJ)— when
recognition is accompanied by recollection. According to one proposal,
ventral parietal recollection effects reflect processes involved in maintaining or representing recollected information. Another proposal suggests the effects reflect attentional re-orienting to the products of
recollection. The present experiment addressed the question whether
these operations map on to the angular gyrus and TPJ, respectively. Subjects (N=16) were scanned during a recognition memory test that combined the ‘Remember/Know’ and source memory procedures, and that
allowed test items to be segregated both according to whether they elicited a subjective sense of recollection, and additionally by the quality of
the contextual information that could be retrieved (indexed by the confidence of the source memory judgment). Activity in angular gyrus
tracked amount of recollected information, whereas activity in TPJ was
enhanced for items endorsed as recollected, but was insensitive to the
amount of information recollected. These findings are consistent with
much prior evidence that the angular gyrus and TPJ are functionally heterogenous, and suggest that the role of the ventral parietal cortex in episodic memory cannot be accounted for in terms of a single cognitive
construct.

G54
NEURAL EVIDENCE THAT RECOLLECTION AND FAMILIARITY MAKE
INDEPENDENT CONTRIBUTIONS TO RECOGNITION MEMORY
JUDGMENTS Lisa Evans1, Edward Wilding1; 1Cardiff University Brain
Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), School of Psychology, Cardiff University —
In the Remember/Know task people give Remember, Know or New
responses to studied and unstudied stimuli. The task is assumed to
depend on the two processes of recollection and familiarity, but how
they contribute is contentious. Recollection involves recovery of encoded
contextual information. Familiarity is a scalar memory strength signal.
By one view, recollection supports Remember responses, familiarity
Know responses and the two are independent. By another view, Remember responses are typically associated with high levels of recollection and
familiarity, Know responses with lower levels of both. We attempted to
separate these accounts using event-related field (ERF) measures of neural activity, as ERFs index recollection and familiarity. ERF signal
changes linked to recollection were greater for Remember than Know
responses. Signal changes linked to familiarity, however, were greater
for Know than for Remember responses. This second outcome challenges accounts where both processes contribute to Remember and
Know judgments, according to which signal changes for recollection and
familiarity will be greater for Remember than for Know judgments. The
outcome is entirely consistent, however, with an account where recollection and familiarity are independent processes, wherein the larger signal
change for familiarity arises because the level of familiarity associated
with all Know responses will be above a criterion, whereas, under independence, the is no comparable lower bound for the level of familiarity
associated with Remember responses. The findings in this ERF study
thus argue strongly for models where the relationship between recollection and familiarity is one of independence.

192

G55
DO UNINFORMATIVE CUES ELICIT PRESTIMULUS SUBSEQUENT
MEMORY EFFECTS? Marianne de Chastelaine1, Michael D. Rugg1; 1Center
for Vital Longevity and School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences, The University
of Texas at Dallas — Previous research has demonstrated that medial temporal lobe (MTL) activity during the interval between a warning cue and
a study item can predict whether or not the item will be remembered on
a later memory test. Studies reporting MTL prestimulus subsequent
memory effects have employed designs in which prestimulus cues signaled the nature of the task to be performed on the upcoming study
item, or the item’s presentation modality. Here we used fMRI to investigate whether prestimulus effects are evident when the prestimulus cue is
uninformative. Eighteen young participants were scanned while a series
of study words were visually presented. Each word was presented on
either an orange or a blue background, the color denoting whether the
word should be subjected to an animacy or a syllabic judgment. A
generic warning cue was presented prior to each word. To allow cueand item-related activity to be deconvolved, the cue-item interval varied
randomly between 1s, 3s and 5s. Following the study phase, a surprise
recognition memory test was administered in which each test item
required a ‘Remembered’, ‘Known’ or ‘New’ endorsement. Prestimulus
subsequent memory effects were localized largely to occipital cortex. By
contrast, stimulus-related effects were evident in bilateral parahippocampal cortex. These findings suggest that, while prestimulus subsequent
memory effects can be elicited with uninformative cues, effects in the
MTL depend upon the availability of information about the study task.

G56
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY AND SUBSEQUENT MEMORY: INCREASED
NEURAL CO-ACTIVATION DURING POST-TASK RESTING STATES IS
RELATED TO LATER MEMORY PERFORMANCE Brian Roberts1, Garth

Thompson2, Jaemin Shin3, Hillary Schwarb4, Shella Keilholz5, Eric
Schumacher6; 1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2Emory University, 3Air Force
Research Lab — Abstract Recent fMRI experiments show a relationship
between performance on paired associate learning tasks and patterns of
temporal synchronization between task activated brain regions during
rest (Tambini et al., 2010). Previous work has shown that activity in fusiform gyrus, medial temporal lobe (MTL), and the left inferior frontal
gyrus (LIFG) during encoding predicts later recall. The current study
sought to unify and test these findings within one experiment. We
hypothesized that the formation of stable memory traces is subserved by
a memory consolidation network composed of frontal and temporal lobe
regions, and that long term storage of encoded stimuli relies in part on
the degree of co-activation observed between brain regions within the
network. Results support this hypothesis by showing that subsequent
memory was predicted by activity at encoding in fusiform, LIFG, and
MTL regions and by the increased connectivity between these regions
during post-task resting states.

G57
NEURAL ACTIVITY SUPPORTING ENCODING OF ITEM-CONTEXT
ASSOCIATIONS Heekyeong Park1, Fernando Leal1, Catherine Spann1;
1

University of Texas at Arlington — Previous fMRI studies have suggested
that successful memory formation of an item elicits neural encoding
activity specific to study task or study material. Further research has
shown that successful formation of item-context associations in memory
recruits neural activity in the medial temporal lobe including the hippocampus during encoding. The present study investigated whether the
regions engaged during successful encoding of item-context associations
varied depending on study material while study task was kept consistent. Participants were scanned while they performed a semantic judgment task on a list of words and pictures presented in one of four colored
backgrounds. In a subsequent test phase, participants were given itemcontext recognition on studied and new items. Participants were asked
to indicate whether the test item was studied, and, if it was studied,
which color the item was presented at study. In accordance with previCognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session G
ous findings, the studied items that were correctly endorsed with the
studied background color elicited greater activity in both the medial
temporal lobe and inferior frontal lobe as well as activity in extensive
occipital areas. For studied words that were later correctly judged with
its source, enhanced activity was found in left mid frontal and right inferior temporal regions during encoding. Successful formation of pictures
was also associated with activity in left mid frontal regions. The findings
suggest that encoding of item-context associations with words and pictures recruits neural activity in common brain regions.

G58
THE SENSITIVITY OF THE LEFT PARIETAL OLD/NEW ERP EFFECT TO THE
SALIENCE OF RECOLLECTED INFORMATION Rachael Elward1, Michael D.

Rugg1; 1Center for Vital Longevity and the School of Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, The University of Texas at Dallas — The left parietal ‘old/new’ ERP
effect is a neural correlate of recollection. It has been linked to the fMRI
recollection effects consistently reported in inferior parietal cortex.
According to one proposal, these effects reflect the role of this region in
supporting the representation of recollected information. The effects
have also been argued to reflect the re-orienting of attention to salient
events, such as the occurrence of recollection. We attempted to adjudicate between these proposals by manipulating the salience of recollected
information. According to the representational account, salience should
not impact the left parietal effect, whereas the attentional account predicts that the effect should vary with salience. Subjects (n=16) studied a
series of pictures, each paired with one of two coins, a Deutschmark or a
Lira. At test, the requirement was to discriminate between studied pictures paired with the Deutschmark or the Lira, with a separate response
for new pictures. There was a reward of $2.00 for correctly detecting pictures paired with the Deutschmark, but only a 2 cent reward for identifying pictures studied with the Lira. ERPs for recollected test items
demonstrated robust left parietal old/new effects that did not differ
according to level of reward. Importantly, an earlier, more anteriorly distributed, effect did differ reliably according to reward value, indicating
that the null finding for the left parietal effect is not due to a generic
insensitivity to reward value. These findings favor the representational
account of the left parietal old/new effect.

G59
NEURAL CORRELATES OF ITEM AND CONTEXT RETRIEVAL IN THE MEDIAL
TEMPORAL LOBES Wei-chun Wang1, Andrew P Yonelinas1, Charan

Ranganath1; 1University of California, Davis — The ‘binding of item and context’ (BIC) model (Diana, Yonelinas, Ranganath, 2007; Eichenbaum,
Yonelinas, Ranganath, 2007) predicts that the perirhinal cortex supports
processing of item information, the parahippocampal cortex supports
the processing of context information, and the hippocampus binds item
and context information together to form episodic memories. In most
studies, however, item and context are operationalized as different types
of memoranda (e.g., memory for words vs. encoding tasks). Here, we
tested the extent to which different medial temporal lobe regions would
be involved in retrieval of item or context information even when the
stimulus materials were held constant. To test these ideas, we developed
a unique memory paradigm in which participants encoded pairs of fractal images in which one fractal was treated as an item and the other was
treated as a context. At test, participants were cued with studied ‘items’
and ‘contexts’ and asked to retrieve the corresponding associated fractals
while being scanned. Results indicated that the hippocampus and parahippocampal cortex were involved when recalling fractals that were
encoded as items or as contexts. In contrast, the perirhinal cortex was
involved when recalling fractals that had been encoded as items, but it
was not involved when recalling fractals that were encoded as contexts.
The results offer support of differential contributions to long term memory for items and contexts in the medial temporal lobes.

G60
COMPARING THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF THE PRIMACY EFFECT AND
THE VON RESTORFF EFFECT IN FREE RECALL – AN ERP STUDY Siri-

Maria Kamp1, Glen R. Forester1, Anthony R. Murphy1, Emanuel Donchin1;
1University of South Florida — Free recall is enhanced for the first few study
stimuli (“Primacy effect”), and for stimuli isolated from the list by physical properties (“Von Restorff effect”). It has been established (Karis et al,
1984) that there is a correlation between the amplitude of the P300 elicited by the “isolates” and the likelihood that an isolate will be recalled. In
the present study we assessed the degree to which this “subsequent
memory effect” is observed for stimuli in the first study list positions,
thus explaining the Primacy effect. Using maintenance rehearsal, participants studied and immediately recalled word lists including one physically deviant “isolate”. The first words in a list and isolates were better
recalled and elicited a P300, whose amplitude was correlated with subsequent recall. Additionally, a frontal slow wave gradually increased in
amplitude for positions 1, 2, and 3. This component showed a subsequent memory effect only for the first two serial positions and for isolates. Finally, a posterior slow wave was correlated with recall for all
words in middle list positions, but not for primacy positions. These findings indicate that (1) both the Von Restorff effect and the Primacy effect
may in part be explained by the outcomes of a context updating process
indexed by the P300, which facilitates later retrieval, (2) cognitive processes associated with a frontal slow wave, possibly indexing working
memory load, also contribute to both behavioral effects, and (3) a posterior slow wave subsequent memory effect is uniquely associated with
words in middle serial positions.

G61
HIPPOCAMPAL ACTIVITY DURING ENCODING PREDICTS GRADED
LEVELS OF REACTIVATION DURING SUBSEQUENT ASSOCIATIVE
RETRIEVAL Jared Danker1, Lila Davachi1; 1New York University — Successful recovery of episodic detail is thought to be mediated by the reactivation of sensory brain regions during retrieval. Furthermore, it is
presumed that reactivation should be related to the strength of the initial
encoding event. To test this, we explored the relationship between trialby-trial activity in the hippocampus during encoding and trial-by-trial
reactivation of modality-specific encoding regions during subsequent
retrieval. Specifically, we predicted that those trials that elicit strong hippocampal activation during encoding (associated with strong binding)
would also elicit strong reactivation during subsequent retrieval (associated with vivid remembering). During a scanned encoding session, participants associated 80 nouns with corresponding sounds and 80 nouns
with corresponding pictures. One day later, during a scanned retrieval
session, participants were presented with the 160 nouns and were
instructed to indicate whether each noun was studied with a sound or
with a picture. Trial-by-trial beta estimates were extracted from the hippocampus during encoding and these estimates were then used as a
regressor on the retrieval data to detect regions whose retrieval activity
is predicted by encoding activity on a trial-by-trial basis. Consistent with
our prediction, we found that hippocampal activity during the encoding
of subsequently remembered pictures was associated with the reactivation of a number of picture-selective regions during subsequent successful picture retrieval. Corresponding across-subject correlations will also
be reported. Our findings suggest that the strength of associative binding, as indicated by hippocampal activity during encoding, is directly
related to more vivid remembering of source details, as indicated by
reactivation during retrieval.

G62
REWARD-ENHANCED DISCRIMINATION IN A VISUAL OBJECT PATTERN
SEPARATION TASK Samuel Ji1, Alisha Jamil1, Daniel Spira1, Michael

Yassa1; 1Johns Hopkins University — The release of dopamine associated

with reward feedback is thought to enhance hippocampus-dependent
memory formation. There is accumulating evidence strongly suggesting
that the hippocampus’s ability to rapidly encode unique experiences is

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

193

Poster Session G — Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
mediated by pattern separation (Yassa and Stark, TINS 2011). This study
examines the role of reward in enhancing pattern separation of similar
items. Forty-eight participants completed a visual object pattern separation task broken into two separate sessions. During the first session, participants were asked to categorize objects as being outdoor or indoor
objects. On a random subset of trials, they received a small monetary
reward (non-contingent on their responses). In the second session, subjects completed a recognition memory test in which they classified pictures as “old”, “similar”, or “new” based on the objects seen in the first
session. We found that when presented with a lure that had been
rewarded in the first session, participants were significantly less likely to
false alarm (call them “old”) than if the lure had not been rewarded.
However, performance on exact repetitions was no different for
rewarded and unrewarded items. These data indicate that reward may
directly mediate pattern separation abilities, perhaps by enhancing the
post-encoding processes that may be involved in creating a detailed and
unique representation for the experience.

G63
SEPARATING RECOLLECTION AND FAMILIARITY: REMEMBER-KNOW
AND SOURCE MEMORY TESTS Amy Frithsen1, Michael B. Miller1;

1University of California, Santa Barbara — Retrieval
during recognition
memory is thought to be comprised of a mixture of recollection and
familiarity processes. Separating these two types of retrieval, both at the
behavioral and neural level, is a difficult and challenging task. Two common methods for doing so are the remember-know paradigm and tasks
involving source memory attributions. Neither of these methods is ideal,
as each is accompanied by unique and valid criticisms. The current study
is one of very few to directly compare and contrast these methods as a
within-subjects manipulation. Thirty subjects studied a total of 304
words and were scanned while performing a remember-know test and a
source memory test. Recollection and familiarity responses, as well as
brain regions associated with those responses, were identified according
to standard remember-know and source memory procedures. Behavioral and neural results were then compared at both an individual and a
group level. Behaviorally, the two methods gave slightly different estimates of recollection and familiarity, with the remember-know test
resulting in higher levels of recollection and the source memory test with
higher levels of familiarity. At the neural level, several prefrontal, parietal, and temporal regions were activated during recollection (as identified by each test), however little to no brain regions were uniquely
activated by familiarity (again, as defined by each test). Results of this
comparison speak to the validity of the remember-know and source
memory tests in accurately separating recollection from familiarity.

G64
MAINTAINING RETRIEVED EPISODIC INFORMATION: AN FMRI STUDY

Kaia L. Vilberg1, Michael D. Rugg1; 1Center for Vital Longevity and School of
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas — Whereas
numerous studies have investigated the neural correlates of successful
episodic retrieval, little attention has been given to the neural networks
supporting the controlled maintenance of successfully recollected information. In the present experiment, subjects studied a series of wordimage pairs under the requirement to judge which of the paired objects
was smaller. Following each of 4 study sessions, a scanned test phase
occurred in which a series of studied and unstudied words was presented. The requirement at test was to decide whether each word was
old or new and, if judged old, to retrieve the associated study picture
and hold it in mind until a test cue appeared. The item-cue interval varied between two and eight seconds. The cue instructed subjects which of
three different judgments should be applied to the retrieved picture (bigger than a shoebox? household object? living?). Separate responses were
required when words were either deemed new or the associated image
could not be retrieved. fMRI data were modeled to separately estimate
activity elicited by the test items as opposed to activity sustained over
the item-cue interval (‘delay activity’). Relative to trials where the cued
picture could not be retrieved, item-elicited activity for trials associated

194

with a correct picture attribute judgment was enhanced in the left medial
temporal lobe, among other regions. Delay activity was evident in
medial and lateral prefrontal cortex, and inferior temporal cortex. Thus,
as in the case of the maintenance of incoming perceptual information,
maintenance of recollected information engages a frontal-posterior cortical network.

G65
ENHANCED HIPPOCAMPAL MEMORY IS ASSOCIATED WITH GREATER
AEROBIC CAPACITY IN HEALTHY YOUNG ADULTS Andrew Whiteman1,

Daniel Young1, Ethan Pravetz1, Robert Wagenaar1, Chantal Stern1, Karin
Schon1; 1Boston University — Animal studies suggest aerobic exercise augments memory by upregulating the expression of growth factors that
mediate several forms of plasticity in the hippocampus and surrounding
cortices. Among these growth factors, the neurotrophin, brain derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF), specifically facilitates neuronal growth, differentiation, and long term potentiation. Our goal was to examine the
link between exercise, aerobic capacity, and hippocampal memory in
humans. To investigate this in healthy young adults, we used a VO2max
test of aerobic capacity in combination with two memory tasks shown in
fMRI studies to recruit the hippocampus. The first task tested subsequent memory (SMT) for images encountered in a working memory paradigm (Schon et al., 2004), and the second task assessed relational
learning (Kirwan and Stark, 2004). Prior to cognitive testing, we collected
peripheral blood samples to assay serum BDNF. Preliminary results (n =
12) show several strong correlations between VO2max and high confidence, correct judgments in the SMT, and decreased misclassifications in
the relational task. Our results provide supporting evidence for a link
between exercise, aerobic capacity and hippocampal memory. These
findings extend the animal work to humans, and may have important,
practical implications for attenuating memory decline due to aging and
to age related dementia.

G66
MAKING THE FUTURE MEMORABLE: THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF
REMEMBERED EPISODIC SIMULATIONS Victoria Martin1, Daniel L.

Schacter2, Michael C. Corballis1, Donna Rose Addis1; 1The University of
Auckland, 2Harvard University — We recently showed that the hippocam-

pus is important for encoding imagined future simulations into memory.
Here we investigated whether memory for an imagined event can be
predicted by phenomenological ratings of the simulation and its components. In session one, 13 participants each generated 110 past episodic
events, identifying a relevant person, place, and object detail (‘memory
components’) in each. They also rated recollection for each memory component. One week later, in session two, participants imagined 90 future
events involving randomly rearranged sets of memory components, and
rated the detail and plausibility of each simulation. An unexpected cuedrecall test then probed their memory for the event components. We used
a log-likelihood multilevel random coefficient model to assess whether
the quality of the memory components (recollection ratings of people,
places, and objects) or the simulation itself (event detail, event plausibility) influenced the likelihood of the simulation being successfully
encoded and recalled. The recollective quality of the memory components did not directly influence level of recall, whereas highly plausible
and highly detailed simulations were more likely to be recalled. However, recollection ratings did influence the level of detail comprising simulations, such that simulations involving highly recollective people,
places, and objects tended to be rated as more detailed. Recollection ratings of memory components therefore have an indirect effect on encoding, via their influence on event detail. Consequently, when testing
subsequent memory for imagined events, it is important to consider the
recollective quality of memory components, as well as ratings of event
detail and plausibility.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session G

G67
EXAMINING THE EFFECTS OF PLAUSIBILITY ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF
FUTURE EVENTS Valerie van Mulukom1, Reece P. Roberts1, Donna Rose

Addis1; 1The University of Auckland — We have previously found that contextual novelty affects the process of simulating future events. Using a
repetition-suppression paradigm in the fMRI scanner, we observed that
when participants imagined a future event three times, reaction times
(RT) and activity in medial temporal regions decreased with reduced
contextual novelty. It is possible that categorical novelty – the unusualness or implausibility of these imagined scenarios within the context of
one’s life – might also influence repetition-suppression effects as well as
the vividness of the imagined events. In this study, participants retrieved
50 memories, and identified a person, place and object in each. These
memory details were randomly recombined and 40 sets were later presented as simulation cues. Future events involving the presented details
were imagined three times, and rated for categorical novelty (plausibility) and vividness (level of detail). Imagined events were divided into
post-hoc plausibility conditions (high, low) according to participant ratings. Preliminary analyses on data from 10 participants reveal there is a
significantly greater RT suppression effect for implausible relative to
plausible events. Moreover, there was a trend for RT during the first simulation to be higher for implausible than plausible events, but there was
no difference by the third simulation. Plausible events tended to be more
detailed than implausible events; again, this difference was most apparent during the first simulation. These preliminary findings suggest that
there are important differences in the initial construction of future events
depending on categorical novelty or plausibility, but that these differences may diminish with repeated simulation.

G68
FRAME OF MIND: FOCUSING STUDENTS ON PERFORMANCE OR
MASTERY YIELDS A DOUBLE DISASSOCIATION OF THE NEURAL
PROCESSES PREDICTING SUBSEQUENT MEMORY. Belen
GuerraCarrillo1, Sylvia Rodriguez2, Jennifer Mangels1; 1Baruch College, City University
of New York, 2Columbia University — Two achievement goals have been

identified to influence students’ educational outcomes: performance and
mastery. A performance orientation stresses the importance of proving
one’s abilities to achieve in comparison to others. Traditionally, this goal
has been associated with poorer academic outcomes and processing
information at a superficial level. Conversely, a mastery goal emphasizes
seeking out learning opportunities, investing effort in learning, and has
been linked to positive academic outcomes. Past research has primarily
examined these relationships using individual difference measures. The
current study extends this work by investigating how framing a challenging general knowledge task as either an opportunity to demonstrate
ability compared to others (performance framing) or as an opportunity
to learn new things (mastery framing) influences students’ ability to use
feedback to correct memory errors on an immediate retest. Although we
found no behavioral difference in error correction, event-related potentials (ERPs) recorded to performance (accuracy) and learning (correct
answer) feedback after each trial revealed different ventral stream mechanisms by which people learned. From 200-800ms post-learning feedback, performance framing was exclusively associated with subsequent
memory effects over parieto-occipital sites, whereas mastery framing
was associated with effects exclusively over inferior fronto-temporal
sites. The spatiotemporal distribution of the ERPs in the mastery framing
is characteristic of deep semantic processing, whereas the distribution
for the performance framing is typical of a shallow, more perceptual
level of encoding. This double disassociation suggests that subtle
changes in the framing of a task can influence the processes a person
uses to encode information.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

G69
THE INFLUENCE OF POST-ENCODING STRESS ON EMOTIONAL MEMORY
TRADE-OFFS Jessica Payne1, Elizabeth Kensinger2, Stephen Mattingly1;

1University of Notre Dame, Department of Psychology, 2Boston College,
Department of Psychology — Due to restrictions on how much an organism

can encode, process, and remember, the brain must pick and choose
which information to preserve in memory. This selection process is influenced both by the valence and arousing nature of the information presented, as well as the state of the brain. Across numerous experiments,
we have shown an emotional memory “trade-off effect”, where memory
for negative arousing objects (but not neutral objects) is selectively preserved at the cost of memory for the neutral backgrounds on which they
appear. However, it is not yet known how stress exposure and cortisol
elevation during the consolidation process affect such trade-offs.
Because previous studies demonstrated that stress exposure benefits
negative information while impairing neutral information, we predicted
that stress exposure following encoding would produce a larger benefit
for negative objects but a larger detriment to the neutral backgrounds on
which they appear. Although a significant three way interaction was
found between image component, valence, and condition F=4.449,
p=.043, counter to predictions, stress did not specifically intensify memory for negative emotional objects or impair the backgrounds on which
they appear. Instead, in the stress condition, both negative F=61.939,
p<.001, and neutral F=10.905, p=.005 objects were preferentially recognized compared to their backgrounds. These findings suggest that postencoding stress exposure creates general tradeoffs in memory, irrespective of valence. This may be useful in stressful situations where the next
potential danger is unknown but expected, e.g. soldiers on patrol.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition
G70
NEURAL CORRELATES OF OBJECT BOUNDARY PERCEPTION IN THE
AUDITORY SCENE Amanda McMullan1, Dillon Hambrook1, Artur Luczak1,

Matthew Tata1; 1University of Lethbridge — Boundaries between perceptual

objects in the visual modality can be defined by differences in luminosity, color, texture, and depth. The brain’s mechanisms for identifying
these boundaries have been well studied, but the analogous mechanisms
in the auditory domain have gone relatively unexplored. We investigated the electrophysiological correlates associated with perceiving different types of auditory boundaries. We recorded brain electrical
responses to boundaries defined by temporal discontinuities in pitch or
acoustic energy using dense-array electroencephalography (EEG). We
created pitch stimuli that were energy-matched to the noise background
by using a delay-and-add algorithm for generating iterated rippled noise
(IRN). Sound stimuli consisted of either white noise or a noise-IRN-noise
sequence. We compared Event-related Potentials (ERP) time locked to
these different kinds of boundaries, along with associated spectral
power and inter-trial phase coherence of the EEG. We report differences
in the N1 component of the ERP as well as differences in spectral power
and inter-trial phase coherence in the theta EEG band.

G71
THE DORSAL AUDITORY STREAM’S ROLE IN PITCH TRANSFORMATIONS
AND COMPARISONS Jean Mary Zarate1, David Poeppel1; 1New York
University — The functional roles attributed to the dorsal auditory stream
include spatial localization, spectrotemporal processing for music and
speech, auditory-motor transformations, and feedforward-feedback
comparisons. We suggest that the dorsal stream may serve a general
computational role that can help disambiguate these putative functions.
In an fMRI study, we focused on the dorsal stream’s computational role
during spectrotemporal processing by testing musicians and non-musicians with pitch-interval comparison tasks; we also evaluated the effects
of musical experience on dorsal-stream activity. Subjects selected the
larger of two pitch intervals presented either at 225 Hertz (fixed condition) or at 225 and 475 Hertz (roving condition). In each condition, pitch
195

Poster Session G — Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
distances between intervals (or interval-differences) were parametrically
varied (25-175 cents). Activity within planum temporale and parietal
regions (i.e., the dorsal stream) increased as a function of interval-difference, and musicians recruited more activity in these areas than nonmusicians. After measuring group discrimination thresholds in each
condition, we contrasted hemodynamic responses during suprathreshold interval comparisons with responses during subthreshold comparisons. Suprathreshold comparisons engaged non-musicians’ presupplementary motor area in the fixed condition and planum temporale
in the roving condition, compared to subthreshold comparisons. Musicians recruited the dorsal stream more extensively (e.g., intraparietal sulcus, premotor cortex, anterior insula) than non-musicians in both
conditions. We conclude that the dorsal auditory stream is engaged during computations underlying pitch transformations and comparisons,
and it is recruited to a greater degree after extensive musical experience.
These results will inform our future studies on the dorsal stream’s computational role during spatial localization and auditory-motor transformations.

G72
STATISTICAL CONSTRAINTS IN THE AUDITORY DOMAIN IMPACT WHOLEBRAIN CONNECTIVITY PATTERNS OF THE ANTERIOR CINGULATE AND
HIPPOCAMPUS Samuel Nastase1, Vittorio Iacovella1, Uri Hasson1; 1CIMeC
- Center for Mind/Brain Sciences, University of Trento, Italy — Statistical constraints pervade our auditory environment and may play a crucial role
in language and active perception. Several proposals regarding the neural systems that code for order have implicated the anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC) and hippocampus. However, the processes underlying this
sensitivity remain unclear; in particular, it is unknown how functional
connectivity of ACC or hippocampus is modulated by statistical constraints governing inputs. Here, fMRI was used to address this issue
with regard to auditory stimuli. Participants listened to four audio
series, each 2.5 minutes long. The four series differed as a function of statistical constraints determining the transition probabilities (Markov
Entropy) of tones within each series: one series was random, two were
moderately ordered, and another was highly ordered. We identified
regions tracking order linearly (more/less connectivity as a function of
order) or via U-shaped connectivity profiles (differentiating mid-level
order from both high and low levels). Physiological noise was removed
to isolate functional connectivity. Connectivity with the seed areas was
modulated by order mainly in frontal, parietal, insular, and left parahippocampal regions. Importantly, two connectivity profiles emerged as
predominant for both seed regions: positive linear relations between
order and connectivity (stronger connectivity for greater order), and Ushaped relations in which high and low levels of order elicited greater
connectivity than intermediate levels. These connectivity profiles suggest two functionally orthogonal processes underlying the brain's sensitivity to auditory order. While some regions may encode the degree of
order linearly, others, characterized by U-shaped connectivity profiles,
may instead code for input complexity.

G73
SUBCORTICAL CORRELATES OF STATISTICAL LEARNING Erika

Skoe1,

Emily Spitzer1, Nina Kraus1; 1Northwestern University — Extracting patterns

from continuous sound sequences, a process called statistical learning, is
fundamental to acquiring music skills and language. Drawing upon the
knowledge that the auditory brainstem is sensitive to regularly-occurring and predictable sounds (within one’s native language or a novel
sound sequence), we posited that statistical learning dynamically
involves subcortical structures. To test this, we recorded auditory brainstem response (ABRs) while adult participants listened passively to 15minute continuous sequences (composed from 8 tones) containing either
no re-occurring patterns or four re-occurring patterns. Across the conditions, each of the 8 sounds was presented with the same probability.
When participants were tested on their ability to recognize the patterns
in isolation, they performed above chance. A comparison of the ABRs
between conditions revealed that the response was attenuated in the pat-

196

terned condition. To confirm that this was reflective of learning and not
context-dependent encoding, in another group of subjects (age-, sex- and
IQ-matched), we recorded ABRs to a different set of patterns (composed
from the same sounds) that formed a less musical-sounding sequence. In
this case, behavioral performance was below chance and, notably, the
ABR was equivalent between the patterned and unpatterned conditions
Although the brainstem has been assumed to be important for auditory
learning, by using identical stimuli to compare learning outcome and
neural plasticity, we present the first validation of this hypothesis. Moreover, our results suggest that learning-related subcortical processes are
mediated by cognitive factors, including the listener's implicit knowledge of musical structure.

G75
IS RHYTHMIC SYNCHRONIZATION IMPAIRED IN PARKINSON’S
DISEASE? Nathaniel Miller1, Youngbin Kwak2, Melanie Sottile3, Martijn

L.T.M Muller1, Nicolaas Bohnen1, Jin Bo4, Praveen Dayalu1, Rachael D.
Seidler1; 1University of Michigan, 2Duke University, 3National Institutes of
Health, 4Eastern Michigan University — Disturbed internal rhythm genera-

tion is hypothesized to underlie gait and speech symptoms of Parkinson’s disease (PD; Freeman, Cody, & Schady, 1993). Impaired rhythm
perception and production in PD support this hypothesis, suggesting a
role for the basal ganglia and/or dopamine in rhythm generation (Grahn
& Brett, 2009). One task used to assess rhythm generation has individuals synchronize finger taps with an external, equally-timed tone
sequence and continue tapping at the same target rate without tones.
Traditional dependent measures are the mean and variability of the produced time intervals. However, these measures neglect the degree to
which individuals can synchronize with pacing tones and internally
maintain synchrony without external pacing tones. We used directional
statistics to compare the phase relationship (synchrony) between finger
taps and a target rate while pacing tones were either present or absent.
Twenty-nine mild-to-moderate PD patients and 46 healthy controls
tapped with the index finger of their right- and left-hands at target time
intervals of 500, 1000 and 1500 ms. Patients were tested ON and OFF
levodopa. To date, our analyses suggest worse synchronization for PD
ON when pacing tones are present—but not when absent—relative to
healthy controls. This difference is greatest at 500 ms when PD patients
tapped with their more affected hand while medicated. These findings
suggest that one aspect of motor timing impaired in medicated PD
patients is the ability to synchronize hand tapping with an external
rhythm at faster rates, but we found no evidence for impaired internal
rhythm generation in PD.

G76
ADAPTATION TO CHANGE IN SENSORIMOTOR SYNCHRONIZATION:
TAPPING PERFORMANCE CORRELATES WITH AUDITORY ERPS Michael

Schwartze1, Maren Schmidt-Kassow2, Sonja A. Kotz1; 1Max Planck Institute for
Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2Johann Wolfgang
Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany — The ability to synchro-

nize the internal mechanisms that underlie cognition and action with
external events is essential in order to cope with an inherently dynamic
environment. The notion of an event implies some perceived change in
the formal and/or temporal layout of the environment. In the current
study we used simultaneous behavioral and EEG recordings to investigate the relation between sensorimotor synchronization (finger-tapping)
and the processing of change (auditory deviance processing). Participants listened attentively to sequences consisting of equidurational (100
ms) sinusoidal tones with a base tempo of 600 ms while they aligned finger taps starting with the third tone of a sequence. Following a variable
number of standards (4-7, 600Hz), deviant events changed the formal
and/or temporal structure of the sequence. Deviant events were tones
that differed from the standards in either pitch (660 Hz), tempo (-75 ms
inter-stimulus-interval), or a combination of both. The quality of the tapping performance was assessed in terms of variability of asynchronies
between the tones and the taps as well as in terms of error correction esti-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session G
mates (phase- and period correction). Amplitude and latency of eventrelated potentials (N2b, P3b) indexed the quality of auditory deviance
processing. The results confirm a strong relation between these measures, suggesting that sensorimotor synchronization influences deviance
processing and vice versa.

G77
MUSICAL EXPERIENCE ACROSS THE LIFESPAN: IMPLICATIONS FOR
PERCEPTUAL AND COGNITIVE ABILITIES Alexandra
Parbery-Clark1,
Samira Anderson1, Emily Hittner1, Travis White-Schwoch1, Nina Kraus1;
Northwestern University — Increasing evidence suggests that younger and

1

older adult musicians have greater perceptual acuity and auditory-based
cognitive abilities than age-matched nonmusicians. However, it is currently unknown whether these effects are due to an advantage that is
sustained and consistent throughout adult life or whether musical training actually offsets the aging trajectory. To assess this, we measured
auditory perceptual and cognitive abilities in 180 musicians and nonmusicians ranging from 18 – 77 years old. Outcomes reveal that musicians
experience less age-related decline for certain perceptual and cognitive
tasks (e.g., backward masking, frequency discrimination and auditory
working memory). Whereas for other tasks, such as speech-in-noise perception (e.g., QuickSIN and HINT), the extent of the musician advantage
remains constant across the lifespan. These results suggest that the
impact of musical experience on sensory-cognitive processes varies
depending on the nature of the task, highlighting the multi-faceted
effects of music on the nervous system.

G78
THE EFFECTS OF TINNITUS AND AGE ON RESTING STATE FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY Sara Schmidt1, Kwaku Akrofi1, Jake Carpenter-Thompson1,
Fatima Husain1; 1University of Illinois — The purpose of the study was to

examine the effects of tinnitus and hearing loss on resting state functional connectivity. Our hypothesis was that increased activity would be
present in the auditory pathway of patients with tinnitus at rest. Three
groups of subjects were examined in this experiment: individuals with
tinnitus and hearing loss (TIN) and individuals with normal hearing
(NH). Resting state functional connectivity data was collected for each
group using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Subjects
were asked to stare at a fixation cross for five minutes and performed no
other task. Group independent component analysis using GIFT as a
MATLAB toolbox was performed to analyze the data, followed by
region of interest (ROI) analysis. The ROI was located at either the left or
the right primary and secondary auditory cortices (corresponding to
Brodmann areas 41, 42, and 22). Preliminary results of the ROI analysis
revealed differences in connectivity maps between the TIN and NH
groups; the TIN group, but not the NH group, showed extensive connectivity with superior and middle temporal gyri. The results suggest
altered connectivity in the auditory processing regions in individuals
with TIN in a non-task directed experiment. Further studies will examine the effects of aging on these connectivity patterns.

G79
HIGH-RESOLUTION IMAGING REVEALS TONOTOPIC ORGANIZATION IN
HUMAN AUDITORY MIDBRAIN Bharath Chandrasekaran1, Seth Koslov1,

Evan Luther1, David Ress1; 1The University of Texas a Austin — A major challenge for auditory neuroscience is to discover how spectrotemporal
information is mapped along the auditory pathway. Experiments in animals reveal detailed maps of frequency information along the dorsoventral dimension within the central nucleus (CN) of the inferior colliculus
(IC), the primary auditory midbrain structure (1-4). Existence of tonotopic maps has not yet been evaluated in human IC due to the limited
spatial resolution of fMRI. In the current experiment, we measured functional activity from the central nucleus (CN) of the IC using a phaseencoded approach at a 1.2 mm voxel size to capture laminar activity
variations in response to auditory stimulation. Stimuli consisted of a random phase noise-carrier filtered through pass bands that differed in
spectral content (systematically proceeding from low to high frequen-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

cies). Participants performed a challenging frequency discrimination
task in the scanner to ensure attention to frequency content. Sinusoidal
fits to the time series for each participant produced phase maps that
encode stimulus frequency. The maps (thresholded at p <0.001), showed
a clear dorsal through ventral gradient for low-to-high frequencies, consistent with animal results. Depth profile measures using surface-based
analyses from the CN and the dorsal cortex (DC, a portion of the IC that
does not show tonotopic representation) confirmed that low-frequency
responses are more superficial than high-frequency responses in CN, but
not in DC. These results provide first evidence for the existence of
detailed tonotopic maps in human auditory midbrain, a crucial first step
needed to develop auditory midbrain prosthetic devices.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control
G80
EFFECTIVENESS OF UNILATERAL VERSUS BILATERAL DEEP BRAIN
STIMULATION IN PATIENTS WITH PARKINSON’S DISEASE Melissa
Wright1, Rachael Seidler1, Kelvin Chou1, Parag Patil1; 1The University of
Michigan — Bilateral deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the subthalamic

nucleus (STN) is the standard surgical treatment for patients with
advanced Parkinson’s disease (PD). Bilateral DBS increases “on” functioning states, reduces necessary medications, and decreases levodopainduced dyskinesias. However, recent research suggests that bilateral
stimulation can result in worse dual task cognitive-motor performance
when compared with unilateral stimulation. The goal of this study was
to expand cognitive-motor assessments during unilateral and bilateral
DBS. We tested 18 PD patients (16 right and 2 left-handed) with bilateral
STN DBS while off medication under conditions of bilateral stimulation
(BStim) and unilateral stimulation (UniStim) to each side. Grasp force
timing was assessed by utilizing a continual sine wave tracking grasp/
release task with peak target force set at 20% of maximal grasp force for
each hand. The force tracking was performed under single and dual task
conditions using a spatial and verbal working memory task as a secondary cognitive load. Temporal force tracking was significantly worse on
the left hand during all stimulation conditions. Ipsilateral UniStim
resulted in poorer performance on the right hand with dual verbal working memory loads, whereas improved performance was seen under
BStim and ipsilateral UniStim on the left hand with spatial memory loading. Right and left hand tracking did not differ with task complexity for
other conditions. These findings suggest temporal grasp control is better
with BStim; however UniStim may be differentially as effective for grasp
control depending on the side of stimulation and type of cognitive working memory load.

G81
THE ORIGIN OF IMAGES THROUGH DRAWING: A FUNCTIONAL MRI
STUDY Steven Brown1, Ye Yuan1; 1McMaster University — Images refer to
visual patterns created on surfaces. The human capacity to generate
images dates back more than 30,000 years. However, there are relatively
few neuroimaging studies devoted to its neural basis. We took advantage of a newly-developed MRI-compatible drawing tablet in order to
examine this capacity. Subjects participated in a series of scribbling tasks
in which they were cued to create geometric patterns (spirals, zigzags,
serpentines) on the tablet's surface. The critical comparison was between
when visual feedback was displayed on the tablet’s screen (image generation) versus when it was not (no image generation). Whereas drawing
with no image generation led mainly to activations in the motor cortex
and cerebellum, image generation led to additional activations in areas
involved in sensorimotor integration (intraparietal sulcus, precuneus)
and motion perception (area V5, frontal eye fields), reflecting the linkage
between drawing movements and the images that result from them.
Interestingly, these same areas were also activated during a motion-perception task in which subjects viewed animations of visual patterns
emerging in the drawing space of the tablet’s surface. Hence, image generation through drawing appears to be an offshoot of embodied motion-

197

Poster Session G — Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
perception mechanisms, in particular those that link visual marks with
the drawing movements that elicit them in real time.

G82
SUPPRESSION OF EEG MU RHYTHMS DURING PHANTOM LIMB PAIN
THERAPY Thomas Fikes1, Alexis Youngberg1, Megan Seymour1, Elizabeth

Franz2; 1Westmont College, Santa Barbara, CA, 2University of Otago, Dunedin,
NZ — Suppression of mu rhythms (electroencephalograph [EEG] power
in the 8-12 Hz band over sensorimotor cortices) is typical during movement, imagined movement, and observed movement. In order to
observe the relation of mu suppression to the experience and treatment
of phantom limb pain, EEG was recorded in a lower-limb amputee during simple movement tasks that heightened the subjective experience of
the phantom limb in order to observe mu suppression over the six-week
course of self-directed mirror therapy aimed at reducing phantom limb
pain. The experimental task involved bilaterally symmetrical movements of either upper or lower limbs, and movements were performed
on either side of a mirror in the mid-sagittal plane that was uncovered
(i.e., identical to therapy, creating the visual illusion of intact lower
limbs), covered (precluding vision of the amputated limb), or absent. Mu
suppression over the hemisphere ipsilateral to the amputated limb was
of typical amplitude and location (centered over parietal lobe; EEG channel CP3), but was abnormal over the contralateral hemisphere showing
almost no mu-band power during rest, and therefore no suppression
during movement. Over six weeks of therapy, there was minimal reduction in self-reported pain and no change in the lateralized mu-suppression pattern. Ongoing work with this participant focuses on the
possibility that resting mu-rhythm power may need to be restored in the
contralateral hemisphere before normal mu-suppression and therapeutic
efficacy will be possible.

G83
RESTING STATE CORTICO-CEREBELLAR FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
PATTERNS OF THE CEREBELLAR LOBULES AND VERMIS Jessica
A.

Bernard1, Scott J. Peltier1, Kelsey M. Hassevoort1, Jillian Lee Wiggins1,
Susanne M. Jaeggi1, Martin Buschkeuhl1, John Jonides1, Christopher S. Monk1,
Rachael D. Seidler1; 1Univeristy of Michigan — Individual lobules of the cerebellum project to distinct regions of the cortex, as shown using tract
tracing in non-human primates, and with diffusion weighted imaging in
humans. However, it remains unknown how the individual lobules of
the cerebellum interact with the cerebral cortex, and what this means for
behavior. Resting-state functional connectivity magnetic resonance
imaging (fcMRI) allows for the investigation of functional networks in
the human brain. While some researchers have begun to employ this
technique to study the human cerebellum, none have taken an anatomically driven approach. In this study, we used fcMRI to investigate the
functional networks of the cerebellar lobules of the right hemisphere and
vermis in healthy right-handed young adults (N=33, 22.76 + 2.95 years,
15 female). We found distinct networks for the individual lobules with a
clear division into “motor” and “non-motor” regions. Crus I and Crus II
show a network consisting largely of prefrontal and parietal regions,
while Lobule VI is part of a network with frontal and parietal regions as
well as premotor regions. Lobules I-V are part of distinct networks relating to motor cortical regions of the brain as well as the cingulate cortex.
Finally, Lobules VIIb, VIIIa, VIIIb, and X are part of multimodal networks including temporal, limbic and somatosensory regions of the cortex. Independent components analysis will be implemented to determine
connectivity redundancies within the cerebellar lobules. Our results
demonstrate motor and cognitive dissociations within the cerebellar lobules consistent with results using invasive tract-tracing techniques.

G84
HABITUATION TO SENSORY STIMULI IN TOURETTE SYNDROME Beth A

Belluscio1, Mark Hallett1; 1NINDS, NIH — Tourette syndrome (TS) is defined
by motor tics: actions made due to an irresistible urge to act. The urge
arises from an uncomfortable bodily sensation. TS patients are also bothered by mild, non-salient, external sensations. The mechanism underly-

198

ing this sensory sensitivity is unknown. We hypothesized that TS
patients habituate less to repetitive stimuli. We administered auditory or
tactile stimuli in 120 trains of 3 at 1Hz. Brain activity in TS patients and
healthy volunteers (HVs) was recorded using magnetoencephalography
(MEG). Responses to the first, second, and third stimuli of the train were
averaged separately. We measured peak amplitude of the event-related
field for the 10 most active MEG sensors. Habituation was expressed as a
percent of the response to the first stimulus. We initially measured the
m100 peak in response to an auditory stimulus in HVs (n=6) and TS
patients (n=6). In HVs, habituation of the second response was 55% relative to the first, and the third was 57%. In TS patients, the response to the
second stimulus was habituated 47% and the third was 51%, which did
not represent a significant difference from the HV population. However,
it is possible that ongoing analyses will reveal TS patients to have
reduced habituation of earlier responses, such as the m50, of responses
localized to other cortical regions, such as prefrontal cortex, and/or of
responses to tactile stimuli.

G85
CHANGES IN MOTOR CORTEX ACTIVATION AFTER HYPOXIC EXPOSURE
AND ENDURANCE EXERCISE INVESTIGATED BY FMRI E. Cousin1,2, T.

Rupp3, M. Jubeau3,5, L. Lamalle2, J. Warnking2, F. Esteve2, Jp. Micallef4, Gy.
Millet3,5, B. Wuyam3, S. Vergès3; 1Psychology and Neurocognition Laboratory,
UMR CNRS 5105, Université Pierre Mendès-France, Grenoble, France, 2SFR 1
« RMN Biomédicale et Neurosciences », Grenoble Hospital, France, 3HP2
Laboratory (INSERM U 1042), Joseph Fourier University, Grenoble, France,
4Movement To Health Laboratory (M2H), Montpellier-1 University, Montpellier,
France, 5Exercise Physiology Laboratory (EA 4338), Lyon University, SaintEtienne, France — Hypoxia impairs whole-body exercise performance as

illustrated by a loss of maximal aerobic power or a reduction in endurance capacities. Underlying mechanisms include increased fatigability at
the muscle (peripheral) level but central (supraspinal) alterations could
also partly explain this performance decrement. This study aimed at
assessing effects of hypoxia by performing a prolonged fatiguing cycling
exercise on motor cortex activation during intermittent knee extensions.
Ten healthy subjects performed three 10-h experimental sessions (consisted in (i) breathing a gas mixture with an inspiratory oxygen fraction
(FiO2) of 12% for 10 h at rest, (ii) breathing a gas mixture with FiO2=12%
for 10 h and cycling for 4 h at 45% of the maximum power output
between the 4th and 9th hours and (iii) breathing a gas mixture with
FiO2=21% (normoxia) for 10 h and cycling for 4 h at 45% of the maximum power output between the 4th and 9th hours) including fMRI
investigations in the first and last hours for each session, respectively.
The parameter estimates (% signal change for each condition) were
extracted from each functional motor ROI and the values were compared
by means of a two-way ANOVA analysis with hypoxia/normoxia and
pre/post-fatiguing exercise as within-subject factors. The ANOVA
revealed significant main effect of hypoxia (increase of cerebral activation) explained by cortical excitability and significant interaction
between hypoxia/normoxia and pre/post-fatiguing exercise with an
increase of the degree of cerebral activation in hypoxia, which is
increased following a prolonged fatiguing exercise, suggesting a balance
between central and peripheral fatigability.

G86
THE ROLE OF THE TEMPOROPARIETAL JUNCTION (TPJ) IN ACTION
PERCEPTION Moritz F. Wurm1,2, Ricarda I. Schubotz1,2; 1Max Planck

Institute for Neurological Research, Cologne, 2Westfälische WilhelmsUniversität, Münster — Observing hand-dominant object manipulations
from the third person (3pp) compared to the first person perspective
(1pp) increases neural responses in the temporoparietal junction (TPJ;
Wurm et al., HBM, 2011). TPJ involvement may reflect a visuospatial
transformation of the action to facilitate the match with the observer's
egocentric frame of reference. The present functional imaging study
sought to investigate the role of TPJ in the transformation of action
parameters by employing a 2x2 factorial design: Subjects were instructed

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session G
to recognize actions that were shown (1) from either the 1pp or the 3pp,
and (2) in either a natural or a pixelated fashion. In the pixelated variants, objects were not identifiable and actions had to be inferred by analyzing the movement kinematics of the action. We hypothesized
increased TPJ responses for both natural and pixelated actions shown
from the 3pp vs. 1pp. In the absence of object information, however,
transformation of movement kinematics might be particularly important
for action recognition. We therefore expected TPJ activation to be strongest for pixelated actions shown from the 3pp. Corrected whole-brain
analyses revealed that observing 3pp vs. 1pp actions increases neural
activity in the TPJ bilaterally, but only when actions were presented in a
natural way. This finding suggests that transformation of action parameters requires precise visual information about hands and objects, which
is absent when actions are pixelated. Together, results corroborate the
notion that TPJ provides the neural substrate for perspective taking during observation of natural hand-dominant actions perceived from the
3pp.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
G87
3D INFORMATION IN FACE RECOGNITION: AN EYE-TRACKING STUDY

Olga Chelnokova1, Bruno Laeng1; 1Department of Psychology, University of
Oslo — One unresolved question about face perception is: what is the role
of three-dimensional information in face recognition? In this study, recognition performance was compared across changes in viewpoint in different depth conditions: a 2D condition without stereo information and a
3D condition, where stereo information was present (by viewing the
same face images as anaglyphs through the 3D glasses). Subjects' eyemovements were recorded during both 3D and 2D sessions. The findings
revealed that participants were more accurate in the 3D condition. Moreover, individual differences in inter-pupillary distance also predicted
recognition performance in the 3D but not in the 2D condition. A ‘region
of interest’ analysis of gaze data showed that rich volumetric properties
provided by certain facial features (e.g., the nose and the cheeks) were
attended more in the 3D condition compared to the 2D condition. Taken
together, these findings support the conclusion that face recognition
across viewpoint transformation is facilitated by the addition of stereoscopic depth cues.

G88
TRACKING DYNAMIC IMPACTS OF DIGESTIVE HORMONES ON BRAIN
MECHANISMS OF FOOD EVALUATION FOLLOWING GASTRIC BYPASS
SURGERY Claudia Lietti1, Léonie Egli3, Vanessa Campos3, Rosanna de

Meo2, Luc Tappy3,4, Vittorio Giusti4, Micah M.Murray1,2,5, Ulrike Toepel5; 1The
Functional Electrical NeuroimagingLaboratory, Radiology Department, Centre
HospitalierUniversitaireVaudoisand University of Lausanne, Switzerland, 2The
Functional Electrical NeuroimagingLaboratory, Department of Clinical
Neurosciences, Centre HospitalierUniversitaireVaudoisand University of
Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of Physiology, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Service of
Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Switzerland, 5EEG Brain Mapping Core,
Center for Biomedical Imaging of Lausanne and Geneva, Switzerland — Food
intake and nutritional behaviour are known to be regulated by several
gastro-intestinal (ghrelin, GLP-1, PYY) and endocrine (insulin, leptin)
factors in animals. In terms of human nutritional behaviour, direct links
and correlations between gastrointestinal (GI) or endocrine signals and
reactions of the central nervous system have so far been seldom investigated. In this interdisciplinary study, combining methods for the monitoring of gastric hormones linked to glucose homeostasis and electrical
neuroimaging, we aim to determine the parallels between Roux-en-Y
gastric bypass (RYGB) - and its associated effects on gastric hormone levels and eating behaviour - and brain activity during pre-ingestion discrimination of food images. In particular, hormone blood measures are

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

correlated with neural responses as measured by electroencephalography (EEG) in RYGB patients before and after food intake as well as in
weight matched healthy normal-weighted and over-weighted control
subjects without surgery. Preliminary results of this ongoing study will
be presented.

G89
EQUALLY INVISIBLE BUT NEURALLY UNEQUAL: CORTICAL RESPONSES
TO INVISIBLE OBJECTS VARY WITH PRESENTATION METHOD Sergey

Fogelson1, Kevin Miller2, Peter Kohler1, Richard Granger1, Peter Tse1;
Dartmouth College, 2Princeton University — Visual stimuli presented with-

1

out any corresponding visual experience may still lead to neural processing (Moutoussis & Zeki, 2002). It is unknown whether such responses
differ as a function of the method used to prevent stimuli from entering
awareness. We asked whether two means of making stimuli invisible
(chromatic flicker fusion and continuous flash suppression) had different effects on object processing within the human brain. Using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) we presented subjects (N=15, 9
males) with face and tool stimuli that were either fully visible or rendered invisible using either method. Whole-brain decoding showed that
both category and, surprisingly, subcategory-level information was
present when stimuli were visible and invisible. However, the cortical
and subcortical response pattern differed as a function of stimulation
method. Chromatic flicker fusion permitted decoding within a set of cortical and subcortical regions that were largely nonoverlapping with
regions that participate in decoding stimulus category and subcategory
during continuous flash suppression. These results have implications for
studying the neural correlates of consciousness, suggesting that finegrained subcategory-level information is available in the absence of
awareness. Furthermore, they indicate that the method used to prevent
stimuli from reaching awareness should be tailored to the specific mechanisms or brain regions being studied.

G90
IN AND OUT OF CONSCIOUSNESS: SUSTAINED ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
ACTIVITY REFLECTS INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN PERCEPTUAL
AWARENESS Carson Pun1, Stephen M. Emrich2, Kristin E. Wilson1, Erene
Stergiopoulos1, Susanne Ferber1,3; 1Department of Psychology, University of
Toronto, 2Department of Psychiatry, University of Wisconsin–Madison,
3Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest — Although significant advances in

our understanding of the cognitive and neural processes involved in
conscious awareness have occurred in recent years, the precise mechanisms that support consciousness remain elusive. Examining the neural
correlates associated with the moment a stimulus enters or exits conscious awareness is one way to potentially identify the neural mechanisms that give rise to consciousness. In the present study, we recorded
neural activity using electroencephalography (EEG) while participants
observed a bilateral shape-from-motion (SFM) display. While the display is in motion, the observer perceives an object that is immediately
segregated from a noisy background. After the motion stops, the
observer’s experience of the object remains momentarily in awareness,
before it eventually fades out of consciousness back into the noisy background. Consistent with subjective reports of perceptual experience, we
observed a prominent sustained posterior contralateral negativity
known as the contralateral delay activity (CDA). This activity was sustained only in conditions associated with sustained awareness. Interestingly, the amplitude of the CDA was correlated with individual
differences in visual awareness, suggesting that this activity plays a significant role in the maintenance of objects in consciousness. The CDA is
typically associated with visual short-term memory (VSTM), suggesting
that conscious visual awareness may be mediated by the same neural
and cognitive mechanisms that support VSTM. Our results demonstrate
that the CDA may reflect the contents of conscious awareness and therefore can provide a measure to track when information moves in and out
of consciousness.

199

Poster Session G — Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

G91
NEURAL DIFFERENCES IN TRANSLATING ABSTRACT VERSUS CONCRETE
VISUAL REPRESENTATIONS INTO ACTIONS Andrew Butler1, Bennis
Pavisian1, Karin James1; 1Indiana University — Using visual information to

G93
ERP SIGNATURES ASSOCIATED WITH BIOLOGICAL FORM AND
BIOLOGICAL MOTION PROCESSING DURING ACTION PERCEPTION

Burcu Aysen Urgen1, Markus Plank1, Marta Kutas1, Howard Poizner1, Ayse P.
Saygin1; 1University of California, San Diego — The processing of others’

perform actions is a fundamental aspect of human behavior. Musicians
commonly translate visual information into action, and many can use
different types of visual information, ranging from concrete to abstract,
to perform the same action. To investigate how visual information
affects translations into action, we exposed expert guitarists to four types
of visual depictions of action instruction including musical notation
(very abstract), tablature (abstract), chord diagrams (more concrete), and
actual pictures of guitars chords being formed (very concrete). All forms
of visual information were familiar, and frequently used by the participants when playing guitar. Visual information was shown during fMRI
scanning as the guitarists formed the appropriate chords (as visually
depicted) on a magnet safe guitar fret board with nylon strings, or where
they simply viewed the visual stimuli without an action. The design of
this study gives us the unique ability to equate motor actions while comparing the translation of vision to action across levels of abstraction.
Results of direct, and linear, whole brain contrasts showed that, during
the translation of visual information to actions, activation in bilateral
posterior parietal cortex (PPC) was increased as the degree of visual
abstraction increased. These results suggested that the PPC plays a key
role in translating visual information into motor actions, but more
importantly suggests that PPC activation is directly related to the concrete-abstract continuum of visual stimuli. The current findings highlight that the degree of visual abstraction is an important factor
modulating visual-motor processing.

actions is both ubiquitous and important. Here, we studied the role of
visual form and visual motion kinematics of the observed agent in action
processing using a stimulus set of human and humanoid robot actions.
Event-related brain potentials (ERP) were recorded while participants
viewed 2s videos of three agents (Human, Android, Robot) performing
recognizable actions: Human had biological form and motion, Android
had biological form and non-biological motion, Robot had non-biological form and non-biological motion. Android and Robot were the same
moving machine in two different appearances disguised via two different appearances, and thus featured identical kinematics. We found distinct neural signatures for processing of biological form and motion, as
well as for congruence of form and motion. Form-sensitive modulation
was characterized by 1) a negativity between 210-400 ms over centroparietal, central, and fronto-central regions bilaterally, 2) a positivity
between 270-370 ms over left parietal areas, both more pronounced for
Robot compared with Human and Android. There was some evidence
for biological motion-sensitivity between 130-230 ms, over left parietooccipital regions, Human being more pronounced than Android. There
was also evidence for a neural signature for processing form-motion congruence in frontal channels between 150-250 ms, where the Android condition differed from Robot and Human. These results highlight
differential spatiotemporal cortical patterns in action perception that
depend on the viewed agent’s form and motion kinematics.

G92
CORRECTION OF VISUAL DYSFUNCTION FOLLOWING TRAUMATIC BRAIN
INJURY DURING STROOP COLOR-NAMING TASK Caitlin M. Hudac1,

G94
PREFERENTIAL PROCESSING OF LEFT HEMIFACE INFORMATION IN
HEARING BUT NOT DEAF ADULTS. Susan M. Letourneau1,2, Teresa V.

Nathan Petro1, Katie Meidlinger1, Roxanne Haslam1, Srinivas Kota1, James
Nedrow2, Dennis Molfese1; 1University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 2Oculi Vision
Rehabilitation — Vision dysfunction is common following traumatic brain

injury (TBI), often resulting in Post-Trauma Vision Syndrome (PTVS).
Neuro-optometric rehabilitation is available through the use of corrective lenses and prisms. However, little is known about the neural mechanisms engaged during neuro-optometric rehabilitation during cognitive
tasks. The goal of this study was to use visual event-related potentials
(VERPs) to assess neurocognitive mechanisms involved during a Stroop
color-naming task both with and without prisms. A patient with PTVS
observed color words presented for 150 ms with congruent (80% frequency) or incongruent (20% frequency) colored font. Single-trial analyses for each observation (with and without prisms) for both congruent
and incongruent conditions were conducted. VERP waveforms were
compared across observations, condition, and electrode cluster using
principal components analysis (PCA) and analysis of variance
(ANOVA). ANOVA results indicated 3 factors with significant interactions of observation accounted for 33% of the total variance. A significant
3-way interaction for Factor 6 (peak at 332 ms) occurred between observation (2: without prisms, with prisms), stimulus condition (2: congruent, incongruent), and electrode cluster (18) using the Huynh-Feldt
correction (F(17,255) = 2.69, p < .035, observed power = .74). Scalp topographies for the P332 ms component derived from Factor 6 of the PCA
indicated comparable peak amplitudes for the congruent condition both
with and without prisms. However, during the incongruent condition,
peak latencies do not occur without prisms, suggesting reduced neural
mechanisms for processing conflicting information. The use of neurooptometric rehabilitation corrects symptoms specific to visual dysfunction as well as cognition.

Mitchell3; 1NYU, 2CUNY Graduate Center, 3University of Massachusetts
Medical School — Deaf users of American Sign Language (ASL) rely
heavily on facial expressions for both linguistic and affective information. The current study tested the hypothesis that deafness and sign language use reduce the right hemisphere/left hemiface asymmetry
commonly observed during face perception. Twelve hearing adults with
no ASL experience, and 12 deaf adults who learned ASL by age five
judged whether a target face had the same or different identity (in one
task) or emotion (in another task) as a quickly presented prime face.
Primes depicted either whole faces, right- or left-hemifaces (faces with
the left and right sides blurred, respectively), and targets depicted whole
faces. Accuracies, reaction times, and event-related potentials (ERPs)
were recorded. While both groups of participants showed highest accuracies following whole face primes, only hearing adults showed higher
accuracies in left- as opposed to right-hemiface trials, specifically during
the emotion task. Face-sensitive ERPs in both groups were larger over
the right hemisphere than the left. However, only the hearing group
showed larger ERP amplitudes in response to left- than right-hemifaces,
and similar ERP responses to left-hemifaces as whole faces. In contrast,
ERPs in the deaf group demonstrated fewer and smaller differences
between left- and right-hemiface trials, and greater differences between
whole faces and both types of hemifaces. Therefore, while overall right
hemisphere asymmetries were not altered in the deaf group, deafness
and/or ASL experience appeared to reduce the preferential processing
of information in the left side of the face.

G95
COGNITIVE CONTRIBUTIONS TO COLOR CONSTANCY; A CASE FOR A
SUBJECTIVIST COLOR ONTOLOGY Abdul-Kareem H Ahmed1, Mazviita
Chirimuuta1; 1University of Pittsburgh — The question of color realism, the

existence of color and veridicality of color perception has troubled philosophers since the Ancient Greeks. With the advent of empirical cognitive sciences new advances have been made in our understanding of
color perception. Some color scientists align with a physicalist view of

200

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session G
color perception, that colors may be reduced to physical properties of
objects, such as spectral surface reflectance. A major contemporary proponent of this theory is David Hilbert (1987; Byrne and Hilbert 2003). In
this study, we will show how an approach such as Hilbert’s has the disadvantage of underestimating the cognitive contribution to color perception, using color constancy as an example. Though he acknowledges
sensory and calculative mechanisms in the brain, he does not make reference to findings of cognitive mechanisms contributing to color constancy. We will argue that admitting a role for cognitive mechanisms
would compel one to accept a level of subjectivism about color, not compatible with physicalism. The methodology of this study was philosophical, where scholarship by Hilbert was compared with recent studies of
color constancy from the cognitive sciences (Smithson 2005). Data from
these studies was compared to ideas proposed by Hilbert, and conflicts
were discerned. These conflicts were then used to reach an understanding which more comprehensively aligns with the cognitive sciences. Ultimately, we conclude that color perception cannot be explained simply as
the detection of physical stimuli.

G96
THE PREDICABILITY OF ACTION-EFFECTS MODULATES NEURAL
RESPONSES IN THE SAME REGIONS DURING ACTION AND
OBSERVATION John A Dewey1, Thomas H Carr1; 1Michigan State
University — Previous neuroimaging studies (e.g. Farrer et al. 2008; Leube
et al. 2003; Schnell et al. 2007; Spengler, Cramon, and Brass, 2009) have
shown that a frontoparietal network including parts of ventral prefrontal
and inferior parietal cortex is involved in predicting and monitoring
visual consequences of one's own movements, or action-effects. In a
rapid event-related fMRI study, we aimed to characterize which, if any,
areas of this frontoparietal network are specific to self-monitoring, and
which are involved in predicting visual action-effects without regard for
source. Results from two experiments show that neural responses in
many frontal and parietal areas were modulated by predictability and by
agency (acting v. observing), but no regions showed a two-way interaction, suggesting a great deal of overlap between networks involved with
predicting and monitoring visual action-effects during direct action and
observation.

G97
MODULATION OF VENTRAL PREMOTOR CORTEX BY INTERPERSONAL
LIKING Mona Sobhani1,2, Glenn R. Fox1,2, Jonas Kaplan2,3, Lisa Aziz-

Zadeh2,4; 1Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Southern California,
Brain and Creativity Institute, University of Southern California, 3Department
of Psychology, University of Southern California, 4Department of Occupational
Therapy, University of Southern California — Observing an action involves
2

regions involved in motor planning, such as the inferior frontal, premotor, and inferior parietal regions. Recent research suggests that during
action observation, activity in these neural regions is modulated by ethnic group membership and physical properties of the person performing
the action. In this study, we investigated whether likability modulates
activity in neural regions involved in action observation. Seventeen Jewish subjects were familiarized with biographies of eight individuals, half
of which belonged to Neo-Nazi groups (dislikable) and half of which did
not (likable). All subjects and actors in the stimuli were Caucasian, and
thus physically similar. The subjects then viewed videos of actors portraying the characters performing simple motor actions (e.g. grasping a
water bottle and raising it to the lips), while undergoing fMRI. Using
multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA), we found above chance classifier
accuracy in the right ventral premotor cortex when the classifier was
trained and tested on the likable and dislikable action observation conditions. This data indicates that activity in the premotor cortex is modulated by likability even when watching a simple action like reaching for a
cup.

G98
HOW TALL ARE WE FOR A NEGLECT PATIENT? IT DEPENDS ON WHERE WE
ARE. Silvia Savazzi1, Lucio Posteraro2, Alessia Manfredini1,2; 1University of
Verona and National Institute of Neuroscience, Italy, 2Rehabilitation Medicine
Unit, Suzzara Hospital, Mantova, Italy — Neglect patients tend to judge the

leftmost stimulus of two equally long objects as being shorter than the
rightmost object. This effect seems to be due to a distortion of space:
space in neglect patients is represented as progressively relaxed toward
the contralesional space and progressively compressed toward the
ipsilesional one (the space anisometry hypothesis). To test this hypothesis we took advantage of an illusion we have recently described: healthy
subjects judge the thinner of two equally tall stimuli as being taller. Thus,
the horizontal extent of a stimulus is not neutral with respect to the perceptual judgment that has to be made on its vertical extent: the wider the
stimulus the shorter it is judged. Accordingly, we expect that the leftmost of two stimuli of the same horizontal and vertical size will be
judged by neglect patients as shorter, as a consequence of a misrepresentation of the stimuli along the horizontal dimension. Here, neglect
patients, brain-damaged patients without neglect and healthy subjects
were asked to judge the vertical extent of rectangles and bodies. Only
neglect patients judged the leftmost of two identical stimuli (tall and
large the same) as being shorter on 75.78% of trials, whereas brain-damaged patients without neglect and healthy subjects judged the leftmost
stimulus as being shorter on 46.45% of trials (chance level). The misjudgment of the vertical extent found with neglect patients is interpreted as
due to a misrepresentation of the horizontal dimension (irrelevant to the
task), thus in line with the space anisometry hypothesis.

G99
CONNECTIVITY IN CORTICAL NETWORKS DURING WORD READING

Nicolas Bedo1, Urs Ribary2, Lawrence M. Ward1; 1University of British
Columbia, 2Simon Fraser University — The neural processes underlying
word-reading remain much of a mystery. In particular, the flow of information within and between language networks during word reading has
not been adequately explored. The present study investigated local spectral power changes and functional and effective (causal) connectivity at
each stage of word reading. EEG was used to record brain activity from
healthy volunteers (n = 15), during a reading task. The task required
participants to view a sequence of three letters, followed by a three-letter
word. Participants were instructed to respond as to whether or not the
word matched the letter sequence. Independent component analysis
yielded many sources of activation previously identified as being crucial
to word-reading. A combination of event-related spectral perturbation
and phase synchrony analyses was performed on these independent
components. Additionally, analyses of Granger causality were conducted to investigate the possible causal information flow between sites
of interest. Analyses show local theta power increases prior to long-distance theta synchronization between several pairs of cortical sites,
reflecting previously-established paths of activation involved in reading
text. Additionally, causal connectivity was established between object
recognition sites and semantic processing sites, suggesting a feed-forward flow of information. These results highlight the interplay between
local and long-distance neural dynamics involved at each stage of processing during reading. Additionally, these measures of functional and
causal connectivity may be used as a benchmark for comparison with
clinical populations (e.g. individuals with certain kinds of dyslexia),
such that disturbances in connectivity may provide insight as to underlying neurological problems.

G100
BODY SPECIFIC N170 COMPONENT IS ALTERED IN ANOREXIA
NERVOSA Boris Suchan1, Katharina Banscherus1, Stephan Herpertz2,

Denise Soria Bauser1; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience; Ruhr University
Bochum, 2Clinic for Psychosomatic and Psychotherapy; Ruhr University
Bochum — Recent findings demonstrated structural alterations in the so
called extrastriate body area, a part of the extrastriate visual cortex that is

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

201

Poster Session G — Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
specialized for visual body processing, in women with anorexia nervosa.
The current investigation aimed at looking at alteration in the body specific N170 EEG component in anorexia nervosa. A group of 14 women
with diagnosed anorexia nervosa according to the DSM IV criteria were
investigated using EEG and stimuli of human bodies. Houses served as
control-stimuli. Results yield evidence for an increase of the N170 amplitude in anorexia nervosa compared to healthy controls. These findings
yield additional evidence for altered visual body image processing in
anorexia already at the level of early visual processing. To our knowledge, this is the first study yielding evidences for visual body processing
related N170 changes in anorexia nervosa.

G101
APPLICATION OF FMRI ADAPTATION TO CHARACTERIZE THE NEURAL
REPRESENTATION OF COLOR Andrew S Persichetti1, Geoffrey K Aguirre1,
David H Brainard1, Omar H Butt1, Nina S Hsu1, Sharon L Thompson-Schill1;
University of Pennsylvania — Color names may be used to divide the con-

1

tinuous spectrum of color percepts into discrete categories. We asked
whether there is a transition from a continuous towards a categorical
representation of color along the visual pathways from V1 to ventral
extra-striate cortex. Ten subjects performed a behavioral color categorization task on 10 stimuli that varied along a green-blue continuum. Separately, these stimuli were presented in an fMRI experiment that
employed a continuous carry-over design to estimate the response
evoked by each color when preceded by every possible pair of colors.
The fMRI measurements were obtained while subjects performed an
orthogonal attention task. Retinotopic mapping and color localizer data
were also collected. The behavioral data revealed the expected categorization, with a transition from “green” to “blue” labels occurring in the
middle of the continuum. In the fMRI data, there was a recovery from
adaptation within posterior visual areas that was related to the magnitude of the color stimulus transition. In ongoing analyses we are examining the precise form of this effect in separate visual areas, and testing
whether recovery from adaptation differs across visual areas for stimulus transitions that cross the categorical boundary compared to those
that do not.

THINKING: Reasoning
G102
GIST-REASONING: AN INDEX OF FLUID INTELLIGENCE IN ADULTS WITH
TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Asha Vas1, LayVette Johnson2, Sandi

Chapman3; 1Center for BrainHealth, University of Texas at Dallas — The fluid
thinking ability to synthesize and abstract meanings from large amounts
of information referred to as gist-reasoning, is essential for daily-functioning. Researchers postulate fluid and flexible thinking abilities to be
suggestive of frontal-lobe integrity. Previous evidence found that a traumatic brain injury (TBI) during the preteen-teenage years (i.e., during the
critical frontal-network myelination period) can lead to gist-reasoning
impairments. The current study expands on this evidence to examine the
effects of adulthood TBI on gist-reasoning. Gist-reasoning was examined
on synthesized meanings conveyed from three complex texts that varied
in length and complexity. Additionally, we examined the contribution of
cognitive processes of (a) inhibition, (b) working memory, (c) switching,
and (d) immediate memory to gist-reasoning. Forty healthy adults and
40 adults with TBI in chronic-stages of recovery, all between the ages of
25-55 years at testing, age and socio-economic status matched, were
included in the study. Results indicated decreased gist-reasoning in
adults with TBI as compared to their healthy peers. Additionally, the
contribution of the core frontal-lobe processes of inhibition, working
memory, and switching to gist-reasoning was over and above immediate
memory for the explicitly stated facts of the three texts. This study introduces a novel index of fluid intelligence abilities of a functionally-relevant task and provides evidence of the vulnerability of higher-order
cognition of complex information processing. Furthermore, the significant contribution of the three frontal-processes supports existing evi-

202

dence of their role as ‘core subcomponent-processes’ for performing
complex fluid-intelligence tasks. The potential implications for cognitive
rehabilitation methodologies are discussed.

G103
DEDUCTIVE REASONING NETWORKS: A META-ANALYSIS OF THE
NEUROIMAGING DATA Sabrina Lemire-Rodger1, Ashley M Bondad1,

Bradley R Buchsbaum2; 1Rotman Research Institute, 2University of Toronto —

There are two dominant theories in the reasoning literature. The Mental
Models Theory (MMT) states that we reason by creating spatial representations of problems. The Mental Logic Theory (MLT) holds that reasoning is rule-based, operating on abstract symbolic mental
representations. Functional neuroimaging studies have supported both
theories, with parietal activation offered as evidence for MMT and temporal lobe activation favoring MLT. Unfortunately, the findings have
been inconsistent. This may be because while there are different types of
deduction, only a few studies have directly evaluated how they differ in
terms of their neural substrates. In this study, we catalogued the different types of deductive reasoning tasks that have been used in neuroimaging studies, and considered additional factors that may modulate
neural activation. We reviewed 27 neuroimaging experiments on deductive reasoning and used ALE (Activation Likelihood Estimation) metaanalyses to examine cross-study consistency in brain activation patterns.
Overall, we found that deduction was associated with a mostly lefthemisphere fronto-parietal activation network. However, we found that
different classes of reasoning tasks elicited markedly different patterns
of activation. Conditional deduction activated a parietal-prefrontal network, while categorical deduction was associated with a temporal lobeventral prefrontal network. Relational deduction was the only type of
reasoning that gave rise to bilateral frontal lobe activation. We also discovered that the task content, whether concrete or abstract, had an effect
on which reasoning network was recruited. These findings encourage us
to view deduction as a set of processes recruiting partially dissociable
brain networks.

G104
RELIGIOUS BELIEF SYSTEMS OF PERSONS WITH HIGH FUNCTIONING
AUTISM Caitlin Murphy1, Tessa Velazquez2, Catherine Caldwell-Harris3,

Patrick McNamara; 1Boston University, 2Boston University, 3Boston University,
PhD, 4Boston University, PhD — The cognitive science of religion is a new
field which explains religious belief as emerging from normal cognitive
processes such as inferring others' mental states, and agency detection.
Our research is comprised of three studies which investigate the proposal that individual differences in belief will reflect cognitive processing styles, with high functioning autism (HFA) being an extreme style
that will predispose towards non-belief (atheism and agnosticism). In
study 1, 192 unique posters on an autism website were analyzed for religious beliefs and for the expression of thinking traits indicative of HFA
cognitive styles. In study 2, an online survey examining religious belief
and cognitive styles was administered to 61 individuals who identified
as HFA. The results of studies 1 and 2 revealed that persons with ASD
were more likely than those in our neurotypical comparison group to
identify with non-belief categories, and, if religious, were more likely to
construct their own religious belief system. In study 2, quantitative analyses revealed significant differences between religious categories with
members of non-belief categories scoring higher on the Autism Quotient
as well as the Systemizing Quotient. Study 3 is currently in progress and
entails a series of empirical tasks preformed by participants ranging
from neurotypical to HFA. The tasks included measure social attribution, intentionality, global/local processing bias, and the survey administered in study 2. Preliminary findings of this study are consistent with
those of studies 1 and 2 but additionally indicate a relationship between
local/global processing bias and religious belief.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session G

G105
NEURAL CORRELATES OF HIGH MATHEMATICAL ABILITY: A VOXEL
BASED MORPHOMETRY STUDY Sephira Ryman1, Ranee A. Flores1, Joe A.

Frantz2, Rex E. Jung1; 1University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center-l
Department of Neurosurgery, 2Mind Research Network — Neuroimaging

G107
RELATIONAL COMPLEXITY AND RELATIONAL DISTRACTION MODULATE
RESPONSE-LOCKED EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS IN ANALOGICAL
REASONING Brian M Sweis1, Krishna L Bharani1, Robert G Morrison1;
1Loyola University Chicago — Numerous studies have shown that relational

studies of mathematical abilities are largely devoted to investigations of
dyscalculia, a disorder that includes deficits in mathematical abilities
(Rotzer et al., 2008; Rykhlevskaia et al., 2009), or functional studies of
mathematical computation tasks (Davis et al., 2009). This study sought to
explore structural correlates of high math ability. Previous research has
demonstrated rather discrete regions of activation during functional
imaging tasks associated with math processing, specifically the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) and the superior parietal lobule (SPL)(Ansari, 2008).
We hypothesized that individuals with high math abilities would have
increased grey matter in the parietal lobe, corresponding with regions
demonstrated to be active during functional imaging experiments. We
utilized optimized Voxel-based morpohometry (VBM) (Good et al.,
2001) to compare high math individuals (N=23) to normal healthy controls (N=23) matched on age, sex, and full scale intelligence quotient
(FSIQ). High math ability was determined by performance (>95th %ile)
on the GRE, ACT, or SAT while FSIQ was assessed by the Wechsler
Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI). A two-sample t-test of an ROI
limited to the parietal lobe was conducted using SPM5 using total grey
matter as a covariate. Multiple areas demonstrated significant increased
grey matter (p<.001) in individuals with high mathematical abilities, the
largest clusters located in the left IPS and the left SPL. Significant grey
matter increases were also seen within the homologous left parietal lobe,
with smaller clusters observed. These findings support results from
numerous functional studies that implicate the IPS and SPL in mathematical abilities.

complexity and distracting featural or relational information increase the
difficulty of analogical reasoning. Both factors interact with age in both
the young and old and in patients with damage to prefrontal cortex
(PFC). In addition, several functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) studies have suggested that more anterior regions (e.g., frontopolar) of PFC become increasingly active as the relational complexity of
analogy problems increases. Likewise, slightly more posterior regions of
PFC become increasingly active in the face of distraction by goal-irrelevant relational information. Some behavioral results have suggested that
these two factors are additive, with goal-irrelevant relational information having a greater effect on more relationally complex problems, but
little is known about the time-course of processing complex relational
reasoning problems. In this study, we use scalp electroencephalography
(EEG) to monitor brain potentials during performance of geometric analogy problems that vary with respect to both factors. Behaviorally, accuracy decreases and RT increases as relational complexity increases and
with the presence of relationally distracting information. In addition,
relational complexity and relational distraction interact, with distraction
having a larger impact on more relationally complex problems. In a prior
visual analogy study, we identified a response-locked event-related
potential (ERP) in left prefrontal electrodes that predicted successful
analogical mapping when measured late in analogy processing. In the
present study, we show that this ERP is modulated by both relational
complexity and relational distraction. The present results provide additional support for this ERP as a neural metric of analogical processing.

G106
EXPLORING THE FUNDAMENTAL COGNITIVE COMPONENTS OF HUMAN
REASONING Ehsan Shokri Kojori1, Penelope Jones1, Srikant Chari1, Michael

G108
WHEN ANALOGY IS LIKE PRIMING: THE N400 IN VERBAL ANALOGICAL
REASONING Robert G Morrison1, Matthew J Kmiecik1, Krishna L Bharani1;

Motes1,2, Daniel Krawczyk1,2; 1The University of Texas at Dallas, 2The University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center — Reasoning has been of historical

interest as one of the most prominent aspects of human cognition. Generally, reasoning can be viewed as the ability to make logical inferences
from the surrounding world in novel circumstances (fluid reasoning) or
conditions that resemble past experiences (crystallized reasoning). Intelligence scores are heavily affected by reasoning abilities and many standardized tests have been specifically developed to assess individual
differences in reasoning abilities. This work is a novel attempt to provide
a partialized realization of fundamental cognitive components contributing to various aspects of reasoning performance. A task was designed
with three conditions examining Visual Search (VS), Rule Verification
(RV) and Rule Generation (RG) processes. Task conditions consisted of
48 trials of visuospatial problems, each with three panels containing 4
geometrical shapes. In VS, participants searched for a shape-change
across the panels. In RV, participants verified whether a shape-change
followed one of four learned rules. In RG, participants inferred whether
a shape-change followed a novel logical rule. Our results indicate that
the systematic increase in contributing cognitive components between
VS, RV, and RG resulted in consistent decline in performance measured
by reaction-time and accuracy. Further, performance on a standard set of
reasoning problems (Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices) was predicted differentially by the task conditions. Raven’s reaction-time was
best predicted by RV followed by RG reaction-times. Raven’s accuracy,
however, was predicted by accuracy in RG and VS conditions. Finally,
these findings provide insight into a subset of cognitive components
accounting for differences in reasoning abilities.

1Loyola University Chicago — Computational models of analogy have frequently relied on explicit relational representations and mechanisms for
structured mapping. This approach predicts engagement of the working-memory system directed by the prefrontal cortex (PFC), a prediction
generally consistent with patient and neuroimaging studies. More
recently, several connectionist models based on the phenomenon of analogical priming have attempted to provide an alternative explanation for
4-term verbal analogies. These models rely on forms of spreading activation and would predict activation more like semantic priming during
verbal analogy solving. To test this claim we recorded scalp electroencephalography during a verbal analogy task. In this paradigm, participants initially retrieved the relationship between a first word pair and
then received a cue instructing them to either judge a second pair of
words for relatedness (semantic only) or alternatively decide whether
they formed a valid analogy (analogy) with the first pair. Bunge et al.
(2005) previously found that the analogy condition activates left rostrolateral PFC compared to the semantic only condition. In our study we
found that event-related potentials (ERPs) of analogy and semantic only
trials diverged at the N400 with semantic only trials giving the more
negative N400. The amplitude of the analogy N400 predicted participant
performance. These results differ from previous studies of visual analogy that have shown only a late response-locked ERP predicting analogical mapping performance. Taken together these results suggest that
under some conditions solving verbal analogies may use a mechanism
similar to priming rather than that of analogical mapping.

G109
PARADOXICAL INFLUENCE OF WORKING MEMORY ON BUILDING AND
UPDATING MENTAL MODELS Derick Valadao1, Britt Anderson1,2, James

Danckert1; 1Department of Psychology - University of Waterloo, 2Centre for
Theoretical Neuroscience - University of Waterloo — The ability for humans
to build mental models is critical for goal setting, decision making, and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

203

Poster Session G — Monday, April 2, 5:00 - 7:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
predicting environmental contingencies. As we engage with our environment, we form mental models by continuously sampling information
and matching it with our model. Mental models also must be updated.
That is, as the environment changes, we should update our internal representations to effectively act on, and engage with, our environment. The
current study aimed to elucidate how individuals form and update mental models of their environment. Further, working memory (WM) represents a key component of mental model building. Here we tried to
determine the influence of WM on forming and updating mental models. Participants completed a spatial prediction task, in which they were
asked to predict the location of sequential targets. Unbeknownst to the
participants, target locations were drawn from normal distributions that
were altered every 20 trials. Simultaneously, participants completed a
WM task in which they determined whether the current object contained
a target feature (0-back) or matched a feature of the object two trials back
(2-back) along three dimensions (location, shape, and colour). It was
expected that maintaining locations in WM would aid in mental model
building. Participants effectively formed and updated representations of
target locations. Contrary to our expectations, spatial WM (2-back) significantly impaired the ability to form mental representations of target
location relative to shape/colour WM. These results suggest that the
highly specific demands of WM tasks interfere with our capacity to
develop and update mental models of spatial distributions.

204

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Poster Session H

Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
H1
SEPARATE NEURAL SYSTEMS RESOLVE
NONEMOTIONAL CONFLICT IN CHILDREN Kayla

EMOTIONAL

AND

Martin1,2, Stephen
3
2,4
1
Shen , Moriah E. Thomason ; Department of Psychology, Wayne State
University, 2Merrill Palmer Skillman Institute, 3Basic Medical Sciences, Wayne
State University School of Medicine, 4Department of Pediatrics, Wayne State
University School of Medicine — It has been shown that cognitive control,
the ability to override competing thoughts and actions in favor of goal
directed behavior, is imperative to a child’s ability to resist cognitive
interference and foundational to cognitive development. Prior work in
adults has shown separable neural systems underlie management of
emotional versus non-emotional conflict, but little is known about the
independent or overlapping behavioral and neural systems that support
the development of different forms of cognitive control in children.
Here, we performed two Stroop-like conflict tasks (emotion and nonemotion gender) while children ages 9-13 underwent fMRI scanning. In
the emotion task, participants identified the expression of a fearful or
happy face while ignoring an overlying emotion word (“fear” or
“happy”), which either matched (congruent; C) or conflicted (incongruent; I) with the facial expression. The highly analogous non-emotion task
required that participants identify the gender of the male or female face
while ignoring an overlying gender word (“male” or “female”). Preliminary analyses of behavioral and neural data has revealed incongruent
stimuli results in reaction time (RT) interference (RT for I>C) across
material-types, that the effect of adaptation (faster RTs on sequential
incongruent trials) was stronger for gender non-emotion trials than emotion trials, and that activity in separate neural regions (rostral anterior
cingulate (rACC) and lateral frontal) is associated with emotional versus
non-emotional conflict resolution. Thus, our analyses support dissociation of these systems in youth at both the behavioral and neural level.
Additionally, our data suggests these systems may follow different maturational timelines.

contrast, achievement goals focusing on challenge and mastery are likely
to be associated with persistence and rebound after failure, regardless of
gender. In the present study, males and females who primarily identified with either normative (N-bias) or challenge goals (C-bias) participated in a difficult test-feedback-retest math paradigm under non-threat
framing. We focused our analysis on event-related potentials (ERPs) to
negative accuracy feedback following first-test errors, subsequent
engagement with a computerized tutor, and the extent to which this
engagement predicted error correction on a surprise retest (i.e., learning). Gender had no effect on either first test performance or learning
from the tutor, although females exhibited an enhanced FRN to negative
feedback and greater investigation of the tutor. Goals, however, did
influence learning. N-biased students fared more poorly at retest than Cbiased students. This poorer rebound from failure was coupled with an
enhanced frontal P3 and late positive potential (LPP) to negative feedback, suggesting that heightened attention to failure signals can interfere
with successful learning, regardless of gender.

H3
PARAMETRIC DEPICTION OF EARLY AND LATE ANALYSIS OF FEAR IN
VARIOUS INTENSITIES: AN ERP STUDY Emily Forscher1, David Rozek2,

College, City University of New York — Achievement in STEM disciplines is

Wen Li1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2University of Notre Dame — In
real life, we experience threat in differing intensities, ranging from a
mild threat of confronting an unfriendly face to the extreme threat of facing death. However, a systemic investigation of human responses to
varying levels of threat and their underlying neural mechanisms has not
yet been performed. Here, combining morphing techniques and brain
electrophysiology, we varied the percentage of fear information morphed into a neutral face from 2% to 45% (in increments of 6%) to parametrically delineate early and late analysis of threatening facial
emotions, and to associate threat processing with individual affective
states. Participants’ fear detection rates across the levels conformed
closely to a sigmoid function, and the inflection point (i.e., fear detection
threshold) correlated positively with positive affect: increased positive
affect reduced sensitivity to fear. Based on the detection threshold, N170
(at P7) revealed differential response to sub- and supra-threshold fearful
faces (t = 2.15, p = 0.05). Late positive potentials (500-600 ms) at Pz exhibited a significant linear trend (t= 3.12, p = 0.01), increasing in amplitude
with incremental fear intensity. Therefore, early visual responses largely
classified these stimuli dichotically into “fear” or “no fear” categories,
while later visual analysis appeared to perform a parametric profiling of
the amount of fear in the face. These patterns conform to the well-established theories of early “quick-and-dirty” processing and later elaborate
analyses of emotion.

not determined by ability alone, but also by social and motivational factors. Recently, there has been considerable focus on the role stereotypes
play in handicapping females’ ability to optimally utilize cognitive
resources for math problem solving. Although environments that neutralize stereotype threat should theoretically eliminate gender differences, if females hold achievement goals that emphasize comparison of
one’s ability to others (normative goals), they may still experience differentially poor outcomes when they perceive that their ability is lacking. In

Limmer1,2, Valerie Voon1,2, Christian Doeller3, Mark Gluck4, Catherine
Myers5,6,7, Barbara Sahakian1,2; 1University of Cambridge, 2MRC/Wellcome
Trust Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute, 3Donders Institute for

H2
THE COST OF COMPARISON: NORMATIVE ACHIEVEMENT GOALS MATTER
MORE THAN GENDER IN DETERMINING REBOUND FROM FAILURE IN
MATH Jennifer Mangels1, Laura Deering1, Catherine Good1; 1Baruch

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

H4
STOP FLIPPING THE SWITCH: STRESS MODULATES THE USE OF BASAL
GANGLIA- AND HIPPOCAMPUS-MEDIATED LEARNING STRATEGIES IN
SUBCLINICAL OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER Winifred

205

Poster Session H — Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, The
Netherlands, 4Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers
University, Newark, NJ, 5New Jersey Health Care Center, East Orange, NJ,
6
Stress & Motivated Behavior Institute, New Jersey Medical School, Newark,
NJ, 7Rutgers University, Newark, NJ — Schwabe and colleagues (2007) proposed that stress functions as a “switch” between the basal ganglia (BG)
and hippocampal (HC) memory systems. They observed enhanced BGmediated “habit” learning at the expense of HC-mediated “cognitive”
learning in animals and humans resulting from acute, as well as chronic,
stress. This theory may be a useful model of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and its subclinical form (OCS). Several recent studies have
documented BG hyperactivity, of which compulsions may be a behavioural manifestation, in individuals with OCD. Impaired HC functioning
has also been documented, though inconsistently. We propose that
Schwabe’s theory accounts for these seemingly unrelated findings. We
furthermore propose that there are several acute and chronic stressrelated features of OCD/OCS that may “flip the switch” between the BG
and HC memory systems (e.g. hyperactivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis). In the present study, acute stress was induced with
the socially evaluated cold-pressor test and assessed via salivary cortisol;
chronic stress was assessed via questionnaire. Then, a probabilistic
reversal task and an object-location memory task, both of which can be
performed using either a HC or BG learning strategy, were administered
to individuals with and without OCS. Preliminary results indicate
impaired hippocampal functioning and increased use of BG strategies in
individuals with OCS – effects that were exacerbated by acute stress.
These results suggest that stress interacts with obsessive-compulsive
symptomology to enhance BG functioning at the direct expense of HC
functioning.

H5
EXAMINING THE EFFECT OF AROUSAL, VALENCE, AND DISTINCTIVENESS
UPON MEMORY TRADE-OFFS Carolina Campanella1, Stephan Hamann1;
1Emory University, Atlanta GA — Memory

for emotionally salient or central
stimuli in emotional scenes is frequently enhanced at the expense of
background, peripheral information. This phenomenon, known as the
emotional memory trade-off effect, has been used widely as a paradigm
for examining how emotion biases memory encoding processes. A leading account of this trade-off effect is that it results from attentional capture by central emotional components, leaving reduced attentional
resources available to encode background information. However, other
non-affective factors such as distinctiveness may also capture attention
and induce a memory trade-off, though these factors have received relatively little attention. We examined the roles of emotional arousal,
valence, and distinctiveness in the memory trade-off effect for complex
scenes. During encoding, participants viewed scenes consisting of a central object (either negative, positive, neutral, or visually distinctive but
emotionally neutral) against neutral backgrounds. Eye-tracking data was
collected to assess attention at encoding. After a 24-hour delay, participants returned for an unannounced recognition test. Participants fixated
more on emotional and distinctive objects than neutral objects, and fixations to the scene backgrounds was correspondingly decreased for emotional and distinctive objects. As predicted, a recognition memory tradeoff occurred for both distinctive objects and emotional objects, relative to
neutral objects, and this trade-off was most marked for high-confidence
recognition judgments. Our findings suggest that both distinctiveness
and emotional characteristics can induce a memory trade-off effect, and
point to the importance of separately assessing the contributions of both
factors when examining cognitive and neural mechanisms underlying
the memory trade-off effect.

H6
ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX GRAY MATTER VOLUME CORRELATES
WITH NONCONSCIOUS ATTENTION BIAS TO THREAT Joshua Carlson1,

Felix Beacher1, Karen Reinke2, Reza Habib3, Eddie Harmon-Jones4, Greg

206

Hajcak1; 1Stony Brook University, 2University of Illinois Springfield, 3Southern
Illinois University Carbondale, 4Texas A&M — The allocation of spatial attention towards threatening stimuli is an important aspect of the fear
response, which can occur automatically without conscious awareness.
Functional neuroimaging research has linked this behavior to a network
comprised of the amygdala, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and visual
cortex. Currently, it is unclear how variability in underlying brain morphometry may relate to individual differences in attention bias to threat.
We performed two experiments collecting whole-brain structural magnetic resonance images and dot-probe data measuring individuals’
attention bias to backward masked fearful faces. Voxel-based morphometry was used to assess gray matter volume. We hypothesized that
reduced gray matter within the amygdala and ACC would be associated
with reduced attention bias to threat. In Experiment 1 (N=42), we found
that backward masked fearful faces captured spatial attention and that
larger ACC gray matter volumes were associated with greater nonconscious attention bias to fearful faces. In Experiment 2 (N=12), we replicated this association in an independent sample. In sum, we provide
both initial and replicating evidence that ACC gray matter volume is correlated with biased attention to nonconscious threat. We demonstrate for
the first time that variability in affective attention bias is associated with
ACC morphometry. Given that elevated attention bias to threat is associated with anxiety, future research needs to explore the underlying brain
morphometry associated with attention bias in anxious populations.

H7
VALENCE EVALUATIONS OVERRIDE INNATE SALIENCE OF HIGHAROUSAL WORDS: THE LATE POSITIVITY AS A DYNAMIC MEASURE OF
EMOTIONAL RELEVANCE Nathaniel Delaney-Busch1, Gianna Wilkie1, Ju

Hyung Kim1, Ann Yacoubian1, Gina Kuperberg1,2; 1Tufts University, 2Martinos
Center for Biomedical Imaging, Mass General Hospital — We used event-

related potentials to investigate the processing of pleasant, unpleasant,
and neutral words that were either high or low in arousal. In a previous
study, we demonstrated that when emotion is not task relevant, a late
positive component (thought to reflect sustained evaluations of emotional stimuli) is modulated by arousal, but not by valence: its amplitude
was larger to high than low arousal words, regardless of whether they
were pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral. But when arousal was matched, its
amplitude was the same across the three valence conditions. These findings suggest that, when emotion was irrelevant, sustained evaluations
were triggered by the inherent arousing properties of the words, rather
than their emotional valence. We asked whether this was also true when
participants overtly attended to valence. We presented the same 468 single words to 22 new participants as they rated each word as pleasant,
unpleasant, or neutral. Word groups were carefully matched on concreteness, frequency, word length, and other lexical properties. In contrast to the previous study, the late positivity showed no difference
between the high and low arousal words. Instead, it showed a robust
effect of valence, with pleasant and unpleasant words eliciting a larger
positivity than the neutral words. Taken together, our two studies demonstrate that the late positivity is a dynamic indicator of immediate emotional relevance, and is not directly connected to either valence or
arousal.

H8
THE SPEED OF MORAL SENSITIVITY Jean Decety1, Stephanie Ortigue2,3;
1

The University of Chicago, 2University of Geneva, 3Syracuse University — Peo-

ple’s capacity to recognize a behavior as intentional is a central component of human social cognition. This capacity plays a crucial role in
moral judgment. To characterize real time neural processing underpinning moral computations, high-density event-related potentials were
measured in participants while they perceived short visual scenarios
depicting intentional and accidental harm done to others. Brain
microstate analysis revealed a total of six time periods of stability that
significantly differed both in timing and location for intentional harm
and accidental harm. The former was significantly distinguished from

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session H
the latter over two main time periods i.e., from 62 to 120 ms, and from
122 to 180 ms post-stimulus. More precisely, a specific scalp potential
field with a current source density maximum in the right posterior superior and medial temporal gyri characterized accidental harm during the
first time period; whereas a different scalp topography with a current
source density in the right amygdala characterized intentional harm. The
fast involvement of these brain regions in differentiating intentional
from accidental harm demonstrates that automatic perception of intentionality is a critical input to the perception of moral valence of an action,
and seems to precede emotional processes. This study is the first to
determine the spatio-temporal dynamic of the neuro-computational processes underlying moral cognition.

H9
EMOTION AND ATTENTION IN CORTICAL RESPONSES TO WRITTEN
WORDS Mareike Bayer1, Werner Sommer1, Annekathrin Schacht2;
1Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 2University of Göttingen — For

emotional
pictures with fear-, disgust- or sex-related contents, stimulus size has
been shown to potentiate emotion effects in event-related potentials
(ERPs), presumably reflecting the enhanced biological impact of larger
emotion-inducing pictures. If this is true, size should not enhance emotion effects for written words with symbolic and acquired meaning.
Here, we investigated the effect of font size for emotional and neutral
words. Emotion effects in ERPs started earlier, were stronger and lasted
longer for large relative to small words. These results suggest that emotion-driven facilitation of attention is not necessarily based on biological
relevance, but might generalize to stimuli with arbitrary perceptual features. This finding points to the high relevance of written language in
today’s society as an important source of emotional meaning.

H10
LANGUAGE SHAPES PERCEPTION OF EMOTION: A CASE STUDY OF
SEMANTIC DEMENTIA Maria Gendron1,4, Kristen A. Lindquist2,3, Lisa

Feldman Barrett2,4, Bradford C. Dickerson2; 1Boston College, 2Harvard
Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital, Martinos Center for
is
Biomedical Imaging, 3Harvard University, 4Northeastern University — It

assumed that emotions are encoded in the face, and that the ability to
perceive emotions is inborn, universal, and fundamental. Language is
not usually considered to play an important role in emotion perception.
We report findings from two patients with semantic dementia that cannot be explained by this “basic emotion” view. These patients, who have
substantial deficits in semantic processing abilities following neurodegeneration to the left anterior temporal lobe, were asked to sort a set of
scowling, wide-eyed, wrinkle-nosed, frowning, smiling and neutral
faces into as many categories as they perceived in the set. Patients could
perceive positive or negative feelings in faces but could not perceive discrete emotions like anger, disgust, fear, or sadness, as indicated their
piles. Our findings support the alternative hypothesis that emotion
words are necessary to transform perceptions of affect (positive/negative feelings) into perceptions of discrete emotion. These findings have
important consequences for the science of emotion and interpersonal
communication in the global community.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring &
inhibitory control
H11
THE ROLE OF STOP-SIGNAL PROBABILITY AND MOTIVATION IN A STOPSIGNAL TASK Hsin-Ju Lee1, Wen-Jui Kuo1; 1Institute of Neuroscience,
National Yang-Ming University — In the stop-signal paradigm, previous
studies indicated that the latency for processing inhibition signal
remains stable, suggesting its independency to the context. In this study,
two experiments were conducted to examine two factors for the control
of response inhibition, i.e., appearance of stop-signal frequency and
motivation (to stop). In Experiment 1, probabilities of stop-signal occurrences were varied in a small range (20%, 30%, and 40%). The go-RTs
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

under the three probabilities differ significantly, indicating that subject’s
attention was modulated. However, the estimated RTs for processing the
stoop-signal were not changed, suggesting the robustness of its independence. The ERP data showed differential P300 effects for the successfulstopping trials (SSTs) and fail-to-stop trials (USSTs). The SSTs elicited a
fronto-central P300 (electrode Fz & Cz) effect whereas the USSTs evoked
a centro-parietal P300 (electrode Pz) effect. The effect of the USSTs
peaked later than that in the SSTs. Moreover, we found an N2-like component occurring only in the USST difference waveform, which behaved
more actively in the 20% condition. In the second experiment we
included money reward to promote motivation of the subjects for both
speeding up the response of the go trials and trying to stop as accurate as
possible for every stop-signal. While the go-RT is faster in rewarding
condition, there was no difference for the SSRT between the neutral and
rewarding condition. The ERP results show obvious N2 effect in USSTs
for the rewarding context.

H12
MEASURING INDIVIDUAL COMPONENTS OF EXECUTIVE PROCESSING:
EVIDENCE FROM DIVERGENT INTERFERENCE EFFECTS IN THE SIMON
Sawi1,
TASK, THE FLANKER TASK, AND THE SWITCHING TASK Oliver

Zack Greenberg1, Kenneth Paap1; 1San Francisco State University — In recent
years, researchers have used the Simon, flanker, switching, and other
tasks to measure various components of central executive processing.
Previous research has reported that executive processing ability is positively associated with bilingualism and computer gaming. In the current
study, 106 participants completed the Simon (yielding a measure of
inhibitory control), flanker (yielding a measure of inhibitory control),
and switching (yielding measures of both conflict monitoring and
switching). The participants also completed the Raven's Test of nonverbal reasoning and a demographic survey containing questions regarding
language proficiency, multitasking, video game play, and team sports
play. The results yielded highly significant Simon effects, flanker effects,
switching costs, and mixing costs. Stepwise regression analysis showed
that the magnitude of the Simon effect was inversely related to the participant's Raven's score and the amount of time spent listening to music
while doing homework. The magnitude of flanker interference was
directly related to the participant's multilingualism score and inversely
related to team sports ability. Contrary to previous reports, the former
suggests a bilingual disadvantage in executive control of attention. Each
of these tasks have been purported to measure executive processing ability. However, the correlations between the magnitudes of these effects
are near zero and this holds even for the Simon and flanker effect that
are assumed to measure the same executive process (viz., inhibitory control). The absence of significant correlations between tasks questions
their use as indices of executive processing in investigations of special
populations such as ADD, dementia, or bilingualism.

H13
BRAIN ACTIVITY RELATED TO CONFLICT PROCESSING VANISHES IN
CHILDREN WITH OCD AND HEALTHY CONTROLS AFTER CONTROLLING
FOR THE RT-BOLD RELATIONSHIP. Kamin Kim1, Joshua Carp1, Kate
Fitzgerald1, Stephan Taylor1, Daniel Weissman1; 1University of Michigan — The

posterior medial prefrontal cortex (pMFC) is thought to participate in
detecting conflict between competing responses. Consistent with this
view, pMFC activity in fMRI studies is greater in incongruent than in
congruent trials of Stroop-like tasks. However, within each of these trial
types, the event-related BOLD signal in adults increases linearly with
reaction time (RT). Moreover, conflict-related pMFC activity vanishes
after controlling for this “RT-BOLD relationship.” Thus, conflict-related
pMFC activity could potentially reflect any process whose recruitment
increases with time on task (e.g., sustained attention). Here, we investigated whether this same ambiguity in interpreting pMFC activity is
present in children. Although a recent study from our laboratory
reported that children did not exhibit a RT-BOLD relationship in the
pMFC, brain activity is often more variable in children than in adults.
We therefore sought to maximize statistical power in the present study

207

Poster Session H — Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
by testing a larger sample of children. Participants (35 Obsessive Compulsive Disorder [OCD] and 29 healthy pediatric controls), performed
the multi-source interference task while their brain activity was recorded
with fMRI. To control for the RT-BOLD relationship in each participant,
we contrasted activity in RT-matched congruent and incongruent trials.
In both children with OCD and healthy controls, we observed a neural
congruency effect and a linear RT-BOLD relationship in the pMFC.
Moreover, the effect of congruency on pMFC activity vanished after controlling for this linear relationship. We conclude that, as in adults, conflict-related pMFC activity in children could potentially index any
process whose recruitment increases with time on task.

H14
THE NEUROANATOMY OF ACTION CONTROL: PARSING THE ROLES OF
THREE BRAIN REGIONS IN PROCESSING ERRORS OF CHOICE AND
ERRORS OF MOVEMENT EXTENT. eldad hochman1, Seqian Wang1,

Theodore Milner1, Lesley Fellows1; 1McGill university — We sought to delineate the necessary roles of three brain regions in action control, by studying the effects of damage to those regions in humans. Five subjects with
damage to right inferior frontal gyrus (rIFG), three with basal ganglia
(BG) damage, and five with damage to the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex
(DMF) were compared to 8 healthy subjects on a modified flanker task
requiring either small or large extent wrist movements to the left or
right. The kinematics of correct, erroneous and corrective responses were
recorded with high temporal resolution. Choice error detection was
indexed by a novel RT measure, based on the hypothesis that more rapid
error detection reflects greater error-correct response mismatch: All subjects except those with BG damage exhibited the predicted direct correlation between error RT and error stop, consistent with intact error
detection. The BG patients showed the opposite pattern, suggesting that
they required a larger degree of error-correct mismatch to detect errors.
For extent errors, again all patients except those with BG damage exhibited a direct correlation between the size of the extent error and the time
between error stop and correction onset. Thus, the BG but not frontal
regions seem critical for both choice and extent error detection. We
examined error inhibition by measuring error acceleration and deceleration, finding that BG damage affected both, while DMF damage slowed
only deceleration. Those with DMF damage were also slower to correct
choice, but not extent errors. RIFG damage did not affect any aspect of
error processing.

H15
A GRATTON EFFECT IN THE ABSENCE OF AWARENESS OF CONFLICT:
EVIDENCE FOR IMPLICIT PERFORMANCE MONITORING Chris Blais1,
George R. Mangun1; 1University of California, Davis — The conflict-monitor-

ing hypothesis states that the Gratton effect occurs because conflict from
an incongruent trial signals the anterior cingulate to recruit executive
processes residing in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex to optimize performance. Electrophysiological studies assume that the N2 component
located over central electrode sites indexes this conflict. An important
theoretical question concerns whether the Gratton effect occurs because
of increased attention to the relevant dimension or decreased attention to
the irrelevant dimension (or both). At a conceptual level, it is difficult to
envision how the system could adjust attention to an unperceived feature. Thus, we measured the Gratton effect when subjects were rendered
unaware of the irrelevant dimension. ERPs were recorded to look at the
N2 component while subjects viewed a task-irrelevant array of randomly moving dots. The dots primed a left or right response because we
manipulated the proportion of the dots (i.e., coherence) moving in the
same direction. In the aware condition, coherence was 95%. In the the
unaware condition, coherence was set individually for each subject. The
task was to make a left or right key press when the moving dots changed
in color from white to yellow or red. A Gratton effect was observed both
when subjects were aware, and unaware, of the direction of motion.
Since subjects are unaware of the irrelevant dimension, the Gratton effect
must be the result of subjects increasing attention to the relevant dimen-

sion. We discuss implications for the conflict monitoring hypothesis and
the allocation of attention in general.

H16
THE MODULATION OF ERROR PROCESSING BY EXPERIMENTALLY
INDUCED NEUROPLASTICITY WITH TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT
STIMULATION (TDCS) Martin Herrmann1, Lisa Bellaïche1; 1University of
Wuerzburg — We constantly controlling the outcome of our actions in
order to detect a possible discrepancy between the expected outcome
and the real outcome of our actions. This process of action, or error monitoring allows us to adjust our behavior in order to correct present action
or to prevent future errors. The underlying neurophysiologic correlates
of error monitoring can be studied with event-related potentials (ERPs,
the so called error-related negativity (ERN) and error positivity (Pe),
Falkenstein et al., 2001). As altered error monitoring has been described
in patients with psychiatric disorders, the use of brain stimulation techniques, like transcranial direct current stimuation (tDCS) might be an
interesting approach for future therapeutic strategies. The aim of our
study was therefore to investigate whether tDCS is suitable to modulate
brain activity related to error monitoring. In our study 48 heathy controls
were randomly assigned to three groups, anodal, cathodal or sham
stimualtion over the medial prefrontal cortex during execution of an
eriskon-flanker task and during simultaneously recording the ERN and
PE. We found that cathodal stimulation attenuates the Pe between 200
and 300 ms compared to sham and anondal stimulation. In contrast the
ERN was not modulated. We conclude that tDCS can decrease the more
concious part of error monitoring processes and might be a considered
as a therapeutic tool for anxiety disorder patients to decrease the sensitivity of their error monitoring system.

H17
NAVIGATIONAL STYLE AND ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF
Buzzell1,
CONFLICT IN AN AUDITORY SPATIAL STROOP TASK George

Carryl Baldwin1, Daniel Roberts1, Jane Barrow1, Craig McDonald1; 1George
Mason University — Research has shown that individuals differ in the
strategy they use to navigate through the world. Some use a predominantly verbal-egocentric strategy while others rely more heavily on a
spatial-allocentric strategy. Navigational strategy, assessed by a wayfinding questionnaire, is predictive of performance on an auditory spatial Stroop task, in which either the semantic or spatial dimension of
stimuli must be ignored. Verbal navigators are significantly slower to
respond when attempting to ignore task-irrelevant semantic information, whereas the opposite pattern is observed for spatial navigators
(with increased interference observed when attempting to ignore taskirrelevant spatial information). To explore the time course of conflict processing--and how it differs between verbal and spatial navigators--participants performed an auditory spatial Stroop task while event-related
potential (ERP) data were collected. Participants were required to
respond to either the semantic meaning or the spatial location of directional words, played from either congruent or incongruent spatial locations. In the Semantic task participants responded to the semantic
meaning of the word (i.e., “Left” or “Right”) and attempted to ignore
task-irrelevant spatial information. In the Location task participants
responded to the spatial location of the stimuli, while attempting to
ignore task-irrelevant semantic information. A significant increase in
ERP amplitude, beginning ~ 200 ms after stimulus onset, was observed
for incongruent trials when spatial navigators performed the Location
task. However, a similar increase was not observed for verbal navigators. This suggests that conflict produced by task-irrelevant semantic
information is rapidly processed, but only in spatial navigators.

H18
THE ROLE OF ERROR PROCESSING AND IMPULSIVENESS IN NICOTINE
DEPENDENCE. Olga Rass1, Tara Davis1, Amy Zhang1, Brian O'Donnell1,2,3;
1

Indiana University, 2Indiana University School of Medicine, 3Larue D. Carter
Memorial Hospital — Factors that prevent long-term non-daily smokers
from transitioning to daily dependent smokers are not well established.

208

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session H
Increased impulsivity, decreased behavioral control, and deficient error
processing are possible contributors to nicotine addiction. Non-smokers,
non-daily smokers, and daily smokers completed a continuous performance task during event-related potential (ERP) recording as well as
self-report questionnaires. Daily smokers scored higher on experience
seeking than non-smokers and higher on motor impulsiveness than both
groups. Both smoking groups showed a trend for higher scores on disinhibition compared to non-smokers. No group differences were found for
response time or error commission in the behavioral control task.
Groups did not differ on initial error processing, measured by the eventrelated negativity (ERN) ERP component, suggesting intact functioning
of the cingulate cortex. However group differences on the Error Positivity (Pe) component support differences in delayed evaluation of error
salience and the functioning of the posterior temporal cortex circuits
involved in the ventral attentional network (Helenius et al, 2010). Nondaily smokers had a stronger Pe response than smokers and non-smokers. Daily – but not non-daily – smoking was predictive of impulsive
characteristics. Non-daily smoking was associated with differences in
error processing, a potential neuroprotective factor in smoking dependence.

H19
ROLE OF THE ERROR-RELATED NEGATIVITY IN ERROR AWARENESS
Ana Navarro Cebrian1,2, Andrew Kayser1,2; 1Ernest Gallo Clinic and Research
Center, 2University of California, San Francisco — The study of error aware-

ness with electroencephalography has led to contradictory results. A
decreased amplitude of the error-related negativity (ERN), thought to
originate in medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), has been found to be correlated with failures of error awareness in some studies, but not in others.
We hypothesized that this variability could be due to differences in how
experimental designs account for uncertainty. Specifically, when subjects
are uncertain of a response but respond correctly, these uncertain
responses might generate larger ERN amplitudes that could be misinterpreted as unaware errors. To differentiate aware errors from both
unaware errors and uncertain responses, our subjects rated their
responses in a flanker task as correct, incorrect, or uncertain. We found
that 9.4% of their responses were aware errors, 5.3% were unaware
errors and 1.6% were uncertain responses. Our preliminary results show
that the ERN activates more with aware than unaware errors, indicating
that MPFC activity may be related to error awareness failure. Our data
also support the possibility that previous studies that found no differences between aware and unaware errors at the time of the ERN may
have included uncertain responses in the unaware averages. When
uncertain responses are counted as unaware errors, our data show no
differences between aware and unaware errors at the time of the ERN.
Finally, in agreement with some of the literature, our results demonstrate that behavioral adjustments after errors occur only when people
are aware of their errors.

H20
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
INDICES
REFLECT
TEMPORALLYSTRUCTURED EXPECTATION AND OUTCOME EVALUATION Sarah
Forster1, Joshua Brown1; 1Indiana University — Current models describe the

iterative shaping of expectation as the foundation for adaptive learning
and decision-making. The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and neighboring medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) regions are thought to be central to
this process, actively representing and revising the value ascribed to
action outcomes in accordance with observations. However, while outcomes have been traditionally characterized with respect to valence
alone, temporal contingencies must also be represented and monitored.
Recent fMRI findings are consistent with this idea, demonstrating that
the mPFC responds to violations of temporal expectancy as well as violations of expected valence (Forster & Brown, 2011). The current study
aims to complement and extend these findings by utilizing the enhanced
temporal resolution of electrophysiological indices to delineate the temporal structure of expectation and subsequent outcome evaluation, especially within the lateral and medial prefrontal cortex. High density EEG

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

was collected during a prediction task in which the expected latency of
feedback was manipulated across blocks by presenting predominantly
early (ExpectEarly), predominantly late (ExpectLate), or equal proportions early and late (ExpectEither) feedback trials. Increased anticipation
of early feedback was associated with a linear increase in brain potentials
over lateral prefrontal electrode sites for ExpectEarly and ExpectEither
conditions but not the ExpectLate condition. In contrast, following the
omission of early feedback, late feedback was 100% likely and differential anticipatory activation was not observed across expectancy conditions. During the outcome evaluation interval, manipulation of temporal
expectations led to modulation of the feedback-related negativity, an
event-related potential ascribed to mPFC.

LANGUAGE: Semantic
H21
WHEN CONCEPTS COMBINE: SEMANTIC PROCESSING IN THE ANGULAR
GYRUS Amy Price1, Michael Bonner1, Jonathan Peelle1, Murray Grossman1;
1University of Pennsylvania — Thought

and language rely on the brain’s
ability to flexibly combine concepts. For example, the word “microwave” has a semantic representation, which can be modified by adding
the word “beeping” before it to make “beeping microwave”. We hypothesized that such conceptual combination was supported by semantic
processing in the angular gyrus. In an fMRI study, 17 participants (mean
age= 25.1) read word pairs on a screen. These word pairs were divided
into pairs that could plausibly combine to form a modified concept, and
pairs that could not. Combinatorial word pairs contained adjectives
describing features in one of four modalities: Sound (“beeping microwave”), Touch (“spongy ball ”), Motion (“drifting balloon”), and Form
(“plaid jacket”). A baseline condition included non-combinatorial word
pairs (“galaxy tulip”). Feature associations and ability to combine were
determined in norming studies. Conditions were matched for word
length, frequency, orthographic neighborhood density, and concreteness. We looked for cortical regions supporting the linking of semantic
concepts with a whole-brain analysis of areas that showed an increased
response for combinatorial pairs compared to non-combinatorial pairs.
This revealed a significant cluster centered on left angular gyrus (p < .01,
whole-brain corrected) and no other significant clusters. We found that
angular gyrus was recruited by each category of combinatorial word
pairs. We demonstrate that angular gyrus is recruited as concepts are
being linked to build an updated and enriched semantic representation,
and that this semantic linking occurs across categories of words, suggesting that the angular gyrus functions as a heteromodal semantic integration region.

H22
FAMILIAR PERSON AND PLACE NAMES IN THE SEMANTIC SYSTEM

Rutvik Desai1, Usha Tadimeti2, Jeffrey Binder1; 1Medical College of Wisconsin,
2
Marquette University — Previous studies suggest common brain regions
involved in social cognition and general semantic processing, but the
reason for this overlap is not clear. We investigated BOLD responses to
personally familiar (PF) and famous (F) names of people and places, to
simultaneously examine effects of familiarity and category. Twenty-one
subjects made a familiarity decision in the scanner for 40 names from
each of the PF and F persons and places. Names with varying degrees of
personal familiarity were collected in advance from each subject. We collected amount of knowledge, sensory experience, and emotional
response ratings for each item after the scan. Relative to unknown
names, the bilateral angular gyrus (AG), anterior/middle temporal lobe
(ATL), posterior cingulate/precuneus (pCg), and hippocampus/parahippocampal gyrus were activated for all PF and F categories, with
stronger activations for PF names regardless of category. Analyses using
the ratings as people- and place-specific covariates revealed that the
amount of knowledge and sensory experience were correlated positively
with activation in the AG, ATL, and pCg for both people and places,
with no significant interactions between people and place names. Nega-

209

Poster Session H — Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
tive emotional valence was correlated with higher right ATL activation.
AG, ATL, and pCg are major hubs in the semantic system. AG and pCg
especially respond to common nouns relative to nonwords. These results
indicate automatic activation of associated knowledge and experience
for both people and place names, and suggest that the overlapping activation for social and general semantic concepts is due to a common
underlying knowledge retrieval process.

H23
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY BETWEEN INDIVIDUAL WORDS: AN FMRI
STUDY Francesca Carota1, Nikolaus Kriegeskorte1, Friedemann
Pulvermuller1,2; 1MRC - Cognition and Brain Science Unit, 2Freie Universität
Berlin — Brain research on words and concepts has shown that semantic

processing activates a range of areas, some of which reflect differences
between semantic categories, for example words referring to actions and
objects. However, it is unclear to which degree these areas process information about the semantic similarity between individual words and, if
so, how this similarity mapping differs between brain areas and semantic types. An area responding in similar ways to semantically similar
words would provide a genuine semantic processing system for these
words. Representational Similarity Analysis (Kriegeskorte et al. 2008)
was applied to compare semantic similarity between action- and objectrelated words, as measured by Latent Semantic Analysis and semantic
ratings, and single-word-elicited fMRI patterns (96 words, 6 repetitions
each) recorded from 23 subjects. Action-related verbs elicited similar
brain activation patterns in left precentral and left supplementary motor
areas. Both precentral cortex and Broca’s region (BA 44 and BA 45)
revealed brain activation pattern-similarity between tool nouns and
verbs related to hand actions. Left inferior frontal gyrus indexed similarity between food and face words suggesting that the body part whose
movement is afforded by an object or that is involved in executing an
action is reflected in brain activation. In temporal pole and superior temporal cortex, semantic similarity could be mapped for sub-categories of
object words, especially tool and food nouns. These results show for the
first time that semantic similarity is manifest in brain activation and that
semantic similarity mapping in the human cortex is sensitive to semantic
categories.

ductivity. These results suggest that tDCS over the left DLPFC might
enhance controlled aspects of word retrieval in persons with impoverished verbal productivity due to deficient set switching for categorical
information.

H25
SEMANTIC RETRIEVAL RECRUITS HETEROMODAL AND MODALITYSPECIFIC ASSOCIATION CORTICES Michael Bonner1, Amy Price1,

Jonathan Peelle1, Murray Grossman1; 1University of Pennsylvania, Department
of Neurology — OBJECTIVE: How do we retrieve information from
semantic memory? We investigate the role of executive and sensorymotor association regions in semantic retrieval in an fMRI word matching experiment, using words with strong associations in three different
sensory modalities: Sight, Sound, and Manipulation. METHODS: In a
BOLD fMRI study, 17 participants viewed word triads on a screen and
responded by button press to indicate which of two word choices on the
bottom matched the word on top. Word sets had strongly associated features (determined in a norming study) in one of three modalities: Sight
(e.g., carrot: potato or lightbulb; n=22), Sound (e.g., thunder: rocket or
downpour; n=22), and Manipulation (e.g., fork: chopsticks or drumstick;
n=22). An Abstract word condition (e.g., saga: epic or proxy; n=22) and a
pronounceable pseudoword baseline (n=22; matching task for letter similarity) were included. Conditions were matched for word length and
frequency. RESULTS: Looking across all word categories, the semantic
matching task recruited a region of heteromodal association cortex in
superior temporal sulcus as well as an executive control region in inferior frontal cortex. Within each sensory word category, we saw activations in the corresponding modality-specific association regions: Sight
words recruited visual association cortex; Sound words recruited auditory association cortex; and Manipulation words recruited motor association cortex. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that in semantic
retrieval, executive control regions of inferior frontal cortex may interact
with heteromodal association regions in superior temporal sulcus as well
as modality-specific association regions that represent conceptual features in the semantic system.

H26
EFFECTS OF EFFICIENT FRONTO-TEMPORAL CIRCUITRY ON LEXICAL
AMBIGUITY RESOLUTION: CONVERGING EVIDENCE FROM CROSS-AGE
COMPARISONS IN EYE-TRACKING AND ERP DATA. Mallory Stites1, Chia-

H24
TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION OF LEFT
DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX SPEEDS CONTROLLED WORD
RETRIEVAL DURING VERBAL FLUENCY J. Jason van Steenburgh1, Laura V.

lin Lee1, Kara D. Federmeier1, Elizabeth Stine-Morrow1; 1University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign — We used eye-tracking to examine how younger and

During verbal fluency productions, people appear to retrieve clusters of
related words via a relatively fast automatic process and switch between
clusters via a slower, more effortful controlled process. Automatic processes (i.e., clustering) likely depend on the dominant temporoparietal
region, while controlled processes (i.e., switching) likely depend on the
dominant dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). In transcranial direct
current stimulation, a form of noninvasive electrical brain stimulation,
anodal stimulation increases and cathodal stimulation decreases cortical
excitability. We previously found that anodal stimulation over the left
temporoparietal cortex speeded automatic word retrieval in healthy
adults. Here we sought to test the hypothesis that anodal stimulation
over the left DLPFC would enhance controlled aspects of word retrieval
(i.e., switching) in terms of productivity, speed of retrieval, or both. Forty
healthy right-handed adults received 30 minutes of 1 mA anodal and
sham or cathodal and sham stimulation over F3, with a reference electrode placed over Cz, while they completed four 60-second letter- and
category-cued fluency trials. Overall productivity, clusters and switches
were tallied. Inter-word intervals were measured with the aid of a spectrograph. Anodal stimulation was associated with faster retrieval
(shorter inter-word intervals) of non-clustered words (M=1.79; SD=1.87
sec) than cathodal stimulation (M=2.24; SD=2.37 sec) on semantic fluency tasks (t(397)=-2.367, p=.018). Stimulation did not affect overall pro-

older adults use syntactic and semantic information to disambiguate
noun/verb (NV) homographs (e.g., park). We find that young adults
exhibit inflated first fixations to NV-homographs when only syntactic
cues are available for disambiguation (i.e., in syntactic prose). This effect
is eliminated with the addition of disambiguating semantic information.
Older adults (60+) as a group fail to show the first fixation effect in syntactic prose; they instead reread NV homographs longer. This pattern
mirrors that in prior event-related potential work (Lee & Federmeier,
2009, 2011), which reported a sustained frontal negativity to NV-homographs in syntactic prose for young adults. Again, semantic constraints
eliminated this effect. The frontal negativity was not observed in older
adults as a group, although older adults with high verbal fluency
showed the young-like pattern. Analyses of individual differences in
eye-tracking patterns revealed a similar effect of verbal fluency in both
young and older adults: high verbal fluency groups of both ages show
only the first fixation effect, while low verbal fluency groups show only
downstream costs (rereading and/or refixating NV homographs).
Jointly, the eyetracking and ERP data suggest that effortful meaning
selection recruits frontal brain areas important for suppressing contextually inappropriate meanings, which also slows eye movements. Efficacy
of fronto-temporal circuitry, as captured by verbal fluency, predicts the
success of engaging these mechanisms in both young and older adults.
Failure to recruit these processes requires compensatory rereading or
leads to comprehension failures (Lee & Federmeier, in press).

Bosley1, Tracy D. Vannorsdall1, Kara Reese1, Megan Andrejczuk1, David J.
Schretlen1, Barry Gordon1; 1Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine —

210

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session H

H27
IMPAIRED SELECTION OF THE CONTEXT-APPROPRIATE MEANING OF
AMBIGUOUS WORDS IN HIGH-FUNCTIONING INDIVIDUALS WITH
AUTISM: AN ERP STUDY Trevor Brothers1, Kerry Ledoux1, Barry Gordon1;
1Johns Hopkins University — Individuals

with autism are reported to have
difficulty appreciating the meaning of language; the theory of weak central coherence attributes this to a deficit in using local context to constrain meaning. We examined mechanisms of contextual constraint in
autism by having participants read ambiguous words in context. Eventrelated potentials were recorded to critical words that were semantically
related to the dominant meaning of a preceding ambiguous word, and
that were or were not congruent with the local sentence context. Normal
controls showed an N400 congruity effect at the critical words, suggesting that they had used the local context to constrain the appropriate
meaning of the ambiguous words. High-functioning individuals with
autism, on the other hand, did not show this effect, suggesting a deficiency in contextual selection. Both groups showed an N400 incongruity
effect to sentence-final words that were not related in meaning to any
other words in the sentence, demonstrating that participants with autism
are sensitive to more global aspects of meaning. Taken together, these
results support the theory of weak central coherence in language comprehension in autism.

H28
ARE SEMANTIC REPRESENTATIONS OF WORDS RADICALLY
DISTRIBUTED? Chris Cox1, Mark Seidenberg1, Jeffrey Binder2, Rutvik

Desai2, Timothy Rogers1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2Medical College
of Wisconsin — Many cognitive abilities can be localized in the brain, but

other faculties may be highly distributed. Some models of semantic
memory, for instance, propose that the very same neurons can encode
information about distinct conceptual domains, that neighboring regions
potentially encode quite different information, and that distal regions
can contribute to the same representation. Neuroimaging studies of
semantic memory, in contradiction to this view, often suggest that
knowledge about different conceptual domains can be localized to different parts of the cortex. Such findings may partly reflect standard
methods for boosting signal, such as spatial blurring, familywise correction for multiple comparisons, and averaging over subjects, all of which
assume local representations that are stable across individuals. Such
methods may not be well-suited to finding radically distributed neural
codes, should these exist. We adopted a new approach in an analysis of
event-related fMRI data collected while participants made semantic
judgments for each of 900 words. Voxels carrying information about animals or artifacts were identified by training two separate classifiers (animal/nonanimal; artifact/nonartifact) with sparse logistic regression.
When constrained to be very sparse, the classifiers showed above-chance
generalization to novel words. The voxels selected by animal and artifact
classifiers overlapped more than expected by chance, suggesting that
some voxels contribute to both animal and artifact representations.
Moreover, the informative voxels were widely distributed and interleaved, with their locations varying substantially across individuals—
raising the possibility that representations of word meanings are radically distributed in the brain.

H29
A NOVEL LATE MEG RESPONSE REFLECTING SEMANTIC INTEGRATION

Suzanne Pendl1, Jeffrey R. Binder1, Gwen Frishkoff, Colin J. Humphries1,
William W. Graves1, William L. Gross1, Sylvain Baillet1; 1Medical College of
Wisconsin, 2Georgia State University — The neural events underlying
semantic integration during sentence comprehension are not fully
understood. This process was explored using a paradigm classically
associated with the N400 component, in which constraining sentence
stems were followed by completion stimuli. Completion items could be
highly expected and congruous, unexpected but still congruous, unexpected and incongruous, or pseudowords. Nineteen healthy righthanded adults read these stimuli and performed meaningfulness judg-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

ments while neural responses to the completion items were measured
with magnetoencephalography. Sources of the evoked magnetic field
responses were estimated using distributed source modeling constrained by individual cortical anatomy. RT averaged ~1300 ms across
conditions. A novel response emerged during a late time window, starting at ~825 ms and often extending beyond 1000 ms. During this time
window, both congruous and incongruous words activated anterior
temporal regions more than pseudowords, particularly in the right
hemisphere. Among word items, incongruous words showed stronger
bilateral temporal responses than expected words. We propose that this
late response reflects effortful integration of the completion item with
the semantic context of the sentence stem, in contrast to the earlier N400,
which reflects a more automatic recognition process.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
H30
DOES LONG-TERM MEMORY RETRIEVAL BENEFIT FROM WORKING
MEMORY TRAINING? Axel Mecklinger1,2, Anna Scheuplein2, Emma

Bridger1,2, Julia Schneiders1; 1International Research Training Group “Adaptive
Minds”, Saarland University, Germany, 2Experimental Neuropsychology Unit,
Saarland University, Germany — Most models of long-term memory are
characterized by the view that successful memory retrieval is determined by an ensemble of cognitive control processes that are engaged
during memory retrieval to meet the demands of the required memory
judgments. Here we explored whether long-term memory retrieval can
be improved by training a demanding working memory task. Participants performed 8 sessions of an adaptive n-back auditory working
memory training with tonal sequences. There was a reliable training gain
during the two week training period. Before and after training, participants performed a combined item and source recognition memory task
in which spoken and written words were studied and old-new decisions
together with decisions about the study format had to be given in a subsequent test phase. Relative to a passive control group with no working
memory training, participants of the training group showed selectively
increased memory performance in retrieval conditions in which incongruent cue-target formats (i.e. a visual target has to be retrieved upon an
auditory cue and vice versa) meant memory judgments did not receive
support from the perceptual similarity between (retrieval) cues and
memory targets. This effect, however, was restricted to participants
(n=11) with high initial n-back performance levels who also showed tentatively higher working memory gains than participants with low initial
performance. These results suggest that cognitive control of memory
retrieval can be improved by working memory training, but that this
transfer is restricted to situations with high retrieval demands and to
participants with high working memory performance.

H31
THE FN400 IS ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICALLY AND FUNCTIONALLY
DISTINCT FROM THE N400 Emma Bridger1,2, Regine Bader1,2, Olga

Kriukova1,2, Kerstin Unger1,3, Jérôme Rimpel1,2, Axel Mecklinger1,2;
1International Research Training Group “Adaptive Minds”, Saarland University,
Germany, 2Experimental Neuropsychology Unit, Saarland University, Germany,
3
Unit for Development of Language, Learning and Action, Saarland University,
Germany — The FN400 or midfrontal ERP old/new effect has been repeatedly shown to operate as a neural marker of familiarity-based recognition. It has recently been claimed, however, that there is no evidence that
this effect is functionally distinct from the N400 index of semantic priming (Voss, J., & Federmeier, K., FN400 potentials are functionally identical to N400 potentials and reflect semantic processing during recognition
testing, Psychophysiology, 48, 532-546, 2011). The inclusion of a semantic
priming manipulation within a continuous recognition test, however,
means that the specific processing demands in that study differ considerably from those traditionally assumed to underlie familiarity-based recognition. Here, we present a stronger test of the claim that the FN400 is
distinct from the N400 by recording ERPs during a semantic priming

211

Poster Session H — Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
paradigm which also served as the encoding phase for a surprise subsequent recognition test phase. An N400 effect elicited in the semantic
priming task demonstrated the established centro-parietal maximum,
whereas the difference between correctly responded to old and new
ERPs in the recognition test was maximal over frontal sites in the same
time window. This pattern demonstrates qualitatively distinct electrophysiological markers associated with semantic priming and familiaritybased recognition processes and comprises direct evidence that the
FN400 is electrophysiologically and functionally distinct from the N400.

H32
PHARMACOLOGICAL DISSOCIATION OF NOVELTY RESPONSES IN THE
HUMAN BRAIN Nico Bunzeck1, Marc Guitart-Masip2,3, Ray Dolan3, Emrah

Duzel2,4; 1Department of Systems Neuroscience, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany, 2Institute
of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, 17 Queen Square,
London, WC1N 3AR, UK, 3Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging at UCL, 12
Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK, 4Institute of Cognitive Neurology and
Dementia Research, Otto von Guericke University, Leipziger Strasse 44, 39120
Magdeburg, Germany — We used functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) in combination with dopaminergic or cholinergic neuropharmacology to investigate the roles of both neurotransmitters in novelty processing. In a double blind procedure, subjects were administered either
150 mg levodopa (dopamine precursor), 8 mg galantamine (acetylcholinesterase inhibitor), or placebo. During fMRI scanning, participants
were presented with novel and repeated (i.e., familiar) pictures of scenes
and indicated their indoor/outdoor status using button presses. As
expected, within the mesolimbic system (including substantia nigra /
ventral tegmental area [SN/VTA] and medial temporal lobe regions)
hemodynamic responses decreased as a function of stimulus repetition
(i.e., novelty or repetition suppression effects). Importantly, this effect
was differentially modulated by levodopa and galantamine. While
levodopa abolished mesolimbic repetition suppression effects, galantamine reversed them (i.e., it led to repetition enhancement). These
results indicate that whether mesolimbic brain regions show repetition
suppression, repetition enhancement, or are neutral depends on the balance of dopaminergic and cholinergic neurotransmission.

H33
DIFFERENTIAL FMRI SUBSEQUENT MEMORY FOR CONTEXT
UNATTENDED TO AT BOTH STUDY AND TEST VS. ATTENDED ITEMS

Yaakov Hoffman1,2, Oded Bein1, Niv Reggev1, Anat Maril1; 1The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, 2Bar ilan University — Subsequent memory refers to
assessment of differential neural encoding-related activation (DM) for
subsequently remembered versus forgotten material. In the present
study we assessed DM for context which was unattended-to at both
study and test, and for its attended target. At study, composite stimuli
containing (attended) black words superimposed on grey (unattended)
words were presented. Participants performed an incidental encoding
task of vowel counting on the black target words. A subsequent recognition test included four types of stimuli, obtained by crossing the targetcontext dimension with old-new status (old targets presented on old
contexts; old targets presented on new contexts, new targets presented
on old contexts, and new targets presented on new contexts). Stimuli
with at least one old component were relevant to the DM analysis. Interaction contrasts revealed differential DM activation profiles in prefrontal
cortex, associated with attended target memory and memory for the
unattended context. Successful encoding-related activation for attended
targets without their contexts (compared to targets presented with their
original contexts) was observed in bilateral BA 10; A distinctively different activation pattern was observed for successful encoding of unattended contextual information. Results reveal that contextual
information unattended-to at both study and test is not only encoded,
but its encoding also qualitatively differs from that of attended targets;
i.e., it is not merely a paler version of the pattern associated with
attended target encoding.

212

H34
AGE-DIFFERENCES IN THE RETRIEVAL OF PREVIOUSLY FORGOTTEN
INFORMATION: THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF INTENTIONAL
FORGETTING AND INHIBITORY CONTROL Avery Rizio1, Nancy Dennis1;
1The Pennsylvania State University — Directed

forgetting studies have
shown that when information undergoes inhibitory-related forgetting, it
is less likely to be remembered than if it had undergone encoding. However, older adults exhibit deficits in their ability to engage inhibitory processes associated with forgetting. Evidence for both the recruitment of
inhibition, and age deficits therein, have only been studied during
encoding. The current study aimed to investigate age-related differences
in inhibition as evidenced by the neural processes that mediate retrieval.
Results indicate largely overlapping neural networks in younger adults
between recollection of information that was intentionally encoded, and
recollection of information that was intentionally inhibited. However,
recollection of that which was previously inhibited was found to engage
additional activity in the right prefrontal cortex (RPFC), suggesting that
this retrieval required greater effort. Older adults, however, did not
exhibit an increase in RPFC activity, indicating that retrieval of inhibited
items did not require more effort than retrieval of encoded items. These
results suggest that older, as compared to younger adults, engage in less
inhibitory-related processing during directed forgetting. Older adults
did, however, exhibit greater engagement of the dorsal anterior cingulate and retrosplenial cortex for items that were intentionally remembered as compared to those that underwent intentional forgetting. Taken
together, these results demonstrate that while older adults experience a
reduction in selectively inhibiting irrelevant information, they still maintain the ability to selectively encode relevant information. This research
contributes to the growing body of literature indicating that the dissociation between intentional and incidental forgetting is reduced with age.

H35
ASSOCIATIVE RECOGNITION WITHOUT HIPPOCAMPUS: FAST MAPPING
CAN CREATE NOVEL, INFLEXIBLE MNEMONIC REPRESENTATIONS

David Warren1, Melissa Duff1; 1University of Iowa — Relational memory theory (Cohen & Eichenbaum, 1993) predicts that hippocampus is necessary
to bind arbitrarily co-occurring information (e.g., item-name) into relational mnemonic representations, and that these representations are flexible in retrieval and expression. In contrast, a recent report suggests that
using fast mapping, hippocampal amnesic patients can learn and recognize new, arbitrary associations between novel visual stimuli and their
names (Sharon et al., 2011). As yet the durability and flexibility of these
associations remains unknown. We investigated these associations in
bilateral hippocampal amnesic patients (n=3) and healthy comparison
participants (n=2). Participants studied new associations in two conditions: explicit encoding, in which a novel item was directly associated
with its name; and fast mapping, in which a pre-experimentally familiar
item was presented simultaneously with a novel item and its name (nb.
in this condition the novel item-name association required recognition of
the familiar foil item). Healthy comparison participants showed good
subsequent recognition of novel associations irrespective of study condition. No amnesic patient performed better than chance in the explicit
encoding condition, but one amnesic patient performed similarly to
healthy comparison participants in the fast-mapping condition. However, all three amnesic patients performed poorly in other memory tests
of the same material, including recall, cued generalization, and familiarity rating. Our results suggest that hippocampal damage may not prevent the formation of very specific associative memories derived from a
partly familiar context, but that those memories lack the distinctive flexibility of the hippocampus-dependent relational memories that play a
crucial role in normal word learning.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session H

H36
THE EFFECTS OF ITEM RELATEDNESS ON THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF
NOVELTY DETECTION Caitlin Bowman1, Kristina Peterson1, Nancy Dennis1;
1The Pennsylvania State University — Successful

memory in recognition
tests requires individuals to distinguish items encountered during study
(i.e., targets) from those not presented during study (i.e., lures). Correctly identifying a lure as ‘new’ (i.e., correct rejection) becomes increasingly difficult the more closely lures resemble targets, leading to a
greater number of lures incorrectly identified as ‘old’ (i.e., false alarms).
The current study uses fMRI to elucidate the cognitive and neural mechanisms involved in the correct rejection of lures as a function of the relatedness between lures and targets. Overall, correctly identified new items
exhibited greater activity in bilateral medial temporal lobes (MTL), early
and late visual cortex, and prefrontal cortex. When compared directly,
correct rejections of items unrelated to targets showed greater activity in
superior temporal gyrus and inferior parietal cortex, whereas correct
rejections of items closely related to targets showed greater activity in
prefrontal cortex, superior parietal cortex, and visual cortex. Differences
in neural networks for related and unrelated correct rejections was also
examined using functional connectivity, with results showing a largely
similar neural pattern. Taken together, results indicate that correct identification of unrelated lures involves bottom-up attention and utilization
of categorical information and correct identification of related lures
requires greater top-down attention and monitoring of perceptual
details.

H37
NEGATIVE SUBSEQUENT MEMORY EFFECTS ARE ACCOMPANIED BY
INCREASED FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY WITHIN THE DEFAULT-MODE
NETWORK Unal Sakoglu1, Marianne de Chastelaine1, Michael D. Rugg1;
1

Center for Vital Longevity and School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
University of Texas at Dallas — Negative subsequent memory effects are

identified as enhanced activity for study items that are subsequently forgotten relative to those that are subsequently remembered. Several of the
regions demonstrating these effects belong to the ‘default-mode network’. Thus, the effects have been interpreted as reflecting the benefit to
encoding that ensues when ‘default processes’ are fully disengaged.
Here, we investigated whether negative subsequent memory effects are
accompanied by changes in functional connectivity between regions
demonstrating the effects and other cortical areas. Subjects (n=18) studied a series of word pairs in a relational encoding task. Later, they discriminated between intact pairs (pairs repeated from the study phase),
rearranged pairs (pairs formed from words presented on different study
trials) and new pairs. Negative subsequent memory effects were identified by contrasting the activity elicited by studied pairs incorrectly
judged rearranged with the activity elicited by pairs correctly judged
intact. The contrast identified negative effects in several regions, most
notably the posterior midline, medial prefrontal cortex, and right lateral
parietal cortex. These three regions were used as seeds in separate psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analyses that identified voxels where
connectivity varied according to the accuracy of the later memory judgment (intact vs. rearranged). Connectivity between each seed region and
a subset of default mode regions was higher for items later judged intact
than it was for items incorrectly endorsed as rearranged. Thus, negative
subsequent memory effects reflect a combination of attenuated activity
and increased connectivity within the default mode network.

degree of global match (sum similarity) between a test probe and previously studied items (Norman et al., 2010). Here, we examined multivoxel patterns of blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) activity in
MTLc and hippocampus to assess the relationships between across-item
pattern similarity and subsequent item recognition. Seventeen participants underwent high-resolution fMRI while viewing images, and then
performed a post-scan item recognition memory test. For each participant, we computed correlations between the multi-voxel patterns of
BOLD activity to pairs of stimuli in anatomically defined MTLc subregions and in the hippocampus. Within MTLc subregions, the magnitude
of the difference between identity (item to same-item) and non-identity
(item to other-item) correlations was significantly greater for subsequently forgotten items relative to subsequently remembered items. This
relationship was due to higher identity correlations being predictive of
subsequent forgetting, and higher non-identity correlations being predictive of subsequent remembering. By contrast, representational similarity in the hippocampus did not relate to subsequent memory. These
results suggest that global match computations in the MTLc subserve
item recognition memory. Support: NIMH (5R01–MH076932), NSF
(IGERT-0801700), NSF (GRFP)

H39
INVESTIGATING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PRIMING AND
FAMILIARITY USING EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Joanne Park1, Kevin

Allan2, David Donaldson1; 1University of Stirling, 2University of Aberdeen —

Does unconscious repetition priming influence conscious episodic familiarity? To address this question we measured conscious and unconscious
forms of memory concurrently - but ensured that participants were
unaware of the priming manipulation. We employed ERPs to investigate
the timecourse and distribution of neural activity evoked during a recognition test, involving a shallow encoding task designed to encourage
familiarity based retrieval. Half of the recognition trials began with a
brief (48ms) masked repetition of the to-be-recognized word prior to the
onset of test items (shown for 300ms). On the remaining unprimed trials
onset of the to-be-recognized word was preceded by the word 'blank'.
The behavioural data demonstrated (~70ms) facilitation of response
times for all primed words - irrespective of study status or recognition
response – but no measure of recognition performance was affected by
priming. The ERP data revealed two priming-related modulations, an
early (0-150ms) frontal negativity and a later (250-500ms) posterior positivity for primed vs. unprimed words. The posterior effect overlapped
temporally with the bilateral frontal old/new effect (FN400, circa 300500ms), a putative ERP correlate of familiarity. This bilateral frontal old/
new effect was evident only when contrasting unprimed HIT vs.
unprimed CR ERPs, and not when contrasting primed HIT vs. primed
CR ERPs. We argue that these data are consistent with the existence of
neural circuits supporting priming that are independent of familiarity,
but that the ability of ERPs to disentangle priming from familiarity may
be reduced because of component overlap in distinct effects that are concurrently activated.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Other
H40
THE MODULATION OF ANXIETY-LIKE RESPONSES BY HUMAN BDNF
POLYMORPHISM IN COMBINED CUE-CONTEXT CONDITIONING

H38
REPRESENTATIONAL SIMILARITY AND RECOGNITION MEMORY: HIGHRESOLUTION FMRI SUPPORT FOR SUM SIMILARITY IN MTL CORTEX

Andreatta Marta1, Ewald Heike1, Glotzbach Evelyn1, Tröger Christian1,
Baumann Christian1,2, Reif Andreas2, Deckert Jürgen2, Pauli Paul1, Mühlberger
Andreas1; 1Department of Psychology, University of Würzburg, 2Department of
Psychiatry and Psychotheraphy, University of Würzburg — The protein Brain

ampus and surrounding medial temporal lobe cortex (MTLc) are known
to be critical for declarative memory, the nature of hippocampal and
MTLc mnemonic computations remains a topic of debate. One proposed
distinction is that MTLc, but not the hippocampus, is sensitive to the

Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF) mediates synaptic plasticity associated with memory and learning. Importantly, the 66Met variant has
been associated with anxiety-related behaviors. Classical conditioning is
a simple form of learning that has been implicated in the development of
anxiety disorders. Here, we investigated in humans the modulation of
BDNF polymorphism in context dependency of fear responses to a cue

Karen F. LaRocque1, Mary E. Smith1, Nathan Witthoft1, Valerie A. Carr1, Kalanit
Grill-Spector1, Anthony D. Wagner1; 1Stanford University — While the hippoc-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

213

Poster Session H — Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
(conditioned stimulus, CS) signaling a painful event (unconditioned
stimulus, US). Thirty-five participants carrying the Met allele and thirtyfive homozygous for the Val allele were guided through two virtual
rooms. In one room (fear context), a colored light (CS+) was associated
with a painful electric shock (US), while another light (CS-) was never
associated with US. In the other room (safety context), the two lights
were also presented, but no US was delivered. Fear learning was quantified by fear potentiated startle (FPS) and verbal reports for valence,
arousal and anxiety. Participants carrying the BDNF Met allele showed
generalized fear conditioned responses (i.e., increased FPS) to the safety
context as well as slower discriminative learning between fear and safety
context compared to the Met group. We did not find modulation of
BDNF polymorphisms on cue conditioning as well as on verbal reports.
In summary, our results support previous animal studies and extend
their findings to humans. Thus, context, but not cue, fear learning was
impaired in participants carrying the BDNF 66Met allele. This may be
further support for the role of the Met variant as genetic predisposition
to anxiety disorders.

H41
REWARD MODULATES EARLY NEURAL CATEGORY PROCESSING Thore

Apitz1, Nico Bunzeck1; 1Department of Systems Neuroscience, University
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf — Converging evidence suggests that
visual brain regions are part of a widespread network that signals forthcoming reward. However, the precise temporal dynamics underlying
the interaction between visual representations of object categories and
reward processing remain unclear. Here, we used magnetoencephalography (MEG) in combination with two versions of a face/scene discrimination task followed by a recognition memory test. In experiment 1, the
distinction between faces and scenes was linked with monetary reward,
whereas in experiment 2 subjects distinguished between both categories
in the absence of reward. In both experiments characteristic neural category effects (i.e., differences between faces and scenes) were observed in
the event-related magnetic field (ERF) at ~100 ms and ~170 ms after
stimulus onset. Importantly, both components were amplified in the
context of reward motivation (i.e. more pronounced in experiment 1)
and this interaction could be source localized to the lateral occipital cortex (~100 ms) and fusiform gyrus (~ 170 ms). Furthermore, a main effect
of reward emerged over frontal sensors at ~300 ms after stimulus onset
which could be identified as a reliable predictor of recognition memory
performance. These results suggest that reward can act as a top-down
signal that directly modulates early neural computations of faces and
scenes possibly by tuning of sensory neurons within the visual cortex.

H42
HIGHLIGHTING IS AMPLIFIED BY TWO FORMS OF PREFRONTAL
SUPPRESSION Matthew J. Weber1, Samuel B. Messing2, Sharon L.
Thompson-Schill1; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2Columbia University — High-

lighting is a learning phenomenon in which preconditioning with one
association strengthens a later-learned association. Subjects first learn
that cues AB invite response X, and later, but with equal frequency, that
cues AC invite response Y. After training, subjects are confronted with
novel cues A and BC. Although A is associated equally strongly with
responses X and Y, and B is as strongly associated with X as C is with Y,
subjects do not respond equivocally to these novel cues, instead preferring response X for A and response Y for BC. Several studies suggest that
highlighting is an attentional phenomenon motivated by error reduction:
When subjects are confronted with cues AC, they attend away from A to
dampen its learned evocation of X, thus loading the balance of Y's associability on C. Accordingly, we expected that occupying cognitive control resources with a secondary task would attenuate this attentional
dynamic, reducing highlighting. Instead, the secondary task increased
highlighting by about 20%. To support our assumption that the effect of
the secondary task was mediated by prefrontal cortex, we suppressed
left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex activity of new subjects in the same
paradigm using cathodal transcranial direct current stimulation. This
elicited elevated highlighting of a similar magnitude (18%), although the

214

difference was marginally significant. We surmise that occupying or
reducing cognitive control resources makes cue A more salient, forcing
subjects to exert greater attentional control to avoid errors; indeed, making A more salient also increased highlighting by about 20%.

H43
RECOGNITION MEMORY IMPAIRMENTS CAUSED BY NOVEL OBJECTS
FALSELY RECOGNIZED AS FAMILIAR Lok-Kin Yeung1, Jennifer D. Ryan1,2,

Morgan D. Barense1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research Institute at
Baycrest, Toronto — Recent studies in rodents have suggested that recognition memory impairments following perirhinal damage are caused by
the misidentification of novel stimuli as being familiar. These impairments are observed under high-interference conditions, but not under
low-interference conditions (McTighe et al, 2010; Burke et al, 2010). In
the present study, we tested whether a similar pattern of recognition
memory impairments was present in humans. In a continuous viewing
task, individuals at risk for MCI and healthy controls viewed high- and
low-interference novel stimuli (as determined by the amount of feature
overlap with previously-studied images), as well as familiar stimuli. The
tendency to disproportionally view novel relative to familiar stimuli was
used as a measure of recognition memory (i.e. novel stimuli were correctly recognized as novel if they were viewed more than familiar stimuli). Compared to healthy controls, individuals at risk for MCI showed
memory impairments under conditions of high interference, with
reduced viewing of high-interference novel stimuli relative to familiar
stimuli. In contrast, both individuals at risk for MCI and healthy controls
showed intact memory under conditions of low interference, with
increased viewing of low-interference novel stimuli relative to familiar
stimuli. These findings suggest that recognition memory impairments
under high-interference conditions in humans, as in rodents, are driven
by the misidentification of novel stimuli as being familiar. Further, they
are consistent with a recent representational-hierarchical view that the
perirhinal cortex supports complex object-level representations necessary for mnemonic and perceptual functions (Saksida & Bussey, 2010).

H44
BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL EFFECTS OF REWARD AND PUNISHMENT ON
GENERALIZATION Suzanne Wood1, Karin Foerde1, Melanie Pincus2, R.

Alison Adcock3, Daphna Shohamy1; 1Columbia University, 2Emory University,
3
Duke University — Multiple neural systems mediate learning and memory. Incremental learning of stimulus-response associations is thought to
depend on the basal ganglia and dopamine, whereas rapidly formed
flexible memories are thought to depend on the hippocampus. Recent
work has also shown that the dopaminergic midbrain and hippocampus
may cooperate during reward learning, however open questions remain
about the role of dopamine in modulating hippocampal memories. In
this study we examined how multiple brain systems support learning
from reward vs. punishment. Participants underwent functional imaging (fMRI) while engaged in a two-phase learning and generalization
task. In the first phase, participants engaged in feedback-based learning
of associations under two conditions: some associations were learned by
gaining a monetary reward for every correct response or nothing for
incorrect responses (Reward condition), and other associations were
learned by incurring a monetary loss for incorrect responses or nothing
for correct responses (Punishment condition). After learning, participants’ ability to generalize what they learned to novel stimulus combinations was assessed. We found that participants learned in both the
reward and punishment conditions, with rewarded trials leading to
enhanced generalization. We found distinct patterns of activation in the
striatum, anterior insula, and the hippocampus for learning from
rewards vs. punishments. In addition, ventromedial PFC showed more
activation during learning for rewarded stimulus pairs that were successfully remembered later. The results suggest that distinct neural
mechanisms are engaged during learning from rewards vs. punishments
and can support later flexible generalization behavior, suggesting effects
of reward on multiple brain systems for learning.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session H

H45
EXPLICIT LEARNING CONFERS ADVANTAGES IN SKILL PERFORMANCE
Priya Kalra1; 1Harvard Graduate School of Education — Most studies to date

have found that if there is an effect of explicit learning on skill performance, it is an interference of other detrimental effect (e.g. Galea et al.,
2010, Brown & Robertson, 2007). Relatively little research in either educational psychology or basic cognitive psychology has explored whether
“redundant” learning of a task through both memory systems confers
any advantages (e.g. learning arithmetic both procedurally and conceptually). Such beneficial collaboration across memory systems, if found,
could be of interest to both basic researchers and educators. The Serial
Response Time Task (SRTT) can be learned purely implicitly, as shown
in studies of SRTT learning and performance in amnesics (Nissen and
Bullemer 1987). However, explicit knowledge of the presence of a pattern in the stimuli can affect its learning by non-impaired subjects. We
tested 50 subjects on the SRTT in one of three conditions: implicit only
(training, no instruction on sequence), explicit only (instruction on
sequence only, no training), and explicit-implicit (both instruction on
sequence and training). Following training, subjects performed two posttests: first, the SRTT in a dual-task condition with tone counting, and second, the SRTT with the pattern slightly modified (all subjects were
informed of the modification). Explicit-implicit condition subjects demonstrated lower response times than implicit-only subjects in both posttests, suggesting an advantage provided by explicit knowledge of the
pattern.

H46
THE HIPPOCAMPUS IN INFERENCE: DISTINCT HIPPOCAMPAL
ACTIVATION FOR IMPLICIT VERSUS EXPLICIT PERFORMANCE. Anthony

Greene1, Lauren Hopkins1, Peter Leo1, Youcai Yang1, Alexander Hinman1,
Patrick H. Heffernan1, Sandra Figueira1, Erin Browning1, Kaila Balling1, Omar
Kattan1; 1University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee — A growing literature of
implicit hippocampus-dependent tasks has recently emerged to include
context priming tasks as well as relational learning. In associative inference, overlapping context relations are learned at study and novel configurations requiring an inference are presented at test. Bunsey and
Eichenbaum (1996) showed that the ability to make the inference at test
is dependent upon the hippocampus in rats. Preston and colleagues
(2004) found involvement in humans, but all participants were explicitly
informed of the contingencies and the requirement to make an inference.
Previous work in our lab has shown that it is possible to solve associative
inference implicitly, without conscious awareness of the relational contingencies (Leo & Greene, 2008). The present study utilized an inference
task to examine whether or not awareness is necessary for correct performance during untrained inference trials as well as the role of the hippocampus during these trials. The results of our study indicate that explicit
and implicit performance on this task corresponds to distinct patterns of
hippocampal activity. These findings are additional support that the hippocampus plays a role in implicit relational learning. Furthermore, distinct patterns of hippocampal activity rule out the possibility that lowlevels of task awareness may be accounting for hippocampal activity
during implicit performance.

H47
INTERFERENCE EFFECTS ON IMPLCIT AND EXPLICIT LEARNING OF
SEQUENTIAL PATTERNS Katherine R. Gamble1, Caterina P. Profaci1, James

H. Howard, Jr.1,2,3, Darlene V. Howard1; 1Department of Psychology,
Georgetown University, 2Department of Psychology, The Catholic University of
America, 3Department of Neurology, Georgetown University Medical Center —

Once implicit sequence learning occurs it is retained long-term if not permanently. While this robust retention can be beneficial, it might also be
detrimental. For example, knowing one language may make learning a
second language easier, but learning the placement of an adverb in one
language may impair correct sequencing of a sentence in another language. The present study investigated whether people can learn two different sequential patterns minutes apart, and whether learning the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

second pattern is impaired or improved by the first. We used the Alternating Serial Reaction Time task (ASRT) in which alternate events follow
a pattern while the intervening events are determined randomly. The
ASRT version used here assessed both implicit and explicit learning of
the same pattern. Explicit blocks occurred under instruction to look for
an alternating pattern, with different colored stimuli facilitating pattern
detection, while on implicit blocks, stimuli were all black and participants were not told of the pattern. Participants completed two sessions
of the ASRT with two different patterns, minutes apart. Everyone gained
full declarative knowledge in the first explicit block for both patterns.
Implicit learning, as measured via reaction time and accuracy differences
in implicit blocks, also occurred for both patterns, but later in training for
the second pattern than for the first. Thus, implicit learning of one pattern slows, but does not prevent, learning of a second pattern minutes
later, even in the presence of declarative knowledge of both patterns,
demonstrating the independence of implicit procedural learning from
declarative.

H48
FAST MAPPING: AN ALTERNATIVE WAY OF LEARNING NEW
ASSOCIATIONS Eve ATTALI1,2, Asaf GILBOA1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute
at Baycrest Hospital, Toronto, 2University of Toronto — Sharon et al. recently

reported a phenomenon of rapid acquisition of novel arbitrary associations in amnesics suffering from MTL lesions. These data challenge the
accepted view of dual declarative memory systems and brings about a
radically different mechanism for directly acquiring semantics without
enlisting the hippocampus: the Fast Mapping (FM). FM refers to a process that supports vocabulary acquisition among children who do not
have a mature hippocampus. They actively infer the meaning of novel
words by generating hypotheses based on contextual cues. Twelve
patients suffering from Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and 12 healthy controls
(HC) participated in the study. Participants performed a FM task and a
standard associative memory task using explicit encoding (EE). In the
FM task, on each trial, one novel picture and one familiar picture appear,
along with a simple perceptual question which contains the target's
label. Responding yes or no, participants infer that the unknown label
corresponds to the novel picture. A forced choice recognition task was
administered 10 min and one week after both the FM and the EE tasks.
Results show that: - HC better perform on the EE task than the FM task
whereas AD patients show the reverse pattern. - AD patients perform as
well as HC on the FM task whereas they are impaired in the EE task. Associations learnt through FM remain after one week. FM is an alternative way of learning, independent of the episodic memory that can be
used when the common pathway of memory is disturbed.

H49
STRESS AND FACE RECOGNITION MEMORY Webster Lincoln1, Delight-

Nicole Labrovich1, Megumi Hosoda1, Cheryl Chancellor-Freeland1; 1San Jose
State University — Stressful situations trigger the activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the subsequent secretion of
stress hormones. In general, the effects of stress on cognition follow an
inverted-U shape function, where there is an optimal level of stress and
extremely high/low stress levels often result in cognitive impairment.
While a majority of research investigating the effects of stress on memory has focused on hippocampal-based memory, few studies have examined the effects stress on face recognition memory. The role of the
hippocampus and the perirhinal cortex in recognition memory has been
subject to debate. The goal of this study is to investigate the effects of
stress on face recognition and to evaluate the distinction between the recollection and familiarity. The Remember/Know procedure was used to
investigate face recognition. Stress was manipulated by using the Trier
Social Stress Test. In addition to significant impairment in overall facial
recognition, results showed significant impairment in facial familiarity
with stress in comparison to control. However, no significant differences
were found on recollection (remember) between stress and control.
Results are consistent with the implications of previous research. These
findings support the evidence of a psychological distinction between rec-

215

Poster Session H — Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
ollection and familiarity and the involvement of distinct brain structures
in both processes.

excitability suggests that subcortical stroke alters the pattern of neuroplasticity that supports enhanced motor learning.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Skill learning

H52
MUSIC-INDUCED DYNAMICS: MUSICAL TRAINING, MEG SIGNAL
COMPLEXITY, AND AUDITORY PERCEPTION Sarah M. Carpentier1,2,

H50
IMPAIRED MOTOR SKILL LEARNING, BUT INTACT MEMORY FOR TOOL
ATTRIBUTES: INVESTIGATING ACQUISITION OF COMPLEX TOOL
KNOWLEDGE IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE Shumita Roy1, Norman W. Park1,
Eric A. Roy2, Quincy Almeida3; 1York University, 2University of Waterloo, 3Wilfrid

Laurier University — OBJECTIVE: Previous research suggests that different
aspects of tool knowledge are mediated by different memory systems. It
has been proposed that tool attributes (e.g., function, color) are represented as declarative memory while motor skills are represented as procedural memory. However, these representations are not well
understood. It has also been suggested that the two memory systems
may interact during acquisition of some aspects of tool knowledge, but
the nature of this interaction is still unclear. In Roy & Park (2010) an individual with hippocampal amnesia demonstrated intact motor skill
acquisition, but impaired memory for tool attributes. These findings
highlight the importance of declarative memory in acquiring various
aspects of tool knowledge. However, the contribution of procedural
memory is still unclear. METHOD: Eighteen patients with Parkinson’s
disease (PD) and 18 controls were trained and tested over 2 sessions, 3
weeks apart, to use six novel complex tools. RESULTS: PD patients
showed a slower rate of motor skill acquisition compared to controls. In
addition, PD patients, but not controls, showed slower completion time
after the 3-week delay. Lastly, PD patients were comparable to controls
in memory for tool attributes. CONCLUSION: Consistent with previous
research, current results suggest that tool attributes are represented
declaratively, while motor skill acquisition is procedural and likely
mediated by basal ganglia and related structures. Taken together with
Roy & Park (2010), these findings present a double dissociation of memory processes involved in acquiring tool knowledge. Current findings
also raise the possibility of compensation between declarative and procedural systems.

H51
CHRONIC SUBCORTICAL STROKE ELIMINATES THE BENEFIT OF
INTERLEAVED PRACTICE ON MOTOR LEARNING AND THE
INTRACORTICAL EXCITABILITY Ming-Chang Chiang1, Chien-Ho Janice

Lin2, Barbara J Knowlton2, Renee E Shimizu2, Omid Yazdanshenas2, Parima
Udompholkul2, Allan D Wu2; 1National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan,
2University of California, Los Angeles — Practice of different tasks in an

interleaved order generally induces superior retention compared to
repetitive practice. We applied paired-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to investigate whether the benefit of interleaved training is
present in subcortical stroke patients and whether it is associated with
changes in intracortical inhibition (SICI) and facilitation (ICF). 14
patients with subcortical stroke and 16 control subjects practiced motor
sequences with the less-affected hand where a set of three 4-element
sequences were arranged in a repetitive or an interleaved order over 2
days. Retention tests took place on Day 5. Subjects practiced sequences
in both Repetitive and Interleaved conditions in separate sessions 2-4
weeks apart. TMS was applied over primary motor cortex as paired subthreshold-suprathreshold TMS pulses separated by interstimulus intervals of 2 (SICI) and 10 msec (ICF). We identified a significant Group by
Condition interaction on response time (RT) during retention tests on
Day 5 where Interleaved training led to faster RT in the control group
but not the stroke patients (p< .05). In addition, control subjects showed
reduced SICI on Day 5 over baseline after Interleaved training while
stroke patients showed such reduction after Repetitive training, resulting in a significant Group by Condition interaction (p< .05). This interaction was not present for ICF. The results suggest that patients with
subcortical stroke do not obtain the typical benefit from Interleaved
training. The differential effect of training condition on corticomotor

216

Takako Fujioka1, Bernhard Ross1,2, Anthony R. McIntosh1,2; 1Rotman Research
Institute, Baycrest, 2University of Toronto — Music training has been sug-

gested to lead to an enhancement in the neural activity associated with
music processing. It has been proposed that brain signal complexity is a
reflection of the functional capacity of that neural system. The present
study tested the hypothesis that musicians have a larger repertoire of
brain activity associated with musical perception then nonmusicians. We
used multiscale entropy to capture the complexity of the MEG signal
while musicians and nonmusicians listened to different melodies. A previous magnetic mismatch negativity study of the current data reported
that the musicians were more sensitive to deviant tones in these repeated
melodies. We observed that initial melody presentation elicited higher
complexity in musicians compared to nonmusicians. Brain signal complexity decreased in both groups as a function of stimulus repetition. We
propose that the neural networks that underlie auditory processing have
a more diverse range of functioning in musicians, as compared to nonmusicians. Repetition reduces the amount of information processing and
corresponding brain signal complexity.

H53
A NOVEL SEMG BASED BRAIN-COMPUTER-INTERFACE (BCI)
ADMINISTERED ON AN ANDROID MOBILE PHONE Ida-Maria Skavhaug1,

Rebecca Bobell1, Ben Vernon1, Sanjay Joshi1; 1University of California Davis —
Previous work in our laboratory has shown that participants can learn to
navigate a cursor to goal targets by controlling the surface electromyogram (sEMG) recorded from a site located directly above the Auricularis
Superior muscle (Perez-Maldonado, Wexler & Joshi, 2010). Two-dimensional control of the cursor was achieved by manipulating the power in
two separate frequency bands defined prior to testing. One of the main
advantages of this newly developed paradigm is that multiple degrees of
freedom are gained from a single recording site. The Auricularis muscles
are responsible for re-orienting the ears independently of head movements, and are rarely used purposefully in humans. For this reason, and
because the Auricularis muscles are usually accessible even to patients
suffering severe neck-down paralysis, a BCI system based on sEMG
from these muscles can enable individuals to control their environment
without causing interruptions to other daily actions (e.g. speech and eye
gaze). The aims of our current experiment were: i) to evaluate new software developed for use on a portable android phone and ii) to investigate if the ability to simultaneously manipulate power in separate
frequency bands can be generalized to other muscles. Preliminary results
show that able-bodied participants can use the android phone system to
control a cursor by contracting Abductor Pollicis Brevis (a muscle of the
thumb). Future experiments will recruit disabled participants, focusing
on Auricularis Superior (or alternative accessible muscles), to establish
the potential of the developed BCI for this user group.

H54
CROSS-MODAL TRANSFER OF ABSTRACT STATISTICAL STRUCTURE
BENEFITS FROM SLEEP Penelope Lewis1, Scott Cairney1, Simon Durrant2;

1
School of Psychological Sciences, University of Manchester, 2Psychology
Departmetnt, Lincolin University — Recent studies have demonstrated that

sleep is beneficial for extracting the essential structure or ‘gist’ from a set
of stimuli. To date, this has been demonstrated only within a single
modality. Here, we extend this work with overnight sleep monitoring
and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to demonstrate for
the first time that sleep is directly involved in the transfer of abstract statistical structure from one modality to another. 36 Participants were
exposed to a statistically structured sequence of 1818 auditory tones,
then tested immediately for recognition of 18-tone auditory sequences
which conformed to the learned statistical pattern. Subsequently, after

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session H
consolidation over thirty minutes or twenty-four hours, they were tested
again with fMRI monitoring. The fMRI session included a set of 84 analogous visual test sequences in which the vertical position of visual stimuli corresponded to the pitch of an equivalent auditory sequence.
Random auditory tones were played during the visual tests to prevent
auditory imagery. Behaviourally, successful transfer of the statistical
information from the auditory to the visual domains took place only
after 24hrs of consolidation, and this transfer was predicted by the
amount of slow wave sleep (SWS) obtained during the night. Functionally, we observed decreased hippocampal responses and increased striatal responses after sleep. Taken together, these findings suggest that
cross-modal transfer of abstract statistical information is associated with
a gradual shift from the hippocampal to the striatal memory system and
that this may be mediated by SWS.

H55
EFFECTS OF LONG-TERM MUSICAL TRAINING ON NEURAL CORRELATES
OF AUDITORY IMAGERY Emily B.J. Coffey1,2,3, Sibylle C. Herholz1,2,3,

Robert J. Zatorre1,2,3; 1Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University,
International Laboratory for Brain, Music and Sound Research (BRAMS),
3Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Music Media and Technology
(CIRMMT) — Long-term musical training influences both auditory percep2

tion and cognition, but little is known about how it affects auditory
imagery. Previous studies have shown that mental imagery of music
recruits secondary auditory and premotor areas, and association areas in
frontal and parietal lobes. The aim of the present study was to investigate the long-term effect of musical training on auditory imagery by
comparing musicians and nonmusicians using functional magnetic resonance imaging. Participants listened to the beginning and imagined the
continuation of familiar melodies in the scanner. To test accuracy of
mental imagery, we asked participants to judge whether a subsequent
probe tone correctly fit into the imagined melody. In the perception conditions, participants merely judged if the last tone of the presented melody was correct or not. In two control conditions, participants listened to
random tone sequences or rested in silence. Functional data were
acquired in a sparse sampling design that was optimized with respect to
the expected imagery-related brain activity. Preliminary results show
that both musicians and nonmusicians were able to correctly imagine the
melodies as evident from their above-chance performance on the imagery task, but musicians showed better performance than nonmusicians.
During imagery, a cortical network encompassing auditory, motor and
association areas was activated in both groups. However, groups differed regarding their activation in the supplementary motor area. This
indicates an effect of long-term music training on the motor preparation
network, which is involved not only in motor, but also in auditory imagery.

H56
REPETITIVE TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION TO THE
DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX MAY FACILITATE CONSOLIDATION
OF INTERLEAVED MOTOR SEQUENCE LEARNING Renee E. Shimizu1,
Chien-Ho Janice Lin1, Allan D. Wu1, Barbara J. Knowlton1; 1University of
California, Los Angeles — Practicing different tasks in an interleaved order

results in superior retention and transfer compared to practicing them in
a blocked order. We hypothesized that the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC) is a neural substrate for the consolidation of interleaved motor
sequence learning, and expected that post-training DLPFC perturbation
would alter retention performance. Eight subjects practiced three 4-item
motor sequences presented in an interleaved order with the non-dominant hand followed immediately by either real or sham 1-Hz repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS). Each subject received stimulation to the contralateral DLPFC for 20 minutes. Subjects returned for a
retention test of the practiced sequences 24 hours later. We used a
within-subjects design with each subject participating in the other rTMS
condition (real or sham) three weeks later, using a different set of
sequences. Response accuracy was better at retention after receiving real

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

rTMS compared to sham, with this difference being most pronounced in
the first third of retention (p = .033). Following real rTMS, there was also
a trend for better retention in response time, with less slowing at the
retention test compared to following sham rTMS (Cohen’s d = 0.648;
medium effect size). These results suggest that 1-Hz rTMS may facilitate
consolidation of motor sequence learning, or may interfere with the consolidation of competing memory representations.

H57
COORDINATED ACTION SELECTION AND TIMING RESPONSES
SEPARATED ACROSS HANDS ARE INTEGRATED IN SEQUENCE
LEARNING Daniel J. Sanchez1, Eric N. Yarnik1, Paul J. Reber1; 1Northwestern
University — Previous work examining the integration of sequential
response order and timing with the Serial Interception Sequence Learning (SISL) task has shown that these two sources of information are integrated during learning (Gobel, Sanchez, & Reber, 2011). This produces a
surprisingly inflexible knowledge representation which resists transfer
to very similar motor sequences. To test the hypothesis that this inflexibility arose from the need to combine order and timing information into
a single keypress response, SISL learning was examined with a manipulandum (simulated guitar) that separated action selection and response
timing across hands and required a bimanually coordinated response on
each trial. Participants completed 2880 trials of training on the SISL task
in which precisely-timed motor responses were made to cues moving
along one of four columns that followed a covertly embedded repeating
sequence of cue order and inter-cue timing. At test, the order of cue
responses and inter-cue timing were separately manipulated from the
trained sequence in order to assess transfer to sequences with novel timing or novel order. Participants exhibited sequence-specific performance
improvements for only the trained sequence and performance was
equivalent to an unpracticed sequence if either timing or order was disrupted. Separate examination of each hand individually also failed to
show any evidence of partial transfer from the trained sequence. When
response timing and order are both necessary for accurate coordinated
sequence performance, they become integrated in the motor plan that is
necessary for expression even when expressed largely through different
hands.

H58
DISENGAGEMENT OF INTERACTING BRAIN SYSTEMS CAN BOOST
HUMAN LEARNING Dezso Nemeth1,2, Karolina Janacsek1, Bertalan

Polner1, Zoltan Ambrus Kovacs1; 1University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary,
2
University of Texas, Austin — Human learning and memory depend on

multiple cognitive systems related to dissociable brain structures. These
systems interact not only in cooperative but sometimes competitive
ways in optimizing performance. It has been previously demonstrated
that functional brain connectivity is reduced in hypnosis, and this is
especially typical for frontal areas. The main question of our study was
how the disruption of frontal lobe functions affects performance in basalganglia dependent sequence learning. Fourteen highly hypnotizable,
healthy adults participated in the experiment. Sequence learning was
measured by the Alternating Serial Reaction Time (ASRT) task. Participants performed the ASRT task in waking alert and hypnotic state. We
found improved sequence learning in the hypnosis condition compared
to the alert condition. Our result provides support for the idea that learning and memory processes may not only involve the engagement of specific neuroplastic mechanisms, but may also rely upon the
disengagement of interacting brain systems. The improved sequence
learning in hypnosis could be attributed to the reduction of interconnectivity between brain areas, especially the connections of the frontal lobe,
which results in the disruption of attentional control and executive system. This result sheds light not only on the competitive nature of brain
systems in cognitive processes, but also could lead to further research on
improving human skill learning.

217

Poster Session H — Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall

H59
ALTERED STRIATAL ACTIVATION DURING COGNITIVE SKILL LEARNING IN
NON-AFFECTED SIBLINGS OF INDIVIDUALS WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA

Dana Wagshal1, Nanthia A. Suthana1, Barbara J. Knowlton1, Jessica R. Cohen2,
Russell A. Poldrack3, Susan Y. Bookheimer4, Robert M. Bilder4, Robert F.
Asarnow4; 1University of California, Los Angeles, 2University of California,
Berkeley, 3Imaging Research Center and Departments of Psychology and
Neurobiology at University of Texas at Austin, 4David Geffen School of Medicine
at University of California, Los Angeles — Patients with schizophrenia show
deficits in skill learning. Recently, we have shown that adolescents, who
are siblings of patients with Childhood Onset Schizophrenia (COS),
exhibit deficits in a probabilistic classification task (weather prediction).
Here, we used fMRI to investigate whether siblings of COS patients display different patterns of neural activation during learning in the
weather prediction task. Ten adolescent siblings of COS patients and 30
matched controls learned the task over two days. Performance differences between the groups emerged within the first 50 trials of training:
the controls showed significant learning while the COS siblings did not.
Furthermore, after extended training of over 800 additional trials, the
COS siblings reached a lower level of asymptotic performance than controls. Subjects were scanned in two runs, one at the beginning and one at
the end of the two days of training. We identified ROIs using the whole
brain group-level analysis (cluster-corrected thresholded at p = 0.05) and
then defined functionally by a task-baseline contrast. ROIs in the striatum showed significant interactions between group and run for BOLD
signal. In the left caudate there was a significant interaction of run x
group (p = 0.014). Also, in the bilateral putamen, there was a significant
interaction of run x group (p = 0.018). These regions demonstrated
increased activity early in training and decreased activity after extensive
training in the COS siblings, while the controls maintained or increased
levels of activation across runs. These results suggest that striatal dysfunction may reflect genetic liability for schizophrenia.

H60
THE ROLE OF M1 IN IMPLICIT LEARNING AND THE PROCESSING OF
REWARD. Leonora Wilkinson1, Mooshagian Eric1, Zimmermann Trelawny1,

Lewis Jeff1, Wassermann Eric1; 1National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Sroke — The basal ganglia and its cortical connections, including the
primary motor cortex (M1) play an important role in both implicit/
unconscious motor sequence learning and processing of reward. Continuous burst transcranial magnetic stimulation (cTBS) reduces motor cortex excitability. We examined the effect of cTBS over M1 on implicit
sequence learning with and without reward, using a probabilistic serial
reaction time paradigm. We investigated implicit sequence learning with
and without reward in two healthy groups after cTBS to M1 or sham.
There was no overall effect of reward on learning. However, cTBS produced more impairment of learning in the unrewarded than the
rewarded condition. Reward appears to protect learning against the
effect of cTBS to M1 and may be a way of overcoming learning impairments in clinical settings.

H61
DISTINCT EFFECTS OF TRIAL SPACING ON PERCEPTUAL LEARNING AND
GENERALIZATION. David F. Little1, Yu-Xuan Zhang2, Beverly A. Wright1;
1

Northwestern University, 2MRC Institute of Hearing Research, Nottingham,
United Kingdom — Learning on a trained condition and generalization to
untrained conditions are thought to stem from the same processes. If so,
learning and generalization should be equally affected by manipulations
of the training regimen. To test this idea, we asked how the spacing of
training trials affected learning and generalization on an auditory frequency-discrimination task. For this task, practicing 720-900 trials/day
for 6-8 days using a standard composed of two brief 1-kHz tones separated by 100 ms yields improvement on that condition and on an
untrained condition (1 kHz, 50 ms). We asked how performance on those
same conditions was affected by two new 7-8 day training regimens: 720
training-trials/day with either a 30-minute break after 360 trials (n=8) or

218

6-minute breaks after every 120 trials (n=7). For the trained condition (1
kHz, 100 ms), neither trained group improved significantly more than
controls (who received no training) between pre- and post-training tests,
though the 6-minute group showed a trend in that direction. In contrast,
for the untrained condition (1 kHz, 50 ms), the 30-minute group showed
clear improvement while the 6-minute group showed none. Thus, the 6minute regimen yielded minimal learning and no generalization while
the 30-minute regimen yielded no learning but clear generalization.
These results suggest that learning and generalization come from at least
partially distinct processes which are differentially sensitive to the spacing of practice trials, and that training can improve performance on
untrained conditions without affecting performance on a trained one.
[Supported by NIH]

H62
MULTIPLE FUNCTIONS OF DOPAMINE DURING HUMAN CATEGORY
LEARNING: A GENETIC TRIPLE DISSOCIATION Benjamin O. Turner1, Erick

J. Paul1, Sebastien Helie1, F. Gregory Ashby1; 1University of California, Santa
Barbara — There is growing evidence that different brain systems mediate rule-based and procedural category learning (Ashby & Maddox,
2011). Rule-based category learning relies on a network including the
prefrontal cortex, while procedural category learning relies on the striatum. The performance of both systems is affected by dopamine (DA) levels: in the prefrontal cortex, it has been suggested that DA improves
working memory functions (Cools, 2006); in the striatum, DA is proposed to function as a learning signal (Schultz et al., 1997). However,
prefrontal and striatal DA levels can differ across individuals as a function of genotypes for three genes: DA transporter (DAT1), DA-andcAMP-regulated phosphoprotein (DARPP-32), and catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT). We tested 151 participants in both rule-based and
procedural category learning tasks. A genotype of the DAT1 gene—associated with faster striatal DA degradation—manifests improved performance in procedural, but not rule-based, category learning. Likewise, a
genotype of the COMT gene resulting in reduced DA degradation in the
prefrontal cortex was associated with better performance exclusively in
the rule-based task. Finally, a genotype of the DARPP-32 gene related to
reduced frontostriatal connectivity correlated with improved stimulusresponse associative learning in the rule-based task, but with no other
behavioral measures in either task. This triple dissociation is in line with
the different roles of DA in rule-based and procedural category learning.
More generally, these results are an important first step in explaining the
individual differences in rule-based and procedural category learning
using a methodology at the crossroad of cognitive neuroscience and
genetics.

H63
THE EFFECTS OF DIVIDING ATTENTION AT ENCODING ON NOVEL
NATURALISTIC ACTION PERFORMANCE IN STROKE PATIENTS Sabrina

Lombardi1, Norman W. Park1; 1York University — OBJECTIVE: Several studies have proposed that performing a secondary task during presentation
of studied material into memory, disrupts efficient encoding of new
information. Previous research has shown that dividing attention during
encoding created a decline in performance of novel naturalistic actions
(NNAs; e.g., building a mock volcano). In the current study, we examined the effects of dividing attention at encoding on memory for NNAs
in stroke patients and controls. We anticipated that dividing attention
would result in a greater number of omission (omitting an action) and
commission (committing an action in error) errors, but that memory for
NNAs would be disrupted to a greater extent in stroke patients than controls. METHOD: Eighteen stroke patients and 18 controls viewed a video
depicting enactment of a NNA, after which they were required to reproduce what they saw. A secondary tone counting task was performed
during the divided attention condition. RESULTS: Dividing attention at
encoding resulted in an increase in omission errors for both stroke
patients and controls. In addition, stroke patients omitted more actions
at full and divided attention than controls. Interestingly, controls, but
not stroke patients, showed an increase in commission errors when
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session H
attention was divided. CONCLUSION: Dividing attention at encoding
resulted in higher omission errors for both groups. Increased commission errors for controls, but not stroke, may suggest that controls are
more likely to form a partial memory trace of the NNA, whereas stroke
patients may have a more impoverished memory for NNAs, resulting in
greater omission than commission errors.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Multisensory
H64
FUNCTIONAL NEUROANATOMICAL CHANGES INDUCED BY MU-BASED
NEUROFEEDBACK TRAINING IN CHILDREN ON THE AUTISM
SPECTRUM Jaime A. Pineda1,2, Mike Datko1, Ralph-Axel Mueller3;
1

Cognitive Science Department, UCSD, 2Group in Neurosciences, UCSD,

3Psychology Department, SDSU — Autism

Spectrum Disorders (ASD) may
arise from atypical anatomical and functional connections and therefore
produce abnormal activity among different regions of the brain. This
type of ‘disconnection syndrome’ could lead to desynchronization and
ineffective intra- and interhemispheric communication in neural circuits
affecting higher order cognitive processes. While no single explanation
can account for the ASD profile, converging evidence implicates the
human mirror neuron system (MNS). Studies from our laboratory have
shown that ASD individuals exhibit normal EEG mu rhythm suppression for self-generated movement but fail to suppress during observation of movement compared to typically developing (TD) controls. On
the other hand, suppression is normal if the actors being observed are
familiar, suggesting that the MNS is not entirely broken. We have shown
that significant improvement occurs in social engagement and related
behaviors, as well as in the electrophysiology of ASD children following
neurofeedback training focused on the mu-rhythm. The present study
tested whether functional neuroanatomical changes occur after mubased neurofeedback training (45 min x 2 week x 20 weeks). Before training, greater activation occurred in regions of interest related to MNS in
TD compared to ASD during object-oriented imitation and observation.
Abnormal functional connectivity, under- and over-connectivity, were
also present in ASD compared to TD groups among MNS areas. Altering
mu rhythm dynamics with training was found to result in increased
activity in the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and other relevant MNS areas,
as well as normalization of functional connectivity in the MNS circuits in
ASD children.

H65
AUDIOVISUAL TEMPORAL FUSION IN 6-MONTH-OLD INFANTS
Franziska Kopp1, Ulman Lindenberger1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human
Development Berlin — Research in adults indicates that perceptual fusion

of temporally disparate audiovisual events recruits neural networks that
differ from those related to the evaluation of audiovisual temporal coincidence. However, it is largely unknown how these processes work early
in ontogeny. In infants, audiovisual temporal disparities below 300-350
ms are correlated to simultaneity perception. The aim of the present
study was to investigate brain dynamics related to audiovisual integration in 6-month-old infants using event-related potentials (ERP). In a
behavioral experiment, infants were habituated to a synchronous audiovisual stimulus. Once infants met the habituation criterion, an asynchronous test trial of the same stimulus was presented in which the visual
stream was delayed to the auditory stream by 200 ms. Results showed
that infants were not able to discriminate this asynchrony on behavioral
level. In a subsequent EEG experiment, audiovisual film sequences were
presented. In synchronous trials the visual and the auditory stream were
in synchrony, whereas in asynchronous trials the visual stream was
delayed to the auditory stream by 200 ms. In contrast to the behavioral
data, ERP data revealed that brain activity differed between the two conditions. In particular, differences due to audiovisual temporal correspondence were observed in auditory P2 peak amplitudes. Moreover,
significant Pb and Nc amplitude differences between synchronous and
asynchronous presentations before sound onset suggest anticipatory

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

mechanisms in the infant brain. Results suggest contributions of different brain networks to the perception of temporally synchronous versus
perceptually fused audiovisual events.

H66
EXAMINING THE EFFECT OF SOUND ON THE SENSITIVITY OF VISUAL TIME
PERCEPTION IN VOLLEYBALL ATHLETES Chiu-Chan Chou1, Yu-Ling Shih1;
1Institute

of Athletics, National Taiwan Sport University, Taichung, Taiwan —

Coordinated movement depends on efficient multisensory integration
and accurate time perception. Auditory dominance of audiovisual time
perception may be modulated by long-term training of sport highly
emphasizing accurate time perception. Nevertheless, the experience of
sports training would cast a differential effect on visual time perception.
Although sports like volleyball and dancing both stress accurate time
perception for successful performance, the strategies used may differ.
Therefore, the purpose of the study was to investigate the effect of sound
on the sensitivity of visual time perception. Three groups of participants,
namely volleyball, dancing and novice, were recruited in the present
study. There were 20 participants in each group and they were
instructed to compare the duration of two visual circles in either no tone
or tone condition. The reaction time (RT) of volleyball athletes was significantly shorter than that of novices whereas no significant differences
of RT were found between novices and dancing athletes nor between
volleyball and dancing athletes in no tone condition. The error rate of
volleyball athletes was significantly lower than both novices and dancing athletes in tone condition. In addition, there were no significant differences of error rate between dancing athletes and novices. Faster
response for visual time perception observed only in volleyball athletes
suggests that they benefit more by sport-specific training in perceptual
stage of visual information processing. The sound facilitation effect, i.e.
volleyball athletes perceive visual time more accurately by the presence
of a tone, may result from the perceptual strategies developed from volleyball skill training.

H67
ENHANCED CORTICAL EXCITABILITY IN GRAPHEME-COLOUR
SYNAESTHESIA AND ITS MODULATION Devin Terhune1, Sarah Tai1, Alan
Cowey1, Tudor Popescu1, Roi Cohen Kadosh1; 1University of Oxford — Synaes-

thesia is an unusual condition characterized by the over-binding of two
or more features and the concomitant automatic and conscious experience of atypical, ancillary images or perceptions. Previous research suggests that synaesthetes display enhanced modality-specific perceptual
processing but it remains unclear whether enhanced processing contributes to conscious awareness of colour photisms. In three experiments,
we investigated whether grapheme-colour synaesthesia is characterized
by enhanced cortical excitability in primary visual cortex and the role
played by this hyperexcitability in the expression of synaesthesia. Using
transcranial magnetic stimulation, we show that synaesthetes display
three-fold lower phosphene thresholds than controls during stimulation
of the primary visual cortex. We next used transcranial direct current
stimulation to discriminate between two competing hypotheses of the
role of hyperexcitability in the expression of synaesthesia. We demonstrate that synaesthesia can be selectively augmented with cathodal stimulation and attenuated with anodal stimulation of primary visual cortex.
A control task revealed that the effect of the brain stimulation was specific to the experience of synaesthesia. These results indicate that hyperexcitability acts as a source of noise in visual cortex that influences the
availability of the neuronal signals underlying conscious awareness of
synaesthetic photisms.

H68
YOU CAN'T ESCAPE THE PAST: CROSS-MODAL BIAS CONTINGENT UPON
THE PREVIOUS TRIAL Alfred Yu1,2, W. David Hairston1,3; 1US Army
Research Laboratory, Human Research and Engineering Directorate, Aberdeen
Proving Ground, MD, 2Washington University in St. Louis, 3Wake Forest
University — Previous work has shown tremendous localization biases
that can occur when there is a conflict between senses. Recent evidence

219

Poster Session H — Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
suggests that these effects are not necessarily transient, but in fact carry
over to affect the perception of following events. For example, in the ventriloquism aftereffect, cross-modal adaptation leads an individual's auditory map to be biased by the presence of a consistent spatial disparity
between co-occuring auditory and visual stimuli after only a few seconds of exposure (Wozny & Shams, 2011), suggesting a sensitivity to the
sequence of spatial disparity experienced on preceding trials. We investigated the relationship between previous exposure to cross-modal discrepancy and the extent of bias observed at the present moment, and
how this relationship is dependent on awareness of the discrepancy.
Subjects performed an auditory localization judgment in the presence of
a spatially discrepant visual stimulus followed by a subjective judgment
of unity in a continuous stream. We found that the degree of bias shown
on the current trial was dependent on the previous perception of unity,
the extent of bias observed on the previous trial, and the consistency in
the discrepancy over past trials. These findings suggest that remapping
of auditory space can occur on a trial-by-trial basis, and that this sensory
recalibration is dependent on not only the history of exposure to crossmodal discrepancy, but also on the subjective experience of perceptual
unity. This approach lends itself to continuous measures of sensory recalibration, and can thus be used to monitor performance in real-world settings.

H69
INCIDENTAL AND CONTEXT-RESPONSIVE ACTIVATION OF FUNCTIONBASED ACTION FEATURES DURING OBJECT IDENTIFICATION: EVIDENCE
FROM LEFT-HEMISPHERE STROKE Chia-lin Lee1, Daniel Mirman1, Laurel

Buxbaum1; 1Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute, Philadelphia, PA — Both

structure-based (grasp-to-move) and function-based (skilled use) actions
are activated incidentally during object identification, with different
temporal dynamics, indicating that these representations are separable
(Lee et al, submitted). Using eyetracking, we assessed the hypothesis
that deficits in skilled object use should be associated with deficient
implicit activation of skilled use action information. Participants were 19
left hemisphere stroke patients, 8 with apraxia, a disorder of object use.
Similar prior investigations (Myung et al. 2010) have shown that
apraxics are sensitive to action similarity among objects, but have not
dissociated structure-based and function-based actions. We assessed the
temporal dynamics of participants’ eye gaze to target objects as well as
distractor objects sharing function-based, but not structure-based, action
features with targets (e.g., remote-control/keyfob). Targets were auditorily presented in neutral contexts (‘He saw the…’) or contexts containing
an action verb (‘He used the…’). As previously shown with healthy participants, non-apraxics fixated action-related distractors more than unrelated distractors in both contexts (p ? .001), indicating intact incidental
activation of skilled use action representations. In contrast, apraxics
showed significant competition effects in the action verb context (p =
.005) but not in the neutral context (p = 0.5). These data suggest, contrary
to the findings of Myung et al (2010), that object-use impairments are
associated with an absence of incidental activation of skilled use action
features during object processing unless additional contextual information is provided.

H70
MULTISENSORY CONVERGENCE OF VISION AND HAPTICS ACROSS
DEVELOPMENT R. Joanne Jao1, Thomas W. James1, Karin H. James1;
1Indiana University — As

perceptual agents situated within an environment, learning relies directly on multisensory experience that is gained
through sensorimotor interactions with objects in the environment. This
in turn drives perception. Thus, the study of active perception (e.g., haptic or visuohaptic manipulation) provides an ideal platform for studying
the development of the neural mechanisms of sensorimotor abilities,
object recognition, and cognition. Three groups of participants, 4- to 5.5year-olds (N = 15), 7- to 8.5-year-olds (N = 13), and adults (N = 8), were
included in an fMRI study investigating the neural development of multisensory systems at two sites of visuohaptic convergence: the lateral
occipital tactile-visual region (LOtv) for object recognition, and the intra-

220

parietal sulcus (IPS) for object-directed motor actions. Participants were
tested in a block design involving visual exploration of two-dimensional
images of objects and textures, and haptic exploration of their threedimensional counterparts. By contrasting objects and textures in both
sensory modalities, multisensory shape-selective BOLD responses were
assessed across the younger age groups and compared to adults. Results
indicated that similar neural systems were recruited for shape-selectivity
in children as in adults, but to a much lesser degree (as measured by
peak BOLD activation and extent). Furthermore, as compared with
adults, the youngest cohort exhibited a weak overlap between haptic
and visual shape-selective processes in LOtv, while the older children
exhibited little overlap between conditions in IPS. These results suggest
that the development of multisensory systems for object recognition is
nonlinearly modulated by increased experience through active perception and exploration.

H71
SIGHT AND SOUND CONVERGE TO FORM SUPRAMODAL
REPRESENTATIONS IN THE POSTERIOR SUPERIOR TEMPORAL
SULCUS Kingson Man1, Jonas Kaplan1, Antonio Damasio1, Kaspar Meyer1;

1University of Southern California — How do streams of information from
different sensory modalities converge to form higher-order supramodal
representations? Would the experience of hearing the ding-dong of a
bell, on the one hand, and watching a bell swing back and forth, on the
other, activate a common representation for a "bell" concept? We performed crossmodal multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) of fMRI data
to probe for supramodal representations, or patterns of brain activity
that met the following two conditions: (1) modality-independence, in
which an object presented in different sensory modalities nevertheless
evokes similar patterns of neural activity, and (2) content-specificity, in
which the pattern of neural activity evoked by one object is distinguishable from the patterns evoked by other objects. We acquired fMRI data
from eight subjects while they were shown audio clips and video clips
corresponding to six concrete objects. A GLM analysis identified four
multisensory regions co-activating to auditory and visual stimuli. Crossmodal MVPA was then performed on a separate set of data, using these
regions. A machine-learning classifier was trained on activity patterns
evoked by video clips and then tested on patterns from the corresponding audio clips. Of the four multisensory regions of interest, only the
posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS) was found to contain supramodal representations. An additional crossmodal searchlight analysis
also revealed a focal region within pSTS. We interpret these results
within a theoretical framework in which sensory information is integrated and rebroadcast by convergence-divergence zones. Finally, we
discuss the relevance of these results to concept empiricism in philosophy.

H72
AUTISTIC TRAITS ARE ASSOCIATED WITH DIMINISHED NEURAL
RESPONSE TO AFFECTIVE TOUCH Avery Voos1, Kevin Pelphrey1, Martha

Kaiser1; 1Yale University — Pleasant, gentle touch has been linked to a class
of slow-conducting, unmyelinated nerves, CT afferents, present only in
the hairy skin of mammals. Microneurography studies have shown that
CT-optimal stroking speeds range from 1-10 cm/s (Loken et al., 2009),
and are rated as more pleasant than both faster and slower speeds. Such
slow, gentle touch is reminiscent of that seen in social interactions, and
several key nodes of the ‘social brain’ were recently identified in processing such touch (Gordon et al, 2011). Given the importance of such ‘affective touch’ in social relationships, the current functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) study aimed to replicate the finding of ‘social
brain’ involvement in processing CT-targeted touch and to examine the
relationship between the neural response and individuals’ autistic traits.
Nineteen healthy adults received alternating blocks of slow (CT-optimal)
and fast (non-optimal) brushing to the forearm followed by filling out
the Autism Spectrum Quotient (AQ) . Relative to fast touch, the slow
touch activated contralateral insula, superior temporal sulcus (STS),
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), and
Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session H
amygdala. Connectivity analyses revealed co-activation of the mPFC,
insula and amygdala during slow touch. Participants’ autistic traits negatively correlated with the response to slow touch in the OFC and STS.
The current study highlights the involvement of a network of ‘social
brain’ regions in processing CT-targeted touch, while the correlation
between brain response and level of autistic traits illustrates a tight coupling of social behavior and brain function in typical adults.

H73
TRAINING-RELATED CHANGES IN THE CORTICAL NETWORKS FOR
MENTAL AUDITORY IMAGERY AND AUDITORY PERCEPTION Sibylle C.

Herholz1,2,3, Emily B.J. Coffey1,2,3, Robert J. Zatorre1,2,3; 1Montreal
Neurological Institute, McGill University, 2International Laboratory for Brain,
Music and Sound Research (BRAMS), 3Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in
Music Media and Technology (CIRMMT) — Short-term training has the
potential to alter neuronal correlates of auditory perception, for example
processing of short melodies within auditory cortex, but effects on
higher-order auditory cognition such as mental imagery are still unclear.
We used functional magnetic resonance imaging to investigate trainingrelated plasticity in the cortical networks for auditory processing and
mental imagery. 15 young adults with very little previous musical experience were scanned at three times, each separated by two six-week
intervals: a baseline interval without training, followed by six weeks of
piano training during which two subgroups were trained on different
sets of melodies. Functional data were acquired in a sparse sampling
design during which participants listened to familiar tunes, imagined
them cued by the first tones of the song, listened to random tones as control condition, or rested in silence. Participants were able to accurately
imagine the songs as evidenced by their above-chance performance in
judging correct or incorrect continuations of the melodies following the
imagery interval. Preliminary functional data revealed no changes during the first six weeks without training (baseline), but increased activity
post-training compared to pre-training in left premotor, prefrontal and
parietal cortex for both listen and auditory imagery conditions. Comparison of trained versus untrained familiar melodies revealed additional
effects in parietal association areas. The results of this short-term auditor-motor training study reveal plastic changes in areas related to motor
preparation and cross-modal integration. We demonstrate for the first
time that similar changes occur within the cortical networks for perception and for mental imagery.

H74
'TRANSCRANIAL ELECTRICAL CURRENTS TO PROBE CROSSMODAL
PHOSPHENES Silvia Convento1, Nadia Bolognini1,2, Chiara Galantini1,

Giuseppe Vallar1,2; 1University of Milano-Bicocca, 2IRCCS Istituto Auxologico
Italiano, Milan — Crossmodal interactions occur not only within brain
regions deemed heteromodal, but also in primary sensory areas, traditionally considered as modality-specific. This view is strengthened by
evidence showing crossmodal enhancement of visual phosphenes
induced by single pulse TMS (sTMS) over the occipital cortex. In the
present study, we took advantage of the possibility to induce polarityspecific excitability changes by using the non-invasive neuromodulation
technique transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) in order to
explore whether crossmodal influences on phosphene perception are
sensitive to the polarization of brain regions presumably mediating multisensory interactions in early visual areas. In a series of experiments,
participants underwent a phosphene detection task in different sensory
conditions: Unimodal (occipital sTMS delivered alone), Bimodal (sTMS
paired with a sound or a touch), or Trimodal (sTMS paired with both
sound and touch). Anodal or sham tDCS were applied to the occipital,
temporal, or posterior parietal cortices, prior to task delivery. Results
show that crossmodal interactions enhance cortical excitability in lowlevel visual areas, facilitating visual perception both in term of detection
accuracy and judgement of brightness of the visual event. In particular,
the more sensory information are combined, the bigger is the benefit on
phosphene perception. Moreover, we demonstrate that tDCS can modu-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

late these effects, likely influencing causal interactions between remote
but interconnected heteromodal parietal regions and early visual areas.
These findings shed further light on the neural mechanism subtending
crossmodal influences on sensory-specific brain regions and indicate
tDCS as a practical tool to manipulate cortical networks supporting multisensory interactions.

H75
ANATOMICAL CONNECTIONS BETWEEN THE COCHLEAR NUCLEUS AND
PRIMARY AUDITORY CORTEX PREDICT SOUND-INDUCED FACILITATION
OF VISUAL TARGET DETECTION IN HUMANS Ruud van den Brink1,

Michael Cohen1, Erik van der Burg2, Durk Talsma3, Marlies Vissers1, Heleen
Slagter1; 1University of Amsterdam, 2Free University of Amsterdam, 3Ghent
University — Auditory signals can improve detection of concurrent visual
targets. However, it remains debated how sounds facilitate visual target
detection. Some researchers have suggested that cross-modal enhancement of target detection is mediated by connections between low-level
sensory brain areas, while others have argued that top-down attention
governs this effect. Here we directly tested the former hypothesis using
diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging. Subjects detected
visual targets, and occasional auditory tones co-occurred with target
stimuli. Each subject’s primary auditory cortex (A1) was localized using
fMRI and an auditory localizer task. Replicating previous findings,
behavioral analyses showed that non-spatial sounds can facilitate spatial
detection of visual targets in a distracter display. Importantly, cross-subject correlation analyses showed that the strength of connections
between A1, the auditory thalamus, and the cochlear nucleus in the
brainstem predicted this sound-induced visual-target detection benefit.
These findings indicate that pathways between the first relay station in
the auditory system and A1 determine one’s ability to benefit from an
auditory cue, and implicate low-level connections in cross-modal attention in humans. More generally, these findings suggest that cross-modal
enhancement is governed by brain anatomy.

H76
MY TOOL HURTS! MODULATION OF PAIN ANTICIPATION IN THE
PERIPERSONAL SPACE Angela Rossetti1, Daniele Romano1, Angelo

Maravita1, Nadia Bolognini1,2; 1University of Milano-Bicocca, 2IRCCS Istituto
Auxologico Italiano — Peripersonal space is the region closely surrounding

our bodies. Within its boundaries avoidance of threatening objects is crucial for surviving. Here, we explored autonomic responses to painful
stimuli with respect to the dynamic properties of the peripersonal space.
To this aim, we recorded in healthy subjects Skin Conductance Response
(SCR) in response to an approaching painful stimulus, i.e. a needle presented at different distance from the body (far, near or on the hand).
Results showed that the SCR increased as the needle approached the
hand. Interestingly, this pattern of activation could be modified by active
tool-use which extended reachable space. Indeed, in a second experiment we demonstrated that after training with a tool to reach distant
objects, SCR increased solely to painful stimuli presented far from the
body. Following control experiments showed that the increase of SCR in
far space disappeared if the subject did not hold the tool, and that the
modulation of SCR was absent after training in far space without using
the tool. Overall, these findings demonstrated that the anticipation
response of pain depends critically on the proximity of the threat to the
relevant body part in external space, being more intense when the threat
approaches our body. However, the spatial coding of approaching painful stimuli can be effectively influenced by acting on the far space. This
evidence sheds novel light on mechanisms of pain anticipation and their
relationship with the representation of peri- and extra-personal space.

H77
GENERALIZATION OF PERCEPTUAL LEARNING USING A VISUAL-TOAUDITORY SENSORY SUBSTITUTION DEVICE. David J Brown1; 1Queen
Mary University of London — Sensory substitution devices (SSD) convert
one type of sensory signal into another and therefore may be used to
facilitate everyday functioning in individuals with some form of sensory
221

Poster Session H — Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
loss. For example, one visual-to-auditory SSD, The vOICe (Meijer, 1992)
converts visual features (brightness, spatial position) into auditory features (amplitude, pitch, and time). Whilst efficacy has been demonstrated for both object recognition and localisation using SSD’s the
neural basis is still unclear. Adapting an established unimodal paradigm
we tested sighted blindfolded participants in an interval discrimination
task using a sonified visual image. Three groups, varying in number of
training days, were trained on a specific monaural temporal interval
(90ms, 1khz) and then tested on 3 novel alternate stimuli ( interval, frequency and binaural input) to try and ascertain which features of the
conversion algorithm were driving the generalization and when on the
time course paradigm this learning transfer occurs. Results indicate
rapid specific perceptual learning to the trained stimulus and a significant trend for generalization to both the untrained frequency (as found
in the auditory paradigm) and untrained temporal interval (novel) for
the longest 10 day training group. The implications of these results are
twofold. From a practical perspective, the temporal lag between specific
and generalized perceptual learning informs on the development of
training protocols for effective use of sensory substitution devices. From
a theoretical basis, generalization to the untrained interval suggests that
whilst the signal from the device is in essence auditory it is processed in
a multimodal manner.

H78
ASSESSING CROSSMODAL INTEGRATION OF AUDITORY AND VISUAL
STIMULI IN POSTERIOR SUPERIOR TEMPORAL SULCUS WITH
MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY Jessica Gilbert1, Ajay Pillai1, Barry

Horwitz1; 1National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication
Disorders — Crossmodal integration of auditory and visual stimuli is an
important component of perception, with the posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS) hypothesized to support this. To test this, we had subjects (N=13) learn 12 abstract, non-linguistic pairs of auditory and visual
stimuli over four weeks. These paired associates were of four types:
auditory-visual (AV), auditory-auditory (AA), visual-auditory (VA), and
visual-visual (VV). At week four, subjects were scanned using magnetoencephalography (MEG) while performing a correct/incorrect judgment on pairs of items. During scanning, subjects were first presented
with a learned auditory or visual stimulus (S1), followed by a delay
period, then the simultaneous presentation of an auditory and visual
stimulus (S2). During S2, the correct paired associate was presented in
either the visual or auditory modality on 50% of trials. MEG data were
collected at a 600 Hz sampling rate, using a 275-channel whole-head
MEG system. Using synthetic aperture magnetometry (SAM), a minimum variance beamformer, we directly contrasted crossmodal (AV and
VA) with unimodal (AA and VV) pairs from S2 onset for 2 seconds.
Comparisons were made in theta (4-8 Hz), alpha (9-15 Hz), beta (16-30
Hz), and gamma (31-54 Hz) frequencies. We found pSTS showed a significant group-level difference in the beta frequency, with greater desynchronization for crossmodal compared with unimodal trials. Using a
sliding window technique, we found the timing of this difference
occurred maximally at ~250-750 ms after S2 onset. Thus, these findings
support an early role for pSTS in crossmodal integration of auditory and
visual stimuli.

H79
EMBODIED AESTHETICS: AUDIOMOTOR REPRESENTATION OF MUSIC IN
EXPERTS AND LAYPERSONS. Luca Ticini1, Giacomo Novembre1, Florian

Waszak2, Simone Schuetz-Bosbach1, Peter Keller1; 1Max Planck Institute for
Human Cognitive and Brain, Leipzig, 2Université Paris Descartes & CNRS —

Our brain can recognize the actions of others by representing their
sounds as a motor event. Previous studies have demonstrated the activation of the listener's motor cortex during passive perception of overfamiliar motor acts, such as the sound of a trained piano performance.
Less is known about the embodiment of the sounds of unfamiliar
actions. We used music as a model to investigate how the motor system
is engaged by passive listening to a piano performance that was unfamil-

222

iar and untrained. Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) was
employed to measure the correspondence between auditory and motor
codes in a group of music experts and a group of laypersons. We compared the corticomotor excitability in response to the presentation of 60
performances of the same melody that differed only in expressive timing
(i.e., the subtle temporal nuances introduced by a performer to an otherwise perfectly timed interpretation). Each performance was followed by
a question referring to preceding audio (how much participants liked the
performance just heard). The findings revealed strongest activation of
the motor system to unrehearsed melodies that (i) differed more in
expressive timing and (ii) were rated as esthetically pleasing. This activation is common to music experts and laypersons. As such, these findings
argue that the human motor system is sensitive to a broader range of features beyond those that are familiar and deepen our understanding on
the embodied simulation account of esthetic experience. Funding: Supported by DFG (Schu2471/1-1), ANR (ANR-08-FASHS-13).

H80
HUMAN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL REFLECTIONS OF THE RECRUITMENT
OF PERCEPTUAL PROCESSING DURING ACTIONS THAT ENGAGE
MEMORY Leanna Cruikshank1, Jeremy B Caplan1, Anthony Singhal1;

1University of Alberta — The N170 event-related potential (ERP) component reflects visual perceptual processes and is known to have a source
in the lateral occipital cortex (LOC) and temporal lobe regions. Convergent evidence from neuropsychological and neuroimaging studies suggests that the LOC is recruited for action tasks in which visibility of a
target is unavailable and perceptual memory must be used instead. We
tested whether the N170 reflects the contribution of additional ventral
stream processes required for actions in which vision of a target is
occluded, predicting that the amplitude of the ERP in the latency range
of the N170 would be larger when perceptual mechanisms are engaged
to a greater extent. Participants were auditorily cued to touch target dots
on a touchscreen. Two viewing conditions varied with respect to the contribution of the ventral stream during response initiation. In condition 1,
the target disappeared with movement initiation whereas in condition 2,
it disappeared with the cue to respond. The N170 during the initiation
phase of trials was larger in amplitude for condition 2. This effect was
observed over temporal electrode sites, likely reflecting an overlap
between auditory cue-related processes and additional perceptual processes within regions in the inferior-temporal cortex. A second experiment ruled out the possible confound of the offset of the visual stimulus.
Thus, the N170 may be a marker of neural activity within the ventral
stream, supporting the notion that actions initiated in the absence of a
visual target rely more on perceptual representations than those directed
towards visually available targets.

H81
EMBODIED AESTHETIC: USING SOMATOSENSORY ERPS AND EXPERTISE
TO REVEAL EMBODIMENT MECHANISM DURING AESTHETIC
PERCEPTION OF BODY POSTURES Beatriz Calvo-Merino1,2, Alexander

Jones2, Helge Gillmeister3, Maria Tziraki2, Bettina Forster2; 1University
Complutense Madrid, Spain., 2City University London, UK., 3University of
Essex, UK. — Aesthetic processing has recently been associated with an
embodiment mechanism. However, the nature of this embodiment is
rather unclear. Here we present a somatosensory event-related potential
study to explore the neurophysiological correlates of this embodiment
during the aesthetic process and how it is modulated by the experience
of the observer. EEG was recorded for two groups of participants (18
expert dancers, 18 control non-dancers) during the observation of pairs
of body postures while they performed two tasks: (a) an aesthetic preference task, (b) a perceptual task in which the same pairs of body postures
were judged for changes in luminance. Moreover, in order to understand
if embodiment follows a somatotopic structure, we selected body posture pairs that differed in either upper or lower limb positions. Somatosensory event-related potentials were evoked by tactually stimulating
hands and feet using small solenoids while participants performed both

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session H
aesthetic and perceptual tasks. Embodiment was measured as the congruency between the body part touched (hands, feet) and the observed
body posture limb change (upper, lower limbs). The results showed task
differences starting at very early stage of processing (P45, N80), likely in
primary somatosensory cortex. Moreover, the expert group showed earlier indicators of embodiment in the aesthetic task than the non-expert
group. These results show that different attitudes for seeing (e.g., aesthetic) and acquired sensorimotor expertise modulates sensory
responses at a very early stages. Finally, these findings may explain why
liking is related to physical sensations and embodiment of an observed
piece of art.

H82
THE HANDS HAVE IT: HAND-SPECIFIC VISUAL EVENTS BOOST TOUCH
PERCEPTION THE MOST Brenda Malcolm1, Karen Reilly2, Jérémie
Mattout3,

Salemme2,

Bertrand3,

Ro1,

Farnè2;

Roméo
Olivier
Tony
Alessandro
The City College and Graduate Center of the City University of New York,
2ImpAct Team, INSERM U1028 - CNRS UMR5292, Lyon Neuroscience
Research Center, Lyon 1 University, 3Brain Dynamics and Cognition Team,
INSERM U1028 - CNRS UMR5292, Lyon Neuroscience Research Center, Lyon
1 University — Our ability to accurately discriminate information from one
1

sensory modality is often influenced by information from other sensory
modalities. Previous research indicates that tactile perception on the
hand may be enhanced if participants look at a hand (compared to a neutral object) and if additional visual information about the origin of touch
conveys temporal and/or spatial congruency. The current experiment
seeks to further assess the effects of non-informative vision on tactile
perception. Participants made speeded discrimination responses to the
location (digit 2 or digit 5 of their right hand) of supra-threshold electrocutaneous stimulation while viewing a video showing a pointer, in a
static position or moving (dynamic), towards either the same digit of a
hand or to the corresponding spatial location on a non-corporeal object
(engine). Therefore, besides manipulating whether a visual contact was
spatially congruent or incongruent to the simultaneously felt touch, we
also manipulated the nature of the recipient object (hand vs. engine).
Results showed that dynamic information speeded up RTs, most likely
by providing temporal cues about the upcoming touch. Critically, a
greater enhancement in tactile discrimination was present when participants viewed a spatially congruent contact compared to a spatially
incongruent contact (measured with inverse efficiency scores (IES) to
control for possible speed/accuracy tradeoffs). Most importantly, this
visually driven improvement was greater for the view-hand condition
compared to the view-engine condition. We conclude that tactile perception is enhanced when vision provides non-predictive spatio-temporal
cues, and that these effects are specifically boosted when viewing a
hand.

H83
EEG CORRELATES OF UNSUPERVISED SPATIAL LEARNING IN
IMMERSIVE, LARGE-SCALE VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENTS Markus Plank1,

Joseph Snider1, Eric Halgren1, Howard Poizner1; 1University of California San
Diego — Humans’ ability to generate, modify, and utilize spatial representations in novel environments is crucial for accurate navigation and
goal-oriented object interaction. Environmental learning occurs even
unsupervised, in the absence of explicit teaching and reward. We were
interested in understanding the electrophysiological markers of unsupervised learning and memory in naturalistic, large-scale environments.
To this end, we developed an innovative, fully synchronized experimental setup allowing us to record high-density electroencephalography
(EEG) and full-body motion capture while subjects were bodily moving
within immersive, realistic virtual environments. On the first day of this
two-day experiment, subjects actively explored the environment and
indicated their interest for uncovered objects on a virtual slider bar
(“exploration task”). On the second day, subsets of these objects were
swapped, and participants indicated if an object was unchanged or
changed (“memory task”). Behaviorally, subjects correctly identified 70 -

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

95% of the objects. Electrophysiologically, the memory task on day 2 elicited an increased positivity around 230 ms following object encounter
over medial frontal regions compared to viewing the objects on day 1,
indicating resource-intense attentional allocation for processing object
identity and location. Furthermore, the memory task was associated
with increased negativity around 450 ms peaking over left-frontal and
left-temporal regions. Strikingly, the amplitude of this N400-like component was further increased in centro-parietal and left-temporal areas
when subjects encountered object alterations in the environment. This
difference most likely indicates distinctive processing when representational expectancies of object-location associations are violated, extending
EEG results of studies on semantic congruency to active spatial exploration.

H84
INFERENCES ABOUT FOOD PLEASANTNESS MODULATE ACTIVITY IN THE
VENTRAL PALLIDUM. Kristina Rapuano1, W. Kyle Simmons1,3, John

Ingeholm1, Nick Knuth2, Kevin Hall2, Alex Martin1; 1Laboratory of Brain &
Cognition, NIMH/NIH, Bethesda, MD, 2Laboratory of Biological Modeling,
NIDDK/NIH, Bethesda, MD, 3Laureate Institute for Brain Research, Tulsa,
OK — With the recent interest in the neural systems that support food
perception and food selection, much translational neuroscience evidence
has accumulated demonstrating that activity in the ventral pallidum is
associated with the hedonic pleasure linked with ingesting a rewarding
food. Efforts to address the growing obesity epidemic, however, will
benefit from knowing whether activity in the ventral pallidum also
reflects our on-going judgments of the pleasure associated with a particular food prior to eating it. We thus asked subjects to view pictures of
foods while undergoing fMRI, and to provide ratings of how pleasant it
would be at that moment to eat the food item depicted in the photograph. Ratings were provided via a hand-held scroll wheel by which
subjects selected values along a 7-point number line. Echoplanar imaging was conducted with a 3T MRI scanner and an 8-element array of
receive-only head surface coils with imaging parameters selected to optimize image quality in the striatum, pallidum, and OFC. We found bilateral regions of the ventral pallidum, as well as the orbitofrontal cortex
(OFC), where activity was modulated on an item-by-item basis by subjects’ ratings of food pleasantness. These findings demonstrate that individuals’ inferences about food pleasantness are related to activity in
ventral pallidum and OFC regions known to underlie the hedonic experience associated with ingesting rewarding food. The ventral pallidum
may thus be an important target for behavioral and pharmacological
interventions aimed at reducing caloric intake by changing how subjects
think about foods prior to eating them.

H85
PHANTOMS AND THE BODY SCHEMA: A CASE OF TACTILE AND VISUAL
SYNCHIRIA Jared Medina1,2, Daniel E. Drebing1,2, H. Branch Coslett1, Roy

H. Hamilton1; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2Haverford College — After

being
presented with a stimulus on the ipsilesional side of space, individuals
with synchiria report stimulation on the ipsilesional and contralesional
side of space. Although most published reports of synchiria are limited
to a single modality, we report an individual with a right frontoparietal
lesion (KG) who demonstrates both tactile and visual synchiria. We presented KG with a series of tests in order to explore the characteristics of
her multisensory deficit. In all experiments, she was asked to report
whether a stimulus was presented on the left side, right side, both sides,
or not at all. For tactile stimulation, she reported tactile synchiria on
approximately 30% of trials. As KG demonstrated tactile synchiria, we
were curious if presenting visual stimuli on the body versus off the body
would modulate her perception of phantom visual percepts. Furthermore, as she does not report seeing phantoms in everyday life, we also
examined the effect of stimulus length on her phantom synchiric percepts. First, we found that KG was significantly more likely to report
phantom synchiric percepts when visual stimuli were on her hands
(61%) versus off her hands (24%). Furthermore, for stimuli on the hands,

223

Poster Session H — Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall
she was significantly more likely to report phantoms for >250 msec stimuli (81%) versus 500-1000 msec stimuli (30%). We discuss these and other
results with regards to the interaction between multisensory representations of the body and the functional mechanisms that, when removed,
result in synchiria.

H88
DISSECTING THE BODY SCHEMA: TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC
STIMULATION AND THE TACTILE TEMPORAL ORDER JUDGMENT TASK

H86
LIP READING WITHOUT AWARENESS Emmanuel

order judgment (TOJ) task with the hands crossed, participants will
often invert the correct order of stimuli at short ISIs (Yamamoto &
Kitazawa, 2002). This and other studies provide evidence that tactile
stimuli are first represented in a somatotopic representation agnostic to
body position, and then takes into account their position in external
space (body posture representation; see Medina & Coslett, 2010). In
order to explore functional and neural dissociations in body representations, we presented TMS during a tactile TOJ task. Eight subjects were
tested on a tactile TOJ task with the hands uncrossed and crossed before
and after 20 minutes of rTMS. Stimulation was presented to left anterior
intraparietal sulcus (aIPS, body form) or left Brodmann Area 5 (BA5,
body posture) during two sessions. We predicted that TMS to regions
involved in representing body form would result in poorer TOJ performance with hands crossed and uncrossed. However, we predicted that
TMS of regions involved in representing body posture would disrupt
updating of limb position with the hands crossed, resulting in a paradoxical improvement in performance after TMS. Using thresholds derived
from adaptive staircase procedures, we found that TMS to left aIPS disrupted TOJ in the uncrossed condition. However, TMS to left BA5
resulted in a substantial improvement in tactile TOJ with the hands
crossed when compared to no TMS. These results provide novel evidence for both functional and neural dissociations of the body schema.

Guzman-Martinez1,
1
1
1,2
Laura Ortega , Marcia Grabowecky , Satoru Suzuki ; 1Department of
Psychology, Northwestern University, 2Interdepartmental Neuroscience
Program, Northwestern University — Looking at a talking face facilitates
speech perception, but this crossmodal effect depends on attention.
What about awareness? As recent evidence suggests dissociation
between attention and awareness, we determined whether visual influences on speech perception required awareness. The task was to listen to
spoken words and to determine as quickly and accurately as possible
whether each word indicated a tool. The face of the speaker was concurrently presented. The face either articulated the word that the participant
heard (the synchronous condition) or a different word of the same length
(the asynchronous condition). The face was either visible or suppressed
from awareness using Continuous Flash Suppression where the face was
presented to one eye and a strong dynamic mask was presented to the
other eye. A dot-detection task was used to ensure that participants
attended to the mouth region whether or not the face was visible. A
small fraction of the “unaware” trials on which participants saw the face
were removed from the analysis. There was no effect of synchronized lip
movements on the face-visible trials probably because participants discarded the visual information, which was inconsistent with the auditory
words on 50% of the trials. Surprisingly, when the face was invisible,
synchronous lip movements (compared to asynchronous lip movements) significantly speeded responses to the target words. This demonstrates that even when a random dynamic mask renders a face invisible,
lip movements are still processed by the visual system with high temporal accuracy to facilitate auditory speech perception based on crossmodal synchrony.

H87
AUDIO-VISUAL INTEGRATION IN MID-CHILDHOOD: AN EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS (ERP) STUDY Natalya Kaganovich1, Jennifer Schumaker1,
Megan MacPherson1, Dana Gustafson1, Danielle Haggard1, Jihyun Kim1;

1Purdue University — Audio-visual

integration plays an important role in
child language acquisition, speech-in-noise perception, and long-term
memory formation. One measure of efficient audio-visual integration is
the ability to differentiate between synchronous and asynchronous
events. It is well-established that sensitivity to audio-visual asynchrony
is poor in infants compared to adults. However, how it develops
throughout childhood is less understood. We examined the ability of 7and 8-year old typically developing children and college-age adults to
discriminate between audio-visually synchronous and asynchronous
stimuli. The stimuli consisted of a 2 kHz pure tone and an explosionshaped red figure. Both stimuli lasted for 200 ms and were presented
either alone (figure only or sound only), synchronously, or separated by
100-500 ms, in 100 ms increments. Participants pressed one button if the
sound and the figure occurred at the same time, and another button if
they did not. Both behavioral and ERP measures were collected. Compared to adults, children were significantly more likely to identify asynchronous stimuli as synchronous when the offsets ranged from 200 to
500 ms, regardless of the order of modalities (visual first or auditory
first). Furthermore, adults showed a larger P2 peak amplitude to audiovisually synchronous stimuli compared to the sum of brain responses to
auditory only and visual only stimuli, but this P2 enhancement was
absent in children. The results indicate that the neural mechanisms
underlying audio-visual integration have a protracted developmental
course and are not yet mature in school-age children.

224

Shaan Khurshid1, Jared Medina1,2, Roy H. Hamilton1, H. Branch Coslett1;
1
University of Pennsylvania, 2Haverford College — On a tactile temporal

H89
RELIEVING A PHANTOM ITCH Elizabeth Seckel1, Claude Miller2, Eric

Altschuler3, V.S. Ramachandran1; 1UCSD, 2UCLA, 3UMDNJ — Many amputees
report experiencing an uncomfortable phantom itch – the perception of
an itch relating to a limb that is no longer a part of the body. They are
unable to relieve the itch as the phantom limb is not under voluntary
control. We have previously shown (Ramachandran and Rogers-Ramachandran, 1996; Altschuler and Scott, 2011) that mirror box therapy
using visual feedback may relieve pain present in a phantom limb. We
wondered whether similar techniques could be used to relieve a phantom itch. A mirror is placed vertically on a table so that the mirror reflection of the patient's intact lower limb is `superimposed' on the felt
position of the phantom. The patient is then instructed to scratch the
intact limb where they felt the itch on the phantom. This gave the patient
the visual illusion that the phantom itch was also being scratched, which
significantly reduced the phantom itch. As a control, subjects repeated
the condition with their eyes closed. This invites the idea of a new expansion upon the mirror box therapy technique as many patients report a
very uncomfortable phantom itch. Further studies should explore
whether mirror visual feedback may reduce an itch in normal subjects.

H90
PERCEPTION AS THE INTEGRAL OF SEMBLANCES FORMED BY REACTIVATION OF EXISTING PREVIOUSLY FORMED FUNCTIONAL LINKS
BETWEEN THE POSTSYNAPSES Kunjumon Vadakkan1; 1Division of
Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba — How does firing of
a neuron or activation of its synapses impart an internal sensory meaning of perception to the nervous system that it is a part of? An item in the
environment can induce simultaneous activation of multiple sensory
receptors, similar to associative learning. This induces changes at the
locations of convergence of the sensory pathways at higher brain orders
such that at a later time point when only one of the sensory inputs
arrives, it is capable of inducing semblance of the remaining sensations
that arrived with it before. This can be explained by the formation of a
functional LINK between postsynapses (postsynaptic membranes), each
from different sensory inputs, at locations of their convergence. At a later
time point when only one of the sensations arrives at its postsynapse, the
functional LINK gets re-activated activating the LINKed postsynapse.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session H
Activation of this second postsynapse without the activation of its presynapse induces a semblance of activity arriving from the latter (Vadakkan KI (2011), Frontiers in Neuroengineering). The sensory identity of
this semblance of activity can be extrapolated from the penultimate neuronal orders that lead towards the sensory receptor level. From this,
hypothetical packets of sensory inputs that can stimulate the minimum
number of sensory receptors to induce the semblance, namely “semblions” are derived. The internal sensation of perception can be viewed
as an integral of all the semblions formed and is a function of the previously formed functional LINKs, which in turn is a function of previous
associative learning.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
H91
CROSS-CATEGORY FACE ADAPTATION OF FEATURE ASSOCIATION

fengpei hu1, jing luo2, duming wang1, huan hu1, yiwen wang1; 1Department of
psychology, zhejiang sci&tech university, 2Institute of Microchemistry,
Beijing — Prolonged viewing of faces can bias the perception of subsequently viewed faces. A recent study (Ghuman, McDaniel, & Martin,
2010) demonstrated that prolonged viewing of sex-specific body images
without faces can also bias the subsequent perception of faces. Here we
provided new pieces of evidence for this cross-category aftereffect.
Adapting to images of non-face objects with strong gender-specific ties
affected subsequent sex judgment of androgynous faces created by morphing between male and female faces. In Experiment 1, we varied the
exposure time of the adapting images between 50 and 3200 ms. We
found the largest aftereffect when the adapting images were presented
for 400 ms. After viewing a female-specific object (e.g., lipstick), participants (n = 12) were more likely to judge a sex ambiguous face as male
than in the baseline condition where no adaptor image was presented. In
Experiment 2 (n = 12), we explored this cross category aftereffect by
using images and words of gender-specific items as adaptors. We replicated the results in Experiment 1 with images of gender-specific items.
With words of gender-specific items we found a smaller but significant
aftereffect. In Experiment 3, we manipulated the cognitive load of the
participants (n = 19) by adding a letter detection task with three levels of
difficulty. Increasing cognitive load reduced and eventually eliminated
the cross-category aftereffect. In conclusion, the current findings suggest
that high-level visual aftereffects can happen when adapting and testing
stimuli share connections that are beyond figural similarity.

H92
CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF A P300 SPELLER DURING DIFFERENT
PERIODS OF EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS. Gunther Krausz1, Rupert

Ortner1, Christoph Guger1; 1g.tec medical engineering GmbH, Sierningstr. 14,
4521 Schiedlberg, Austria — When talking about Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) controlled spelling devices for disabled people, P300 based
systems are the preferred ones, as they provide a high information transfer rate and low training time. In a previous study measurements on 100
subjects were performed, to find out how many people are able to control a P300 based BCI. 8 EEG channels were recorded and each subject
performed a 5-character training session followed by a 5-character test
session to obtain the individual classification accuracy using a linear discriminant analysis (LDA) classifier. Almost 90% of the participants
reached an accuracy of 80 – 100% with the row-column speller. Beneath
these results we present the classification accuracy of some single periods of the event related potential such as components occurring around
100 ms, 200 ms and 300 ms after stimulus onset. The data proves that a
high spelling accuracy can be achieved with the P300 BCI system, with
needing only about 5 minutes of training time. When looking at specific
periods it is not surprising that the component around 300 ms is best
suitable for discriminating between target and non-target stimuli,
although for “bad performers” a window around 200 ms delivers even a
higher accuracy. These findings underline the importance of the N200

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

component for the spelling-BCI as it reflects both, involuntary visual
processing and conscious attention.

H93
OCULOMOTOR DEFICIT IN PATIENTS WITH BASAL GANGLIA LESION

Bridget Andrews1, Giovanni d'Avossa1, Ayelet Sapir1; 1Bangor University —
Stroke patients often show slow saccadic reaction time (SRT) towards
contralesional targets. This could be due to difficulty in target detection
or in planning and executing the saccade itself. Thirteen chronic stroke
patients (seven with a right hemisphere lesion) with unilateral cortical
and subcortical lesions, and twelve healthy control participants completed a pro- and anti-saccade task to assess their perceptual and oculomotor deficits. Participants viewed two white circular place holders
either side of central fixation cross, while at random intervals one of
them would become green (pro-saccade target) or red (anti-saccade target). Participants moved their eyes toward the green target and away
from the red target toward the opposite place holder, while an eyetracker recorded their eyes. The anti-saccade condition enabled us to dissociate between perceptual and oculomotor deficits, as slow SRT following an ipsilesional red target (requiring a contralesional eye movement)
would indicate an oculomotor deficit, while a slow SRT following a contralesional red target (requiring an ipsilesional eye movement) would
indicate a perceptual deficit. Three patients were slow to execute contralesional saccades in both the pro- and anti-saccade conditions, showing an oculomotor deficit. These patients were the only patients to have
lesions in the basal ganglia while none of the other patients with lesions
elsewhere showed the same deficit. We conclude that lesions in the basal
ganglia lead to a deficit in planning and executing eye movements
toward contralesional stimuli. These results support recent findings
associating the basal ganglia with directional hypokinesia in neglect
patients.

H94
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF FEEDBACK INFORMATION PROCESSING
Hammer1,
Vladimir
IN VISUAL CATEGORY LEARNING TASKS Rubi

Sloutsky2, Kalanit Grill-Spector1; 1Department of psychology, Stanford
University, 2Center for Cognitive Science and Department of psychology, The
Ohio State University — Visual Category Learning (VCL) is a fundamental

cognitive capacity that has been reported to involve multiple neural systems in the human brain. To date the respective role of these neural systems and the way they interact in VCL tasks is not well understood. In
order to determine the neural mechanisms involved in processing feedback information necessary to disambiguate a categorization rule, we
scanned participants while they performed both supervised and unsupervised VCL tasks where informative trial-by-trial feedback was provided only in supervised VCL tasks. For each task we used a distinct
novel creature-like stimuli in which stimuli differed from one another
across several feature-dimensions (e.g. body shape, limbs size, tail
length…), yet only one feature-dimension was important for determining the category identity among one of two subcategories. This design
mimicked the expected ambiguity one experiences when introduced
with novel natural-like objects. Each learning trial was composed of
three sequential events – stimuli presentation, response via key press,
and feedback processing. This allowed disassociating the neural correlates of these VCL components. Our data show higher neural activity
associated with negative feedback (as compared with positive feedback)
in the intraparietal sulcus, anterior cingulate, frontopolar, ventrolateral
and premotor cortices. This finding suggests that brain processing of
informative negative feedback which leads to performance improvement
involves coupling between neural activity in brain regions involved in
error detection and conflict management (anterior cingulate) as well as
cognitive control (frontopolar; ventrolateral), with regions associated
with visuospatial processing (intraparietal sulcus) and response execution (premotor cortex).

225

Poster Session H — Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall

H95
OBJECT-BASED
ATTENTIONAL
MODULATION
OF
EFFECTIVE
CONNECTIVITY IN BIOLOGICAL MOTION PERCEPTION Ashley Safford1,

Kristine Siembieda1, James Thompson1; 1George Mason University — The
ability to recognize and understand the movements and actions of others
is critical to effective social interaction. The role that selective attention
may play in modulating the brain regions involved in processing these
complex stimuli is unclear. To better characterize this relationship, here,
we combined event-related fMRI and dynamic causal modeling (DCM)
to examine task-related changes in effective connectivity between attention control areas and cortical areas that show object-motion categoryspecific responses. Eighteen participants attended to point-light animations of either human or tool motion that were spatially overlapping
with either intact or scrambled versions of the other motion type. fMRI
results showed object-category responses in the lateral temporal cortex;
bilateral superior temporal sulcus (STS) responded more strongly to biological motion, while left inferior temporal gyrus (ITG) showed a greater
response to tool motion. Importantly, these category responses were
modulated by attention such that directing attention to tool motion
reduced responses in STS. The superior parietal lobule (SPL) and middle
temporal gyrus (MTG) showed greater response to overlapping intact
stimuli, reflecting increased attention. Random effects group analysis
comparing 24 DCM models with family level inference support a model
in which visual information enters the network through MTG; following
this initial object motion processing step, category selective regions
(ITG/STS) are modulated by top-down and bottom-up influences from
SPL and MTG based on task-attention conditions. These results highlight
the important role of top-down influences on cortical regions selective
for biological and tool motion.

H96
ISOLATING THE RIPPLES OF RECOGNITION WITHIN STIMULUS-DRIVEN
SSVEP WAVES: TOPOGRAPHIC INSIGHTS INTO WORD AND FACE
IDENTITY PROCESSING Yuliya Yoncheva1, Zachariah Reagh1,2, Bruce

McCandliss1; 1Vanderbilt University, 2University of Alabama at Birmingham —
Steady-state visual evoked potentials (SSVEPs) are resonant oscillatory
EEG responses to repetitive stimulation. While it has been demonstrated
that low-level perceptual and attentional processes can modulate SSVEP
power, it remains unknown whether SSVEPs exhibit sensitivity to
higher-level categorization processes such as word recognition. To
investigate this question, we induced a novel EEG frequency related specifically to higher-level processes, independent of stimulus oscillation
rate. Category specificity was indexed by shifts in SSVEP topography for
recognizing words versus faces. High-density EEG was recorded while
sixteen adults detected occasional targets within blocks of word or face
stimuli, each presented at a constant frame-update rate of 7.5 Hz. Identity-update rate was manipulated: in the control condition, each stimulus
represented a unique face or word at a unique location; in the experimental condition, stimulus identity was updated only once every three
frames (2.5 Hz). Power increases emerged at the identity-update rate and
its harmonic for words and faces, indicative of an oscillation relevant to
stimulus identification. This effect was category-specific (whole-map
topographic ANOVA p<.05). Notably, the topography of identityupdate harmonic revealed differential power over left versus right visual
cortex (p<.05): oscillating words produced a more left-lateralized
response relative to oscillating faces. This pattern is consistent with the
engagement of left-lateralized networks in early perception of linguistic
information. These findings demonstrate that higher-level mechanisms
encoding categories, e.g., words and faces, can induce new frequencies
in the SSVEP, independent of stimulus presentation rate, and thus offer a
novel tool for studying face perception and reading development.

226

H97
THE ROLE OF SPATIAL FREQUENCY IN OBJECT RECOGNITION: EVIDENCE
FROM BACKWARD MASKING AND FMRI Anat Fintzi1, Brittany Eltman2,

Bradford Z. Mahon1; 1University of Rochester, 2Messiah College — Previous
research shows that mid-to-high spatial frequencies (SF) are critical for
face recognition. We conduct two experiments, one behavioral (Exp 1)
and one using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI; Exp 2), to
study the role of different SF bands in supporting recognition of a
broader range of categories: tools, places, animals, and faces. Experiment
1 used a backward masking paradigm where participants made living/
nonliving decisions on visible targets preceded by masked primes. Prime
images were identical to targets and were scrambled or band-passed filtered (width = 1.32 octaves, range = .17 to 11.1 cycles per degree). Midto-high band-pass primes (2.12 to 4.87 cycles per degree) elicited the fastest response times for target categorization across all categories, indicating that a relatively narrow range of SF is critical for object recognition.
In Experiment 2, two-minute movies were created in which a given picture (tools and animals) transitioned from low SF to high SF, or the
reverse. Critically, only a narrow range of SF (width = 1.2 octaves) was
present at any given moment. Participants free-viewed the movies during fMRI scanning. We used phase-lag analyses to create whole brain
maps of continuous variation in BOLD preferences of different SF
ranges. Results show that activation in the ventral object-processing
stream is most highly correlated with mid-to-high SF information for
tools and animals. This is consistent with Experiment 1, where mid-tohigh SFs elicited the strongest semantic priming across categories.
Results of both experiments are discussed in the context of current models of visual object recognition.

H98
IF YOU LOOK HAPPY, YOU LOOK FEMALE: STEREOTYPICAL BIAS IN FACE
AFTER-EFFECTS Fika Karnadewi1, Derek H. Arnold1, Ottmar V. Lipp1;

1University of Queensland — Exposure to a human face can induce a ‘face
after-effect', wherein the appearance of a subsequent face is altered.
Exposure to a male face, for instance, can make a subsequent androgynous face look more female. Investigations of these effects, to date, have
been bound within a single categorical dimension, such as gender, race,
or emotion. Processing each of these categorical dimensions has been
shown to map onto separate neural networks (e.g., Haxby et al., 2000).
The multidimensional nature of facial coding, however, allows for interactions between distinct facial characteristics. For instance, male faces
adopting neutral expressions are more often judged as angry than are
female faces, and androgynous happy faces are more often judged as
female than male. In Experiment 1 we replicated these subjective relationships. We then examined if these relationships would impact face
after-effects via face adaptation test. We found that adapting to male and
female faces adopting neutral expressions produced an after-effect when
judging the facial expressions of androgynous faces (Exp2). Similarly,
exposure to androgynous faces adopting angry and happy expressions
produced an after-effect when judging gender (Exp3). These results
show that the interdependence of gender and emotional expression
impacts the processes responsible for generating face after-effects. These
data suggest that face after-effects could be used to identify independent
and interdependent facial characteristics.

H99
REDUCED OCULOMOTOR INHIBITION WITH INCREASED VISUAL
WORKING MEMORY LOAD Keisha Notice1, Ian van der Linde1, Shahina

Pardhan1, Peter Bright1; 1Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge, UK — Oculo-

motor inhibition in the retinotopic neuronal map of the superior colliculus results in saccadic eye movements deviating away from covertly
attended objects. Saccades have also been shown to deviate away from
the locations of remembered objects in peripheral vision (e.g., Theeuwes
et al., 2005). Using a dual-task paradigm, this study, comprising three
counterbalanced conditions, examined the extent to which visual working memory (VWM) influences saccadic deviation. In condition 1 (sac-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 8:00 - 10:00 am, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session H
cade paradigm) participants executed eye movements from a fixation
cross towards a target stimulus following a briefly presented (500ms)
peripheral distractor. In condition 2 (VWM paradigm) participants performed a 2-interval yes/no recognition memory task for a single Gabor
test stimulus following a three Gabor 1500ms memory display. Condition 3 (dual-task paradigm) combined conditions 1 and 2. In condition 3,
participants expressed significantly reduced saccadic deviation (measured as the mean angle of saccade trajectory) for distractors in close
proximity to a target in comparison to condition 1, and a poorer recognition memory performance in comparison to condition 2. These results
suggest that when VWM is loaded, as evidenced by reduced memory
performance, the inhibition of neurons used in saccade programming is
reduced. These findings highlight the need to re-examine current saccade programming theory that, as yet, only accounts for attentional
mechanisms. Our data indicates that VWM serves to suppress distracting information in peripheral vision during the preparation of visually
guided saccades. Goal-directed suppression of irrelevant information is
reduced when the availability of VWM is limited due to increased task
demands.

H100
BIASES IN SPATIAL PERCEPTION REFLECT PATTERNS OF
LEXICALIZATION Alexander Kranjec1, Gary Lupyan2, Anjan Chatterjee3;
1

Duquesne University, 2University of Wisconsin-Madison, 3University of
Pennsylvania — We show that biases in the visual perception of spatial

relations reflect patterns of lexicalization. Kosslyn (1987) originally proposed a hemispheric bias for processing two types of spatial information.
Categorical information refers to spatial relations that are discrete,
abstract, and commonly lexicalized by locative prepositions like above,
below, left, and right. More fine-grained coordinate information pertaining to metric distance relations is continuous and less amenable to lexicalization. In the present experiment, participants made same/different
judgments on pairs of dot-cross configurations presented simultaneously for 200ms to the left and right of central fixation. Pairs could be
different with respect to either their categorical or coordinate relations.
For CATEGORICAL trials, dots were located in different quadrants the
same distance from the center of each cross; for COORDINATE trials,
dots were located in the same quadrant at different distances from the
center of each cross. The orientation of the crosses was also manipulated.
In AMBIGUOUS trials, crosses were composed of intersecting vertical
and horizontal lines forming a “+” shape. In UNAMBIGUOUS trials,
both crosses were rotated 45° to form an “×” shape such that the quadrants were now unambiguously associated with easy-to-name verbal
spatial categories (above/below/left/right). Results demonstrate that
discriminating categorical spatial relations between easy-to-name categories is easier than between more ambiguously-named categories; conversely, discriminating coordinate spatial relations within an easy-toname category is actually more difficult than within a more ambiguously-named category. These results suggest that lexicalized categories
can modulate the perception of spatial relations even for coordinate
information.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

227

Poster Session I

Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
I2
ELECTRICAL STIMULATION ABOLISHES THE ELICITATION OF
SCHADENFREUDE DURING VICARIOUS LEARNING ON THE IOWA
GAMBLING TASK Caroline Bowman1, Alys Griffiths1, Andrew Dawson1,
Oliver Turnbull1; 1Bangor University, Wales, U.K. — Schadenfreude

(experiencing pleasure at the misfortune of another) in response to emotional
feelings provoked by inequality, or envy of others, has been shown to
lead to inappropriate learning in observers of same-sex friends playing
the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT; Turnbull, Worsey & Bowman, 2007). To
investigate whether the manifestation of schadenfreude was resultant
from the nature of abstract punishment (loss of money), or explicit punishment, aversive electrical stimulation was administered to Players
when they received the heaviest financial penalties on the IGT. Sixtyeight participants were tested in pairs of same-sex friends, either with or
without electrical stimulation being administered to the Player as they
performed the IGT. Observers passively watched play, and then performed themselves, in the absence of electrical stimulation. Results demonstrated that the use of electrical stimulation as an explicit punishment
enhanced early, but not late, performance on the IGT in Players. Further,
results showed that Observers who witnessed explicit punishment performed advantageously on the IGT, but those who observed play in the
absence of electrical stimulation, performed disadvantageously on the
IGT. These results add to previous findings that suggest, somewhat paradoxically, that the experience of schadenfreude debilitates rather than
facilitates future decision-making behaviour. Furthermore, although
much research investigates the nature of schadenfreude amongst intergroup rivals, these findings provide important insight into the boundary
conditions that elicit schadenfreude within intra-group relationships.

I3
MULTIPLE OXYTOCIN RECEPTOR POLYMORPHISMS ARE ASSOCIATED
WITH CHARITABLE BEHAVIORS IN EVERYDAY LIFE Laura Beavin1, Jorge

Barraza1, Paul Zak1; 1Claremont Graduate University, Center for
Neuroeconomic Studies — Recent evidence links various oxytocin receptor

single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to positive social traits and performance in lab-based social decision tasks. The goal of the study was to
investigate whether charitable giving, as measured by self-report and in
a lab-based donation task, vary across oxytocin receptor alleles of
rs2254298, rs53576, rs237887, and rs2268490. Results demonstrated that
individuals homozygous for the A allele in the rs237887 SNP reported
donating a larger amount compared to those with at least one copy of the
G allele. There was also an effect of rs53576 genotype, with AA individuals having donated a larger percent of their income than those with at
least one copy of the G allele. Moreover, rs53576 was linked to religious
giving, such that those with the AA or AG genotype gave more for religious purposes than individuals homozygous for G. Further analyses

228

indicated that this relationship was mediated by self-reported religious
commitment. For the lab donation task, the distribution of individuals
who chose to donate varied across genotypes of the rs237887 and
rs2268490 SNPs, with a larger percentage of individuals who were heterozygous for A and C, respectively, making donations. The same group
of individuals with the CC genotype for rs2268490 also donated a larger
dollar amount in this task. This study demonstrates the presence of a
genetic component in laboratory based and real world charitable behaviors.

I4
IMPAIRED IDENTIFICATION OF FACIAL EXPRESSIONS OF FEAR IN IRAQ
WAR VETERANS WITH PTSD AND MTBI Victoria Ashley1, Jary Larsen2,

Nikki Pratt1, Diane Swick1,2; 1University of California, Davis, 2Veterans Affairs
Northern California Health Care System — Studies suggest that patients
with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) process emotional facial
expressions differently then healthy individuals; PTSD patients display
exaggerated amygdala and diminished prefrontal cortex responses to
fearful facial expressions. A recent study also found specific accuracy
impairments and decreased sensitivity in recognizing expressions of fear
and sadness in war veterans with PTSD (Poljac et al., 2011). To assess the
role of PTSD in facial expression recognition, we showed pictures of
faces to Iraq war veterans with PTSD and mild traumatic brain injury
(mTBI), and to healthy age-matched military controls, and asked them to
identify the expressions. A total of 140 faces (Ekman & Friesen, 1976)
were presented in black and white, one at a time, in pseudo-randomized
order. Faces had one of six basic expressions (happy, angry, fear, surprise sad, disgust) or neutral, with half of the expressions at 100% full
intensity and the other half at 50% intensity made by morphing expressions with neutral (Calder, et al., 1996). Preliminary results suggest that,
like Poljac et al. (2011), PTSD patients show impaired accuracy at identifying 50% intensity fear faces, relative to military controls (p<.05; Accuracy: patients=38%, controls=51%) and display a trend for impaired
accuracy for full intensity fear faces (p<.06). PTSD patients also show a
trend for misidentifying fear as surprise (p<.1). Our study did not find
impairments on expressions of sadness, but is consistent with a growing
body of research indicating altered processing of fearful facial expressions in PTSD (Poljac et al., 2011; Beevers et al., 2011).

I5
AN EXPECTANCY BIAS FOR AVERSIVE EVENTS: THE ROLE OF AROUSAL
AND AWARENESS Julian Wiemer1, Paul Pauli1; 1University of Würzburg —
The tendency to associate fear-relevant stimuli with aversive consequences was shown to be correlated with the perceived aversiveness of
electrical shocks after fear-relevant stimuli. In the present study we
investigated how the aversiveness per se affects the expectancy of
events. If expectancies are guided by an adaptive conservatism, highly
aversive events should rather be expected than less aversive events. Participants attended to three types of neutral colored visual stimuli. Each
stimulus color was associated with a different level of loudness of an
acoustic startle probe (95dB, 100dB, 105dB). We measured online expectancy of these tones and pupil diameter as a measure of sympathetic

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session I
arousal. Although the probability of a startle probe was always 50%,
expectancy ratings were enhanced for the loudest tones. There were no
differences between the visual cues in terms of arousal ratings and pupil
diameter, indicating that the effect was not mediated by differential
arousal. After the experiment we asked the participants whether they
noticed the association between visual cues and aversiveness of the tone.
The illusory correlation between aversiveness and occurrence was still
significant for those who were not aware of this association. The results
imply that humans' expectancies of aversive events are guided by an
adaptive conservatism that works so effectively that the awareness of the
aversiveness is not a prerequisite. This cognitive bias could be a sustaining factor of anxiety disorders.

I6
BRAIN PATHWAYS UNDERLYING COMPASSIONATE ACTION Yoni Ashar1,

Jessica R. Andrews-Hanna1, Nicholas W. Peterson1, Brandin Williams1, Tal
Yarkoni1, Sona Dimidjian1, Tor D. Wager1; 1University of Colorado, Boulder —
Compassion is a cornerstone of individual well-being and a well-functioning society. In this work, we are developing a model of compassionate action, operationalized as decisions to give money to others in need,
at both psychological and brain systems levels of analysis. Using factor
analysis, we dissect the predictors of charitable donation into several
affective components, such as feelings of closeness/empathy and personal distress, and several cognitive components, including attributions
of responsibility and perceived instrumentality of the donation in helping. Each of these factors independently predicts how much a person
will give to a recipient, but controlling for these factors, perceived similarity to the recipient is not predictive. Our current work maps these
affective and social cognitive factors onto brain circuits, focusing on a)
distinctions between areas of the medial prefrontal cortex thought to
track affiliative feelings and social cognitive judgments, and b) distributed systems thought to track the giver's subjective emotional distress.

I7
STRESS EFFECTS ON REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IN YOUNGER AND
OLDER WOMEN: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION Nichole Lighthall1, Lin Nga1,

Alex Ycaza1, Jung Jang1, Ricardo Velasco1, Mara Mather1; 1University of
Southern California — Stress is common in everyday life and appears to

alter learning and decision making involving potential rewards and
punishments. This finding that may be attributed to stress-induced
enhancements of dopamine system activity. Due to age-related changes
to brain structure and function, however, the impact of stress is likely to
differ for younger and older adults. The present study used functional
neuroimaging to investigate acute stress effects on brain activation during a reinforcement learning task that included positive and negative
social feedback. The current study also examined whether stress effects
on reinforcement learning and related brain activation differed by age,
by comparing healthy younger (age 18-35) and older (age 60-77) women.
The cold pressor task was used to induce a neurophysiological stress
response. After a delay to align the learning task with hypothalamicpituitary-adrenal axis response to the stress, participants completed a
feedback-based probabilistic learning task during functional magnetic
resonance imaging. The goal of the task was to maximize positive feedback and minimize negative by using trial and error to determine the
outcomes associated with several novel stimuli in choice pairs. Neural
response to reinforcer-associated stimuli, prediction error, and feedback
will be determined. Salivary cortisol levels will be used as a measure of
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis reactivity to stress. Older participants appeared to learn better from social reward than punishment, but
stress reduced this valence bias. In addition, stress effects on task-related
brain activation were more pronounced in older participants. These findings indicate that stress effects on reinforcement learning depend on age.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

I8
ALTERNATING BIGENDER: A NOVEL CONDITION SHEDS LIGHT ON THE
Case1,
Vilayanur
PLASTICITY OF SEX AND GENDER Laura

Ramachandran1; 1Center for Brain and Cognition, University of California San
Diego — Between the two extreme ends of human sexuality – male and
female – lie a poorly understood spectrum of sexual identities that are
very much a part of the human condition but defy rigid classification.
“Bigender” is a recently formed sub-category of transgenderism,
describing individuals who experience a blending or alternation of gender states. To date, no scientific work has addressed this fascinating condition, or proposed any physiological basis for it. We present the results
of a survey of 30 bigender individuals indicating that many of them
experience an involuntary switching of gender states. In addition, similar to transsexual individuals, the majority of bigender individuals experience phantom breasts or genitalia corresponding to the non-biologic
gender when they are in a trans-gender state. Finally, our survey found
decreased lateralization of handedness in the bigender community.
These observations and others suggest a biologic basis of bigenderism
and lead us to propose a novel gender condition, “Alternating Gender
Identity” (AGI). We hypothesize that AGI may be related to an unusual
degree or depth of hemispheric switching and corresponding callosal
suppression of sex appropriate maps in parietal cortex- possibly the
superior parietal lobule- and its reciprocal connections with the insula
and hypothalamus. We are currently exploring cognitive and hormonal
differences in bigender individuals across male and female states. By
providing a case of sharp brain-sex shifts within individuals, we believe
that the study of AGI could prove illuminating to scientific understanding of gender, body representation, and the nature of self.

I9
ANXIETY AFFECTS VISUAL PERIMETRY Caroline Crump1, Andrea Wong2,

Eran Zaidel1; 1University of California, Los Angeles, 2Southern California
College of Optometry — Anxiety is known to be associated with changes in
processing higher cognitive functions involving emotional stimuli (e.g.,
Ferneyhough, Stanley, Phelps, & Carrasco, 2010; Bocanegra & Zeelenberg, 2009), but few studies examined the effects of anxiety on low-level
perceptual processes of non-emotional stimuli. In this experiment, we
asked whether anxiety affects simple visual perimetry; namely the ability to detect spots of light in the periphery of the visual field. We
assessed anxiety level using the trait portion of the State-Trait Anxiety
Inventory (Spielberger et al, 1983) in 35 undergraduate participants. Participants then completed a modified version of a standard perimetry test,
detecting a small dot of light 13 cd/m² at a visual angle of 8°, 14°, 20°,
and 26° from fixation. High anxiety resulted in two separate effects on
perception: first, individuals with high anxiety showed an increase in
sensitivity to the center of their vision, reflecting increased attention to
that region. Second, individuals with high anxiety set a more conservative criterion for target detection, reflecting a more conservative decision
threshold. Our results suggest a simple diagnostic test for anxiety that
does not involve emotional stimuli. Our results also suggest that care
should be taken to account for the emotional condition of the participant
even in simple perceptual tests.

I10
DOMAIN-SPECIFIC NEURAL DIFFERENCES IN ADOLESCENTS WITH
BIPOLAR DISORDER, ADHD, AND BIPOLAR COMBINED WITH ADHD IN A
STOP SIGNAL TASK James Ellis1, Alessandra Passarotti1, Ezra Wegbreit1,

Mani Pavuluri1; 1Pediatric BRAIN Center, Institute for Juvenile Research,
Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago — The goal of this

study was to elucidate the neural correlates of response inhibition processes between adolescent patients with common symptoms of poor
attention, impulsivity, and poor inhibition, but different diagnoses,
namely pediatric bipolar disorder (PBD), ADHD, and PBD with ADHD.
Thirty-one acutely-ill adolescents with PBD (mean age±SD; 13.9±2.5),
twenty-one adolescents with ADHD (13.2±2.3), twenty-four adolescents
with comorbid PBD/ADHD diagnosis (13.8±1.9), all un-medicated, and

229

Poster Session I — Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
thirty-three typically developing healthy controls (HC) (14.2±2.8) were
scanned while performing a Stop Signal Task. The groups did not differ
significantly in accuracy. Whole-brain analyses revealed that on Stop trials where all subjects correctly withheld a response, PBD subjects demonstrated greater activation compared to ADHD subjects in the left
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC), and more activation compared
to comorbid subjects in left parahippocampal regions. HC exhibited
greater activation in bilateral temporal regions compared to all other
groups. On Stop trials where all subjects incorrectly responded, group
differences were found in the left middle frontal gyrus, where ADHD
and PBD subjects exhibited greater activation than HC. In this condition,
HC demonstrated heightened activation of the superior temporal sulcus/BA41 compared to the patient groups. For correct versus incorrect
Stop trials, the patient groups, relative to HC, showed decreased activation of the putamen. Our findings suggest important neural differences
in the patient groups in regions involved with response inhibition, such
as the VLPFC and putamen. This is one of the first studies to test for and
find neural differences in symptomatically overlapping pediatric illnesses such as PBD and ADHD.

I11
NEURAL REGIONS RECRUITED DURING IMPROVED EMOTION
REGULATION ABILITY IN PATIENTS WITH BORDERLINE PERSONALITY
DISORDER BEFORE AND AFTER TREATMENT. Jocelyn Shu1, Jennifer A.

Silvers1, Hedy Kober2, Emily A. Biggs3, Amanda Carson-Wong4, Eric Fertuck1,3,
Jochen Weber1, Barbara Stanley1,3, Kevin N. Ochsner1; 1Columbia University,
2
Yale University, 3New York State Psychiatric Institute, 4Rutgers University —
Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is characterized by unstable emotional experiences and deficits in emotion regulation abilities. Assessing
changes in emotion regulation capacity as a function of treatment may be
a useful means for evaluating the efficacy of different interventions. The
present study sought to examine changes in emotion regulation ability
as assessed by a cognitive reappraisal task before and after six months of
treatment (Dialectical behavioral therapy or fluoxetine medication).
Thirteen women diagnosed with BPD were scanned at two time points
on a task that involved reappraising memories of aversive events in their
lives. Participants were asked to recall eight aversive memories and were
cued to think about them with an immersed, emotional perspective or an
objective, distanced perspective. During the pre-treatment and posttreatment scans, participants reported greater negative affect when
recalling memories from the immersed perspective and demonstrated
the capacity to decrease negative affect when taking the distanced perspective. However, after receiving treatment for six months, participants
showed a greater ability to down-regulate negative emotions while
thinking about memories from a distanced perspective. The ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) was amongst the neural regions
recruited during improved emotion regulation ability while thinking
about memories from a distanced perspective in the post-treatment scan.
VMPFC has been implicated in mood and affective disorders as well as
in the regulation of negative affect. These findings suggest that VMPFC
may play an important role in the mechanisms that underlie improvements in emotion regulation ability stemming from treatment.

I12
THE INFLUENCE OF EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS ON EMOTIONAL
PROCESSING Alana Campbell1, Deana Davalos1; 1Colorado State
University — Affective processing interacts with many cognitive processes; emotionally salient information is better remembered (LaBar &
Phelps, 1998) and cognitive strategies can modify emotional responses
like fear and reward. Less is known about how emotional processing
interacts with executive functions. This study seeks to understand this
interaction. To do this, participants had their brainwaves recorded while
completing a modified working memory task, the delayed matching to
sample task. The task presented participants with sample and target
emotional images taken from the International Affective Picture System
and were positive, neutral or negative in valence. A sample emotional

230

image was presented followed by a delay during which the sample
image was to be maintained. Finally, a comparison emotional image was
presented whose emotionality was either congruent or incongruent to
that of the sample image. Emotional responses to the comparison image
were recorded both behaviorally and electrophysiologically, as measured by the late positive potential (LPP). The amplitude of the LPP is an
indicator of change in neuronal activity and can be compared across
types of stimuli. We found that the amplitude of the LPP waves in
response to the comparison images that were emotionally congruent to
the sample were accentuated, while those that were incongruent were
attenuated. This suggests that we are able to selectively modify our emotional responses.

I13
OUTCOME ASSOCIATIONS INDUCE EARLY EFFECTS IN ERPS
Annekathrin Schacht1, Nele Adler2, Peiyao Chen3, Taomei Guo4, Werner
Sommer3; 1University of Goettingen, 2Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin,
3
Pennsylvania State University, 4Beijing Normal University — Emotional pic-

tures, faces, or words elicit an early posterior negativity (EPN) in the
event-related potential, starting around 200–400 ms, followed by a late
positive complex (LPC). Occasionally, also very early effects of emotion
(VEEEs) are seen prior to 200 ms. The present study examined whether
VEEEs can be due to direct links established by reinforcement learning.
In the learning session, participants learned to associate previously
unknown Chinese words with monetary gain, loss, or neither. In the test
session, they were required to distinguish the learned stimuli from novel
distracters. Specific to stimuli associated with positive outcome a VEEE,
consisting of a posterior positivity, appeared around 150 ms and an LPC
between 550 and 700 ms, whereas an EPN was absent. These results
show that previous association with reward can induce VEEEs, indicating that emotion effects in ERPs may arise in the absence of biologically
preparedness and semantic meaning.

I14
THE LEAN AND THE RICH SIDE OF EMOTIONS. DISSOCIATED INSULAR
AND TEMPORO-PARIETAL PATTERNS IN AFFECTIVE THEORY OF MIND
TASK Corrado Corradi-Dell'Acqua1,2, Christoph Hofstetter1,2, Patrik

Vuilleumier1,2; 1Swiss Centre for Affective Sciences, University of Geneva,
Geneva, Switzerland, 2Laboratory for Neurology and Imaging of Cognition,
Department of Neurosciences and Clinic of Neurology, University Medical
Center, Geneva, Switzerland — Studies investigating the neural substrates
for understanding others’ emotions suggest an involvement of temporoparietal and medio-prefrontal regions whose role is often interpreted in
"mentalistic" terms", that is, as a recruitment of more general processes
involved in assessing others’ mental states. We carried out an fMRI
study in 46 female volounteers and used multivoxel pattern analysis to
test whether, in these regions, the activation patterns coding for people’s
affective states overlapped with those triggered by traditional theory-ofmind tasks. We found that in the temporo-parietal junction (bilaterally)
and in the precuneus there was a strong pattern overlap between the
responses associated with assessing others’ emotions and beliefs (but not
others’ pain). This was not the case of the medial prefrontal cortex which
exhibited increased neural activity when assessing both beliefs and emotions, although there was no evidence for a unique activation pattern
behind these responses. Finally, the left insula cortex exhibited a pattern
overlap between the activation associated with assessing others’ emotions and pain (but not beliefs), thus suggesting that the neural underpinnings underlying evaluating others’ emotions are not exclusively
mentalizing-related. Our data provides strong evidence that in the temporo-parietal junction, but not in the medial prefrontal cortex, the neural
responses underlying mentalizing are also recruited when inferring others’ affective states.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session I

I15
EXPECTATION OF EMOTIONAL STIMULI ENHANCE PERCEPTUAL
DECISIONS Tamara Sussman1, Aprajita Mohanty1, Akos Szekely1; 1Stony
Brook University — Prioritized perceptual processing of emotional compared to neutral stimuli may account for faster responses to emotional
stimuli; however, the mechanisms involved remain unclear. According
to the “predictive coding” hypothesis, the brain generates predictive
codes or templates prior to stimulus encounter, resulting in greater
speed and accuracy of subsequent perceptual judgments. Drawing from
this hypothesis, we examined if expectation of, rather than encounter
with, an emotional stimuli is critical in its enhanced perception. We
determined each participant’s perceptual threshold (75% correct) by presenting degraded angry (AF) and neutral faces (NF) in a two-alternative
forced-choice task. Subsequently, AF or NF were presented at this
threshold following predictive cues while subjects indicated the presence of AF or NF. Results show that perceptual sensitivity (d’) is greater
for AF following angry cues versus NF following neutral cues,
t(11)=2.44, p<.05. Furthermore, detection of AF following angry cues
was faster than NF following neutral cues, t(11)=-3.05, p<.05. Therefore,
expectation of emotional stimuli results in faster and more accurate
detection. Using fMRI and multivariate pattern analyses (MVPA), we
expect that cue-related ensemble activity patterns in ventromedial prefrontal cortex will reflect the target stimulus prior to stimulus onset,
while the amygdala does so only for the angry targets. Activity patterns
in the fusiform face area will reflect the target stimulus before and after
stimulus onset with stronger pre-post ensemble pattern correlations for
emotional stimuli which will also predict improved d’. Overall, findings
from this study will highlight the psychological and neural mechanisms
underlying perceptual prioritization of emotional stimuli.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Person perception
I16
FIRST IMPRESSION MATTERS: THE INFLUENCE OF INITIAL IMPRESSION
ON REVERSAL LEARNING Yeonsoon Shin1, Hackjin Kim2, Hye-young Kim1,

Sanghoon Han1; 1Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea, 2Korea University, Seoul,
Korea — Although an impression such as extraversion, one of the big five
personality traits, can be formed rapidly even at neutral faces, a caveat of
rapid impression is its inaccuracy. Given that people tend to learn and
update the actual personality trait as experience with the person accumulates, the reversal learning often plays a more fundamental role in an
impression formation during person perception. With a model-based
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we examined neural substrates of an impression reversal learning and an effect of perceived initial trait on it. We scanned a prediction task during which participants
made guesses about whether the target face, who was initially judged
introverted or extraverted, would perform the presented activities, either
introverted or outgoing. Participants were provided with trial-by-trial
feedback indicating whether the target person had preferred extraverted
activities or introverted ones. The behavioral result reliably indicated
that the initial impression of Introverted is more sluggishly reversed to
Extraverted (IE) than Extraverted to Introverted (EI). Our model-based
fMRI results with temporal difference learning model revealed activation in nucleus accumbens, ventromedial prefrontal cortex, and hippocampal/parahippocampal regions as a function of prediction error fitted
at feedback events for IE reversal. In contrast, for EI reversal, insula, fusiform gyrus, medial prefrontal cortex, and parietal lobe were activated.
Along expected value signals at face presentation, dorsal striatum
showed an interaction between first impression and personality. The
results suggest that, during impression reversal, IE requires more valuation updates whereas EI is better learned with greater emotional
response.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

I17
ALONE OR TOGETHER. INTERACTIVE OR INDIVIDUAL EMOTIONS IN
CROWDS: AN FMRI STUDY. Elisabeth Huis in 't Veld1, Beatrice de

Gelder1,2,3; 1Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience Laboratory, Tilburg
University, Tilburg, the Netherlands, 2Brain and Emotion Laboratory Leuven,
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Martinos Center for
Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School — Studies on the perception of crowds are gaining a lot of interest,
also in the ICT community. However, most studies have used static stimuli portraying many individuals put together in a picture, even though
the interaction and synchronisation of movement between the individuals is of importance. To study the neurological underpinnings of natural
and emotional crowd perception, participants viewed video stimuli of a
group of actors that were displaying a neutral, happy or fearful emotion.
However, in one condition, the crowd was collectively sharing the emotion, and in the other each group member experienced the emotion without interacting with the others. The results show that early visual
processing areas and areas related to biological motion already respond
differently to collectively shared emotion and that this is stronger for
some emotions than others. These results not only provide insights for
neuropsychological social interaction research, but also for game and
security software development.

I18
NEUROFUNCTIONAL BASIS OF GROUP INFLUENCES ON ACTION
PREPARATION Ruud Hortensius1, Beatrice de Gelder1,2,3; 1Cognitive and

Affective Neuroscience Laboratory, Tilburg University, 2Brain and Emotion
Laboratory Leuven, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 3Martinos Center for
Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School — We spontaneously react to the actions of other people. Reflex
like, automatic helping behavior has been observed in humans and in
other primates indicating a neurobiological basis for assisting conspecifics in difficulty. However, it is well known that the likelihood of helping
a person in distress decreases with the increasing number of bystanders
(the “bystander effect”). So far only top down mechanisms and higher
cognitive explanations were provided for this effect. The goal of this
study is to measure the influence of a social context consisting of a group
of bystanders on these processes. We take a bottom-up perspective and
argue that a reduction in action preparation and emotional processing
underlie the diminished helping behavior as a function of group size. We
measure both implicit behavioral and neurofunctional effects of social
context. In a slow-event related fMRI design participants viewed
dynamic stimuli of a woman in need while she was alone or with 1, 2 or
4 bystanders while they perform an unrelated color detection task. Preliminary fMRI results reveal that two separate processes reflect the influence of a group: i) reduction in activity with more bystanders in an
action preparation network, ii) increase in activity with more bystander
in brain areas associated with inferring mental states of others. Our
results are consistent with the hypothesis that diminished helping
behavior is related to an automatic influence of group size on these processes. Currently, we are testing this to further extend.

I19
SOMETHING ALWAYS STICKS – EMOTIONAL INFORMATION MODULATES
THE OLD-NEW EFFECT FOR NEUTRAL FACES Janine Strehlow1, Johanna

Kissler1,2; 1University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany, 2University of Bielefeld,
Bielefeld, Germany — Many studies show that processing of emotional

faces elicits larger brain activity than processing of neutral faces. In the
EEG effects are seen at early (N1, Early Posterior Negativity ~ EPN) and
late (late positive potential ~ LPP) processing stages. Here, we investigate the effect of linguistic emotional information on subsequent perception and neural processing of originally neutral faces. Event-related
potentials were collected from 24 healthy students (12 male, 12 female).
During the first run, participants viewed briefly presented neutral male
faces. In the second run, each face was preceded by a descriptive phrase

231

Poster Session I — Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
including either information about the person’s occupation or supposed
criminal activities. Finally, in a third run the original faces were re-presented randomly mixed with new faces and participants were instructed
to perform an old-new recognition test on the faces. Behaviorally, the
associated information did not affect recognition memory. Participants
were unable to discriminate the faces reliably. However, on a neural
level the associated information modulated the ERP old-new effect
around 500 ms post-stimulus presentation. Old faces that had been associated with negative information elicited larger centro-parietal positivity
than old faces that had been associated with neutral information. Despite
this increased LPP, no context-related modulation was found for earlier
ERP components such as the N1 or the EPN. Results indicate that linguistic emotional information modulates neural processing of faces at
distinct processing stages in the absence of overt discrimination and
demonstrate the power of verbal emotional information in implicitly
altering neural mechanisms of person perception.

I20
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF THE DETECTION OF SINCERE
COMPLIMENTS AND WHITE LIES Simon Rigoulot1, Karyn Fish1, Marc D.

Pell1; 1School of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Faculty of Medicine,
McGill University — During social communication, linguistic and extra-linguistic cues combine to indicate the real meaning of what is said (i.e., the
true intentions of the speaker). Previously, we demonstrated that listeners rely significantly on vocal cues, such as speech rate and pitch differences, to interpret the sincere or insincere nature of a compliment
embedded in a verbal exchange. Here, we investigated by means of
Event-Related Potentials how the brain detects the intended meaning of
sincere and insincere compliments (white lies). We recorded the electroencephalogram of 33 participants while they heard 52 QuestionResponse pairs (e.g., Question: “So, what did you think of my presentation ?” / Answer: “I found it really interesting.”). Participants judged
whether responses were spoken in a way to be either sincere or insincere
(26 items each). Behaviorally, we observed that the overall accuracy of
participants was high (81% correct responses) but that the detection of
sincere compliments was easier than the detection of white lies ("truth
bias"). Electrophysiological analyses revealed three components--respectively peaking at 200, 260 and 380 ms after the onset of the responses and
located in right posterior, fronto-central and left anterior areas--that
were differently activated according to the sincere or insincere intention
of the speakers. These data begin to unravel some of the brain mechanisms involved in the detection of the underlying intentions of speakers
during conversation, crucial for social perception and cognition and in
the production of socially adapted behaviors.

I21
IMPLICIT MEMORY FOR PUPIL SIZE: EFFECTS ON PERSON
JUDGMENT. Ralph Pawling1, Steven Tipper1; 1Bangor University — Since
the Italian Renaissance it has been known that pupil size is automatically
encoded when viewing a face, motivating the use of poisonous extracts
from the belladonna plant to dilate pupils. Subsequent experimental
studies have confirmed that faces with dilated pupils influence person
perception. However, all previous studies demonstrated online effects,
during direct observation of faces with pupils of different sizes. The current study demonstrates for the first time that pupil size, interacting with
the trustworthiness of a person, is encoded into memory and influences
judgments of an individual at a later time. In two experiments, participants were presented with faces whose pupils consistently dilated or
constricted, without the participant’s awareness of this manipulation. In
a second task the participants made judgements regarding the friendliness and level of interest of the faces, but made these judgements in
response to versions of the faces with average sized pupils. In Experiment 1 female faces whose pupils had dilated elicited significantly
higher ratings than those whose pupils had constricted. This effect was
reversed for ratings of male faces. In Experiment 2, participants viewed
only male faces, pre-rated as high or low trustworthiness. Like female
faces, high-trust males whose pupils dilated received significantly

232

higher ratings than those whose pupils constricted. However, the opposite effect was found for the low-trust male faces. These results suggest
the effects of pupil size go beyond the current moment of interpersonal
interaction, and modulated by apparent trustworthiness, influence
longer-term representations, enabling predictions of future interactions.

I22
AFFECTIVE SOUNDS ENHANCE ELECTRO-CORTICAL FACE PROCESSING –
A STEADY-STATE EVOKED POTENTIALS STUDY Matthias J Wieser1, Antje

B M Gerdes2, Christian Karl1, Paul Pauli1; 1University of Würzburg, 2University
of Mannheim — In everyday life, faces are embedded in social and affective contexts like affective sounds. Early stages of face processing have
been shown to be modified by visual context information and congruent
prosody facilitates emotional face recognition. However, little is known
about how affective sounds influence face processing. Thus, facial
expressions (neutral, fearful, happy, surprised) were presented together
with affective sounds. Faces were flickered at 15 Hz to evoke steadystate evoked potentials (ssVEPs). Results showed significant modulation
of the ssVEP amplitudes by affective sounds: overall, ssVEP amplitude
in response to faces was elevated when paired with affective compared
to neutral sounds. Interestingly, processing of ambiguous facial expressions (surprised and neutral) was differentially influenced early (-1500
ms): Processing of surprised facial expressions was enhanced both for
pleasant and unpleasant sounds, whereas processing of neutral faces
was elevated during unpleasant sounds, only. A follow-up experiment
confirmed that affective sounds boosts face processing in general. The
results show that processing of facial expressions is influenced by auditory context information. Interestingly, effects are already present in the
first 1500 ms for ambiguous facial expressions suggesting quick information extraction from auditory channels and audiovisual integration
when visual information does not suffice. The general enhancement of
visual face processing by affective sounds suggests that emotionally relevant information from one modality boosts processing of another sensory modality. Most likely, this is accomplished in convergence zones
such as in the amygdala and the middle temporal gyrus, but possibly
also due to direct crosstalk between auditory and visual associative cortices.

I23
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS TO STATIC AND DYNAMIC EXPRESSIVE
FACES Karissa Reiter1, Abigail Mayfield1, Reiko Graham1; 1Health
Psychophysiology Lab, Department of Psychology, Texas State University —
Nonverbal expression, including facial expressions, typically unfolds
dynamically. However, the majority of event-related potential (ERP)
studies examining the neural correlates of facial expression processing
have employed static displays. The objective of this study was to compare the timecourses of ERPs to static and dynamic expressive faces. A
secondary objective was to determine whether individual differences in
empathy were systematically related to ERP components. Twenty-three
participants (10 male, 13 female; mean = 22.6 years) viewed either static
or dynamic displays of fearful and angry faces, and completed the
Empathizing (EQ) and Systematizing Quotients (SQ), and the Davis
Interpersonal Reactivity Scale (IRI). Examination of early ERPs over lateral occipital areas revealed that amplitudes of the P100 and N170 were
larger for static displays. The P100 was also sensitive to emotion, being
larger for angry faces over the right hemisphere. Movement effects were
evident in later ERP components, being larger for the P250/N250 over
lateral occipital/central areas and were also manifested in increased
amplitudes in a widespread late positive component. P100 amplitudes to
static faces were significantly correlated with scores on the EQ and
P250/N250 amplitudes to moving faces were significantly correlated
with the Empathic Concern subscale of the IRI (i.e., higher scores on
these scales were associated with higher amplitudes). Results suggest
that the addition of movement alters the timecourse of ERPs to facial
expressions, possibly by reducing processing loads at earlier stages of
encoding and enhancing later processing. Furthermore, individual differences in empathy may modulate these responses.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session I

I25
COMPETENCE EVALUATIONS IN FIRST ENCOUNTERS: AN FMRI
INVESTIGATION OF THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF NON-VERBAL
COMMUNICATION IN SOCIAL INTERACTION Sanda Dolcos1, Keen Sung2,

Florin Dolcos1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2University of
Massachusetts Amherst — Effective social interactions require the ability
to evaluate other people’s actions and intentions, sometimes only on the
basis of subtle body language cues. Such evaluative judgments may lead
to powerful first impressions, which may further influence social and
financial decisions. However, little is known about the impact of affective body language on evaluative responses in social settings, and the
associated neural correlates. In the present study, fMRI data were
recorded while 18 participants viewed and rated videos of guest-host
interactions in a business setting. The host displayed behaviors that
either encouraged (Approach condition) or discouraged (Avoid condition) further social interactions. Approach trials were associated with
greater ratings (competence, trust, interest) than the Avoid trials. Brain
activity in regions of the social cognition network, including the superior
temporal sulcus (STS) and the amygdala, was sensitive to processing
cues for both the Approach and Avoid trials, compared to a no-social
interaction condition, while also showing greater sensitivity to the
Approach condition. Furthermore, STS and amygdala activity had distinct roles in evaluating competence. Specifically, increased STS activity
was associated with a negative evaluation of competence for the Avoid
behavior, possibly reflecting the necessity to further assess the intentions
of avoiding strangers. On the other hand, increased amygdala activity
was associated with a positive evaluation of competence for the
Approach behavior, possibly reflecting positive emotions to the
Approach behavior. These findings have relevance for understanding
the neural correlates of non-verbal communication in social interactions,
and its specific effects on competence evaluations.

I26
MDMA (3, 4-METHYLENEDIOXYMETHAMPHETAMINE, ECSTASY)
INCREASES RATINGS OF TRUSTWORTHINESS OF FACES BY A
SEROTONERGIC MECHANISM Matthew Baggott1, Kathleen Garrison2,

Jeremy Coyle2, Keith Flower2, Gant Galloway2, Sara Verosky3, Nikolaas
Oosterhof4, Alexander Todorof3, John Mendelson2; 1University of Chicago,
2
California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, 3Princeton University,
4Bangor University — MDMA is a widely used illicit drug and experimental adjunct to psychotherapy that can induce feelings of sociability. It is
unknown whether MDMA also alters perception of others’ traits. Here,
we show that MDMA increases feelings of closeness to others and perceptions of trustworthiness by a serotonergic mechanism. In a doubleblind, placebo-controlled, within-subjects MDMA-citalopram interactions study, 13 healthy MDMA-experienced participants rated the trustworthiness and dominance of computer-generated faces and reported
feelings of sociability (visual analog item “closeness to others”). MDMA
alone increased peak VAS “closeness to others” and ratings of the trustworthiness (but not dominance) of faces. Citalopram pretreatment significantly attenuated these effects, suggesting that they depend on
MDMA interactions with the serotonin transporter.

I27
AUTOMATIC INFERENCE OF ANIMACY: DOTS IN CIRCLES ACTIVATE THE
NEURAL SUBSTRATE FOR ANIMACY DETECTION Kelly Anne Barnes1,
Kevin M. Anderson1, Alex Martin1; 1National Institute of Mental Health — It

has been well established that simple visual stimuli whose motion is
evocative of animate agents or which appear in contexts associated with
animate agents activate brain regions important for social cognition.
Minimalist stimuli were presented during functional MRI to test
whether such brain regions (e.g., posterior superior temporal sulcus
[pSTS] and ventromedial prefrontal cortex [vmPFC]) would be recruited
during motion direction discrimination (left/right) when patterns of
motion and context were carefully controlled. Adults determined motion
direction for two stimulus types: plain white dots and white dots with

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

two red dots (previously shown to be perceived as animate, Gao et al.,
2010). Critically, task demands and patterns of motion were matched
across stimuli, and subjects were explicitly told that there was no relationship between the position of the red dots and the direction of motion
for the experimental stimulus. A distributed set of brain regions was
active during the task. Activation in hMT+ was consistent with a role in
general sensory processing, showing robust activation for both stimulus
conditions. Activation in dorsal anterior cingulate and bilateral anterior
insula was consistent with a role in general decision making, with
responses modulated by subjects’ decision times for both stimuli. In contrast, activation in pSTS and vmPFC was greater for stimuli with red
dots than the plain dots, but was not modulated by subjects’ decision
times, revealing stimulus-sensitive sensory processing. These results
show that minimalist stimuli presented in non-social contexts automatically recruit brain regions important for animacy inference.

I28
“WHO’S COOLER?”: NEURAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING SOCIAL
COMPARISONS INVOLVING THE SELF AND SIMILAR OR DISIMILAR
ACQUAINTANCES. Will Moore1, Junaid Merchant1, Lauren Kahn1, Jennifer

Pfeifer1; 1University of Oregon — The ability to carry out social comparisons
and its underlying neural mechanisms is an emerging area of research
interest, but most paradigms employed to date have asked participants
to make decisions about abstractly familiar, but not personally
acquainted, others. In this fMRI study, we asked participants to engage
in social comparisons between themselves and several acquaintances,
selected on the basis of high or low self-similarity. Distinct patterns of
activity in regions routinely implicated in social cognition (e.g., inferior
frontal gyrus (iFG), posterior superior temporal sulcus (sTS), medial and
parietal cortical midline structures) were observed based on the absolute
and relative degrees of self-similarity of individuals compared. Participants (n = 19) underwent BOLD fMRI while engaging in social comparisons between themselves and several acquaintances, selected on the
basis of high or low self-similarity. The task was to decide which of two
pseudo-randomly chosen targets better exemplified a trait adjective.
Traits were evenly distributed across trials consisting of comparisons
between the subject and a similar (YS) or dissimilar peer (YD) or a similar peer and another similar (SS) or dissimilar peer(SD). Trials in which
the participant was personally involved compared to those involving
familiar others were associated with greater activity in ventral medial
prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and bilateral pSTS, while the reverse contrast
revealed increased activity in the mPPC, bilateral iFG, and medial orbitofrontal cortex. Further distinctions along anterior-posterior and
medial-lateral gradients were additionally observed, varying as a product of the absolute or relative degree of self-similarity of each individual
involved.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring &
inhibitory control
I29
AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF JOINT ACTION IN A SHARED VERSUS NONSHARED STROOP TASKS: UTTERANCE MATTERS Sukru Baris Demiral1,

Chiara Gambi2, Martin Pickering3; 1Washington University in St. Louis,
2
University of Edinburgh, 3University of Edinburgh — Representing
others’

actions is a fundamental property of human social cognition (Sebanz et
al., 2003). In two ERP experiments (N=25), we explored whether participants would represent each others’ tasks in a joint performance of a twocolor Stroop task. In Exp.1, ERP participant responded to one color while
the other participant gave feedback. In Exp.2, each participant
responded to different colors while they gave feedback to each other.
The experimental conditions were 2x2x3, CONGruency (Congruent vs.
Not-Congruent), Task (Go vs. No-Go), TOPography (Frontal, Central,
Posterior). The stimulus word was shown for 500ms, followed by a blank
screen for 700ms, after which a cross was shown. Participants waited for
the cross to utter their responses. Our hypothesis was that when partici-

233

Poster Session I — Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
pants shared the task (Exp.2), the inhibitory N2 Stroop effect (Liotti et al.,
2000) would be equally pronounced for the No-Go conditions due to the
joint representations. In Exp.1, in 230-290ms, there was an interaction
between Task and Congruency (F(1,23)=6.31, p<.05), where IncongruentGo conditions were significantly more negative than the Congruent-Go
conditions (F(1,24)=8.03, p<.01). In Exp.2, Congruency effect was significant only in the parietal electrodes (F(1,23)=4.43, p<.05). Strikingly, in the
earlier P2 window (170-230ms) both the frontal (p<.05) and the parietal
electrodes (p<.05) showed the main effect of Congruency. Our results
indicate that when people shared the Stroop task, other participant’s
Incongruent-Go response had an effect on the N2 component of the ERP
participant’s No-Go response. P2 was found to be another index for the
effect of joint action related congruency effect.

I30
INVESTIGATING EXECUTIVE CONTROL NETWORKS WITH A STIMULUS
ONSET ASYNCHRONY MANIPULATION IN THE STROOP TASK Emily

Coderre1, Walter JB van Heuven1; 1University of Nottingham — Stimulus onset
asynchrony (SOA) manipulation in a Stroop task has previously demonstrated that different conflict-related processes are employed in each
SOA depending on the magnitude and the nature of the conflict
(Coderre et al. 2011). This study uses the Stroop SOA paradigm and
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate how
recruitment of the executive control (EC) network in the brain is modulated by pre-exposure of the irrelevant (word) stimuli. Fourteen subjects
performed a Stroop task with three SOAs (-400, -200, 0 ms) while fMRI
data was collected in a 3T scanner. A disparity was found between the
imaging and behavioral data: the 0 ms SOA elicited stronger and more
extensive brain activation, whereas the -200 ms SOA generated greater
behavioral interference. This suggests that reduced Stroop interference is
driven by a more active recruitment of the executive control network.
Functional connectivity analyses indicated that a similar EC network
was activated in each SOA, but the specific areas recruited within that
network differed between SOAs, indicating that the EC is differentially
recruited based on the nature and magnitude of conflict. Structural analyses indicated that behavioral Stroop interference effects were correlated
with increased grey matter (GM) volume in the left angular gyrus, while
behavioral Stroop facilitation effects were correlated with GM volume in
the left inferior frontal gyrus, suggesting different underlying mechanisms contributing to Stroop interference and facilitation effects. These
results from SOA manipulation highlight the complex and flexible
nature of the EC system and its interaction with the language network.

I31
SPEED PRESSURE AND THE EXPRESSION AND SUPPRESSION OF
ACTION IMPULSES IN PARKINSON'S DISEASE Scott Wylie1, Wery van
den Wildenberg2, K. Richard Ridderinkhof2; 1Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, 2University of Amsterdam — Strategic adjustments in response

speed as well as inhibitory action control have been linked to basal ganglia function. These processes often interact. Pressing for performance
speed increases the interference from stimulus-driven action impulses,
thus increasing demands on inhibitory control. This speed effect on
impulse control is especially apparent in conflict tasks (e.g., Simon task),
where irrelevant features of stimuli activate action impulses that correspond or conflict with goal-directed action selection. Parkinson's disease
(PD) patients are less proficient at suppressing the interference produced
by action impulses, so we investigated the hypothesis that pressing for
performance speed would further exacerbate this deficit. PD patients
(n=21) and healthy controls (HC) (n=21) performed a Simon task under
task instructions that emphasized speed or accuracy of responding.
Guided by the conceptual framework of the dual process activation-suppression model, we performed distributional analyses to dissociate susceptibility to impulsive action and the proficiency of suppressing action
impulses as an act of cognitive control. Both groups adjusted performance speed according to instructions. On conflict trials, pressing for
speed increased fast, impulsive errors for both groups similarly. For HC,
focusing on accuracy led to earlier suppression of incorrect action

234

impulses. Overall, PD patients were less proficient than HC at suppressing the interference produced by impulsive actions, and speed pressure
exacerbated this difference. These results suggest that action control deficits in PD are modifiable by intentional adjustments in performance
strategy and add to recent evidence suggesting key involvement of the
basal ganglia in action control.

I32
REWARD PROCESSING AND COGNITIVE CONTROL: EVIDENCE FOR
REDUCED FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN SUBSTANCE ABUSE Julian

C. Motzkin1, Joseph P. Newman1, Kent A. Kiehl2,3, Michael Koenigs1;
of Wisconsin - Madison, 2MIND Research Network, 3University of
New Mexico — Compulsive drug seeking behavior is thought to reflect an

1University

increase in the salience and reward value of drug-related cues with an
associated reduction in inhibitory behavioral control. Neurocognitive
models of substance use disorders (SUDs) typically propose disrupted
interactions between the ventral striatum (VS, a brain region implicated
in the representation of reward) and the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex
(dACC, a brain region implicated in inhibitory behavioral control). To
test the hypothesis that interactions between VS and dACC may be disrupted in drug abusers, we examined resting state functional connectivity to identify regions in which individuals with SUD have altered VS
connectivity relative to non-abusers. Resting state functional MRI data
were acquired from 40 incarcerated male prison inmates (SUD group: n
=22; Non-SUD group: n = 18). SUD diagnosis was based on the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Disorders (SCID). The SUD group
had significantly lower functional connectivity between the bilateral VS
seed region and a cluster in the dACC/BA32 (p < 0.05, corrected). When
psychopathy was included as a covariate (assessed using the Psychopathy Checklist – Revised), additional clusters in the right inferior frontal
gyrus and left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex were also observed (p < 0.05
corrected), suggesting interactions between SUD and psychopathy in
these regions. These results support the hypothesis that drug abuse is
associated with impaired interactions between the VS and dACC, two
central hubs in a network implicated in addiction and drug abuse.

I34
FOCUSED ULTRASOUND LESIONING OF THE VIM THALAMUS
MODULATES INHIBITORY CONTROL IN ESSENTIAL TREMOR PATIENTS

Scott A. Sperling1, Wery P.M. van den Wildenberg2, Scott A. Wylie3, William J.
Elias1; 1University of Virginia, 2University of Amsterdam, 3Vanderbilt
University — Surgical lesioning and deep brain stimulation of the ventral

intermediate (VIM) nucleus of the thalamus improves action tremor in
patients diagnosed with Essential Tremor (ET). Magnetic resonanceguided focused ultrasound has been introduced recently as a non-invasive procedure for lesioning VIM thalamus in ET patients. Expanding on
the role of VIM “motor” thalamus in involuntary motor processes, we
investigated the hypothesis that focused ultrasound in the VIM of the
thalamus would also improve voluntary motor control. Nine patients
with ET performed the Stop-Signal task before and three months after
focused ultrasound lesioning of the VIM thalamus contralateral to their
dominant hand. The Stop-Signal task measures the speed of voluntary
manual response time to go stimuli as well as the speed of inhibiting voluntary actions upon the occurrence of a stop stimulus. Focused ultrasound of the VIM thalamus did not alter the speed of action generation
in the treated hand (p>.10), but improved the speed of inhibiting an
action initiated for the treated hand by approximately 40 ms (p<.05).
These results raise intriguing ideas about the role of VIM thalamus,
which is primarily innervated by cerebellar afferents, in voluntary action
control. Furthermore, these findings provide initial support that surgical
lesioning of the VIM improves both involuntary and voluntary motor
processes in patients with ET.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session I

I35
DISRUPTED OSCILLATORY NEURONAL NETWORKS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA
DURING CONTEXT PROCESSING Seung Suk Kang1,2, Jessica Jones2,
Angus MacDonald1, Scott Sponheim2,1;

2Minneapolis VA Medical Center — The

1University

of Minnesota,

present study investigated functional network in schizophrenia patients during context processing
using novel time-frequency-phase-synchrony (TFPS) measures of interregional functional connectivity between distant oscillatory neural signals. Thirty normal controls and 30 schizophrenia patients participated.
During stimulus response reversal task (SRRT), subjects saw sequences
of color-cue and arrow-probe pairs and responded according to conditions. For green-cues, subjects were instructed to press a right/left button to the direction of the following arrow, while for red-cues, they were
instructed to press a button to the opposite direction of the following
arrow. EEG data was recorded in 128-electrodes, preprocessed with
independent component analysis to remove noises, and segmented to 200~2000 ms relative to cue onsets. TFPS was computed for 65 electrodepairs and averaged across three time periods; activation (0~600 ms),
delay-1 (601~1200 ms), and delay-2 (1201~2000 ms). Principal component analysis (PCA) was conducted for the time-averaged frequency
phase-synchrony values, and four frequency principal components
(PCs) were obtained; alpha: 8~13 Hz, beta: 17~30 Hz, low-gamma: 31~42
Hz, and high-gamma: 43~55 Hz. PCA was also conducted for the frequency PC loadings across the 65 electrode-pairs, and 5 or 6 spatial PCs
were obtained in each frequency PCs. Patients had low accuracy
(t58=3.00, p=.004) and slow reaction time (t58=2.82, p=.007) for red-cue
trials than controls. They also had deficient phase-synchrony in spatial
PCs of fronto-parieto-occipital network in alpha (t58=3.06, p=.003) and
beta frequency (t58=2.72, p=.009) during the delay period, suggesting
that disrupted alpha/beta oscillatory neural communications in frontoparieto-occipital network might underlie context processing deficits in
schizophrenia.

I36
METHYLPHENIDATE INCREASES SIGNAL TO NOISE IN THE RESTING
BRAIN Clare Kelly1, Robert Hester2, L. Sanjay Nandam3, F. Xavier

Castellanos1,4, Michael Milham4,5, Mark Bellgrove3; 1NYU Child Study Center,
2University of Melbourne, 3University of Queensland, 4The Nathan Kline
Institute for Psychiatric Research, 5Child Mind Institute — Catecholaminer-

gic agents methylphenidate (MPH) and atomoxetine (ATM) are commonly used in the treatment of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder (ADHD). Although their mechanisms of action are well understood at the molecular level, the neuronal bases of their beneficial effects
on cognition and behavior are less well understood. Animal work demonstrating their effects on neuronal firing in prefrontal cortex (PFC) has
led to the hypothesis that MPH and ATM increase signal-to-noise within
neuronal circuits. Resting state fMRI data lend themselves to the examination of such effects in humans, by permitting the interrogation of two
aspects of intrinsic brain activity: the strength of the intrinsic activity
itself (brain “noise”), and local and global synchrony (“signal”) among
brain regions, known as network centrality. We examined the effects of
MPH (30mg), ATM (60mg), citalopram (CIT; 30mg) and placebo (PLAC;
dextrose) on voxel-wise measures of intrinsic activity (ALFF) and network centrality (Degree and Eigenvector Centrality – DC and EC) in 27
males (18–35yrs) using a randomized, placebo-controlled design. Effects
were strongest for MPH: decreases in ALFF were localized to primary
sensory and motor areas, while increases were observed in prefrontal
and parietal cortex, and the striatum. Similarly, decreases in local synchrony (DC) were observed throughout sensorimotor cortex, while
MPH-related increases in global synchrony (EC) occurred in PFC and
striatum. The latter were related to MPH-related behavioral improvements on a stop signal response time task. These findings suggest that
monoamine drugs alter signal-to-noise in large-scale brain networks and
provide testable hypotheses regarding catecholaminergic effects in disorders such as ADHD.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

I37
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF IMPAIRED VISUAL INTERFERENCE
CONTROL IN INDIVIDUALS WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER

Shawn E. Christ1, Amanda J. Moffitt1, Lindsay E. Kester1, Kimberly Bodner1,
Judith H. Miles1; 1University of Missouri — Given the countless sources of

visual information that we encounter on a moment-to-moment basis, the
ability to filter and resist interference from visual distractors (RIVD) is
critical for efficient functioning in everyday life. Recent studies (e.g.,
Christ et al., 2007, in press) have documented impaired RIVD in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). In the present study, we utilized functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine the
neurocognitive disruption(s) that contribute to RIVD impairment in
ASD. A sample of 16 individuals with ASD (mean age = 15.5 years) and
11 neurologically intact individuals without ASD (mean age = 15.9
years) were imaged while performing a typical flanker visual filtering
task. In this task, participants had to respond to a centrally-presented
target stimulus which was flanked closely to the left and right by distracting stimuli that could be either compatible or incompatible with the
target. Group-differences in RIVD-related activity were observed in several brain regions including left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC).
Although speculative, these results are consistent with the hypothesis
that disruptions in DLPFC -mediated processes associated with the topdown monitoring and regulation of interference control may contribute
to RIVD impairment in ASD.

I38
CULTURAL VARIATION IN NEURAL BASIS OF RESPONSE INHIBITION

Narun Pornpattananangkul1, Ahmad Hariri2, Tokiko Harada4, Yoko Mano1,
Hidetsugu Komeda3, Todd Parrish1, Norihiro Sadato3, Tetsuya Iidaka4, Joan
Chiao1; 1Northwestern University, 2Duke University, 3National Institute for
Physiological Sciences, Okazaki, Japan, 4Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan —
In order to function well in society, people are expected to inhibit their
responses although the extent which this occurs may vary from culture
to culture. Numerous aspects of society, from childrearing to hierarchical preference, illustrate how cultures may vary in their preference for
response inhibition. However, very little is known about how neural
mechanisms underlying inhibitory-related activity are shaped by culture. Here we conducted cross-cultural functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) in two cultures that differ in the degree to which
response inhibition is emphasized: Japan (high emphasis) and the US
(low emphasis). Results show that Caucasian-American and JapaneseAmericans show increased response within prefrontal regions, including
precentral gyrus, cingulate gyrus, medial frontal gyrus, compared to
native Japanese. By contrast, native Japanese show increased response
within basal ganglia, including caudate, brain regions previously shown
to correlate with impulsivity. Taken together, these results provide novel
evidence of cultural variation in the neural basis of response inhibition.

I39
NEURAL MARKERS OF CIGARETTE CRAVING AND REGULATION Junaid

Merchant1, Will Moore1, Elliot Berkman1; 1University of Oregon — Regulation
of craving is a critical process for successful smoking cessation. Prior
work has implicated the interplay between lateral prefrontal cortices and
the striatum as potential neural correlates of this process in active smokers. To examine this relationship further, the current study integrated
neuroimaging methodologies (fMRI), physiological indices of smoking
regularity (percent exhaled CO2) , and a cognitive regulation task to
examine the neural correlates of craving regulation, and its role in successful quitting for smokers enrolled in a cessation program. 29 community participants (14 female) enrolled in a cigarette cessation program
completed a fMRI scan, along with baseline psychometric (FTND, Positive/Negative Urges scale) and physiological measures of smoking prior
to starting the program. During the fMRI scan, participants were presented with cigarette cues and were instructed to either focus on the
immediate sensations of a cigarette (craving) or to think of the long term
consequences (regulation). 26 participants returned to provide post mea-

235

Poster Session I — Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
sures 3 weeks into the intervention. Our data shows that increases in
physiological indices of successful smoking cessation were correlated
with activity in lateral prefrontal regions (inferior frontal gyrus/dorsolateral prefrontal cortex) while subjects considered the long-term consequences of smoking. Extending these findings beyond the laboratory, we
also found that lateral prefrontal activity was correlated with later selfreport measures of cigarette use. The current study not only replicates
findings linking prefrontal cortical activity to craving regulation, but
also uses such activity in the brain to accurately predict subsequent quitting behavior.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Other
I40
MODELLING THE EFFECT OF PERCEIVED OWNERSHIP ON REWARD
EVALUATION Cameron D. Hassall1, David J. Turk2, Olav E. Krigolson1;
1Dalhousie University, 2University of Aberdeen — Recent

work by Krigolson
et al. (submitted) found that perceived ownership of won or lost objects
biased the amplitude of the feedback error-related negativity (fERN), a
component of the event-related brain potential (ERP) sensitive to
rewards and punishments. In that study, participants completed a simple gambling task in which an item was won or lost on every trial. Each
trial included an ownership cue—the item was either won or lost by the
participant or someone else. Krigolson and colleagues results demonstrated a reduced fERN magnitude following an other-ownership cue.
Here, we adapted a previous reinforcement-learning model for a decision-making task by Holroyd and Coles (2008) that predicted both
human performance and fERN amplitudes to simulate the ownership
task. In our model, fERN amplitude was predicted by the error term
from a temporal-difference (TD) component. Further, our model
includes an ownership unit that biased the TD unit, and thus accounted
for the differences in fERN amplitude between the self- and other-ownership conditions.

I41
GOAL-ORIENTED
OBJECT
KNOWLEDGE
RETRIEVAL
UNDER
UNCERTAINTY Evangelia G. Chrysikou1, Sharon L. Thompson-Schill2;
1University of Kansas, 2University of Pennsylvania — Recent

research in neuroscience has shown that some cognitive tasks benefit from a tradeoff
between brain regions involved in rule-based processing and regions
involved in object processing. For instance, past work from our lab has
provided evidence for such a tradeoff between prefrontal cortex (PFC)
and visual cortex in a creative object use generation task, during which
participants were asked to generate an uncommon use for a series of
common objects. In this experiment we used functional magnetic resonance imaging to explore this tradeoff in a creative goal implementation
task, during which participants were asked to generate an uncommon
object they would use to satisfy a series of common goals. Thirty participants were shown common goals (e.g., ‘to roll out dough’) and they
either generated verbally the most common object that could be used to
satisfy the goal (e.g., ‘rolling pin’) or an uncommon object that could be
used instead, if the typical objects were unavailable (e.g., ‘baseball bat’).
In both conditions participants also completed a baseline task. The
results of the random effects and region of interest analyses showed that
left PFC regions provide support for such goal-oriented behavior. Critically, analyses revealed a significant interaction in left inferior parietal
cortex which may reflect decision making about which object will best
satisfy each goal under conditions of uncertainty during the uncommon
object task. The results are discussed in the context of measures of individual differences, including cognitive control, mood, and personality
assessments.

236

I42
FRONTAL OSCILLATORY DYNAMICS GUIDE FEEDBACK LEARNING VIA
INTER-SITE PHASE SYNCHRONIZATION Irene van de Vijver1, K. Richard

Ridderinkhof1, Michael X Cohen1,2; 1University of Amsterdam, 2University of
Arizona — To accomplish action improvement and learning, performance

feedback must be used to create new and adjust existing stimulusresponse(-outcome) associations. Medial frontal brain areas seem to play
an important role in feedback processing: an increase in oscillatory activity in the theta frequency band (4-8 Hz) has been implicated in the processing of errors and negative performance feedback, whereas positive
performance feedback can induce an increase in beta-band oscillatory
activity (15-30 Hz). In this project we investigated how the brain uses
these feedback-related local theta- and beta-band signals to adjust stimulus-response associations and performance on a next encounter (trial).
Because the frontal cortex may use electrophysiological oscillatory synchronization to coordinate other systems during learning, we used EEG
and MEG to examine changes in oscillatory dynamics both within and
between sites in a network of frontal, stimulus-processing and responseprocessing brain areas during feedback-based learning. Data from multiple experiments will be presented, in which we demonstrate the relation
between oscillatory brain dynamics and subsequent performance adjustment, as well as changes in oscillatory feedback processing with aging.

I43
DISENTANGLING THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF VALENCE AND
EXPECTANCY IN FEEDBACK PROCESSING Bertram Opitz1, Nicola K.

Ferdinand1; 1Saarland University — Despite the general agreement that the

ventral striatum and the mediofrontal cortex, especially the ACC play an
important role in feedback processing, there is much less consensus
about the exact nature of their involvement. Previous studies have identified at least two crucial factors, namely feedback valence and unexpectedness that might determine the specific involvement of these brain
structures in feedback processing. As these two factors were often confounded in previous research we employed a novel experimental task
that separated the valence and the unexpectedness of performance feedback. In a variant of the time estimation task participants (N=20) were
asked to indicate when a 2.5sec empty interval had elapsed. Performance
feedback was provided via an adaptive mechanism tied to each participant’s performance that ensured the unexpected occurrence of positive
and negative feedback (only 20% of cases, respectively), while neutral
feedback occurred in 60% of cases and therefore was expected. In the
present functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study participants perceived a total 300 feedback stimuli. The behavioral results show
that the adaptive mechanism succeeded in generating the intended frequency distribution for the three feedback types. Participants received
positive feedback (19.98%) when responding on average within a
±105ms time window and negative feedback (19.14%) when responding
outside a ±552ms time window around the 2.5 sec. Preliminary fMRI
results indicate that brain activity in both regions varied as a function of
valence and expectancy. Further analysis will use a parametric approach
to examine the pattern of activity in both regions in more detail.

I44
INFORMATION PROCESSING SPEED IS RELATED TO ANTERIOR
CINGULATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS

Katherine Koenig1, Erik Beall1, Jian Lin1, Blessy Matthew1, Lael Stone1, Robert
Bermel1, Stephen Rao1, Bruce Trapp1, Micheal Phillips1, Mark Lowe1; 1The
Cleveland Clinic — Cognitive impairment is common among those diagnosed with multiple sclerosis (MS), with estimates of affected individuals ranging from 40-70%. Several structural and functional MRI
measures show correlation with cognitive impairment on a variety of
tasks, presumably as a consequence of compromised white matter integrity. The current study uses resting state low frequency temporal fluctuations as measured using blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD)
weighted imaging to measure functional connectivity (fcMRI) of the
right anterior cingulate (ACC) in MS and controls. FcMRI to the ACC has

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session I
previously been shown to correlate with measures of cognitive performance in MS. The goal of the current study is to establish how resting
state fcMRI is related to cognitive performance in MS and controls. 47
MS patients and 24 healthy controls underwent anatomical and resting
state connectivity scans. 10 controls and 10 MS subject performed a verbal memory retrieval task. fMRI activation from this task was used to
seed the right ACC. Functional connectivity maps were created for each
individual and transfered to Talairach space. Performance on the SDMT,
a measure of information processing speed commonly used in MS, was
correlated on a voxel-wise basis with connectivity maps. In patients, performance on the SDMT correlated with right ACC connectivity to the left
caudate (r=0.55, p=0.00006, corrected for multiple comparisons) and
inversely correlated with right ACC connectivity to the left medial frontal gyrus (r=-.64, p=0.000001, corrected for multiple comparisons). Controls showed no significant correlations between task performance and
connectivity measures.

I45
GENERAL COGNITIVE ABILITY (G): A CENTRAL ROLE FOR EXECUTIVE
FUNCTION Kanchna Ramchandran1, Eugene Zeien1, Nancy Andreasen1;
1

University of Iowa — Current theories propose overall lower cortical
resource consumption in efficient cognitive performance, while we
hypothesize a more complex, executively distributed mechanism of
resource allocation. In order to identify a potential, neurally efficient,
distributed mechanism in the brain that processes “g”, we functionally
neuroimaged 22 individuals (Age : M=36.77yrs, SD=13.23; Gender: 12M,
10F) with average intelligence (Mean Full scale IQ =114, SD=14) while
solving the Raven’s advanced progressive matrices (RAPM) and a simple pattern matching control task. Whole brain analyses (contrast of
RAPM vs. control) reveals a significant (p=0.05) increase in BOLD
response at the superior parietal lobule (BA 7). This is accompanied by a
concurrent significant suppression of the left lingual gyrus (BA 39) and
the bilateral fronto-polar regions (BA 10), extending into the rostral anterior cingulate (acc). We argue that the RAPM (a visuospatial, cognitive,
measure), is processed primarily in the precuneus/superior parietal
executive hub, critical to error processing in visuospatial decisions, while
the frontal (no longer necessary) and lingual gyrus (may interfere with
error processing) hubs are silenced to perhaps maximize neurophysiological resources at the critical processing region (BA 7). We conclude
that this distributed oscillatory mechanism of activation and suppression
of various executive hubs may represent a unique and novel example of
neural efficiency in the processing of “g”. This could represent self-organizing, small-world, complex, adaptive executive function networks that
may toggle on and off based on the nature and complexity of the task
and customized allocation of cortical resources required to succeed in
the real world.

I46
TEMPORAL PREDICTION ERRORS ANTICIPATORILY MODULATE
CINGULATE-INSULAR CONNECTIONS Roberto
Limongi1,
Steven

Sutherland2, Jerry Zhu2, Michael E. Young2, Reza Habib2; 1Venezuelan Institute
for Scientific Research, 2Southern Illinois University Carbondale — Anticipatory activity in the anterior middle cingulate cortex (aMCC) and in the
anterior insula (aINS) is associated to prediction error likelihood. We
propose a mechanistic model of the aMCC-aINS system upon which the
simultaneous error-likelihood-driven anticipatory activity would rest.
Fifteen participants were scanned in an MRI system when performing a
temporal prediction task. They observed visual animations and predicted when a stationary ball would move after being touched by a moving ball. Three spatial gaps and three temporal delays between the balls
introduced uncertainties thus inducing prediction errors. BOLD
responses were modeled within the general linear model approach. We
used a dynamic causal model approach to infer unobserved neuronal
states within the aMCC and the aINS and the modulation of their connections in which task would drive activity in the aINS and the prediction errors would modulate cingulate-insular connections. Eight
additional competing models were included. The model comprising

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

driving inputs to the aINS and modulatory inputs to the forward cingulate-insular connections yielded the highest exceedance probability.
Task-related driving activity in the aINS was positive and predictionerror related signals negatively modulated aMCC-aINS forward connections. The aMCC-aINS system not only responds anticipatorily when
humans predict whether an event occurs but also when it is to occur.
Our mechanistic model is a natural extension of the previously shown
error-dependent coactivation of the aMCC-aINS system. Our results
open at least two questions: First, which region originates the modulatory signals? Second, does this prediction error signal drive learningrelated synaptic plasticity in the aMCC-aINS connections?

I47
ERP INVESTIGATION OF TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL DEVIATION
PROCESSING IN NEWLY LEARNED NAVIGATION ROUTES Elisabeth

Ploran1, Sujala Maharjan2, Emily Urban3, David Hawkins1, James C.
Thompson1; 1George Mason University, 2Wesleyan College, 3Marquette
University — As we navigate through the environment, we are constantly
using information about both the spatial context and the temporal
sequence of our movement. Learning both types of associations in a new
environment may contribute to our ability to navigate flexibly. Our
study assessed the ability to identify temporal and spatial deviants during passive navigation through a recently learned environment. Participants were familiarized with two routes through a commercial district.
They were then asked to indicate whether sequences of images were
intact (all from the same route in the correct order), spatial deviants (one
image was from the other route), or temporal deviants (all from the same
route, but two reversed in order). Event-related potentials (ERPs) were
recorded simultaneously with behavioral performance. The behavioral
data indicate that although participants sometimes labeled spatial deviants as temporal deviants, thus still indicating recognition of a deviation,
the reverse was not true. When participants mislabeled a temporal deviant, it was most likely labeled "intact", suggesting difficulty in identifying temporal deviations. In addition, ERP analysis of correct trials
demonstrated a strong N200 response in frontal electrodes to spatial
deviants compared to intact trials. Interestingly, this N2 response was
only found for the second image of the reversed order sequence. The first
image, which skipped ahead along the route, was associated with a similar ERP response as intact trials. The results suggest that although both
temporal and spatial information are available in newly learned environments, reactions to temporal deviations are most pronounced when time
appears to reverse.

I48
THE DEFAULT AND EXECUTIVE NETWORKS DEMONSTRATE TASKDEPENDENT AND TASK-INDEPENDENT PATTERNS OF FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY Matt Dixon1, Melissa Ellamil1, Kieran Fox1, Kalina

Christoff1; 1University of British Columbia — The brain is organized into several coherent networks that can be reliably identified during rest and
during task performance. Using seed regions from the default and executive networks, we examined functional connectivity during rest and
during 5 different tasks and looked for task-dependent and task-independent patterns of functional connectivity. Preliminary analyses provide evidence for both types of patterns. The core regions comprising the
default network [posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) and inferior parietal cortex (IPL)] and core regions comprising the executive network [lateral prefrontal cortex (lPFC), anterior midcingulate (aMCC), and intraparietal sulcus (IPS)] remain functionally
connected independent of task. However, connectivity with other
regions shows some degree of task specificity. For instance, the PCC
seed from the default network exhibits relatively greater connectivity
with the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex during a creativity task, whereas
the lPFC seed from the executive network shows relatively greater connectivity with the striatum during a cognitive control task. These data
suggest that while network functional connectivity adapts to external
demands, a high degree of consistency is present.

237

Poster Session I — Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

I49
A COMPUTATIONAL MODEL OF RULE-GUIDED BEHAVIOR IN THE
PREFRONTAL CORTEX Ashley N. Cline1, Jeremy R. Reynolds1; 1University of
Denver — Rule-guided behavior is a major component of cognitive control. One important question regarding rule-guided behavior is how
rules are represented and developed. Recent work has shown that rulelike representations can be developed in neural networks that have the
ability to actively maintain information and rapidly update such information when necessary (Rougier, Noelle, Braver, Cohen, and O’Reilly,
2005). The current study extends this previous work by investigating
how such abilities may occur via hypothesized interactions between the
prefrontal cortex (PFC) and basal ganglia (BG; O’Reilly & Frank, 2006).
In particular, the previous models used a very rigid and specific updating mechanism, and the goal of the current set of simulations was to
investigate whether a more general-purpose, flexible mechanism could
account for similar phenomena. As in Rougier et al., the current models
are trained on several different task rules that require the model to
respond on the basis of a relevant dimension. Critically, several stimuli
are left out of training, and are subsequently used to test how generalpurpose the developed rule representations are. We replicate prior
results across a number of control networks, and demonstrate that the
more flexible updating mechanism has both strengths and weaknesses
relative to the more rigid updating mechanism used previously.

I50
PERCEIVED OBJECT OWNERSHIP BIASES REWARD EVALUATION WITHIN
MEDIAL-FRONTAL CORTEX Olave Krigolson1, Cameron Hassall1, David
Turk2; 1Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Dalhousie University,

2Department of Psychology, University of Aberdeen — Recently

it has been
established that ownership of an object biases perceptual processing
(Turk et al., submitted). Specifically, Turk and colleagues found perceived self-ownership was associated with increased perceptual processing. Here, we sought to determine whether or not perceived object
ownership would bias the output of the medial-frontal reinforcement
learning system (Holroyd & Coles, 2002; Krigolson et al., 2009). Specifically, we used event-related brain potentials (ERPs) to examine whether
or not the amplitude of the feedback error-related negativity (fERN;
Miltner et al., 1997) was modulated by perceived object ownership. Participants completed a gambling task in which they either won or lost
objects that were presented to them on a monitor. In an important
manipulation, objects were presented in conjunction with a cue that indicated whether or not the participant or someone else would win or lose
the object as a result of the gamble. As with Turk and colleagues, we
found that objects associated with self-ownership evoked a larger P300
component. Further, we found that the amplitude of the fERN was
reduced for other-ownership as opposed to self-ownership gambles. Our
results confirm Turk and colleagues finding that perceptual processing is
sensitive to object ownership. Further, our results demonstrate that the
medial-frontal reinforcement learning system is sensitive to perceived
object ownership.

I51
DOSE DEPENDENT DOPAMINERGIC MODULATION OF REWARD-BASED
LEARNING IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE Nelleke C. van Wouwe1,2, Richard

K. Ridderinkhof4,5, Guido P.H. Band2, Wery P.M. van den Wildenberg4, Scott A.
Wylie3; 1TNO Behavioral and Societal Sciences, Soesterberg,the Netherlands,
2
Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, Leiden University, Leiden, the
Netherlands, 3Vanderbilt University, 4Amsterdam center for the study of
adaptive control in brain and behaviour (Acacia), University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 5Cognitive Science Center Amsterdam,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands — Learning the most
adaptive behavior in novel situations is an essential aspect of life that
requires the ability to quickly associate stimuli with actions that optimize rewarding outcomes. Animal electrophysiology and human fMRI
studies converge on the notion that different aspects of this rewardbased learning process can be linked to dissociable corticostriatal circuit-

238

ries. Specifically, the processing of mismatches between actual reward
and anticipated reward early in the course of learning is linked to ventral
striatum and associated frontal circuitry, whereas the formation of stimulus-action-reward associations is linked to the anterior putamen and
associated motor circuitry late in learning. Dopaminergic (DA) innervation of these circuitries is well established; however the modulatory role
of DA on these stages of reward-based learning remains to be fully elucidated. Using a mathematical model of these learning processes, we studied the modulatory role of DA in patients diagnosed with Parkinson’s
disease (PD) who performed a probabilistic reward learning task both on
and off of their dopamine medication. Compared to the off medication
state, low and moderate doses of dopamine medication had no impact
on the early, outcome evaluation phase of learning, but significantly
improved the proficiency of learning stimulus-action-reward associations. This suggests a dopaminergic modulation of learning supported
by the anterior putamen and associated motor circuitry. Importantly,
high doses of dopamine produced increased reward prediction errors,
suggesting that too much dopamine may interfere with ventral striatal
circuitry involved in early outcome evaluation learning processes.

I52
ALTERED DEFAULT MODE NETWORK FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
DURING THE RESTING STATE IN LONG-TERM MEDITATION
PRACTITIONERS Kieran C.R. Fox1, Matthew L. Dixon1, Melissa Ellamil1,

Kalina Christoff1; 1University of British Columbia — Recent years have seen a
surge of interest in the default-mode network (DMN), a diverse web of
brain regions showing strong functional connectivity (FC) in fMRI studies when the brain is in its ‘resting’ state. DMN regions include posterior
cingulate cortex (PCC), medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), and the hippocampus (HC). The DMN is thought to support spontaneous thought
and mind-wandering: ruminations on past and/or potential future experiences, fantasizing, and a running self-narrative – a picture generally
consistent with the regions showing strong activation and connectivity
during the resting state. The explicit goal of many contemplative (meditation) practices is to quiet the stream of thoughts, associations, memories and fantasies which occupy much of our waking life and may be
mediated at the neural level by DMN activity – and instead attend to the
present moment of experience. To test the hypothesis that experienced
meditation practitioners would show altered DMN activity, we examined 7-min epochs of eyes-closed resting state fMRI data in long-term
meditation practitioners (mean experience ~6000 hrs). We chose a central
region of PCC as the FC seed region, as PCC is the most commonly
reported DMN node. Compared to connectivity measures in normal subjects, meditators showed decreased connectivity between PCC and HC,
and a shift in connectivity from typical ventral mPFC regions to more
dorsal regions of the anterior cingulate. Our results suggest that longterm meditators show altered DMN activity during rest that may represent a shift away from long-term memory and fantasizing toward a more
present-centered attentional stance.

LANGUAGE: Other
I53
INVESTIGATING THE USE OF LEFT AND RIGHT-LATERALIZING TDCS FOR
REHABILITATION OF NAMING IN APHASIA Elizabeth H. Lacey1, Brenda
Rapp2, Tracy D. Vannorsdall1, David J. Schretlen1, Barry Gordon1; 1The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, 2The Johns Hopkins University — Some

encouraging results have been reported after anodal transcranial direct
current stimulation (tDCS) targeting regions in the left hemisphere (LH)
in people with chronic aphasia (e.g., Fridriksson et al., 2011). However,
the optimal electrode positioning and polarity for enhancement of language skills remains to be determined. We report naming data before
and after left-lateralizing, right-lateralizing and sham stimulation in two
people (Patient 1 (P1) and Patient 2 (P2)) with chronic post-stroke naming deficits. P1’s lesion encompasses mostly frontal areas while P2’s
lesion is fronto-temporal. During left-lateralizing tDCS, participants

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session I
practiced naming pictures (with phonological and orthographic cues) for
30 minutes, at 2 mA, with the anodal electrode over left Broca’s area and
the cathodal over the right hemisphere (RH) homologue (similar to the
configuration in Turkeltaub et al., 2011). In the right-lateralizing condition, electrode polarities were reversed (anodal, RH; cathodal, LH). Each
condition was administered for two consecutive days. Results show no
change in naming accuracy after tDCS in P1. For P2, naming accuracy
did not differ from baseline after left-lateralizing tDCS or sham (McNemar p=.227 and p=1.000, respectively), but did improve after right-lateralizing tDCS (McNemar p=.012). There is evidence that residual
language skills in individuals with aphasia originate from left perilesional areas in most individuals, although there is also some evidence
that residual capabilities can arise from the RH. The current study, the
first we know of to investigate anodal stimulation to RH, indicates that
individual differences in the anatomical origin of residual language
capabilities may determine optimal stimulation parameters.

I54
CLASSIFICATION OF WORDS AND SYLLABLES: A P3 ERP STUDY.
Nicholas Walker1, Phillip M. Gilley1; 1University of Colorado at Boulder — This

study sought to compare classification of words and syllables using the
P3 response of the auditory event related potential (ERP) as an index of
speed of classification. In this study, we measured ERPs and behavioral
reaction times to auditory stimuli consisting of three-phoneme words
(e.g. /bæd/) and two-phoneme syllables (e.g. /bæ/) in ten young
adults. Stimuli were presented in an auditory odd-ball paradigm under
two experimental conditions (words-rare and syllables-rare), presented
monaurally and repeated in each ear. Using planned comparisons on the
PZ electrode, and controlling for ear, condition was a significant predictor of latency with earlier P3 latencies in the words-rare condition. This is
consistent with the behavioral data revealing faster responses to words
than to syllables. The interaction of ear and condition was significant
with participants having earlier P3 latencies on average in their left ear in
the syllables-rare condition, and earlier P3 latencies on average in their
right ear in the words-rare condition. The right ear advantage was
present in the P3 response to words; however, the response to syllables
did not show this advantage. The difference in P3 latencies suggests that
classification occurs faster for words than for syllables, and may suggest
that the latency of the P3 response reflects the behavioral relevance of the
stimulus.

I55
THE
BILINGUAL
AND
MONOLINGUAL
DIFFERENCES
IN
COMPREHENSION PROCESSING: AN FMRI STUDY ON GRAMMAR AND
SEMANTIC VIOLATION IN SENTENCES. Patricia Román Fernández1, Aina

Rodríguez-Pujadas2, Noelia Ventura-Campos2, Ana Sanjuán2, Julio González2,
César Ávila2; 1Max Planck Intitute, 2Universitat Jaume I — The development

of neuroimaging techniques together with the growing interest in the
effect of bilingual experience have increased knowledge about neural
differences in the bilingual brain. Wartenburger, Heekeren, Abutalebi,
Cappa, Villringer, and Perani (2003), found that early bilinguals activated the prefrontal cortex to a higher extent in L2 grammatical judgment rather than in semantic but not late bilinguals. This can be
interpreted in terms of the declarative/procedural model of language
(Ullman, 2004) where grammatical rules are dependent on implicit
knowledge sub served by frontal areas and basal ganglia. Late L2 acquisition would not rely on the same structures as it would be acquired
explicitly. To test this hypothesis, in the present study we wanted to
explore whether grammatical and semantic processing in bilinguals differ in L1 too. An fMRI study was conducted where 23 bilinguals and 20
monolinguals performed a grammatical and semantic judgment task.
We observed a more extensive activation of the bilingual brain in grammatical and semantic judgment. More interestingly, higher activation of
LIFC for L1 grammatical jugdments than semantic was found in bilinguals and specially in less proficient. These results are in agreement with
those observed for L2 processing in other studies, thus suggesting that
bilinguals recruit a more extensive network than monolinguals in L1 too.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

However, this results question the interpretation based on the declarative/procedimental model, or at least suggest that L2 processing influences performance in L1.

I56
OVERLAPPING AND UNIQUE NEURAL SUBSTRATES FOR NARRATIVE
PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION: AN FMRI STUDY Nuria

AbdulSabur1,2, Yisheng Xu1, Ho Ming Chow1, Allen Braun1; 1National Institute
On Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, National Institutes of
Health, 2University of Maryland, College Park — While most language communication happens at the discourse level and includes both comprehension and production, most neuroimaging research either examines
comprehension and production in separate studies or focuses on language processing at lower levels, e.g. single words and sentences. In the
current study, we aim to 1) identify regions that are either shared or
uniquely associated with discourse comprehension and production and
2) examine the functional connections between these regions and other
cortical areas. Eighteen right-handed individuals, underwent functional
magnetic resonance imaging while listening to and telling short narratives. Our results indicate that narrative comprehension and production
share neural correlates in the left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and posterior temporal regions, as well as fusiform, anterior temporal, inferior
parietal, and medial prefrontal cortices. However, we also found unique
activations for each: narrative comprehension is more bilateral, e.g. activating the right IFG and temporal cortex, while narrative production
uniquely engages a diverse array of cortical and subcortical structures.
Additionally, comprehension and production exhibit disparate connectivity patterns, even when the seeds regions are selected from areas of
shared activity. For example, the left IFG is connected with the supplementary motor area and basal ganglia during production; while during
comprehension, this region is connected to auditory and visual cortices.
Interestingly, seed regions are consistently connected to anterior brain
regions during production, and to more posterior regions during comprehension. While narrative production and comprehension share core
anatomical features, they are also characterized by unique neural correlates and patterns of functional connectivity.

I57
THE EVENT-RELATED OPTICAL SIGNAL (EROS) REVEALS PATTERNS OF
HEMISPHERIC PROCESSING DURING LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION
Edward W. Wlotko1, Kara D. Federmeier1, Monica Fabiani1, Gabriele Gratton1;
1University of Illinois — Hemispheric specialization has been examined

with visual half-field techniques (presentation of stimuli in one half of
the visual field, stimulating and biasing processing to the contralateral
hemisphere) in conjunction with neurophysiological or behavioral
responses. A major assumption of these techniques is that hemispheric
biases remain after initial visual processing, which is difficult to verify
with most methodologies. The event-related optical signal (EROS) is
uniquely suited to provide a window into hemispheric asymmetry and
cooperation, as it allows interrogation of the timecourse of activity
within localized cortical areas. To examine contralateral and ipsilateral
activity associated with language processing, EROS was recorded while
participants read sentences presented word-by-word in the center of the
screen, with the sentence-final word randomly presented in central, left,
or right visual field (CVF, LVF, or RVF). Lateralized stimulation elicited
contralateral activity in left and right inferior frontal gyrus approximately 310-385 ms post-stimulus onset. Stimulus-locked averages
showed little contralateral activity in temporal areas. Cross-correlation
analyses (a measure of functional connectivity) revealed bilateral frontotemporal within-hemisphere correlations, for all presentation conditions
(CVF, LVF, RVF). Temporal activity lagged frontal activity by 95-195 ms
in the LH and 215-330 ms in the RH. Taken together, these results provide evidence that processing biases produced by half-field presentation
persist after initial visual processing. Further, intrahemispheric circuits
seem to be engaged regardless of initial stimulation. These circuits
appeared faster and more robust in the LH than in the RH, concurring

239

Poster Session I — Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
with claims of stronger or more efficacious top-down language mechanisms in the LH.

I58
NEURAL CORRELATES OF VISUAL LETTER IMAGERY IN TYPICALLY
DEVELOPING READERS Raj Stewart1, Aparna Pisupati1, Scott Burns1,
Nikki Davis1, Sheryl Rimrodt1, Laurie Cutting1; 1Vanderbilt University — Word

recognition has been established as an important component in reading,
and previous work has identified multiple neural regions active during
word recognition tasks. However, less is known about regions involved
in processing single-letters, including during letter imagery, a clear component of word recognition. The present study used an fMRI paradigm
to examine minimum neural correlates of visual letter imagery, and the
hypothesis that correlates of letter processing are similar to those active
in word recognition. Twenty-three adults with normal or corrected-tonormal visual acuity completed two runs (96 total trials) of a letter imagery task. During each trial, participants first saw a block representation
of an English letter. On half of the trials (“control”), participants then
saw a grid with a transparent version of the letter, along with a target ‘X’;
on the other half (“imagery”), participants were only shown the target
‘X’. For all trials, participants were instructed to indicate whether the target’s location overlapped a grid space previously occupied by the letter.
Comparing imagery > baseline and imagery > control conditions in
whole brain analysis, we found that regions in middle and superior frontal gyrus, fusiform gyrus, and precuneus were active during letter imagery, with precuneus and middle frontal gyrus displaying differentially
greater activation for imagery > control. These findings provide evidence that single letter processing activates similar areas as word recognition; however, additional regions are recruited specifically for
imagery. Findings also suggest that this may be a relevant experimental
task for investigating networks involved in word recognition.

I59
SPATIALLY SEPARABLE NETWORKS FOR OBSERVED MOUTH AND
GESTURE MOVEMENTS DURING LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION Jeremy

Skipper1, Jason Zevin2, Sarah Kane1, Megan Calabrese1; 1Hamilton College,

2Weill Medical College of Cornell University — Most

neurobiological language research discards “context” in favor of studying isolated speech
sounds or words. We test an alternative model in which language
engages multiple brain networks in a context-dependent manner. We
tested this model with source localized high-density encephalography
(EEG) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) with both naturalistic and controlled stimuli. When participants watched a television
game show, both EEG and fMRI revealed that speech-associated mouth
movements and co-speech gestures were processed in spatially separable ventral and dorsal pathways. The ventral “mouth” regions included
posterior superior temporal (ST), inferior parietal, and ventral premotor
(PM) cortex. The dorsal “gesture” regions included anterior ST, superior
parietal, and dorsal PM cortex. In the controlled study, participants
watched an actress speaking sentences that were constructed to vary on
the informativeness of mouth movements (more or less visible) and cospeech gesture (none or more or less imagistic). Preliminary results suggest that mouth and gesture movements were associated with their own
ventral and dorsal networks. Functional connectivity analyses show that
when mouth movements were more informative, the ventral network
was weighted more strongly whereas when gestures were more informative, the dorsal network was weighted more strongly. Results suggest
that the organization of language in the brain is not static but, rather, is
supported by multiple, distributed, and simultaneously active networks
each processing a different type of context, weighted by the informativeness of different sources of information in the environment.

I60
CHARACTERIZING DISCOURSE LEVEL LANGUAGE DEFICITS IN “WELLRECOVERED” POST-STROKE APHASIC PATIENTS Stephanie

Bissonnette1,2, Meghan Healey1, Jennifer Ryder3, Ho Ming Chow1, Siyuan Liu1,
Yisheng Xu1, Beth Solomon3, Allen Braun1; 1The National Institute on Deafness

240

and Other Communication Disorders, The National Institutes of Health,
2
University of New England College of Osteopathic Medicine, 3Rehabilitation
Medicine, The National Institutes of Health — Although real world communication exists predominantly at the discourse level, language in this
context is largely ignored in the assessment of post-stroke aphasia. Yet
among the patients in our clinic, a large number of “well-recovered”
aphasics (i.e. those without sentential or lexical deficits) report continued
struggles in daily functioning and communication despite scoring well
on classic tests of aphasia. The current study is an attempt to characterize
this population by comparing the performance of 15 post-stroke aphasic
patients with left sided lesions to a set of age-matched controls. All
patients scored above an 88 on the Western Aphasia Battery Aphasia
Quotient and within normal ranges on lower level tasks including object
naming, sentence completion, and word finding. The administered discourse battery included tasks such as story comprehension and retell,
picture description, sequencing, and inferencing. Measures of working
memory and attention were also obtained. Analysis of variance
(ANOVA) revealed significant between-group differences in several elements of discourse level processing, notably organizing a coherent story
structure, recalling details of a story, and building inferences from
implicit information. Furthermore, voxel-based lesion symptom mapping (VLSM) identified an association between damage to frontal
regions anterior and superior to the inferior frontal gyrus and discourse
level impairments. In total, these data reveal (1) a need for improved
assessment tools for aphasia, (2) the need for continued monitoring of
discourse performance for patients with lesions extending into the frontal cortex, and (3) a role for rehabilitation services that seek to improve
communication at the discourse level.

I61
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF AUDIOVISUAL SPEECH
PERCEPTION IN AUTISTIC CHILDREN Yang Zhang1, Tess Koerner1, Meri

Naumceska Blumenkron2, Erin Diamond1, Edward Carney1; 11Department of
Speech-Language-Hearing Sciences, University of Minnesota, 2Berlin School
of Mind and Brain, Luisenstraße 56, Haus 1, 10099 Berlin, Germany — The

ability to detect auditory-visual correspondences in speech is an early
hallmark of typical language development in infancy. This event-related
potential study examined the individual differences in bimodal speech
perception in children (5~10 years old) clinically diagnosed with autism.
The stimuli consisted of two vowels, /i/ and /a/, produced by a male
speaker. Congruent and incongruent matchup conditions for the auditory and visual information were digitally created to examine the detection of incongruency in the individual subjects. Among the ten subjects,
four children showed no significant waveform differences between the
congruent and incongruent conditions, and the other six showed significant incongruency effect. The latency of incongruency detection
responses in the autistic children appeared similar to that of 5~11 month
old infants. Minimum norm estimation results showed significant activities in the right superior temporal and parietal regions for the incongruency effect. The results suggest the lack of homogeneity in audiovisual
integration for speech perception in autistic children, which cannot be
easily predicted from behavioral measures.

I62
EMOTIONS SPEAK LOUDER, THEN WORDS: NON-VERBAL EMOTIONAL
CUES PREDICT FORTHCOMING WORDS Amanda O'Brien1, Jeremy

Safran1, Jeremy Skipper1; 1Hamilton College — The study of language and

the brain has largely proceeded as if non-verbal expressions of emotion
are independent of spoken language. We tested an alternative interactive
perspective, i.e., that non-verbal emotional displays are used to predict
forthcoming words. Participants watched videos of two people having a
conversation. One talker displayed an emotion on the face (e.g., a smile)
or a neutral face. The other talker then asked a question (e.g., “How did
the interview go?”). The final word of the reply was more or less predictable based on the prior facial display (e.g., “It went well”). Using source
localized high-density encephalography, we found that the reply, prior

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session I
to the final word, resulted in more activity in auditory and motor areas
for initially valenced compared to neutral facial expressions. The final
word of the reply resulted in more amygdala and little other activity for
the same comparison. In contrast, the final word resulted in more auditory and motor area activity for initially neutral compared to valenced
facial expressions. Taken together, these results suggest that the
amygdala aids in the pre-activation of a neighborhood of words associated with emotional facial expressions that can be used to constrain the
prediction of subsequent words by the motor system. This prediction
frees up brain resources that might be used for other purposes. This
implies that the division between non-verbal and verbal information is
blurry and that a full understanding of language and the brain requires
that we study how these forms of communication interact.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
I63
BRAIN SIGNAL VARIABILITY IN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY AND
REST: A MEG STUDY Jennifer Heisz1,2, Brian Levine1,2, Bernhard Ross1,2,

Anthony R. McIntosh1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest, 2University of
Toronto — Complex cognitive operations like autobiographical memory
emerge from integrative dynamical activity across widespread networks. Critically, such operations reflect coordinated processes that
unfold over time rather than a particular state of function. Information
theoretic metrics, like multiscale entropy (MSE), quantify brain signal
variability over time at multiple timescales and therefore could capture
the dynamics of neural network activity. The present study used MSE to
quantify the spatial-temporal variability of human neuromagnetic brain
signals while individuals listened to audio recordings of past autobiographical episodic and semantic events. Detail-rich episodic autobiographical memories evoked more brain signal variability than semantic
memories. Moreover, this difference in variability was observed at brain
regions that are commonly active during both episodic and semantic
tasks. When contrasting the variability of brain signals during the cued
memory conditions versus rest greater variability was associated with
memory conditions at brain regions common to both memory and rest.
The results suggest that entropy measures provide an important marker
of network dynamics and a way to dissociate cognitive operations even
when similar brain regions are recruited for processing.

I64
ASSESSING MEMORY STRATEGIES USING COMPUTATIONAL
CLASSIFICATION OF EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Laura
Matzen1,
Michael Haass1; 1Sandia National Laboratories — Although there are many

strategies and techniques that can improve memory, people often use
suboptimal memory strategies. Our goal in this study was to use eventrelated potentials (ERPs) recorded during a memory task to assess
whether or not participants were using an effective memory strategy.
We predicted that participants with ERPs that were consistent with an
effective memory strategy would perform better at test than other participants. In the memory task, some words were studied once, some were
studied twice, and some were studied once then followed with a quizlike memory test. All of the words were subsequently tested or retested.
On average, participants had the best memory performance for words
that were quizzed during study. The quizzed words elicited a large late
positive component (LPC), an ERP that has been associated with explicit
memory search processes. We hypothesized that some participants
would adopt a self-quizzing strategy for the study words that were not
explicitly quizzed. This strategy should lead to larger LPCs in response
to the studied words and to better memory at test. We developed a computational model that characterized the brain activity associated with
passive study and with explicit memory testing. We then used that
model to predict which participants adopted a self-quizzing strategy
during the study sessions and which did not. Finally, we evaluated the
behavioral performance of the two groups of participants. This analysis
revealed that, as predicted, the participants whose brain activity was

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

consistent with a self-quizzing strategy had better memory performance
at test.

I65
ROLE OF LEFT PARAHIPPOCAMPAL GYRUS IN EPISODIC AND SEMANTIC
FAMILIARITY Sasha Cervantes1, Jessica Wong1, Ian McDonough2, Patrick

Dolan3, David Donaldson4, David Gallo1; 1University of Chicago, 2University of
recognition
Texas at Dallas, 3Drew University, 4University of Stirling — In
memory, words can feel familiar not only because they were recently
encountered in an experiment (episodic familiarity), but also because
they have high pre-experimental or baseline frequency (semantic familiarity). Here we investigated the neural correlates of these two factors by
crossing study repetitions at encoding with baseline word frequency,
and then using event-related fMRI during a recognition memory test
with recollect/familiar judgments. Behavioral results confirmed that
both study repetition and word frequency enhanced familiarity estimates, and also revealed a word-frequency mirror effect in recollect
judgments. An unbiased whole-brain analysis on studied items revealed
that activity in the left parahippocampal gyrus, a region sometimes associated with familiarity, interacted with repetition and frequency. Specifically, this region showed greater activity for high frequency words
compared with low frequency words, and this difference was greatest
for items that were repeated at study. These results suggest that this
region is sensitive to the effects of both episodic and semantic information when experiencing a feeling of familiarity at retrieval, with implications for dual process theories of recognition memory.

I66
THE ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL NEURAL MECHANISMS SUPPORTING
M
TEMPORAL AND SEMANTIC CLUSTERING IN FREE RECALL Nicole

Long1, Michael J Kahana1; 1University of Pennsylvania — In freely recalling

lists of items, people exhibit two striking forms of clustering: temporal
clustering in which items studied in neighboring positions are recalled
successively, and semantic clustering in which items with similar meanings are recalled successively. There is growing evidence that differential
encoding mechanisms support temporal and semantic clustering during
recall. Less evidence exists on what mechanisms underlie these forms of
organization during the retrieval period. To examine encoding and
retrieval processes supporting organization during recall, we conducted
an experiment in which items of varying semantic similarity were studied in either adjacent or widely spaced list positions. We then examined
the degree to which the spectral features of the scalp EEG could distinguish between encoding and retrieval of successfully (1) recalled items,
(2) semantically clustered items, and (3) temporally clustered items.
Behaviorally, semantic and temporal clustering are positively correlated
with successful recall while negatively correlated with each other. The
neural results of encoding show similar patterns for items subsequently
recalled and items subsequently semantically clustered, specifically
decreases in theta, alpha and beta power. The most robust temporal
effect is an increase in alpha power for subsequently temporally clustered items. Preliminary results during retrieval show theta power
decreases and gamma power increases during successful recall. These
results suggest a shared encoding and retrieval mechanism characterized by changes in low frequency power with the potential for a
retrieval-specific mechanism characterized by change in high frequency
power.

I67
NEURAL SIMILARITY BETWEEN ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL PREDICTS
ITEM-SPECIFIC VARIATION IN MEMORY SUCCESS Maureen Ritchey1,2,

Erik A. Wing1, Kevin S. LaBar1, Roberto Cabeza1; 1Duke University, 2University
of California, Davis — A central hypothesis in memory research is that
memory is a function of the similarity between encoding and retrieval
operations. Several neurocomputational models of memory have likewise proposed that the hippocampus is involved in reinstating neocortical representations of prior experiences at the time of retrieval. However,
it has remained a challenge to characterize the reactivation of individual

241

Poster Session I — Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
memory representations in humans. To this end, fMRI data were collected during the encoding and recognition of emotionally arousing and
neutral scenes. Beta patterns corresponding to each individual trial were
extracted from a set of anatomically-defined ROIs, and neural similarity
between encoding and retrieval patterns was evaluated for each possible
encoding-retrieval pair. We found evidence for enhanced encodingretrieval similarity for successfully remembered trials versus forgotten in
several cortical regions of interest; a subset of these regions (especially
within occipito-temporal cortex) was particularly sensitive to the reactivation of item-specific information. Critically, hippocampal activation
mediated the relationship between encoding-retrieval similarity and
memory on a trial-to-trial level, underscoring its participation in facilitating cortical reactivation during retrieval. Consistent with the modulatory influence of emotional arousal on memory, emotional items were
associated with enhanced encoding-retrieval similarity, particularly
within middle occipital gyrus. This study presents novel evidence that
memories are tied to encoding-retrieval similarity at the level of the individual item, and that memory reactivation can be modulated by emotion. Successful memory reactivation is linked to hippocampal-cortical
interactions, confirming predictions from neurocomputational models.
These findings speak to the promise of pattern similarity measures for
evaluating individual memory representations.

I68
THE GENERATION EFFECT AND STRATEGIC RETRIEVAL IN REALITY
MONITORING Timm Rosburg1, Mikael Johansson2, Axel Mecklinger1;
1

Saarland University, 2Lund University — Reality monitoring represents a

special case of source monitoring which requires the differentiation
between perceived and imagined events or between own actions and
actions of second persons. The role of control processes in reality monitoring is yet not fully understood. In our current study, we investigated
such control processes (in the form of retrieval orientation and strategic
retrieval of nontarget information) by event-related potentials (ERPs).
Complete or incomplete object words were presented in sentences. Participants had to identify the words as the subject of the sentence (perceive condition) or had to complete them (generate condition). The
participants’ memory accuracy was better for generated items than for
perceived items, as tested in a subsequent memory exclusion task. Comparison of ERPs to new items between the two target conditions (i.e.
assessing retrieval orientation) showed more positive ERPs when generated object names were targeted. Nontarget retrieval (as reflected in a
left-parietal old/new effect to nontargets) was observed only for generated items which were more easily retrieved than perceived items. Current findings are in line with the assumption that retrieval orientation in
reality monitoring is supported by prefrontal brain structures. The
occurrence of a left-parietal old/new effect to nontargets when the hard
to retrieve perceived items were targeted corroborates the concept that
the ease with which items can be accessed promotes nontarget retrieval.

I69
LAUGH YOURSELF TO SLEEP: THE ROLE OF HUMOR IN THE
INVESTIGATION OF SLEEP’S EFFECTS ON POSITIVE MEMORY Alexis

Chambers1, Jessica Payne1; 1University of Notre Dame — Numerous studies

have examined sleep’s influence on emotional memory formation. Most
of these studies have focused solely on memory for negative material, or
have grouped positive and negative material together to investigate the
differential impact of sleep on “emotional” versus neutral memory. Yet
the question of how sleep specifically impacts positive memory formation remains unanswered. The present study investigated the role of
humor as a strong positive emotional stimulus in sleep-dependent memory consolidation, as studies have more consistently found enhanced
memory for humorous over non-humorous material. Participants
(N=66) incidentally encoded 27 Farside cartoons that appeared in either
their original humorous version or were altered into non-humorous versions. Subjects freely recalled the cartoons following a 12-hour delay
across a period of either wake or sleep. Results indicate that humor
enhanced later recall overall, with subjects recalling more humorous car-

242

toons than non-humorous ones (F= 5.33, p<.001). Although sleep had no
effect on the type of cartoons recalled, there was a significant impact of
sleep on the number of memory distortions present when recalling the
cartoons. Specifically, subjects in the wake group exhibited greater mixing of features among cartoons (t=2.16, p=.035), implying a subtle
impairment in memory accuracy. These results suggest that the shortterm memory humor effect found in previous studies is robust across a
longer, 12-hour delay. Further, sleep appears to offer some protection to
the integrity of memories over this delay.

I70
AN FMRI STUDY OF THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF RECOGNITION
MEMORY STRENGTH FOR ITEM AND RELATIONAL INFORMATION YiChieh Chiu1, Brian Gonsalves1; 1University of Illinois — Research has identi-

fied functionally dissociable regions within the medial temporal lobes
that support different aspects of recognition memory. Item memory
tends to be associated with graded deactivations at retrieval in perirhinal
cortex (PRc) as a function of memory strength. Relational memory,
which supports recollection, has been associated with activations in hippocampus (Hc) and parahippocampal cortex (PHc) that seem not to be
graded with memory strength. Typically investigations of this issue use
participants’ confidence as a proxy for memory strength and measure
fMRI activity in the MTL as a function of recognition confidence. This is
potentially problematic as may not be a straightforward mapping from
memory strength to subjective confidence. The present study aimed to
experimentally manipulate item and relational strength by varying
encoding repetitions of elements within face-scene pairings. Some faces
were presented alone 1 or 2 times before being shown once with a scene,
to vary item strength while holding relational memory constant. Variations in relational strength were created by presenting faces with their
associated scenes either 1, 2 or 3 times. Functional MRI data collected
during recognition revealed an area in PRc that showed decreasing activation with increasing face repetition, independent of face-scene pairings. On the other hand, an area in PHc showed increasing activation
with increasing face-scene pair repetition. These finding supports theories that posit dissociations among regions that represent item and relational memory, and further, reveals regions that track gradations in
relational memory strength.

I71
RECOGNIZING WORDS IS NOT THE SAME AS RECOGNIZING PICTURES:
INVESTIGATING THE MATERIAL SPECIFICITY OF ERP CORRELATES OF
EPISODIC MEMORY IN A LARGE SAMPLE. Catherine A. MacLeod1, David

I. Donaldson2; 1Bangor University, 2University of Stirling — Dual-process

models of episodic memory propose that two independent retrieval processes support recognition memory – familiarity and recollection. EventRelated Potential (ERP) studies of recognition memory have identified a
set of old/new effects, including putative correlates of familiarity (the
300-500ms mid-frontal effect) and recollection (the 500-800ms left-parietal effect). These ERP effects have been repeatedly demonstrated for
word stimuli and provide one of the strongest sources of support for the
dual process view of episodic memory. By contrast, however, recent evidence from studies using pictures of objects and faces suggest that the
traditional old/new effects typically associated with episodic recognition may not provide a universal index of recollection and familiarity,
with these stimuli showing a more anteriorally distributed effect compared to words. Here we present ERP memory effects for simple old/
new recognition of words and pictures – using photographs that are rich
in both conceptual and perceptual detail. ERP data was collected from a
large sample of 122 participants, providing a large range of performance
scores for each type of stimulus. The distribution of ERP old/new recognition memory effects was significantly different for words and pictures.
During both early (300-500ms) and late (500-800ms) time windows the
old/new effects were maximal over anterior locations for pictures, but
maximal over posterior locations for words. These results therefore further support the hypothesis that the traditional mid-frontal and left-parietal old/new effects do not provide a universal index of recognition

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session I
memory, and that ERP correlates of episodic recognition are in fact material specific.

I72
INVESTIGATIONS OF EPISODIC ENCODING AND POST-ENCODING
RESTING ACTIVITY USING INTRACRANIAL EEG Arielle Tambini1, Thomas

Thesen2, Chad Carlson2, Werner Doyle2, Orrin Devinsky2, Lila Davachi1,3;
1
Center for Neural Science, New York University, 2Comprehensive Epilepsy
Center, New York University School of Medicine, 3Department of Psychology,
New York University — Coordinated activity between cortical areas as well

as between the hippocampus and cortex is thought to facilitate long-term
memory storage in cortical networks. Much work in animals has provided evidence for increases in coordinated activity during post-encoding rest periods. In humans, we and others have recently shown that
post-encoding hippocampal-cortical and cortico-cortical connectivity, as
measured with fMRI, can be enhanced after associative learning experiences. In order to explore the neurophysiological basis of enhanced correlations during periods of post-encoding awake rest, we used a similar
paradigm in epilepsy patients implanted with intracranial EEG electrodes. First, subjects performed a baseline rest block, followed by an
object-face associative encoding task, followed by another rest block. We
then tested subjects’ item recognition as well as associative memory for
stimuli seen during encoding. Subjects additionally performed a 1-back
task on images of faces, objects, and other stimuli in order to isolate electrodes with stimulus-selective responses. Preliminary results show evidence for electrodes with stimulus selective responses using both eventrelated averaging and frequency-domain measures. These and other
electrodes also show modulation of trial-evoked activity during encoding. Ongoing analyses are examining changes in activity patterns from
baseline to post-encoding rest periods. These results will provide an
important contribution to our understanding of processes occurring during post-encoding awake rest periods and their potential relevance for
memory consolidation.

I73
REACTIVATION OF STIMULUS-SPECIFIC PROCESSING REGIONS IN AN
ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY TASK Brion Woroch1, Alex Konkel2, Brian

Gonsalves1; 1University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, 2Washington University
in St. Louis — Theories of episodic memory often posit that retrieval

involves reactivation of cortical regions engaged during initial processing of the episode. The current study investigates the idea that reactivation of these regions during episodic memory retrieval drives the
experience of recollection of contextual detail, with the degree of reactivation determining the subjective strength of recollection. Specifically,
we investigated whether stimulus-specific regions would reactivate during an associative memory task and whether the level of reactivation
would scale with confidence in memory for encoded associations. At
study, words were presented with either a picture of a face or a picture
of a place/scene. We then identified face (fusiform face area; FFA) and
place (parahippocampal place area; PPA) processing regions with localizer scans. At test, participants were presented with the words and asked
to remember whether they had been previously presented with a face or
a place, and to rate their confidence in this judgment on a 6-point scale.
Consistent with predictions, results revealed a region in the left FFA that
was more active during memory for words previously paired with a face
than those shown with a scene. Conversely, a region in the left PPA was
more active for words previously paired with places than faces. Results
show that memory for associated source or contextual information
involves reactivation of cortical regions that represent that type of information.

I74
SLEEPSOUNDS PROVIDE EVIDENCE FOR ACTIVE MEMORY
CONSOLIDATION DURING SLEEP Jessica Creery1, James W. Antony1, Joel

L. Voss1,2, Ken A. Paller1; 1Northwestern University, 2University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign — “SleepSounds” is a term to refer to the use of auditory stimulation during sleep to promote rehearsal and improve memory storage. In a prior study (Rudoy et al., 2009), we showed that cued
recall of object-location associations could be improved via SleepSounds.
After learning, object-related sounds were presented at low intensity
during slow-wave sleep. Here we provided further evidence on the efficacy of SleepSounds. We hypothesized that SleepSounds might improve
memory both as a reminder of the learning context and as a reminder of
specific item locations. Prior to an afternoon nap, participants learned 50
object-location associations. Each object was always presented with a
related sound. During the 2-hr retention interval, different groups of
participants were either sleeping (S), sleeping with 25 cues (SC), waking
(W), or waking with 25 cues (WC). In waking conditions, participants
performed a demanding visual working-memory task. Memory, quantified by recall change scores, was superior in the two sleep groups compared to the two waking groups. When cues were administered during
sleep, memory was superior for cued compared to uncued locations, but
only for trials wherein recall before the nap was neither extremely accurate nor extremely poor. There was no evidence for memory effects due
to cue administration during waking. Results failed to support the
notion that cues served as general reminders of the learning context, but
the specific memory advantage for cued versus uncued items confirmed
the hypothesis of an active role of sleep in memory consolidation for specific item-location associations.

I75
AN INVESTIGATION OF EYE-MOVEMENT FIXATION PATTERNS TO
REPEATED AND NOVEL FACES IN INDIVIDUALS WITH DEVELOPMENTAL
PROSOPAGNOSIA Rosanna Olsen1, Yunjo Lee1, Jana Kube1, Courtney

Smith1, Cheryl Grady1,2,3, Morris Moscovitch1,2, Jennifer Ryan1,2,3; 1Rotman
Research Institute, Baycrest, 2Department of Psychology, University of Toronto,
3Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto — Face viewing is abnor-

mal in developmental prosopagnosia (DP); however, little data exist
addressing the question of whether individuals with DP demonstrate
eye-movement based memory effects. We investigated whether a group
of seven individuals with DP showed an intact face repetition effect,
which is characterized by fewer fixations to familiar faces compared to
novel ones. We further investigated whether small changes in viewpoint
between repetitions (5-25° rotational shifts) affected the typical viewing
decrease and whether these changes affected subsequent recognition.
DPs and healthy controls made gender judgments on faces, each of
which was seen five times over the course of the experiment in either the
same viewpoint across repetitions (static condition) or different viewpoints across repetitions (alternating condition). Both groups made
fewer fixations to repeated faces compared to novel faces; however, individuals with DP made significantly fewer fixations to the eyes and more
fixations to the mouth compared to controls. Controls (but not individuals with DP) made more fixations to faces in the alternating condition
compared to static condition. In both groups, subsequent recognition
was significantly higher for faces probed with a repeated viewpoint
compared to faces probed with a novel viewpoint; furthermore, this
effect interacted with the study condition. Thus, although overt face recognition is impaired in DP and eye movements to faces differ between
DP and controls, covert learning of faces in DP is relatively preserved. In
addition, exposure to multiple views of a face facilitated subsequent recognition of a novel view in both groups.

I76
CLOSE RELATIONSHIPS IN AMNESIC PATIENTS Patrick

Davidson1,
Heloise Drouin1, Donna Kwan2, Morris Moscovitch3,4, Shayna Rosenbaum2,3;

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

243

Poster Session I — Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
1

University of Ottawa, 2York University, 3Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest,
University of Toronto — Recently, attention has turned to domains beyond

4

memory in which amnesic patients may be impaired. We explored close
interpersonal relationships in these patients. Do they retain pre-morbid
relationships? Can they build new ones post-morbidly? Although Duff
and colleagues (2009) recently reported an amnesic patient who established several new close interpersonal relationships, this report was at
odds with our anecdotal observations of several other amnesic people.
To examine close friendships in amnesia in a more systematic way, we
administered the National Social life, Health, and Aging Project questionnaire to 3 amnesic patients (K.C., D.A., and H.C.) and controls, and
to patients’ family members for corroboration. The patients had somewhat fewer close relationships than the controls did. Notably, a higherthan-normal percentage of amnesic patients’ close relationships were
with family members. This may have been due to the patients’ relative
lack of involvement with neighbors and religious and community
groups. The adult-onset cases (K.C. and D.A.) made few new close
friends in the 2-3 decades since the onset of their amnesia. On the other
hand, the patient with developmental amnesia (H.C.) had forged a few
close relationships, including one with her fiancee. Social networks
appear to be winnowed down by amnesia. The close relationships that
remain in amnesic patients are more likely to be familial, in which the
bonds are supported by social norms (e.g., marriage vows) and kinship.
The obvious explanation for the patients’ reduced social functioning
stems from their memory impairment, but other impaired cognitive abilities may be crucial too.

I77
MOVING
BEYOND
ONE-PARAMETER
DESCRIPTIONS
OF
RECOLLECTION. Iain M. Harlow1, David I. Donaldson2; 1UC Davis,
2University of Stirling — Understanding

of episodic memory has been
enhanced by the analysis of Receiver-Operator Characteristic (ROC)
curves, which provide more information about underlying memory than
simple old/new decisions do. Inherently, however, the interpretation of
ROC data requires reference to a theoretical model. Currently, the DualProcess Signal Detection (DPSD) model is dominant, not least because it
allows recollection and familiarity to be separately measured. The DPSD
model relies, however, on the assumption that recollection always yields
accurate, high confidence responses. Since this assumption has been
widely challenged by recent studies, we advocate the use of a VariableRecollection Dual Process (VRDP) model. The VRDP model is almost
identical to DPSD, but differs in that it explicitly allows for variable recollection strength. Here we examine behavioral and neural data
recorded during associative recognition tests. We demonstrate that the
VRDP model provides a superior fit to behavioral data than DPSD, and,
importantly, leads to dramatically different conclusions from the same
dataset: the DPSD model suggests associative recognition is supported
strongly by familiarity, whereas the VRDP model suggests familiarity
does not meaningfully contribute. The VRDP interpretation is supported
by Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) that reveal evidence of a mid-frontal
(familiarity-linked) old/new effect for item, but not associative, recognition. The data also highlight a broader problem with the DPSD model severe underestimation of variable recollection and overestimation of
familiarity. As the field moves beyond one-parameter descriptions of
recollection, the VRDP model offers a more robust way of correctly estimating the contribution of different processes to memory.

I79
USING SIGNAL DETECTION PARAMETERS TO INVESTIGATE THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN RECOGNITION AND CUED RECALL Andrew

McCullough1, Andrew P. Yonelinas1, Jeffrey P. Toth2; 1University of California
Davis, 2University of North Carolina Wilmington — A long-standing problem

in research on explicit memory is finding ways to directly compare performance across different memory tests. Using a unique paradigm, we
tested participants’ memory with two common tests: recognition and
cued recall. After studying a word list, participants were given a mem-

244

ory test that included both recognition and cued recall trials, and participants provided confidence ratings or subjective judgments (i.e., recollect,
familiar) for each test item. While performance on these two explicit
memory tests can be dissociated as a function of experimental variables,
it is generally accepted that recognition and recall performance are correlated. Using signal detection parameters derived from the confidence
ratings, we compared performance on the two tests within-participants.
In agreement with prior research, performance was better on the recognition test, compared to cued recall. We show that the source of the discrepancy is similar across participants. Using process estimates derived
from ROC curves, we further explore the relationship between the processes that support recognition and those that support cued recall. Neuroimaging studies have shown distinct neural substrates for the separate
processes underlying recognition memory. The relationships shown
between recognition and recall could facilitate future investigations of
the neural correlates of the processes underlying these two memory
tests.

I80
FAMILIARITY-BASED RESPONSES TO DIFFERENT VISUAL STIMULUS
CATEGORIES IN THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE Chris Martin1, Edward
O'Neil1, Victoria Barkley1, Stefan K?hler1; 1University of Western Ontario —

The prevailing view in the current medial temporal lobe (MTL) literature
is that item familiarity, i.e., the ability to recognize prior occurrence of a
stimulus without retrieval of contextual associations about a specific
encounter, is supported by perirhinal cortex (PRc). Currently, it remains
unclear whether PRc mediates familiarity assessment for all stimulus
categories or whether more posterior regions (i.e., parahippocampal cortex) are recruited for large scale stimuli, such as buildings. Although a
number of fMRI studies have compared recognition for scenes and
objects, results are difficult to interpret because such comparisons confound category specificity with relational processing demands; such
demands are higher for scenes given they typically include multiple
objects. In the perceptual literature, occipito-temporal regions have been
shown to respond differentially to buildings, faces, and small scale
objects such as chairs during visual discrimination. Here, we asked
whether similar category specific effects would be present for familiarity-based item recognition decisions in the MTL. To address this question we conducted an fMRI study in which participants first studied
photographs of buildings, faces, and chairs. During scanning at test, they
were encouraged to base their recognition decisions on familiarity using
a four point scale. Spontaneously occurring contextually-based recognition responses (i.e., recollective responses) were rare and discarded from
our analyses. Behaviorally, recognition accuracy was matched across category types. We replicated previously reported category specific effects
in posterior occipito-temporal regions. Importantly, our initial analyses
also revealed category specific effects related to familiarity assessment in
MTL regions, with a differential involvement beyond PRc.

I82
GESTURES MAKE MEMORIES, BUT WHAT KIND? THE COGNITIVE AND
NEURAL MECHANISMS UNDERLYING HAND GESTURE Nathaniel

Klooster1, Susan Wagner Cook1, David Warren1, Melissa Duff1; 1University of
Iowa — Gestures influence communication, helping in the transmission of
ideas from speakers to listeners. Gesturing also helps people learn and
remember new information, suggesting that gestures impact cognition
beyond simply supporting expression of already-formed ideas. The cognitive and neural mechanisms that support gesture, however, are
unknown. Information conveyed in gesture is often not included in
speech, and gestures are actions suggesting that these mental representations may be non-declarative. The current study replicates work by Cook
and Tannenhaus (2009) that showed that viewing hand gestures during
an explanation affected the listeners’ subsequent thoughts and actions.
Four patients with bilateral hippocampal damage and severe declarative
memory impairment and four healthy matched comparison participants
watched videos of someone explaining how to solve the Tower of Hanoi
(TOH). The speakers’ hand gestures, but not their speech, reflected par-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session I
ticular actions associated with moving disks across the board either on a
computer (flat sideways gesture) or using real objects (large arching
hand gesture). The amnesic participants then solved the TOH on a computer. Like healthy participants, the mouse trajectories of amnesic
patients were related to the particular gestures they observed (i.e., after
watching the speaker with the large arching hand gesture, amnesic participants’ mouse trajectories displayed higher arching). Participants
mentally represented the gesture and the representation affected their
subsequent actions. Amnesic patients, who could not consciously recall
the video explanations, formed a lasting impression that guided their
behavior. These findings suggest that the comprehension and mental
representation of gesture is independent of the hippocampal declarative
memory system.

I83
IS WHAT GOES IN WHAT COMES OUT? ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL ERP
COMPONENTS IN RECOGNITION MEMORY ARE RELATED Yvonne Chen1,

Kirstie Lithgow1, Jumjury Hemmerich2, Jeremy Caplan1,2; 1Centre for
Neuroscience, 2Department of Psychology — The study of memory is about
tracking an item from encoding to retrieval. Previous research has identified event-related potential (ERP) components at study (“subsequent
memory effect,” SME, comparing subsequent hits with misses) and at
test (“old/new effect”, comparing hits with correct rejections). The late
positive component (LPC) of the SME and the FN400 old/new effect
have each been linked to shallow processing (rote rehearsal and familiarity-based recognition). Similarly, the slow-wave SME and the late parietal positivity (LPP) old/new effect have each been linked to deep
processing (semantic study and recollection-based recognition). We
tested the hypothesis that the variability in encoding tapped by the LPCSME materializes as variability in the FN400 and likewise for the slowwave-SME and LPP. We correlated difference measures for SME components with both old/new effect and retrieval success (RS; hits vs. misses)
components across 64 participants. In line with our predictions, significant (p<0.05) correlations were found between the LPC and the FN400
(RS) [r(63) = 0.35], and between the slow wave and the LPP (old/new)
[r(63) = 0.26]. Partial correlations suggested that these correlations mediated two additional correlations. Unexpectedly, the slow-wave-LPP
association was non-significant when using retrieval success, consistent
with recent suggestions that the parietal contribution to recognition may
not be necessary for accurate recognition. Our findings largely confirm
the emerging interpretation of these four commonly reported memory
ERPs, but suggest that this kind of large-sample, individual-difference
approach could be extended to sharpen our understanding of the
broader range of memory ERPs.

I84
SWITCHING FROM THE PARIETAL-EPISODIC TO THE STRIATUM-BASED
MEMORY SYSTEM AFTER INCREASING CENTRAL CHOLINERGIC ACTIVITY
DURING CONSOLIDATION Monika Schoenauer1, Luca Matarazzo2,

Mélanie Boly2, Audrey Vanhaudenhuyse2, Thien Thanh Dang-Vu2, Annabelle
Darsaud2, Pierre Maquet2, Steffen Gais1; 1LMU Munich, 2Université de
Liège — Memory function and its behavioral effects are the result of parallel processing of experience in multiple interacting neural systems.
Depending on the task and environmental conditions, individual systems contribute various amounts to memory formation. Acetylcholine
modulates this relative contribution of different systems to memory formation. Low levels of acetylcholine are thought to facilitate the consolidation of hippocampus-dependent declarative memory. On the other
hand, the caudate nucleus can inhibit hippocampal processing via cholinergic mechanisms. Here, we investigated how memory consolidation
is modified by increasing central cholinergic activity in both sleep and
wakefulness. Subjects learned a paired-associate wordlist task. During
the consolidation interval, the cholinesterase inhibitor physostigmine
was administered. Afterwards, during recall testing, brain activity was
measured with fMRI. Recall in the placebo condition activated mainly
the precuneus (pFWE<.05), whereas recall after physostigmine infusion

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

recruited primarily the caudate nucleus (pFWE<.05). The precuneus is
frequently ascribed an episodic retrieval function in the declarative
memory system, whereas the caudate nucleus of the striatum is usually
associated with the consolidation of stimulus-response-learning. We
suggest that cholinergic modulation suppressed hippocampal-neocortical memory consolidation, while at the same time strengthening consolidation in the striatal memory system. Together, our results further
strengthen the idea of cholinergic influences on memory consolidation,
and demonstrate the possibility of a flexible interaction between different memory systems.

I85
THE POSTERIOR PARIETAL CORTEX FACILITATES INTERACTION WITH
MEMORIES FROM A FIRST-PERSON PERSPECTIVE Jeremy Elman1, Alice

Verstaen1, Arthur P Shimamura1; 1University of California, Berkeley — In neu-

roimaging studies, the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) has been found to
show greater activation for successful retrieval of studied items compared to new items. In particular, the angular gyrus is especially active
for high confidence recollection responses. However, the boundary conditions under which this region is active remains unclear. A common
approach to developing models of PPC function in memory has been to
draw on research from other areas of research in which the parietal cortex has long been implicated, such as attention and spatial cognition.
One model by Byrne, Becker, & Burgess (2007) proposes that memories
created from a first-person, egocentric framework are transformed into a
viewpoint independent, allocentric framework for long-term storage in
the medial temporal lobes. When retrieving this flexible form of memory, a reverse translation integrates current position and heading to facilitate mental exploration of the retrieved memory. Here, we assess
activation in the PPC (angular gyrus in particular) based on whether a
task requires memory for an environment to be translated to an egocentric representation or not. Subjects were asked to make judgments from
memory regarding either the direction of buildings in comparison to a
given location and heading, or distance of a building from a given street.
Results showed greater activation in the angular gyrus for the direction
task. This suggests a role for the angular gyrus in translating stored representations into an egocentric framework which may underlie our ability to re-experience and interact with memories from a first-person
perspective.

I86
PARIETAL ACTIVITY IS INDICATIVE OF CONTEXTUAL BINDING IN
EPISODIC RETRIEVAL ZACHARY ROSNER1, Jeremy Elman1, Brendan CohnSheehy1, Arthur Shimamura1; 1University of California, Berkeley — Prior func-

tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have demonstrated
that the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) signals successful episodic
retrieval (hits>correct rejections), though its particular role in memory
remains unclear. The Cortical Binding of Relational Activity (CoBRA)
model posits that the inferior PPC acts to bind object and contextual
information (Shimamura, 2011). Therefore, heightened activity in the
inferior PPC is expected when contextual information is particularly
important to retrieval. Via fMRI, we examined retrieval-related PPC
activity for images. During encoding, participants from UC Berkeley
viewed novel buildings from campuses other than UC Berkeley. At
retrieval, participants were scanned while viewing either buildings seen
during the encoding phase, familiar (i.e., located on the UC Berkeley
campus), or unfamiliar buildings. Subjects responded whether they recognized each with confidence ratings. Heightened bilateral angular
gyrus activity was observed for previously studied buildings compared
to buildings that were simply familiar. Although familiar buildings elicited increased lateral occipital cortex activity compared to new buildings, these context-independent items did not lead to increased
activation in the angular gyrus. These results support the CoBRA model,
suggesting that retrieval related PPC activity is particularly sensitive to
contextual binding of information and not merely retrieval success.

245

Poster Session I — Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

I87
NEURAL CORRELATES OF REACTIVATION AND RETRIEVAL-INDUCED
DISTORTION Donna J Bridge1, Ken AN Paller1; 1Northwestern University —
Reactivation -- neural replay of prior events -- occurs spontaneously during sleep and wake, and is thought to facilitate memory consolidation.
Reactivation may be exogenously induced through sensory stimulation.
Of course, certain stimuli will function as reminder cues and thereby
induce retrieval. Retrieval may function (a) to reinforce the information
initially stored, or (b) to promote storage of the retrieval event, which
can alter the original representation, sometimes reducing accuracy. Here,
we sought to identify neural signals of memory consolidation and examine the influence of retrieval on memory storage. Participants learned
novel object-location associations in a 3-session protocol. At Session 1,
participants learned 180 associations and then completed a cuedretrieval test; at Session 2, EEG was recorded while a subset of the associations were reactivated via cued retrieval; and at Session 3, a final cuedretrieval test was administered. We found that cued reactivation
strengthened long-term memory and facilitated storage of the reactivation event, presumably due to retrieval practice. For cues that produced
a relatively stronger memory for the original location, a late positivity
between 400-600 ms reflected this successful retrieval. Although subsequent memory effects for the original representation were not apparent,
there were reliable subsequent memory effects (at 600-1000 ms) that predicted memory for the reactivation location. Reactivation thus appeared
to produce distortion based on less-than-perfect retrieval following the
reactivation cue. This evidence demonstrates an integration of retrieved
information with information stored earlier, leading to retrieval-induced
memory distortion.

I88
PERCEPTUAL REACTIVATION DURING COVERT RECALL PREDICTS LATER
MEMORY ACCURACY Erik Wing1, Maureen Ritchey2, Roberto Cabeza1;
1Duke University, 2University of California, Davis — Remembering

items produces neural activity comprising both general retrieval processes and
elements specific to the initial encoding episode. This reactivation may
reflect perceptual features of a specific stimulus, encoding context, or
evaluative processes that were present during encoding. Recent work
focusing on reinstatement of encoding judgments has also shown that
the patterns of reactivation vary by the confidence with which items are
remembered during recognition (Johnson et al. 2009). To explore the
relationship between reactivation, subjective experience, and memory
accuracy, we used an fMRI paradigm designed to elicit specific cortical
reactivation during covert cued recall. During encoding, participants
viewed a series of detailed scene images along with descriptive labels of
each image (e.g. “mountain range”). The labels were then presented
alone during a retrieval session in which participants rated the vividness
with which they could recall the associated picture. A post-scan exemplar recognition task (with highly similar exemplars) displayed a direct
correspondence to vividness ratings, with higher recognition performance at each increasing level of vividness. Retrieval was associated
with widespread activity in occipital cortex and parahippocampal
gyrus—demonstrating reactivation of areas highly engaged in perceptual encoding—along with phase-specific activity in posterior midline
and dorsal parietal regions. In parametric analyses, retrieval activity in
medial prefrontal, bilateral hippocampal, and parahippocampal regions
increased with vividness ratings. These findings suggest hippocampallylinked recovery of perceptual information corresponding to reported
vividness and memory accuracy.

I89
SPATIAL CLUSTERING DURING MEMORY SEARCH Jonathan

Miller1,
Markus Neufang , Joshua Jacobs , Michael J Kahana ; Drexel University,
2
University of Freiburg, 3University of Pennsylvania — An important issue in
2

1

3 1

understanding the nature of human memory is learning how people
remember where and when events occurred. We investigated this by
examining performance in a unique memory task containing both epi-

246

sodic and spatial memory components. In our experiments, participants
were asked to navigate a virtual town with the goal of delivering objects
to various distinct landmarks. After a series of deliveries, participants
were asked to recall the identities of the delivered items. We found that
location had a strong organizational effect on the order of participants'
recall sequences, such that items that were recalled nearby in time were
likely to have been previously delivered to nearby landmarks in the
town. Moreover, we analyzed electrophysiological brain data recorded
during the task, revealing that patterns of neural activity representing
spatial information during navigation were reinstated when the delivery
items were recalled. Together, these findings suggest that that there is a
close link between the neural circuits that support human episodic and
spatial memory.

METHODS: Other
I90
SIMULTANEOUSLY RECORDED EEG AND FMRI IDENTIFIES BRAIN
NETWORKS RELATED TO VISUALLY-EVOKED GAMMA OSCILLATORY
ACTIVITY Erika Nyhus1, Michael S. Worden1, David Badre1; 1Brown
University — A growing literature has highlighted the importance of neural oscillations in cognition. These rhythms may reflect neural synchonization both within and between brain regions during task
performance. However, EEG cannot localize the network of brain
regions that correlate with changes in oscillatory activity. Simultaneously recording EEG and fMRI may provide a means to identify brain
networks correlated with trial-by-trial fluctuations in oscillatory activity.
However, relatively few studies have related oscillatory effects in EEG to
simultaneously measured changes in the BOLD signal. The present
study sought to validate this approach by simultaneously recording EEG
and fMRI during an established visual target detection paradigm. Subjects were shown a checkerboard that was presented to the right or the
left visual field and were asked to detect a missing square that occurred
on 10% of the trials. EEG was recorded with a 64-channel MRI compatible system. EEG analysis was performed on the channel data after MR
gradient and cardioballistic artifacts were removed. EEG was correlated
to the fMRI BOLD activity by entering single-trial gamma power as a
regressor in the fMRI analysis. Consistent with prior work, there were
posterior P1 ERP effects. Importantly, preliminary results showed that
posterior gamma power correlated with the fMRI BOLD response in
inferior occipital cortex. These results suggest that correlating EEG oscillatory activity to the BOLD signal can reveal functional networks related
to oscillatory effects. Simultaneous EEG and fMRI methods for correlating oscillatory activity to the fMRI BOLD response in various cognitive
domains will be discussed.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
I91
DECODING VISUAL SELF-BODY REPRESENTATION IN THE HUMAN
BRAIN Barbara Vogt1, Simone Schütz-Bosbach1, Carsten Bogler2, John-

Dylan Haynes2,3; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2Bernstein Center for Computational
Neuroscience, Berlin, Germany, 3Berlin Center for Advanced Neuroimaging
(BCAN), Berlin, Germany — The present study sought to investigate the
visual representation of one's own and others' bodies using fMRI and
multivariate pattern classification, employing a novel approach. While
previous research mainly focused on locating differential sensitivity for
self and others using activation differences, we aimed to study whether
the representation of the own body differs from that of other bodies in
the sense of more information being encoded. Participants were shown
static images of their own body as well as those of a familiar- and unfamiliar other, respectively, from three different visual perspectives, while
being engaged in a luminance change detection task. Results showed
that different perspectives were decodable significantly better for visual
self-body stimuli compared to familiar and unfamiliar bodies in left hip-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall — Poster Session I
pocampus, fusiform gyrus, bilateral posterior cingulum and precuneus.
Visual perspectives of familiar other body stimuli could selectively be
decoded better than all other bodies from activity in left middle frontal
gyrus. For decoding unfamiliar bodies no specific brain locations could
be identified. These results indicate that one’s own body is indeed represented in a unique fashion, even when directly compared with familiar
others and even when no conscious body recognition is required. Areas
identified for representing the visual self-body have, for example, been
associated with configural body processing, memory, and self-referential
processing. The frontal region specifically involved in representing
familiar other bodies may be part of a broader network for body identification.

I92
MICROSACCADE DIRECTION AND SPONTANEOUS ATTENTION SHIFTS
Shlomit Yuval-Greenbeg1, Elisha P. Merriam1, David J. Heeger1; 1NYU,
department of Psychology and Center for Neural Science — Purpose: In a

cued-attention “Posner” protocol, microsaccade direction tends to follow
the cue. This observation has led to the hypothesis that microsaccades
index the locus of attention. We tested this hypothesis by determining
whether microsaccade direction is also affected by spontaneous shifts of
attention without a cue. Methods: Subjects fixated a cross while microsaccades were detected from the streaming eye position data. On half of
the trials, detection of a microsaccade triggered the appearance of eight
peripheral grating patches at one of three eccentricities (microsaccade
condition). On remaining trials, identical stimuli appeared but were not
triggered by a microsaccade (no-microsaccade condition). In both conditions, the grating patches were followed by a central arrow indicating
the target location. In the microsaccade condition, the arrow was either
congruent or incongruent (opposite) with respect to the microsaccade
trajectory. In the no-microsaccade condition, the arrow pointed randomly toward one of the gratings. The task was to report the tilt direction of the target grating. Results: Accuracy rates were higher for
“congruent” than for “incongruent” trials, especially in the middle
eccentricity. The spatial distribution of performance accuracy was correlated with the spatial distribution of microsaccade frequency. Conclusion: the direction of microsaccades occurring during fixation (with no
cue) is linked to spontaneous fluctuations in the locus of attention.

I93
CONDITIONAL PROBABILITY EFFECTS IN VISUAL SEARCH Bryan Cort1,

Britt Anderson1,2; 1University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, 2Centre for
Theoretical Neuroscience, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada —
The goal of our study was to investigate the effects of probability on
visual search in general and the efficiency of visual search in particular.
Previous work has shown that people can utilize both spatial and
sequential probability information to improve their performance on simple visual attention tasks. In our study, participants searched a field of
distractors (cyan and magenta diamonds) for a target (a cyan or magenta
diamond with one corner removed) and reported which corner (top, left,
right, or bottom) was missing. At the beginning of each trial, participants
saw two cues (each colored magenta or cyan, independently of the
other), which indicated the probable color of the target. The absolute
probability of a particular color target on any given trial was 0.5; however, the conditional probability – the likelihood of a particular color
given a particular cue combination – varied from 0.1 to 0.9. For example,
on 90% of trials in which both cues were magenta, the target was
magenta. Accuracy was high (mean = 98.7%) and response time
increased linearly as a function of number of distractors on screen. Participants were faster to locate and report high conditional probability targets and slower to locate and report low conditional probability targets.
In addition, the efficiency of search (indexed by the response time/distractor number slope) increased for the high conditional probability
cases and decreased for the low conditional probability cases. We conclude that participants utilize knowledge of conditional probability to
increase the efficiency of visual search.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

I94
ADAPTATION TO LEFTWARD-SHIFTING PRISMS ALTERS CONFIGURAL
FACE PROCESSING: EVIDENCE FROM THE COMPOSITE FACE ILLUSION
AND FMRI Janet Bultitude1,2, John Taylor3, Jo Mason4, Robert Rafal4, Paul

Downing4; 1University of Oxford, 2INSERM, Lyon, France, 3Cardiff University,
4
Bangor University — When the upper and lower halves of two faces are

recombined, the result is a virtually unavoidable illusion that one is
viewing the face of a third, different person (the ‘composite face illusion’). When asked to identify the top or bottom halves of such composites there is a reaction time (RT) cost compared to when performing the
same task when the two face halves are offset. Such observations demonstrate our automatic configural or global-level processing of faces.
Recent research from our lab demonstrates that visuo-motor adaptation
to leftward, but not rightward, prismatic shifts in the visual field
decreased processing of global relative to local levels of hierarchical
Navon figures by healthy individuals. Here we demonstrate that prism
adaptation also eliminates configural face processing. Participants
(N=64) identified the top or bottom halves of composite faces constructed from photographs of Brad Pitt and George Clooney. Before
prism adaptation, both groups showed RT costs for aligned composites
compared to misaligned composites in which the face-halves were offset,
preventing configural processing. This RT cost was eliminated in participants who adapted to leftward-shifting prisms, however adaptation to
rightward-shifting prisms did not change performance. In a second
study (N=17) examining BOLD signal changes associated with this
effect, adaptation to leftward-shifting prisms resulted in elevated activity in the right fusiform face area for aligned compared to misaligned
composites. These results add to a growing literature suggesting that
low-level sensory-motor realignment by prism adaptation can have a
pervasive influence on higher cognitive functions.

I95
COSTS OF SWITCHING SCENE CATEGORY IN REAL-WORLD SEARCH

Kevin Price1, Satoru Suzuki1, Marcia Grabowecky1; 1Northwestern University —
Real-world visual search is heavily dependent on context, and experienced searchers use their knowledge of scenes to facilitate search. While
it is known that searching in the exact same scene facilitates search, is it
possible to produce similar effects by repeating different scenes from the
same category? Furthermore, will these effects hold for different exemplars of a target? If so, we would predict that (1) Repeated search within
real-world scenes from similar categories will facilitate visual search,
and (2) A sudden switch to a different real-world scene type will cause a
drop in search efficiency. To test these hypotheses, we had participants
search for birds in three blocks of different scene categories: urban, forest, and indoor. Switching scenes exacted a significant cost in search efficiency, particularly as learning grew stronger. This search cost remained
when the scenes were uniformly inverted during presentation, and
when targets and scenes were randomly inverted throughout the task,
suggesting that this effect is not due to long-term familiarity with global
scene features. Furthermore, an analysis of the effect of target location
showed a severe decrease in search efficiency when the target bird was
located in the bottom quarter of the display, consistent with previous
studies that suggest that the nature of real-world targets influence expectations of probable target locations.

I96
THE ATTRACTIVENESS OF FACIAL AVERAGENESS: A COMPARISON OF
ADULTS AND CHILDREN Larissa Vingilis-Jaremko1, Daphne Maurer1, David

Feinberg1; 1McMaster University — Adults rate averaged faces with feature

shapes, sizes, and locations approximating the population mean as more
attractive than most individual faces (e.g., Langlois & Rogmann, 1990).
We are examining developmental changes in the influence of averageness by showing adults and children pairs of individual faces, in which
one face was transformed 50% toward its group average, while the other
face was transformed 50% away from that average. In Experiment 1,
adults and 5-year-olds (n = 36/group) rated the more average faces as

247

Poster Session I — Tuesday, April 3, 3:00 - 5:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
more attractive whether the faces were of adult females, 5-year-old boys,
or 5-year-old girls (all ps < .001). The effect of averageness, however, was
significantly weaker in 5-year-olds than in adults (main effect of age, p <
.001). In Experiment 2, adults and 9-year-olds (n=26/group) rated the
more average faces as more attractive for male and female faces of
adults, 9-year-olds, and 5-year-olds (all ps < .001). However, the influence of averageness was again weaker for children than for adults (main
effect of age, p =.006). The results indicate that the influence of averageness increases between children age 5-9 and adulthood. The changes
may reflect the refinement of an average face prototype as the child is
exposed to more faces, increased sensitivity to distinctive cues in the
faces experienced, and/or the greater salience of attractiveness after
puberty. To evaluate the influence of experience, results will be compared to those from ongoing tests of children in single-gender versus
mixed-gender schools.

I97
TIME-DILATION AFTEREFFECT MEDIATED BY LOW-LEVEL VISUAL
PROCESSING Laura Ortega1, Emmanuel Guzman-Martinez1, Marcia

Grabowecky1, Satoru Suzuki1; 1Northwestern University — Several seconds of
adaptation to a flickered stimulus makes a subsequently presented brief
(200-800ms) static stimulus appear longer in duration. We investigated
what causes this time-dilation aftereffect by manipulating the adaptor
and test stimuli and measuring the perceived duration of the test stimulus using a standard temporal-bisection task. The time-dilation aftereffect is significantly reduced by a 45° change in Gabor orientation
between adaptation and test. The reduction of the aftereffect with a small
45° orientation change suggests the involvement of lower-level cortical
visual neurons (orientation-tuning bandwidths are approximately 25–
40° in V1, 35–75° in V4, and 70° in Inferotemporal cortex). Furthermore,
the time-dilation aftereffect is abolished when the adaptor and test stimuli are presented to different eyes. Because eye preferences are strong in
V1 but diminish in high-level visual areas, the specificity for eye of origin corroborates the involvement of low-level visual neurons. This also
suggests that cognitive processing does not contribute to the aftereffect
because people are unaware of eye-of-origin information. Finally, the
time-dilation aftereffect occurs for a broad range of flicker rates (no difference between 5Hz and 20Hz adaptation). These results suggest that
flicker adaptation of low-level cortical visual neurons contributes to
expanding the perceived duration of subsequently presented stimuli.
This time-dilation aftereffect dissociates from the previously reported
time-constriction aftereffect, which is orientation independent and frequency dependent (an aftereffect with 20Hz but no aftereffect with 5Hz).
Thus, the visual system may possess two complementary types of timers
to adaptively adjust temporal processing across the visual field.

I98
ELECTRICAL BRAIN DYNAMIC OF PROBABILISTIC INTENTION
PREDICTION IN DYADS Elizabeth Clark-Polner1, Nisa Patel2, Stephanie
Ortigue1,2; 1University of Geneva, Switzerland, 2Syracuse University — Recent

evidence suggests that intention perception may be facilitated by the
emotional bond between actor and perceiver (stronger bond = faster
intention understanding). In line with embodied cognition theory, we
posit that this facilitation may be due to differential learned situational
probability (closer partners = greater familiarity = faster intention perception processing.) To address this question, we examined the spatiotemporal dynamics of brain activity from 23 volunteers during a standard behavioral intention inference task (in which individuals were
asked to distinguish between neutral intentions of four types of agents
(participant; participant’s best friend; president of participant’s sorority;
same-sex stranger), portrayed in a three-frame videos; see: Ortigue et al.,
2009), using high-density 128-channel electroencephalogram recordings.
Analysis of group-averaged visual-evoked potentials identified four stable brain microstates; GLM repeated measures analyses revealed a double dissociation in duration of two stable, distinct, brain-microstates
within the first 250 ms post-stimulus, distinguishing perceptions of best
friends’ from sorority presidents’ intentions. Perceptions of sorority

248

presidents’ intentions were characterized by significantly greater duration of the earlier microstate (occurring up to 168ms post-stimulus; current source density maximum in the cuneus), and significantly lesser of
the latter microstate (occurring up to 250ms post-stimulus; current
source density in the right-uncus-area); perceptions of best friends’
intentions evinced the exact opposite pattern (p < .05). In line with our
hypothesis, the results implicate brain areas mediating perception of
social hierarchy, associative memory, person knowledge, and learning in
the early stages of intention perception.

I99
NONCONSCIOUS PRIMING ENHANCES THE PROCESSING OF DEGRADED
STIMULI Eric S. Clapham1, Aaron T. Karst2; 1Black Hills State University,

2University of Nevada, Reno — How does object information obtained during brief fixation influence the later processing of that stimuli under
degraded conditions, processing that is dominated by the magnocellular
pathway? This project explored how very brief exposures to full spectrum stimuli can facilitate the recognition of that object following high
spatial frequency filtering. Each trial consisted of a stream of stimuli that
began with a fixation point and terminated with a target stimuli that
required a forced choice response. Prior to target presentation a forward
and backward masked full spectrum prime was presented for 33 ms, a
duration that proved quick enough to limit awareness. The task was to
identify a filtered target stimulus and categorize it as natural or man
made. Congruent conditions, trials that presented corresponding stimuli, resulted in significantly faster response times when compared to the
incongruent conditions. These data indicate that the information that
enters the visual system but does not originally attract a great deal of
attention and awareness can still be utilized for more efficient processing
later. The information obtained from the brief exposure to the prime may
facilitate processing via top-down modulation from the magnocellular
channels. This type of modulation may also help provide the illusion of a
clear and detailed visual world, a perception that seems to extend
beyond foveal vision.

I100
THE EFFECT OF TARGET/NON-TARGET SIMILARITY ON SPEED OF VISUAL
OBJECT DISCRIMINATION Amy Guthormsen1, Michael Ham1, John

George1, Brenna Fearey1, Luis Bettencourt1; 1Los Alamos National
Laboratory — Event related potentials have been used to demonstrate the
fact that humans can discriminate natural images containing an animal
from those that do not in less than 150 ms (Thorpe et al. 1996). These data
have been used to argue that feedback from visual areas higher in the
processing hierarchy to lower areas cannot be an important aspect of
visual object recognition because 150 ms is not long enough to allow
such feedback to occur. However, images that contain animals differ systematically in many ways from those that do not. In this study we asked
individuals to identify a more specific class of targets (Experiment 1: cats
or dogs, Experiment 2: male or female human faces). Non-target images
included both those containing a non-target object highly similar to the
target (e.g. target: cat, non-target: dog) and those without a similar nontarget (Experiment 1: images with no animal present, Experiment 2: nonface objects). Our data show that although ERP waveforms for targets
diverge from dissimilar non-target waveforms in less than 150 ms, they
do not reliably diverge from waveforms produced in response to more
similar non-targets until much later (c. 350 ms). These data are consistent
with the theory that a first-pass feed-forward processing stream may
account for discrimination of a fairly broad class of stimuli, such as animals, but making the fine level discrimination that is characteristic of
basic level object identification requires enough time for recurrent pathways to operate.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Poster Topic Index

ATTENTION: Auditory

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Self perception

Posters A1 - A4, A6 - A10, Saturday, 5:30 - 7:30 pm
Posters C23, Sunday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

Posters A11 - A21, Saturday, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

ATTENTION: Development & aging

Posters B22 - B31, Sunday, 8:00 - 10:00 am
Posters C48 - C57, Sunday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters D24 - D32, Sunday, 4:00 - 6:00 pm

Posters B1 - B8, Sunday, 8:00 - 10:00 am

ATTENTION: Multisensory
Posters C1 - C7, Sunday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

ATTENTION: Nonspatial
Posters D1 - D5, Sunday, 4:00 - 6:00 pm

ATTENTION: Other
Posters E1 - E10, Monday, 8:00 - 10:00 am
Posters F1 - F10, Monday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

ATTENTION: Spatial
Posters F11 - F22, Monday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters G1 - G12, Monday, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Development & aging
Posters B9 - B21, Sunday, 8:00 - 10:00 am

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition interactions
Posters C8 - C17, Sunday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters D6 - D15, Sunday, 4:00 - 6:00 pm
Posters E11 - E20, Monday, 8:00 - 10:00 am
Posters F23 - F32, Monday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters G13 - G22, Monday, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
Posters H1 - H10, Tuesday, 8:00 - 10:00 am
Posters I2 - I15, Tuesday, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional responding
Posters A83, Saturday, 5:30 - 7:30 pm
Posters C18 - C19, Sunday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters C21 - C27, Sunday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters E21 - E29, Monday, 8:00 - 10:00 am
Posters F34 - F42, Monday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Other
Posters C28 - C37, Sunday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters D16 - D22, Sunday, 4:00 - 6:00 pm

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development & aging

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Goal maintenance & switching
Posters A22 - A38, Saturday, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring & inhibitory control
Posters C58 - C67, Sunday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters H11 - H20, Tuesday, 8:00 - 10:00 am
Posters I29 - I39, Tuesday, 8:00 - 10:00 am

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Other
Posters C68 - C75, Sunday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters I40- I52, Tuesday, 8:00 - 10:00 am

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working memory
Posters A5, Saturday, 5:30 - 7:30 pm
Posters C76 - C85, Sunday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters D33 - D42, Sunday, 4:00 - 6:00 pm
Posters F43 - F57, Monday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters G23 - G32, Monday, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
Posters B32 - B41, Sunday, 8:00 - 10:00 am
Posters C86 - C93, Sunday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters C95 - C96, Sunday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

LANGUAGE: Lexicon
Posters D43 - D53, Sunday, 4:00 - 6:00 pm
Posters E30 - E40, Monday, 8:00 - 10:00 am

LANGUAGE: Other
Posters E41 - E50, Monday, 8:00 - 10:00 am
Posters F58 - F67, Monday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters G33 - G39, Monday, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
Posters I53 - I62, Tuesday, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

249

Poster Topic Index

LANGUAGE: Semantic

NEUROANATOMY

Posters E51 - E60, Monday, 8:00 - 10:00 am
Posters F68 - F77, Monday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters G40 - G49, Monday, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
Posters H21 - H29, Tuesday, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Posters A51 - A58, Saturday, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

LANGUAGE: Syntax

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition

Posters A39 - A45, Saturday, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

Posters C94, Sunday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters F88 - F98, Monday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters G70 - G79, Monday, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Development & aging
Posters B42 - B54, Sunday, 8:00 - 10:00 am
Posters C97 - C102, Sunday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters D54 - D57, Sunday, 4:00 - 6:00 pm

Other
Posters A59 - A63, Saturday, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Development & aging
Posters B55 - B61, Sunday, 8:00 - 10:00 am

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control

Posters A73, Saturday, 5:30 - 7:30 pm
Posters C20, Sunday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters D58 - D66, Sunday, 4:00 - 6:00 pm
Posters E61 - E70, Monday, 8:00 - 10:00 am
Posters F78 - F87, Monday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters G50 - G69, Monday, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
Posters H30 - H39, Tuesday, 8:00 - 10:00 am
Posters I63 - I89, Tuesday, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

Posters D93 - D102, Sunday, 4:00 - 6:00 pm
Posters E91 - E100, Monday, 8:00 - 10:00 am
Posters G80 - G86, Monday, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Multisensory
Posters H64 - H90, Tuesday, 8:00 - 10:00 am

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Other

Posters E71 - E77, Monday, 8:00 - 10:00 am
Posters H40 - H49, Tuesday, 8:00 - 10:00 am

Posters A64 - A72, Saturday, 5:30 - 7:30 pm
Posters A74 - A79, Saturday, 5:30 - 7:30 pm
Posters F33, Monday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters F73, Monday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Priming

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision

Posters A46 - A50, Saturday, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

Posters G87 - G101, Monday, 5:00 - 7:00 pm
Posters H91 - H100, Tuesday, 8:00 - 10:00 am
Posters I91 - I100, Tuesday, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Other

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Semantic
Posters D68 - D80, Sunday, 4:00 - 6:00 pm

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Skill learning
Posters H50 - H63, Tuesday, 8:00 - 10:00 am

METHODS: Electrophysiology
Posters D81 - D84, Sunday, 4:00 - 6:00 pm

METHODS: Neuroimaging
Posters D85 - D92, Sunday, 4:00 - 6:00 pm
Posters E78 - E90, Monday, 8:00 - 10:00 am

METHODS: Other
Posters I90, Tuesday, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

MOTION & SOCIAL: Person perception
Posters C38 - C47, Sunday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters I16 - I28, Tuesday, 3:00 - 5:00 pm

250

THINKING: Decision making
Posters B62 - B73, Sunday, 8:00 - 10:00 am
Posters C103 - C112, Sunday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm
Posters D103 - D112, Sunday, 4:00 - 6:00 pm
Posters E101 - E110, Monday, 8:00 - 10:00 am

THINKING: Development & aging
Posters F99 - F103, Monday, 1:00 - 3:00 pm

THINKING: Other
Posters A80 - A82, Saturday, 5:30 - 7:30 pm
Posters A84 - A90, Saturday, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

THINKING: Problem solving
Posters A91 - A103, Saturday, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

THINKING: Reasoning
Posters G102 - G109, Monday, 5:00 - 7:00 pm

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Author Index

A
Abbott, R 134
Abduljalil, A 56
AbdulSabur, N 239
Abe, J-i 177
Abundis, A 109
Achten, E 126
Adams, K 84
Adams, S 118
Adcock, A 26
Adcock, RA 33
Adcock, RA 154, 214
Addante, R 117
Addis, DR 191, 194, 195
Adler, N 230
Adnan, A 118
Aggleton, J 118
Aguirre, GK 202
Ahissar, M 176
Ahlheim, C 152
Ahmed, A-KH 200
Ahn, W-Y 75, 128
Akimoto, Y 39, 161
Akrofi, K 38, 197
Alain, C 37
Albert, D 178
Albiero, EE 130
Alderweireldt, A-S 126
Alexander, J 40
Alexander, R 40
Alexander, W 91
Algeri, L 182
Ali, T 89
Alimardani, M 125
Allan, K 213
Allan. R 26
Allard, E 64
Allik, J 102
Ally, B 47, 118
Ally, BA 47
Almeida, Q 216
Alpaugh, M 40
Alperin, B 61
Alshara, S 170
Altschuler, E 224
Amaral, D 35
Amaral, L 123
Aminoff, E 157
Anand Mudar, R 72
Anderson, B 75, 154, 203, 247

Anderson, E 162
Anderson, KM 233
Anderson, N 62
Anderson, S 175, 177, 197
Andin, J 169
Andrea, S 26
Andreas, M 213
Andreas, R 213
Andreasen, N 237
Andrejczuk, M 210
Andrews Espy, K 108
Andrews, B 225
Andrews-Hanna, J 44, 153
Andrews-Hanna, JR 229
Angus, L 47
Annoni, J-M 187
Ansaldo, A-I 140
Ansari, D 50, 58
Anticevic, A 26
Antony, JW 243
Apitz, T 214
Appelbaum, L 24, 25
Appelbaum, M 69
Araujo, HF 41
Armony, JL 191
Armson, M 53
Arndt, J 144
Arndt, S 63
Arning, L 132
Arnold, KM 117
Arredondo, MM 141, 168
Asano, M 69
Asano, Y 177
Asarnow, RF 218
Ashar, Y 229
Ashby, FG 218
Ashley, R 126
Ashley, V 228
Askren, M 95
Asthana, S 109
Astheimer, L 97
At, A 90, 176
Atchley, RA 138
Atherton, K 71
Atir, S 76
Atkins, SM 112
Attali, E 215
Auerbach, E 110
Austin, B 67
Ávila, C 239
Awati, N 68
Awipi, T 48

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Axelson, E 63
Azevedo, N 138
Aziz-Zadeh, L 201

B
Bachewski, SL 158
Backer, KC 37
Bäckman, L 49
Bader, R 144, 211
Badre, D 60, 246
Baggott, M 233
Bailey, JA 74
Baillet, S 211
Baker, L 109
Bakkour, A 67, 128
Baldwin, D 22, 23
Baldwin, C 208
Ballard, K 110
Balling, K 215
Balslev, D 159
Baltuch, G 144
Band, GPH 238
Bandettini, P 146
Banich, M 44, 153
Baniqued, PL 42
Banscherus, K 201
Baran, B 118
Barbieri, E 45
Barch, D 26
Barch, D 44, 65, 92, 166
Barense, MD 214
Barkley, V 244
Barnea-Goraly, N 26
Barnes, K 188
Barnes, KA 121, 233
Barnet, J 109
Barnett, A 191
Barraza, J 228
Barraza, P 169
Barrett, A 131
Barrett, AM 130
Barrett, LF 40, 207
Barrow, J 208
Barry, R 28
Barsalou, L 184
Barsalou, LW 40
Bartlett, L 45
Bartlett, LB 188
Bartz, E 189
Bassett, D 125

Bassett, DS 96, 157
Bato, A 186
Battista, C 58
Bauch, EM 144
Bauer, P 134
Bauer, PJ 134, 146
Baum, S 170
Bayer, A 118
Bayer, M 207
Bayliss, A 52
Beach, SD 98
Beacher, F 206
Beadle, J 64
Beadle, JN 164
Beall, E 236
Beavin, L 228
Becerril, K 92
Beck, D 104, 156
Beck, DM 124
Becker, A 68
Bedo, N 201
Beeman, M 54, 58
Begany, KL 43
Behmer Jr., LP 126
Beilock, S 80, 120
Bein, O 212
Bellaïche, L 208
Bellebaum, C 50, 75, 101, 119
Bellgrove, M 235
Bellugi, U 84
Belluscio, BA 198
Belyk, M 183
Benali, H 140
Benarroch, M 44
Benasich, A 69
Benasich, AA 97, 170
Benjamin, C 109
Bennett, C 116
Bennett, IJ 90
Benson, L 22
Ben-Zeev, A 87, 88
Berens, M 139
Berentsen, ST 143
Berger, A 79
Berger, N 63
Berglund Mattsson-Mårn, I 161
Bergman Nutley, S 111
Bergmann, H 82, 94
Bergstrom, Z 174
Berkman, E 235
Berkmen, E 87
Berman, M 95

251

Author Index
Bermel, R 236
Bernard, JA 198
Berry, A 181
Berryhill, M 111, 166, 180
Berti, A 152
Bertrand, O 30, 223
Beste, C 61, 92, 132
Bettencourt, L 248
Beul, S 94
Beversdorf, D 58, 59
Beversdorf, DQ 162
Bhandari, A 45
Bharani, KL 58, 203
Bhardwaj, P 147
Bialystok, E 97
Bickel, S 49
Bicksel, J 66
Biggs, EA 230
Bilder, R 186
Bilder, RM 218
Binder, J 31
Binder, J 209, 211
Binder, JR 143, 211
Binkofski, F 151
Birbaumer, N 123
Bissonnette, S 240
Black, M 154
Blair, J 106, 107
Blais, C 208
Blindauer, K 31
Bliss-Moreau, E 34, 35
Bo, J 196
Bobell, R 216
Bodammer, N 49
Bodner, K 235
Boehler, C 25
Boehler, C 181
Boehm, SG 47, 144
Boesiger, P 32
Boettiger, CA 24
Boggia, J 156
Boggio, PS 19, 20
Bogler, C 246
Bohnen, N 73, 196
Boksem, M 128
Boksem, MAS 100
Bolbecker, AR 121
Bolger, DJ 68, 112
Boll, S 86
Bolo, NR 50
Bolognini, N 73, 153, 221
Boly, M 245
Bondad, AM 202
Bonnefond, M 146
Bonner, M 209, 210
Bookheimer, SY 218
Booth, J 123
Booth, JR 54, 68, 90, 177
Boroditsky, L 158
Borofsky, L 105
Borst, G 173
Bosley, L 190
Bosley, LV 210
Bossaerts, P 30
Boster, A 56
Boston, R 131

252

Botvinick, M 22, 23
Bouazzaoui, B 71
Boudewyn, M 26
Bowden, HW 188
Bowen, HJ 66
Bowman, C 213, 228
Boyd, J 171
Boyd, R 48
Boyden, N 73
Boylan, C 124
Bozgunov, K 128
Bradley, JL 131
Bradley, M 145
Brainard, DH 202
Brander, KM 93
Brandstatt, K 58
Brang, D 27, 28
Brannon, E 70, 127
Branscombe-Caird, L 66
Brauer, J 69
Braun, A 239, 240
Braun, C 123
Braun, EK 100, 153
Braunlich, K 166
Braver, T 25, 34
Braver, TS 42
Braverman, A 174
Bravo, F 90
Brennan, C 68
Brew, J 60
Brewer, JB 120
Bricolo, E 58
Bridge, DJ 246
Bridger, E 211
Bright, P 226
Brislin, S 107
Brodmann, K 101
Broglio, SP 93
Bromberger, B 120
Broster, L 110
Brothers, T 211
Brown, DJ 221
Brown, J 74, 91, 95, 209
Brown, S 40, 183, 197
Brown, T 69
Browning, E 215
Brownoff, N 40
Bruce, AS 22
Brumm, M 63
Brunye, T 106
Brysbaert, M 126
Buchsbaum, BR 202
Buckholtz, J 24
Buckner, RL 128
Buechel, C 86
Buhle, J 34, 36
Bultitude, J 247
Bunting, MF 112
Bunzeck, N 147, 212, 214
Burakowski, L 65
Burgess, N 146
Burianová, H 152
Burke, D 98
Burke, DT 73
Burke, J 144
Burkhart, K 79

Burman, DD 68
Burnett, KE 160
Burns, S 137, 240
Buschkuehl, M 135, 136, 198
Busemeyer, J 128
Busemeyer, JR 75
Butler, A 200
Butler, C 71
Butt, OH 202
Butterfield, B 77
Butterworth, B 59
Buttery, P 149
Butts, A 150
Butts, AM 71, 116, 149
Buxbaum, L 22, 23
Buxbaum, L 220
Buxbaum, LJ 51
Buzzell, G 208

C
Caballero, J 64
Cabeza, R 18, 33, 241, 246
Cacic, K 154
Caddigan, E 104, 156
Cai, Q 126
Cairney, S 147, 216
Calabrese, M 240
Caldwell-Harris, C 202
Calley, C 121
Callow, N 85
Calvo-Merino, B 222
Camblin, CC 98
Campanella, C 206
Campbell, A 230
Campbell, K 124
Campos, V 199
Cantlon, J 29
Cantlon, JF 55
Cao, F 68
Capek, C 95
Caplan, J 185, 245
Caplan, JB 222
Cappa, S 119
Caramazza, A 32
Cardillo, E 120
Cardin, V 95
Carlisle, JF 139
Carlson, C 243
Carlson, J 125, 206
Carlsson, C 109
Carnell, S 21, 22
Carney, E 240
Carota, F 210
Carp, J 27, 28, 207
Carpenter-Thompson, J 38, 197
Carpentier, SM 216
Carr, TH 201
Carr, VA 213
Carrasco, M 109, 181, 185
Carreiras, M 46, 169
Carson-Wong, A 230
Carstens, K 107
Carter, C 26
Carter, C 44
Carter, M 154

Carter, R 147
Carter, RM 148
Case, L 165, 229
Casey, BJ 64
Castellanos, FX 163, 235
Caterina, B 26
Catz, I 76
Cauda, F 184
Ceaser, A 166
Ceballos, N 157
Cervantes, S 241
Cetinkaya, A 128
Chaddock, L 65
Chambers, A 242
Champoux, F 74
Chan, CCH 133
Chan, JSY 95
Chan, M 185
Chancellor-Freeland, C 215
Chandrasekaran, B 197
Chang, J-R 91
Chang, L 101, 128
Chang, Y-C 180
Chapman, S 202
Chari, S 203
Charlton, R 99, 100
Chatterjee, A 55, 104, 120, 190, 227
Chauvin, KW 101
Chavez, RS 40, 63
Chein, J 178
Chein, JM 186
Chelnokova, O 199
Chen, AJ-W 43
Chen, C 163
Chen, C 91
Chen, H-C 140, 170, 189
Chen, J 168, 169
Chen, L-c 181
Chen, N-F 145
Chen, P 130, 131, 230
Chen, Q 114
Chen, SHA 113
Chen, Y 245
Chen, Z 175
Cheng, S-k 145
Cheong, T 184
Chevalier, N 108
Cheyne, JA 53
Chiang, M-C 32
Chiang, H-S 72, 189
Chiang, M-C 216
Chiao, J 165, 235
Chiapella, L 182
Chiarello, C 115
Chiba, A 84
Chiew, KS 42
Chinnarath, KJ 105
Chirimuuta, M 200
Chiu, Y-C 242
Chiusano, B 178
Choi, C 147
Choi, H 99
Chou, C-C 219
Chou, K 197
Chou, T-L 189
Choudhury, N 69, 170

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Author Index
Chouiter, L 187
Chow, HM 239, 240
Chow, W-Y 171
Christ, SE 162, 235
Christensen, BK 189
Christian, B 24, 213
Christian, T 213
Christoff, K 29
Christoff, K 56, 237, 238
Chrysikou, EG 236
Chu, L 190
Chueh, C 163
Chueh, C-H 135
Chun, M 33
Chung, H-T 180
Chung, M 185
Church, J 188
Chwilla, DJ 169
Cirulli, E 102
Civai, C 81
Claassen, JAHR 71
Clapham, ES 248
Clarke, A 27
Clarke, E 66
Clarke, S 176
Clark-Polner, E 248
Clewett, D 63
Cline, AN 238
Close, MS 127
Coad, B 191
Coch, D 55
Coderre, E 234
Coffey, EBJ 217, 221
Cogan, G 83
Cohen Kadosh, R 19, 56, 180, 219
Cohen, J 35
Cohen, LG 19, 20
Cohen, A 188
Cohen, JR 218
Cohen, M 56, 221
Cohen, MX 91, 236
Cohen, NJ 48, 70
Cohn, N 30, 32
Cohn, M 117, 173
Cohn-Sheehy, B 245
Colange, A 37
Cole, M 24, 25
Cole, M 41
Collard, P 39
Collela, B 118
Collier, A 129
Collins, P 65, 110
Colzato, L 24
Cómbita, LM 109
Compton, R 80
Comrie, JK 37, 66
Conant, L 31
Congdon, E 186
Connelly, JJ 108
Connolly, A 27
Conrad, A 140
Constable, M 52
Contreras, J 186
Convento, S 221
Convit, A 123
Conway, ARA 186

Conway, C 97
Cook, A 173
Cooke, G 90
Cooper, A 188
Cooper, JA 67
Cooper, S 126
Coppola, R 96
Corballis, MC 194
Corbeil, C 115
Cordova, N 23
Corlett, P 26
Corradi-Dell'Acqua, C 106, 230
Correll, D 174
Cort, B 247
Corvin, A 85
Coslett, HB 223, 224
Costes, N 30
Coulson, S 31
Coulson, S 187
Couperus, J 182
Coupland, N 147
Cousin, E 198
Coutanche, MN 148
Cowey, A 219
Cox, CL 163
Cox, C 211
Coyle, J 233
Craft, S 109
Craig, HK 139
Craik, F 168
Crawley, A 118
Creery, J 243
Crescentini, C 81
Crinion, J 19
Critchley, H 163
Crossman, M 53, 161
Crosson, B 127
Cruikshank, L 222
Crump, C 229
Cruse, D 175
Cservenka, A 105
Culbreth, AJ 175
Curie, A 87
Curtis, C 24
Curtis, AF 37, 66
Cusack, R 125
Cutting, L 240
Cyr, AB 98
Czernochowski, D 88

D
d'Avossa, G 160, 225
D'Esposito, M 43, 89
D'Zmura, M 38
D. Friederici, A 142
d’Acremont, M 29, 30
D’Ausilio, A 52
Daffner, K 61
Dahlström, O 167, 169
Daltrozzo, J 30
Damasio, A 41, 220
Damasio, H 41, 63
Dams-O'Connor, K 134
Danckert, J 75, 131, 154, 203
Dang-Vu, TT 245

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Daniel, A 58
Danker, J 193
Danoun, O 76
Darsaud, A 245
Datko, M 157, 219
Dautoff, R 162
Davachi, L 32
Davachi, L 48, 193, 243
Davalos, D 230
Davenport, T 30, 31
Davidow, JY 75
Davidson, R 24, 34, 35
Davidson, P 243
Davidson, R 183
Davis, SW 30, 31
Davis, T 32, 33
Davis, C 67
Davis, N 240
Davis, T 208
Daw, N 155
Dawson, A 228
Dayalu, P 196
Dayan, A 79
De Beuckelaer, A 133
De Brigard, F 191
de Chastelaine, M 192, 213
de Dios, CI 52
de Gelder, B 184, 231
De La Vega, A 153
de Lange, F 52
De Leon, A 67
de Luna, X 73
de Meo, R 199
de Visser, E 80
Deason, RG 47
Decety, J 82, 86, 123, 136, 206
Decorrevont, K 102
Dede, A 144
Deen, B 84
Deering, L 205
Del Tufo, S 137, 188
Delamater, AR 83
Delaney-Busch, N 137, 206
Delazer, M 56
DeLeon, A 65
Delgado, MR 34, 83
Deliz, J 75
Demiral, SB 233
Demiralp, E 85, 95, 135, 136
Denburg, N 64, 102, 127
Deng, S 181
Deng, Y 114
Dennehy, T 88
Dennehy, TC 126
Dennehy, V 85
Dennis, N 212, 213
des Portes, V 87
Desai, R 31
Desai, R 209, 211
Desantis, A 177
DeSantis, JH 165
Deschamps, I 170
Devereux, B 27
Deville, J 58
Devinsky, O 243
DeVolder, I 140

Dew, I 32, 33
Dewey, JA 201
DeYoung, C 29
DeYoung, CG 57
Di Martino, A 163
Diamond, E 240
Diamond, S 122
Diaz, M 98
Diaz-Arrastia, R 148
Dickerson, BC 207
Dickson, D 142
Didino, D 59
Dien, J 57, 139
Dierolf, A 132
Dimidjian, S 229
Direito, A 171
Dixon, M 237
Dixon, ML 238
Dobryakova, E 102
Doeller, C 146, 205
Dolan, P 241
Dolan, R 212
Dolcos, F 18
Dolcos, F 134, 162, 233
Dolcos, S 134, 233
Donaldson, D 191, 213, 241
Donaldson, DI 174, 242, 244
Donchin, E 193
Dong, Q 54
Donohoe, G 85
Donohue, S 70
Doody, S 79
Doron, K 132
Dosch, H-G 139
Dougherty, MR 112
Dovan, M 188
Dowling, M 109
Downing, P 247
Doydum, AO 111
Doyle, W 243
Drebing, DE 223
Drew, A 143
Driver, J 152
Drouin, H 243
Drucker, JH 40
Dubis, J 42, 188
Dubno, JR 62
Dubovik, S 104
Duda, B 47, 118
Duff, M 48, 135, 212, 244
Duhoux, S 64
Dukic, M 29
Dumas, J 107
Dumontheil, I 112
Duñabeitia, JA 46
Duncan, J 42, 45
Dunsmoor, JE 147
Dupoux, E 41
Durgerian, S 71, 116, 149, 150
Durrant, S 147, 216
Duss, S 145
Duss, SB 47
Dussias, P 46
Dutat, M 41
Duzel, E 212
Düzel, E 49

253

Author Index
Dvorkin, AY 156
Dwivedi, V 47
Dyckman, K 67
Dye, M 62

E
Eckart, C 147
Eckert, MA 62
Eddy, M 137, 138, 188
Edgin, J 100
Egidi, G 30, 32
Egli, L 199
Egner, T 45
Eich, TS 111
Eichenlaub, J-B 30
Eickhoff, S 151
Eisenberger, N 35
Eisner, F 176
El-Hinnawi, N 145
El-Hout, M 135
Elias, L 50
Elias, WJ 234
Ellamil, M 56, 237, 238
Elliott, J 104
Ellis, J 229
Elman, J 245
Eltman, B 226
Elward, R 193
Emerson, R 29
Emery, DJ 76
Emrich, SM 165, 199
Endrass, T 126
Engel, A 21
Engman, J 146
Entz, L 49
Epplen, JT 132
Erb, J 176
Erhart, M 69
Eric, M 218
Eric, W 218
Erickson, K 65
Erickson, MA 175
Eskenazi, T 52
Estefan, D 174
Esterman, M 122
Esteve, F 198
Etzel, J 25
Eulitz, C 55, 137
Evans, L 175, 192
Evelyn, G 213

F
Fabiani, M 42, 48, 88, 89, 124, 239
Fadiga, L 52
Fahey, C 85
Fairhurst, M 21
Falkenstein, M 92
Fan, C 139
Fanucci, K 137
Farnè, A 223
Farooqui, A 42
Fasel, I 101
Fassbender, C 155

254

Fast, E 143
Fearey, B 248
Fechtner, J 132
Federmeier, K 142, 143, 171
Federmeier, KD 172, 190, 210, 239
Fedota, J 91
Fei-Fei, L 104, 156
Feinberg, D 247
Feldman Barrett, L 84, 135, 136,
162, 184
Fellows, L 92, 208
Felton, A 115
Feng, G 140
Feng, J 160
Ferber, S 199
Ferdinand, NK 236
Ferguson, B 58, 59
Ferguson, BJ 162
Fernandes, M 89
Fernandez, G 18, 19
Fernández, G 82, 94
Fernandino, L 30, 31
Ferrarin, M 152
Ferrea, S 50
Fertuck, E 230
Festa, E 119, 121
Fetz, E 123
Fias, W 76
Fields, E 137
Fiez, J 57
Figgucio, M 98
Figner, B 153
Figueira, S 215
Fikes, T 198
Filipowicz, A 75, 154
Filippin, L 41
Filliter, J 129
Finn, B 117
Fintzi, A 226
Fiorentino, R 141
Fiori, N 115
Fish, K 232
Fisher, K 130
Fitzgerald, K 66
Fitzgerald, K 207
Flanagin, V 121
Flanary, K 63
Flannery, KA 130
Flavia, C 26
Fletcher, M 48, 88, 89
Flores, RA 59, 203
Flores, VL 50
Flower, K 233
Foerde, K 100, 153, 214
Foertsch, A 18
Fogelson, S 199
Fogle, K 79
Fonteneau, E 149
Ford, J 70, 191
Forester, GR 193
Forman-Alberti, A 154
Forscher, E 205
Forster, B 79, 222
Forster, S 209
Foster, MK 116
Foster, P 59

Foundas, A 130
Foundas, AL 96
Fournier, LR 126
Fowler, K 106
Fox, A 24
Fox, GR 201
Fox, K 237
Fox, KCR 238
Franconeri, S 58, 182
Frank, MJ 60
Fransson, P 169
Frantz, J 59
Frantz, JA 203
Franz, E 198
Frensch, P 71
Friederici, AD 69
Friedrich, C 114
Friedrich, CK 68
Frishkoff, G 211
Frithsen, A 157, 194
Frost, DJ 190
Froud, K 99, 141
Fruchter, J 138
Fu, S 157
Fuhrman, O 158
Fujii, N 151
Fujioka, T 216
Fujiwara, E 40, 76, 153
Fukunaga, M 157
Fukunaga, R 91
Fuligni, A 30
Furlong, D 182

G
Gaab, N 30, 98, 109
Gabbitas, R 44
Gabrieli, J 137, 188
Gabrieli, JDE 98
Gacad, R 42
Gagnon, S 106
Gais, S 121, 245
Galantini, C 221
Gallen, CL 89
Gallo, D 241
Galloway, G 233
Gallucci, M 182
Gambi, C 233
Gamble, KR 215
Gamer, M 86
Gangopadhyay, I 190
Gansler, D 183
Gao, Y 79
Garbarini, F 152
Garcea, F 151
Garcia, F 99
Garcia, J 181
Garel, K-LA 98
Garnsey, S 31
Garrison, K 233
Garza, J 108
Gavin, P 58
Gayda, J 90
Gazes, Y 67
Gazzaniga, M 132
Gehring, W 109, 181

Gehring, WJ 185
Geisler, M 88
Geisler, MW 87, 94, 138
Geliebter, A 22
Geminiani, G 184
Gendron, M 207
Gentsch, A 126
George, J 248
George, T 57, 142
Gerdes, ABM 232
Ghane, M 62
Ghazi Saidi, L 140
Ghilardi, F 130
Giannakidou, A 172
Gibson, L 73
Gibson, R 47
Giesbrecht, B 104, 180
Giffin, L 172
Gigler, K 112
Gilbert, J 222
Gilboa, A 215
Gilchrist, ID 93
Gill, M 85
Gilley, PM 239
Gillmeister, H 222
Gilmore, AW 117
Gimbel, SI 120
Gindri, P 152
Giovanello, K 70, 191
Girgis, D 101
Giuseffi, K 108
Giusti, V 199
Glasauer, S 121
Gleason, C 109
Gluck, MA 154
Gluck, M 76, 205
Godsey, S 79
Godwin, CA 94
Goedert, K 130, 131
Goffredina, S 100
Goksun, T 190
Gold, BT 91
Gold, DA 116
Gold, J 44
Goldman, J 130
Goldstein, JM 22
Goldstein, D 102
Golkar, A 161
Gomes, H 130
Gomez-Lavin, J 166
Gomez-Palacio-Schjetnan, A 122
Gonsalves, B 242, 243
Gonzales, S 126
González, J 239
González-Vilbazo, K-E 45
Good, C 205
Goodrich, R 87, 88
Gordon, B 48, 190, 210, 211, 238
Gorlick, M 67, 128
Gosman, D 79
Gotlib, IH 135, 136
Gottfried, J 119
Grabner, R 50
Grabowecky, M 54, 78, 95, 105,
122, 224, 247, 248
Gracco, V 170

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Author Index
Grady, C 124, 243
Grady, CL 66
Graetsch, M 121
Grafman, J 82
Grafon, ST 157
Grafton, S 125
Graham, R 157, 232
Grainger, J 137, 138
Gramfort, A 137
Grammer, J 185
Grammer, JK 109
Granger, R 199
Gratton, C 43, 89
Gratton, G 42, 48, 88, 89, 124, 239
Graves, WW 143, 211
Gray, J 29
Gray, J 56, 57
Gray, M 163
Gray, T 143
Grazioplene, R 57
Green, A 56
Green, J 181
Green, K 122
Green, R 118
Green, S 113
Greenberg, Z 207
Greene, A 215
Greening, SG 38
Greenwood, P 66, 185
Greve, A 191
Griffiths, A 228
Grigg, O 124
Grill-Spector, K 213, 225
Groppe, D 49
Grose-Fifer, J 92, 93, 178
Gross, WL 211
Grossman, M 209, 210
Grove, J 172
Grubb, M 26
Gruber, MJ 144
Grundy, J 44
Grunewald, K 57
Grupe, D 184
Grzybowski, S 39
Guan, Z 169
Guerra-Carrillo, B 195
Guevarra, D 87
Guger, C 225
Guggisberg, A 104
Guillory, S 181
Guitart-Masip, M 212
Gullick, M 178
Gunnar, M 44, 49
Guo, Y 30, 31
Guo, S 157
Guo, T 230
Gupta, R 135
Gustafson, D 224
Guthormsen, A 248
Guzman-Martinez, E 54, 78, 224,
248

H
H. Arnold, D 226
H.B., C 163

Haacke, M 41
Haarmann, H 57, 139, 142
Haas, B 26
Haas, BW 49
Haass, M 241
Habeck, C 67, 77
Habib, R 206, 237
Haese, A 88
Haggard, D 224
Haimson, B 156
Hairston, WD 122, 219
Hajcak, G 206
Hakun, J 94
Halfmann, K 127
Halgren, E 223
Hall, K 223
Hallett, M 198
Halperin, J 130
Ham, M 248
Hamada, C 108
Hämäläinen, JA 97
Hamalainen, M 137
Hamann, S 81, 133, 206
Hambrook, D 122, 195
Hamilton, C 31
Hamilton, RH 165, 223, 224
Hammer, R 225
Hämmerer, D 110
Hampton, J 58
Han, C-C 59
Han, S 81, 231
Hanawa, S 161
Handy, TC 184
Hanna-Pladdy, B 99
Hantke, N 71, 149, 150
Hantke, NC 116, 149
Harada, T 165, 235
Hare, S 58
Hargreaves, A 85
Hari, R 83
Haring, A 61
Hariri, A 165, 235
Harlow, IM 244
Harmon-Jones, E 206
Harms, V 50
Harrington, D 167
Harris, KC 62
Harrison, N 163
Hart Jr., J 72
Hart, Jr., J 121
Hart, J 148, 189
Hartmann, T 28
Hartsuiker, RJ 139
Harvey, M 83
Haselgrove, C 124
Hashizume, H 161
Haslam, R 200
Hassall, C 238
Hassall, CD 236
Hassett, JM 81
Hassevoort, KM 198
Hasson, U 26, 139, 196
Hau, CLV 166
Hauser, PC 62
Hawco, C 191
Hawes, D 29

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Hawkins, D 237
Haxby, J 27
Hayes, AE 85
Haynes, J-D 246
He, H 163
Healey, M 240
Heatherton, TF 40
Hebrank, A 148
Hecht, P 58
Hechtman, L 165
Heckman, G 89
Hedgcock, W 127
Hedin, L 87
Heeger, DJ 26
Heeger, DJ 247
Heekeren, HR 167
Heffernan, PH 215
Hegadoren, K 147
Hegarty, II, JP 162
Heidlmayr, K 170
Heike, E 213
Heim, S 170
Heindel, W 119, 121
Heinze, H-J 49
Heissler, J 81
Heisz, J 241
Helie, S 218
Heller, A 35
Hemforth, B 170
Hemmerich, J 245
Henckens, MJAG 19
Henderson, S 164
Henke, K 32
Henke, K 47, 145
Henry, M 176
Henry, MJ 176
Hensel, SL 140
Henson, R 174
Herbert, C 182
Herholz, SC 217, 221
Hermans, EJ 19
Hermsdorff, G 41
Hernandez Rodriguez, MY 164
Hernandez-Vallant, A 183
Herpertz, S 201
Herrmann, C 27
Herrmann, M 208
Hershaw, JN 51
Herting, M 185
Herting, MM 70, 89, 90
Herzallah, M 76
Hester, R 235
Hetrick, WP 75, 121, 175
Heusser, A 48
Hibbing, J 108
Hickok, G 46, 54, 170
Higgins, A 178
Higueras, Y 144
Hilchey, M 158, 160
Hillman, C 65, 171
Hillman, CH 70, 93
Hillyard, SA 28
Hiner, B 31
Hinman, A 215
Hinrichs, H 132
Hirsch, J 22

Hittner, E 197
Hochman, E 92, 208
Hodel, A 49
Hoffman, J 142
Hoffman, Y 212
Hofheimer, J 80
Hofstetter, C 230
Hogeveen, J 125
Holcomb, P 32
Holcomb, P 61, 137, 138
Holsen, LM 21, 22
Hood, BM 93
Hoogenboom, WS 50
Hoover, S 93
Hopkins, L 215
Hopkins, NH 162
Hopkins, R 173
Hortensius, R 231
Horton, C 38
Horwitz, B 222
Hosoda, M 215
Howard, Jr., JH 154, 215
Howard, DV 154, 215
Howard, L 99
Hsieh, L 78
Hsu, L 169
Hsu, LS-J 141, 168
Hsu, N 156
Hsu, NS 120, 202
Hu, S 131
Hu, F 225
Hu, H 225
Huang, D 175
Huang, H-W 143
Huang, J 170
Huang, S-L 180
Huang, S-TT 82
Hubbard, E 57
Hudac, CM 200
Hue, C-W 113
Huettel, S 102, 127, 154
Huettel, SA 148
Hughes, G 177
Hughson, R 89
Huis in 't Veld, E 231
Humann, J 71
Humfleet, J 73
Humphreys, K 111
Humphries, CJ 211
Hung, D 39
Hung, DL 91, 145
Hung, S-M 189
Hunt, R 44, 49
Hunt, S 118
Hurley, R 119
Husain, F 38, 164, 197
Hussey, E 47, 118
Hussey, EP 47
Hwang, JY 86
Hyde, D 178

I
Iacovella, V 196
Ignacio, M 69
Ihara, M 161

255

Author Index
Ihnen, S 188
Iidaka, T 165, 235
Imai, M 69
Immordino-Yang, MH 83
Inagaki, M 112
Ingbretsen, Z 63
Ingeholm, J 223
Ingeholm, JE 157
Inman, C 133
Insel, C 101, 111, 127
Inzlicht, M 125
Iordan, A 134
Ip, K 169
Ip, KI 141, 168
Irwin, W 72
Isaac, S 174
Isel, F 115, 170
Ishai, A 27
Ishida, H 151
Ishiguro, H 125
Isingrini, M 71
Ivanoiu, A 88

J
Jablonski, PM 131
Jack, A 108
Jackendoff, R 32
Jackson, F 134
Jackson, FL 134
Jacobs, J 144, 246
Jacobson, AM 50
Jaeggi, S 135, 136
Jaeggi, SM 198
Jahn, A 74
James, K 27
James, T 27
James, K 200
James, KH 74, 220
James, TW 220
Jamil, A 193
Janacsek, K 72, 217
Janetsian, SS 93
Jang, J 229
Jang, JH 41, 86
Janice Lin, C-H 32
Janssen, A 56
Jantz, T 38
Janus, M 97
Jao, RJ 220
Jarskog, LF 101, 127
Jarvinen-Pasley, A 84
Jasinska, AJ 139
Jeff, L 218
Jensen, O 146
Jerram, M 183
Ji, S 193
Jia, S 170
Jiang, X 141
Jiang, Y 110
Jicha, G 110
Joanisse, M 187
Johansson, M 242
Johnson, M 33
Johnson, A 157
Johnson, B 152

256

Johnson, J 192
Johnson, JS 165
Johnson, L 202
Johnson, M 98
Johnson, NF 91
Johnson, S 65, 109, 129
Johnsrude, I 125, 167
Johnstone, T 35
Jolly, E 86
Jones, A 79, 222
Jones, DK 118
Jones, J 235
Jones, K 111
Jones, MN 121
Jones, MR 132
Jones, P 203
Jonides, J 84, 95, 135, 136, 198
Josefsson, M 73
Joshi, S 216
Juan, C-H 145
Jubeau, M 198
Jung, J 158
Jung, RE 59, 203
Jürgen, D 213
Just, MA 87

K
Kable, J 76
Kaga, M 112
Kaganovich, N 224
Kahana, MJ 33
Kahana, M 144
Kahana, MJ 241, 246
Kahn, I 75
Kahn, L 233
Kaiser, M 220
Kalenine, S 51
Kallai, AY 57
Kalra, P 188, 215
Kam, J 184
Kambara, T 117
Kamp, S-M 193
Kamps, J 96
Kamvar, S 84
Kandhadai, P 172
Kane, S 240
Kang, E 160
Kang, SS 235
Kanske, P 81
Kanter Bartz, E 72
Kanwisher, N 84
Kaplan, 41
Kaplan, J 105, 201, 220
Kaplan, R 146
Karl, C 232
Karlsgodt, K 186
Karnadewi, F 226
Karnath, H-O 159
Karst, AT 248
Karuzis, V 139
Kasai, T 158, 159, 182
Kathmann, N 126
Kätsyri, J 83
Kattan, O 215
Katz, B 110

Kaur, N 174
Kawa, K 100
Kawasaki, M 85
Kawashima, R 39, 117, 161
Kayser, A 209
Kazinka, R 80
Keane, M 168
Keedy, S 79
Keehn, B 62
Kehayia, E 138
Keil, J 27, 28
Keil, A 170, 183
Keilholz, S 186, 192
Keilholz, SD 186
Keisler, A 29, 43
Keller, P 20, 21
Keller, TA 87
Keller, C 49
Keller, P 222
Kelley, RG 49
Kelly, C 163, 235
Kelsey, K 108
Kendall Braun, E 29
Kennedy, D 124
Kennedy, K 148
Kensinger, EA 18
Kensinger, E 64, 195
Kensinger, EA 63
Kent, J 121
Kent, JS 75
Kenyon, A 109
Keown, C 62
Kere, J 111, 112
Keri, S 154
Kern, B 79
Kessels, RPC 71, 82, 94
Kessler, K 24
Kester, LE 235
Khamis-Dakwar, R 99, 141, 142
Kharaman, M 55
Khurshid, S 224
Kiang, M 189
Kieffaber, P 73
Kieffaber, PD 51
Kiehl, K 136, 234
Kiehl, KA 164
Kielar, A 45, 113
Kielholz, S 43
Kim, J 29
Kim, C 91
Kim, H 231
Kim, HS 86
Kim, H-y 231
Kim, J 56, 173, 224
Kim, JH 206
Kim, JJ 138
Kim, K 207
Kim, KK 160
Kim, S 55, 173
Kim, SN 86
Kim, YY 90
King, C 24
King, D 145
King, L-W 188
Kiran, S 143, 172, 187
Kirk, G 164

Kissler, J 136, 182, 231
Kita, S 69
Kitajo, K 69, 85
Klatt, M 65
Klauser, B 79
Klein, C 47, 144
Klein, R 158, 160
Klibanski, A 22
Klingberg, T 111, 112
Klooster, N 244
Kmiecik, MJ 203
Knaus, TA 96
Knierim, IN 53
Knight, M 18
Knoblich, G 51, 52, 152
Knopp, K 187
Knowles, ER 177
Knowlton, B 32
Knowlton, BJ 216, 217, 218
Knuth, N 223
Knutson, K 82
Kohler, S 244
Ko, P 47, 118
Ko, PC 47
Koban, L 106
Kober, H 230
Kobza, S 50
Koch, I 151
Koenig, K 167, 236
Koenig, T 145
Koenigs, M 164, 234
Koerner, T 240
Koestner, B 102
Kohler, P 199
Kolarik, B 88
Koldewyn, K 84
Kolk, HHJ 169
Komeda, H 235
Konkel, A 48, 243
Kopp, F 219
Korb, FM 45
Korthauer, L 100
Koslov, S 197
Kosslyn, S 173
Koster-Hale, J 107
Kota, S 200
Kotozaki, Y 161
Kotz, SA 53, 115, 171, 196
Kounios, J 58
Kourtis, D 51, 152
Kousaie, S 115, 171
Kovacs, ZA 217
Kovelman, I 141, 168, 169
Kraemer, DJM 165
Krafft, C 67
Kragel, PA 148
Kramer, A 65
Kranjec, A 227
Kraus, N 38, 70, 168, 175, 177, 196,
197
Krausz, G 225
Kraut, M 72, 121
Krawczyk, D 203
Krawitz, A 95
Krebs, R 181
Kriegeskorte, N 210

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Author Index
Krigolson, O 238
Krigolson, OE 236
Kritikos, A 52
Kriukova, O 211
Krizman, J 168
Krogh, L 65
Kroll, J 46
Kroner, KA 131
Kross, E 84
Krueger, F 80, 82
Krusemark, E 135
Kryklywy, J 38
Krystal, J 26
Kube, J 243
Kubicki, M 50
Kuhl, B 32, 33
Kühn, AB 167
Kühn, S 49
Kumar, A 51, 99, 100
Kumar, J 115, 171
Kundu, B 96
Kung, S-J 39
Kuo, B-C 24, 25
Kuo, S 44
Kuo, W-J 137, 207
Kuperberg, G 30, 32
Kuperberg, G 137, 141, 173, 206
Kurczek, J 135
Kurth-Nelson, Z 43
Kurup, P 154
Kusumoto, K 94
Kutas, M 200
Kutcher, L 40
Kwak, Y 73, 196
Kwan, D 243
Kwon, JS 41, 86
Kynor, D 122

L
LaBar, KS 106, 147, 241
Labrenz, F 61
Labrovich, D-N 215
Lacey, EH 238
Lachman, M 35
Ladavas, E 26
Ladell, T 22
Laeng, B 199
LaFreniere, D 162
Lahey, BB 86
LaHue, S 190
Lai, J 69
Laliberté, C 115, 171
Lamalle, L 198
Lamar, M 99, 100
LaMontagne, P 32, 34
Lancaster, M 149, 150
Lancaster, MA 71, 116, 149
Landy, K 121
Langworthy, S 24, 25
Lapate, R 35
Lapish, CC 93
LaRocque, J 113
LaRocque, KF 213
Larsen, J 228
Larson, E 156

Lau, E 137
Lavigne, K 149
Lawson, BL 36
Lawson, EA 22
Leal, F 192
Lech, R 146
Ledoux, K 190, 211
Lee, T-H 18
Lee, VK 34
Lee, A 59
Lee, C-F 133
Lee, C-l 210, 220
Lee, C-N 135
Lee, FS 64
Lee, H-J 207
Lee, M 80
Lee, MC 82
Lee, S-H 55, 189
Lee, TMC 133
Lee, Y 97, 243
Lee, Y-S 163
Leekley, K 95
Lega, B 144
Lehet, M 55, 190
Lejuez, C 154
Leland, DS 131
Lemire-Rodger, S 202
Leo, P 215
Leonard, C 115
Leong, J 72
Leotti, LA 34
Lepage, M 191
Lepping, R 99
Letourneau, SM 200
Leung, H-C 166
Leung, M-K 133
Leventon, JS 146
Levin, I 127
Levine, B 53, 241
Levinson, A 80
Levy, J 53
Levy, JP 161
Levy-Gigi, E 154
Lewis, AH 83
Lewis, P 147, 216
Lewis-Peacock, J 34
Lewis-Peacock, J 111
Leynes, PA 146
Li, C-S 131
Li, J 110
Li, Q 67
Li, S 185
Li, S-C 71, 110, 167
Li, W 133, 135, 161, 205
Li, X 161
Liao, S 163
Lidji, P 98
Lieberman, M 35, 87
Lier, E 172
Lietti, C 199
Lighthall, N 229
Lightman, E 183
Lim, K 43, 65, 110, 150
Limmer, W 205
Limongi, R 237
Lin, C-HJ 216, 217

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Lin, J 167, 236
Lincoln, W 215
Lindbergh, C 73
Lindenberger, U 49, 110, 167, 219
Lindquist, KA 162, 207
Lindström, BR 161
List, A 122
Lithgow, K 245
Little, DF 218
Littlefield, L 95
Liu, D 167
Liu, H 175
Liu, J 139
Liu, L 54
Liu, P 175
Liu, S 240
Liu, Y 185
Liu, Z 158
Loehr, J 51
Loerts, H 97
Lohoff, F 163
Lombardi, S 218
London, E 186
Long, NM 241
Longhi, E 73
Longstaffe, KA 93
López Zunini, R 115, 171
Lopez, B 116
Losecaat Vermeer, AB 100
Loui, P 20
Lövdén, M 49
Low, K 48, 88, 89
Low, KA 42, 124
Lowe, M 167, 236
Lu, J 54
Lucas, HD 173
Luciana, M 65, 105, 110
Luczak, A 122, 195
Luechinger, R 32
Luking, K 65
Luks, T 190
Luo, J 225
Lupyan, G 227
Lussier, C 55
Lustig, A 104, 156
Lustig, C 181
Luther, E 197
Lutz, A 183
Ly, M 164
Lyons, I 120

M
M.Murray, M 199
Macchi Cassia, V 73
MacDonald, III, A 24, 25, 150
MacDonald, A 43, 44, 105, 235
MacDonald, E 125
Mack, J 113
Mackiewicz Seghete, KL 89, 90
MacLeod, CA 242
Maclin, E 88
Maclin, EL 124
Macpherson, EA 38
MacPherson, M 224
Madden, D 98

Maddox, T 67
Maddox, WT 128
Maehara, Y 134
Maess, B 142
Magnotta, V 63, 140
Magnuson, M 186
Maguire, M 189
Maharjan, S 237
Mahon, B 151
Mahon, BZ 226
Mahoney, C 106
Majewski, A 48
Makris, N 22
Malaia, E 113, 142
Malapani, C 111
Malarkey, W 65
Malcolm, B 223
Malykhina, K 190
Mamashli, F 142
Man, K 220
Mancini, S 46
Manfredini, A 201
Mangels, J 195, 205
Mangun, GR 208
Manini, T 127
Mano, Y 165, 235
Manuel, A 90
Manzel, K 102
Maquet, P 245
Marantz, A 138
Maravita, A 153, 221
Margolin, G 105
Margulies, DS 53
Marian, V 168
Maril, A 120, 212
Marjan'ska, M 110
Markes, O 145
Marrelec, G 140
Marsh, L 79
Marslen-Wilson, WD 149
Marsman, C 82
Marstaller, L 152
Marta, A 213
Mårtensson, J 49
Martin, L 21
Martin, LE 22
Martin, R 31
Martin, A 121, 147, 223, 233
Martin, C 244
Martin, K 205
Martin, LE 84, 101
Martin, V 194
Martins, B 34
Mascarelli, D 178
Mascho, K 141, 168, 169
Mason, E 47
Mason, J 247
Massol, S 46
Mastic, A 141, 169
Mata, J 135, 136
Matarazzo, L 245
Matchin, W 46, 54, 170
Mather, M 18
Mather, M 63, 64, 229
Mathias, C 163
Mathis, J 145

257

Author Index
Matsson, H 112
Matsui, J 63
Matsunaga, R 177
Matsuo, K 113
Mattarella-Micke, A 80
Matthew, B 236
Matthews, M 71, 149, 150
Matthews, MA 116, 149
Matthews, SC 121
Mattingly, S 195
Mattout, J 223
Mattsson, H 111
Matzen, L 241
Maurer, D 73, 247
Mayfield, A 232
Mayseless, N 59
McAndrews, M 117
McAndrews, MP 173, 175, 191
McBride, A 94
McCabe, K 80
McCandliss, B 226
McCandliss, B 57
McCandliss, BD 111
McCarthy, G 18
McCarthy, S 58
McCormick, C 173
McCullough, A 244
McDaniel, M 34
McDermott, KB 117
McDonald, C 91, 208
McDonough, I 148, 241
McDowell, J 67
McGarry, R 66
McGregor, K 127
McHugo, M 29
McIntosh, AR 216, 241
McKinley, A 43, 186
McKinley, RA 186
McLaughlin, P 62
McLaughlin, PM 66
McLaurin, E 102
McMullan, A 195
McNamara, P 202
McNorgan, C 68
McQuire, M 187
Mecklinger, A 144, 211, 242
Meconi, F 85, 96
Medendorp, W 172
Medina, J 223, 224
Mehta, A 49, 64
Mehta, P 128
Meidlinger, K 200
Meissner, S 98
Mellinger, J 123
Meltzer-Asscher, A 113
Mendelson, J 233
Mengotti, P 151
Menoret, M 87
Merchant, J 233, 235
Merriam, EP 247
Messier, F 156
Messing, SB 165, 214
Mesulam, M 119
Metcalfe, J 77
Metzak, P 44, 149
Metzler-Baddeley, C 118

258

Meyer, K 220
Meyer, M 87
Micallef, J 198
Michalska, KJ 86
Michel, C 88
Michele, M 58
Mickley Steinmetz, K 18
Middleton, E 114
Miezin, F 188
Mikulis, D 118
Miles, JH 235
Milham, MP 163
Milham, M 235
Miller, B 72
Miller, C 224
Miller, E 143
Miller, J 246
Miller, K 199
Miller, M 116, 145
Miller, MB 157, 194
Miller, N 196
Miller, P 67
Millet, G 198
Millington, G 48
Mills, B 69
Mills, G 174
Milner, T 208
Minas, T 68
Mirman, D 114, 220
Miskovic, V 183
Mitchell, J 34
Mitchell, DGV 38
Mitchell, J 86
Mitchell, TV 200
Mitra, P 138
Miyauchi, CM 39
Mizuno, A 87
Moes, P 172
Moffitt, AJ 235
Mohanty, A 231
Moisello, C 130
Molfese, D 200
Molinaro, N 46
Möller, K 180
Molony, J 58
Monk, CS 198
Monteiro, S 44
Montemayor, C 94
Monti, JM 70
Moodie, C 150
Moody, L 80
Moon, E-O 55
Moon, Y-J 55
Moore, A 84
Moore, M 138
Moore, RD 93
Moore, W 233, 235
Mooshagian, E 29, 43
Moran, J 86
Morell, A 146
Moreno, G 102
Moreno, S 97
Morgan-Short, K 45, 188
Moriguchi, Y 134, 162
Morlet, D 30
Morningstar, M 98

Morris, D 85
Morris, J 137
Morris, JP 108
Morrison, A 186
Morrison, F 109
Morrison, FJ 140, 185
Morrison, RG 58, 203
Morsella, E 38, 94, 126
Morton, NW 33
Morton, JB 58
Moscovitch, M 118, 175, 243
Moser, D 63
Moses, P 69
Mossbridge, J 95
Motes, M 121, 189, 203
Mott, K 182
Motta, AA 130
Motzkin, JC 234
Moutier, S 170
Mucha, P 125
Mudar, R 189
Mueller, MM 81, 159
Mueller, R-A 62, 219
Muetzel, R 65, 110
Mujahid, N 127
Mukai, I 157
Mukherjee, P 190
Müller, N 28
Muller, M 73
Muller, MLTM 196
Müller, V 110
Mullette-gillman, O 102
Mumford, J 67, 128
Munevar, G 41
Munhall, K 125
Murali, D 24
Murohashi, H 158
Murphy, AR 193
Murphy, C 202
Murphy, KJ 116
Murray, AM 25
Murray, J 174
Murray, MM 176
Murray, J 26
Murtha, S 62
Murtha, SJE 37, 66
Murty, V 32, 33
Murty, V 154
Musen, GF 50
Musz, E 119
Mutreja, R 177
Myers, C 76, 205

N
Nadel, L 100
Nadler, N 83
Nadya, M 126
Nagel, B 185
Nagel, BJ 70, 89, 90, 105
Nail, J 43
Nair, A 62
Najjar, LM 117
Nakano, H 52
Nandam, LS 235
Narayanan, S 80

Naslednikova, R 128
Nastase, S 196
Natale, E 73
Natsheh, J 76
Naumann, E 132
Naumceska Blumenkron, M 240
Navarro Cebrian, A 209
Navarro, K 178
Nazir, TA 87
Nedrow, J 200
Nee, D 74, 95
Nee, DN 111
Nelson, S 188
Nelson, SM 117
Nemeth, D 72, 217
Ness, V 92
Neufang, M 246
Neuling, T 27
Newman, JP 164, 234
Newman, S 93, 113, 142
Newton, A 28
Ng, R 84
Nga, L 64, 229
Niblett, S 87
Nicolas, A 30
Nielson, K 150
Nielson, KA 71, 116, 149
Nilsson, L-G 73
Nimmo-Smith, I 149
Nishio, S 125
Nitschke, J 184
Niznikiewicz, MA 34, 83
Noack, H 49
Nobre, AC 25
Nobre, AC 71
Nocera, J 127
Nomura, EM 43, 89
Noohibezanjani, F 73
Nook, EC 80
Nopoulos, P 63, 140
Norman, K 111
Norris, C 35
Norris, CJ 63, 164
Norton, ES 98
Notebaert, W 42
Notice, K 226
Nouchi, R 117
Novak, L 133
Novakovic-Agopian, T 43
Novembre, G 222
Novis, S 106
Noyce, A 113
Nozawa, T 161
Nuerk, H-C 180
Nummenmaa, L 83
Nwosu, C 105
Nyberg, L 73
Nyhus, E 246

O
O'Brien, A 240
O'Donnell, B 208
O'Donnell, BF 75, 121
O'Hara, M 80
O'Neil, E 244

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Author Index
O'Rourke, P 57, 139
O'Sullivan, MJ 118
Oathes, D 184
Oberg, S 102
Obhi, S 125
Obleser, J 115, 142, 176
Ochsner, K 35
Ochsner, KN 80, 230
Okada, H 69
Okada, K 170
Okumura, Y 158, 182
Olichney, J 117
Olofsson, J 119
Olsen, R 243
Olson, R 168
Olsson, A 161
Omura, K 94
Onoda, K 108
Oosterhof, N 233
Oosterwijk, S 162
Opitz, B 144, 236
Oppliger, D 145
Orederu, T 160
Orfanidou, E 95
Orr, J 44
Ortega, L 54, 78, 105, 224, 248
Ortigue, S 206, 248
Ortiz-Mantilla, S 97
Ortner, R 225
Oschner, K 34
Osterhout, L 46
Ott, B 119
Otten, LJ 144
Overhalser, L 29
Ozernov-Palchik, O 98

P
Paap, K 207
Pacini, S 156
Paczynski, M 141, 173
Pahwa, D 51
Palazova, M 162
Palazzolo, L 160
Paller, KA 173, 243, 246
Palmer, C 20, 21, 98
Pan, W 186
Pantazatos, S 22
Papa, VB 84, 101
Papalambros, P 157
Papenberg, G 110
Paradiso, S 63, 64, 164
Parasuraman, R 66, 80, 91, 185
Parbery-Clark, A 175, 177, 197
Pardhan, S 226
Park, D 148
Park, G 55
Park, H 192
Park, HY 41, 86
Park, J 139, 213
Park, NW 116, 216, 218
Parkinson, C 136
Parks, NA 124
Parreno, K 178
Parrish, T 165, 235
Parrott, S 78

Passarotti, A 229
Patel, N 248
Patil, P 197
Patriciu, I 189
Patten, C 127
Patterson, B 67
Patterson, RD 149
Patton, JL 156
Pattwell, S 64
Patzelt, E 25
Patzelt, E 43
Paul, P 213
Paul, EJ 218
Pauli, P 228, 232
Paulignan, Y 87
Paulsen, D 127
Paulsen, J 167
Pavisian, B 200
Pavlovic, S 37
Pavuluri, M 229
Pawling, R 232
Payne, JD 18
Payne, J 195, 242
Payne, L 181
Paz-Alonso, PM 109
Pecenke, N 21
Pedroarena-Leal, N 68
Peelle, J 209, 210
Pélégrini-Issac,, M 140
Pell, MD 232
Pelphrey, K 107, 220
Peltier, SJ 198
Pena, L 178
Pendl, S 211
Peng, M 133
Penhune, VB 74
Peretz, I 98
Perkins, S 66
Perlbarg, V 140
Perlman, D 183
Perrotin, A 71
Persichetti, AS 202
Persson, J 73, 146
Petersen, S 42, 188
Peterson, D 166
Peterson, K 213
Peterson, NW 229
Petro, N 200
Petrosko, M 110
Peyrard-Janvid, M 111, 112
Pfeifer, J 233
Pfleiderer, B 61
Pfordresher, P 20
Phelps, E 160
Philippi, C 131
Phillips, C 171
Phillips, M 236
Pia, L 152
Pickering, M 139, 233
Picozzi, M 73
Piedimonte, A 152
Pillai, A 222
Pillon, A 88
Pincus, M 214
Pine, D 106
Pineda, JA 219

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Pinhas, M 70
Pinnow, M 132
Pisupati, A 240
Plank, M 200, 223
Platt, M 102, 127
Pleskac, T 129
Ploran, E 129, 237
Poeppel, D 83, 195
Pöhnl, V 137
Poizner, H 200, 223
Poldrack, R 33
Poldrack, R 67, 128, 186
Poldrack, RA 150, 218
Politzer-Ahles, S 141
Polk, TA 140
Pollok, B 50
Polner, B 217
Polyn, SM 32, 33
Ponjavic-Conte, KD 37
Pontifex, M 65
Pope, K 107
Popescu, T 56, 180, 219
Poppe, A 25
Poppe, A 44
Porges, E 82, 123
Pornpattananangkul, N 235
Porter, M 125
Porter, MA 157
Posteraro, L 201
Postle, BR 96, 113, 165
Potowski, K 188
Potter, A 107
Pourtois, G 90, 107
Power, C 76, 153
Power, J 188
Power, R 147
Powers, A 64
Powers, KE 40
Pozuelos, JP 109
Prado, J 54, 158, 177
Prakash, A 51
Prakash, R 56, 65
Prakash, RS 67
Prather, R 51
Pratt, N 228
Pravetz, E 194
Price, A 209, 210
Price, K 247
Pritchard, S 56
Profaci, CP 215
Ptak, R 104
Pudas, S 73
Pulvermuller, F 210
Pun, C 199
Purdon, S 153
Purdon, SE 76
Purdy, J 97

Q
Qi, Z 30, 31
Qin, S 19
Quigley, C 159
Quraan, M 173

R
Rabin, JS 174
Rabuffetti, M 152
Race, L 168
Rach, S 27
Radomski, AD 76
Rafal, R 247
Ragland, D 44
Ragusa, E 156
Rahni, R 138
Raine, L 171
Raio, C 160
Rakitin, B 67
Rakowsky, S 82
Ramachandran, VS 28
Ramachandran, V 229
Ramachandran, VS 165, 224
Ramaiya, M 156
Ramchandran, K 237
Ramsay, I 105
Randall, B 27
Randazzo, M 99
Ranganath, C 117, 166, 193
Rao, N 121
Rao, S 150, 167, 236
Rao, SM 71, 116, 149
Rapp, B 238
Rapuano, K 223
Raschle, N 30
Raschle, N 98
Raskin, S 174
Rass, O 121, 208
Ratala, C 128
Rauss, K 123
Ravaja, N 83
Ravizza, S 94
Ray, R 29
Raymond, N 43
Raymont, V 82
Raynov, I 128
Reagh, Z 226
Reber, T 32
Reber, P 112
Reber, PJ 217
Reber, TP 47, 145
Reber. T 32
Redoute, J 30
Reeck, C 106
Reed, CL 131
Reese, K 210
Reese, M 50
Reggev, N 212
Reilly, J 69
Reilly, K 223
Reinen, J 101
Reinen, JM 127
Reinke, K 206
Reiss, AL 49
Reiter, K 232
Reith, W 144
Rentz, D 61
Ress, D 197
Reynolds, J 44, 187
Reynolds, JR 238
Ribary, U 201

259

Author Index
Rich, A 152
Rich, J 62
Richman, L 140
Ridderinkhof, KR 234, 236
Ridderinkhof, RK 238
Riggins, T 72, 99, 154
Rigoulot, S 232
Rijpkema, M 82, 94
Rimpel, J 211
Rimrodt, S 240
Ristic, J 156, 180
Ritchey, M 241, 246
Riva, F 107
Rivera, HG 90
Rizio, A 212
Rizzolatti, G 151
Ro, T 223
Roach, JR 126
Roberts, B 166, 186, 192
Roberts, D 208
Roberts, K 181
Roberts, RP 195
Robertson, A 89
Robinson, A 102
Rodrigue, K 148
Rodriguez, S 195
Rodríguez-Pujadas, A 239
Roeder, B 114
Rogers, T 22, 23
Rogers, T 211
Roggeman, C 112
Rollins, L 72
Román Fernández, P 239
Romano, D 221
Ronchi, R 182
Rönnberg, J 95, 167, 169
Root, N 165
Rosario, M-A 52
Rosburg, T 242
Rose, EJ 85
Rose, N 168
Roselli, C 121
Rosen, H 72
Rosen, ML 158
Rosenbaum, RS 174
Rosenbaum, S 168, 243
Rosenberg, M 122
Rosner, Z 245
Ross, B 216, 241
Ross, TJ 154
Rossetti, A 221
Rossi, E 46
Rossi, F 101
Rossi, V 107
Roth, C 145
Rothermich, K 171
Rottschy, C 151
Rowe, K 63
Roy, C 189
Roy, E 89
Roy, EA 216
Roy, M 155
Roy, S 216
Rozek, D 205
Ruberry, E 64
Rubin, D 70

260

Ruby, P 29, 30
Ruch, S 145
Rudner, M 95, 167, 169
Rudrauf, D 131
Rueda, MR 109
Rueschemeyer, S-A 52, 169
Rugg, M 192
Rugg, MD 192, 193, 194, 213
Rumiati, RI 81, 151
Rupp, A 139
Rupp, T 198
Ruprecht, K 84
Russell, M 57
Rustemeier, M 75
Rustichini, A 29, 81
Rüther, N 119
Rutledge, KJ 155
Ruzic, L 54
Ryan, J 243
Ryan, JD 214
Ryder, J 240
Ryff, C 35
Ryman, S 203
Ryman, SG 59
Rypma, B 90

S
Sabb, F 186
Sacchet, M 123
Sacco, K 184
Sacher, M 71
Sadato, N 165, 235
Safford, A 226
Safran, J 240
Saft, C 92
Sahakian, B 205
Saidel-Goley, IN 130
Saj, A 158
Sakaie, K 167
Sakaki, M 64
Sakoglu, U 213
Salemme, R 223
Sali, A 159
Salillas, E 169
Salmeron, BJ 154
Salmon, D 121
Salo, R 155
Salvi, C 58
Samaha, J 87, 88
Samanez-Larkin, G 24
Samson, D 88
Sanchez, DJ 217
Sandberg, C 172
Sanfey, A 101, 128
Sanfey, AG 100
Sanjuán, A 239
SanMiguel, I 37, 176
SanPietro, S 172
Santacruz, S 185
Santander, T 116
Sapir, A 160, 225
Sarter, M 181
Saße, J 88
Sasse, SF 89
Satel, J 158, 160

Satpute, AB 80
Saupe, K 37
Savage, CR 22
Savage, C 99
Savage, CR 101
Savage, G 152
Savazzi, S 201
Sawi, O 207
Saxbe, D 105
Saxe, R 84, 107
Saygin, AP 200
Scanlon, M 110
Schacht, A 162, 207, 230
Schachtman, T 58
Schacter, D 191
Schacter, DL 194
Schaefer, S 35
Schaefer, S 49
Schafer, S 53
Schapiro, A 23
Scheuplein, A 211
Schiabor, K 102
Schild, U 68, 114
Schlaggar, B 188
Schlichting, ML 120
Schmid, MS 97
Schmidt, GL 143
Schmidt, L 54
Schmidt, R 183
Schmidt, S 197
Schmidt-Kassow, M 196
Schneider, M 50
Schneider-Garces, N 48, 88, 89
Schneiderman, JS 50
Schneiders, J 211
Schnider, A 104
Schnitzler, A 50
Schoch, P 136
Schoen, A 183
Schoenauer, M 245
Schoenwald, LI 81
Schon, K 194
Schönfelder, S 81
Schretlen, DJ 210, 238
Schriefers, H 189
Schroeder, C 83
Schröger, E 37, 176
Schubotz, RI 152, 167, 198
Schuchard, J 45
Schuck, N 71
Schuetz-Bosbach, S 222
Schultz, W 30
Schulz, S 132
Schumacher, E 43, 186, 192
Schumacher, EH 183, 186
Schumaker, J 224
Schunn, CD 57
Schuster, J 138
Schütz-Bosbach, S 126, 151, 246
Schwabe, L 75
Schwarb, H 43, 186, 192
Schwartz, M 114
Schwartze, M 196
Schweitzer, JB 155
Scudder, M 171
Scullin, M 34

Seals, U 181
Seaman, KL 154
Seaman, S 78
Sebanz, N 51, 52, 152
Seckel, E 224
Seger, C 166
Seidenberg, M 71, 116, 143, 149,
150, 211
Seidler, R 197
Seidler, RD 73, 196, 198
Sekuler, R 113, 181
Senna, I 73, 153
Seres, P 147
Sessa, P 85, 96
Seton, BJ 97
Severens, E 139
Seymour, M 198
Shadmehr, R 29
Shafer, AT 18
Shafer, A 162
Shafiro, V 177
Shafto, MA 31
Shah, A 156
Shah, P 130
Shamay-Tsoory, S 59
Shannon IV, N 113
Shapiro, AD 51
Sharafi, M 22
Sharan, A 144
Sheau, K 26
Sheau, KE 49
Shedden, J 44
Shen, S 205
Shen, W 115
Shenhav, A 128
Shenton, ME 50
Sherman, A 78, 122
Shermohammed, M 154
Shibata, M 134
Shiell, MM 74
Shigemune, Y 117
Shih, C 39
Shih, P 62
Shih, Y-L 219
Shim, G 41, 86
Shimamura, A 245
Shimamura, AP 245
Shimizu, RE 32, 216, 217
Shin, J 192
Shin, M-S 41
Shin, NY 41, 86
Shin, Y 231
Shin, YS 41
Shohamy, D 29
Shohamy, D 54, 75, 100, 101, 127,
153, 155, 214
Shokri Kojori, E 203
Shook, A 168
Shu, J 230
Siebenhuehner, F 96
Sieg, E 79
Siegel, J 42
Siegler, R 50
Siembieda, K 226
Silas, J 53
Silvers, J 34, 35

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Author Index
Silvers, JA 230
Silverstein, S 44
Silvetti, M 74, 76
Simmons, WK 21
Simmons, WK 223
Simmons-Stern, NR 47
Simon, TJ 88
Simon-Dack, S 79
Simons, J 174
Simonson, DC 50
Sinclair, S 106, 107
Singhal, A 40, 222
Sinha, P 188
Sinning, G 79
Sitaram, R 123
Skavhaug, I-M 216
Skeide, MA 69
Skelly, L 136
Skene, P 102
Skiadopoulos, L 58
Skipper, J 240
Skoe, E 196
Slagter, H 24
Slagter, H 221
Sloutsky, V 225
Smaliy, A 57
Small, DM 21, 22
Smidts, A 128
Smilek, D 53
Smith, CT 24
Smith, A 178
Smith, C 110, 243
Smith, CN 117
Smith, DV 154
Smith, EE 101, 111, 127
Smith, G 97
Smith, JC 71, 116, 149, 150
Smith, K 82, 108, 134
Smith, ME 213
Smolka, E 137
Snider, J 223
Snowball, A 56
Snyder, J 104
So, K-F 133
Sobhani, M 201
Söderlund, H 146
Söderqvist, S 111
Sollers, J 132
Solman, G 53
Solomon, J 82
Solomon, B 240
Somers, DC 158
Sommer, W 47, 162, 207, 230
Song, A 181
Sonuga-Barke, E 74
Soria Bauser, D 201
Sottile, M 196
Souchay, C 71
Sowman, P 152
Soylu, F 93
Spada, MS 182
Spangler, K 31
Spaniol, J 66
Spann, C 192
Spath, S 141, 169
Specker, S 43

Spelke, E 178
Spence, I 160
Spencer, R 118
Sperling, SA 234
Spierer, L 90, 176, 187
Spilich, G 95
Spinazzola, L 152
Spira, D 193
Spitzer, E 196
Sponheim, S 235
Sprouse, J 46
Sprute, L 55
Spunt, R 34, 35
Spunt, R 87
Squire, L 173
Squire, LR 117
Srinivasan, R 38, 181
Stachowiak, C 122
Stadler, W 152
Stanley, B 230
Steffener, J 67
Stein, M 90
Steinberg, L 178
Stenfelt, S 167
Stergiopoulos, E 199
Stern, E 66
Stern, C 194
Stern, CE 158
Stern, Y 67, 77
Stevens, C 36
Stevens, JS 81, 134, 146
Stevens, WD 121
Stewart, R 240
Stickle, L 136
Stine-Morrow, E 210
Stites, M 210
St-Laurent, M 175
Stockall, L 138
Stodola, D 34
Stoettinger, E 75
Stokes, M 25
Stone, L 236
Störmer, V 167
Story, R 158, 160
Stöttinger, E 154
Stowe, LA 97
Strain, J 148
Strait, D 38, 70
Strauss, A 115
Strehlow, J 231
Strenziok, M 66, 185
Stringer, K 59
Strohl, J 66
Stroup, ML 89, 105
Stuss, DT 174
Su, L 168
Suchan, B 146, 201
Sudhyadhom, A 127
Suedmeyer, M 50
Sugarman, MA 49, 71, 116, 149
Sugiura, M 39, 161
Sultan, Z 43, 183
Sun, R 81
Sung, K 233
Sussman, T 231
Suthana, NA 218

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Sutherland, M 18
Sutherland, S 237
Sutterer, DW 96, 165
Suzuki, E 94
Suzuki, S 54, 78, 95, 105, 122, 182,
224, 247, 248
Swaab, T 26
Swain, S 27
Sweeney, J 79
Sweis, BM 203
Swick, D 228
Swisher, J 27, 28
Sykes, L 175
Szekely, A 231
Szewczyk, J 189

T
Tachtsidis, I 56
Taconnat, L 71
Tadimeti, U 209
Tai, S 219
Taich, Z 28
Takeya, R 158, 159, 182
Taler, V 115, 171
Talsma, D 221
Tambini, A 243
Tamietto, M 184
Tan, Y 31
Tan, CH 48, 88
Tanigawa, N 138
Tanner, D 46
Tannock, R 158
Tanoue, R 180
Tappy, L 199
Tardif, T 169
Tardif, TZ 168
Tata, M 102, 122, 195
Tata, MS 37
Taylor, S 66
Taylor, H 106
Taylor, J 247
Taylor, S 87, 207
Telzer, E 29, 30
Tennekoon, M 90
Terasawa, Y 134
Terhune, D 219
Tesan, G 152
Teslovich, T 64
Tessler, MH 121
Tettamanti, M 119
Themann, M 61
Thesen, T 243
Thierbach, L 141
Thierry, G 69
Thoma, P 101
Thomas Friedman, J 170
Thomas, K 25, 44, 49
Thomason, ME 205
Thompson, C 113
Thompson, CK 45
Thompson, E 56
Thompson, G 186, 192
Thompson, J 56, 66, 164, 180, 226
Thompson, JC 237
Thompson, P 49

Thompson, RJ 135, 136
Thompson, W 173
Thompson-Schill, SL 119, 120, 124,
148, 165, 202, 214, 236
Thorpe, S 181
Thwaites, A 149
Ticini, L 222
Ticini, LF 151
Tierney, A 70
Tillman, G 121
Timm, J 37
Timm, MM 93
Tipper, CM 157
Tipper, S 232
Tirsi, A 123
Todd, BM 93
Todorof, A 233
Toepel, U 199
Tomer, R 24
Tomlinson, S 153
Tomory, J 38
Tomporowski, P 67
Tong, F 28
Torres, J 181
Toth, JP 244
Tourville, J 48
Townsend, J 62
Tranel, D 48, 131
Trapp, B 236
Traub, KL 136
Trelawny, Z 218
Tremblay, P 139
Tremel, J 129
Tremont, G 119
Tricomi, E 102
Trinkler, I 41
Tripp, L 43, 186
Troyer, AK 116
Trueswell, J 124
Tse, P 199
Tseng, Y-C 131
Tseng, W-YI 113
Tsujimoto, S 112
Tsukiura, T 117
Tun, P 35
Turati, C 73
Turk, D 238
Turk, DJ 39, 236
Turk-Browne, N 23
Turnbull, O 228
Turner, BO 218
Twieg, P 80
Ty, S 157
Tyas, S 89
Tydgat, I 139
Tyler, LK 27, 31
Tzeng, O 39, 137
Tzeng, OJL 145
Tziraki, M 222

U
Uckert, K 178
Udompholkul, P 32, 216
Uhlig, M 21
Ullas, S 26

261

Author Index
Umeda, S 134, 163
Unger, K 211
Ungerleider, LG 157
Urban, E 237
Urgen, BA 200
Urosevic, S 65
Ursache, A 123
Ursu, S 155
Uusberg, A 102

V
V. Lipp, O 226
Vadakkan, K 224
Vaidya, A 92
Vainik, U 102
Valabrègue, R 110
Valadao, D 203
Valiante, T 173
Vallar, G 182, 221
Vallila, S 187
Valt, C 47
van Beek, AHEH 71
van Bochove, ME 42
van de Meerendonk, N 169
van de Rest, O 71
van de Vijver, I 236
van den Bergh, B 128
van den Brink, R 221
van den Wildenberg, W 234
van den Wildenberg, WPM 234,
238
van der Burg, E 221
Van der Haegen, L 42, 126
van der Linde, I 226
van Driel, J 91
Van Dyke, J 31
Van Essen, DC 150
van Heuven, WJ 234
Van Loon, J 94
van Marle, HJF 19
van Mulukom, V 195
van Reekum, C 34, 35
van Son, V 128
van Steenburgh, JJ 210
van Veen, L 122
van Wouwe, NC 238
Vandemaele, P 126
Vander Wyk, B 107
Vanhaudenhuyse, A 245
Vannorsdall, TD 210, 238
VanPatter, M 65
Vanston, JE 157
Vas, A 202
Vasilev, G 128
Vassena, E 76
Vassileva, J 128
Vazquez, D 115
Velasco, R 229
Velazquez, T 202
Veldhuizen, MG 22
Venezia, J 54
Ventura-Campos, N 239
Verfaellie, M 168
Vergès, S 198
Verguts, T 42, 74, 76

262

Vermeij, A 71
Vernon, B 216
Verosky, S 233
Verstaen, A 245
Vesper, C 51
Vessel, E 65
Vicente-Grabovetsky, A 125
Vijayin, T 129
Vilberg, KL 194
Vingerhoets, G 126
Vingilis-Jaremko, L 247
Virji-Babul, N 126
Vissers, M 221
Vitense, K 63
Vocat, R 90
Vogel, A 188
Vogel, S 50
Vogt, B 246
Vohs, K 105
von Stutterheim, C 139
Voon, V 205
Voos, A 220
Voss, JL 243
Voss, M 65
Vuilleumier, P 106, 158, 230

W
Wagenaar, R 194
Wager, T 35, 53, 155
Wager, TD 36. 54, 101, 127, 150,
229
Wagley, N 141, 169
Wagner Cook, S 244
Wagner, AD 213
Wagshal, D 218
Wakefield, E 74
Waldman, J 185
Wali, E 113
Walk, A 97
Walker, N 239
Wallisch, P 26
Walter, S 159
Wan, NJA 52
Wang, X-J 26
Wang, C 139
Wang, C-T 190
Wang, D 144, 225
Wang, J 123
Wang, S 140, 170, 171, 208
Wang, W-c 193
Wang, X 169
Wang, Y 188, 225
Wang, Z 158, 160
Ward, LM 201
Wardin, K 141
Waring, J 18
Warnking, J 198
Warren, D 102, 212, 244
Warren, DE 48
Warren, KG 76
Wascher, E 61
Wassermann, E 29
Wassermann, E 43, 82
Waszak, F 151, 177, 222
Waters, T 134

Watson, C 120
Weber, J 35
Weber, E 153
Weber, J 80, 101, 127, 230
Weber, MJ 214
Wedin, W 123
Wegbreit, E 229
Wegier, P 66
Weigelt, S 84
Weil, A 143
Weinberger, A 67
Weinberger, DR 96
Weissman, D 158, 207
Weisz, N 28
Welby, L 58
Welcome, S 187
Wellington, R 134
Welsh, R 66
Welsh, RC 140
Weng, H 34
Weng, T 48, 88, 89
Weng, X 114
Wenger, E 49
Werheid, K 63
Wessa, M 81
West, JL 73
Weymar, M 145
Wharton, W 109
Wheatley, T 136
Wheeler, ME 129
White, S 106, 107
Whiteman, A 194
White-Schwoch, T 175, 177, 197
Wiebe, S 108
Wiemer, J 228
Wiener, M 163
Wiersema, R 74
Wieser, MJ 232
Wiggins, JL 198
Wikström, J 146
Wilding, E 175, 191, 192
Wilkie, G 206
Wilkinson, L 218
Will, M 58
Williams, B 229
Williams, M 152
Williamson, CM 36
Wilson, KE 199
Wilson-Mendenhall, C 184
Wilson-Mendenhall, CD 40
Wimmer, GE 29, 75
Wing, E 246
Wing, EA 241
Winkler, A 131
Wisner, K 25
Wisner, K 150
Witthoft, N 213
Wlotko, EW 172, 239
Woldorff, M 25
Woldorff, M 70, 78, 181
Wolford, G 178
Woll, B 95
Woltering, S 158
Womack, K 148
Wonderley, L 29
Wong, A 229

Wong, ACN 177
Wong, F 175
Wong, J 241
Wong, LM 88
Wong, PC 106
Wong, PCM 177
Woo, S 129
Wood, S 214
Woodard, J 150
Woodard, JL 49, 71, 116, 149
Woods, AJ 55
Woodward, AL 99
Woodward, T 44, 149
Worden, MS 246
Woroch, B 243
Worringer, B 151
Worth, A 48
Worthy, D 67, 128
Worthy, DA 67
Wright, P 31
Wright, BA 218
Wright, M 197
Wu, AD 32, 216, 217
Wu, BCY 82
Wu, C-Y 113
Wu, D 39
Wu, D-L 190
Wu, M 170
Wu, Q-y 114
Wu, VF 93
Wurm, MF 198
Wuyam, B 198
Wyczesany, M 39
Wylie, S 234
Wylie, SA 234, 238
Wymbs, N 125

X
Xiang, M 172
Xu, J 184
Xu, P 161
Xu, Y 182, 239, 240

Y
Yacoubian, A 206
Yamada, Y 182
Yamagata, B 26
Yamaguchi, K 94
Yamaguchi, S 108
Yamaguchi, Y 85
Yamashita, Y 112
Yan, JH 95
Yanagawa, T 151
Yang, E 29
Yang, F 190
Yang, J 41
Yang, T 129, 163
Yang, T-H 135
Yang, X-F 83, 105
Yang, Y 215
Yantis, S 159
Yarkoni, T 150, 229
Yarnik, EN 217

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

Author Index
Yassa, M 173, 193
Yasumura, A 112
Yazdanshenas, O 32, 216
Ybarra, O 84
Ycaza, A 229
Ye, Y 41
Yee, D 188
Yee, E 119
Yen, N 59, 163
Yen, N-S 135
Yeung, L-K 214
Yin, J 133
Yoder, K 123
Yokosawa, K 177
Yokoyama, R 161
Yomogida, Y 39, 161
Yoncheva, Y 226
Yonelinas, A 117, 165
Yonelinas, AP 193, 244
You, Y 161
Younce, S 141, 169
Young, D 194
Young, L 107
Young, ME 237
Young, R 78
Youngberg, A 198
Yu, A 219
Yu, J 110
Yu, S 192
Yuan, Y 197
Yuval-Greenbeg, S 247
Yzer, M 105

Zipursky, RB 189
Zish, K 146
Zollman, F 156
Zottoli, T 92, 178
Zuk, J 30, 109

Z
Zabelina, D 54
Zacks, J 22, 23
Zaidel, E 229
Zak, P 228
Zaki, J 34
Zald, D 24, 29
Zamarian, L 56
Zarate, JM 195
Zatorre, RJ 74, 217, 221
Zeien, E 237
Zenisek, SFM 101, 127
Zevin, J 240
Zhang, A 99, 208
Zhang, W 165
Zhang, Y 188, 240
Zhang, Y-X 218
Zheng, Z 125
Zheutlin, A 80
Zhou, R 133
Zhou, X 54, 141
Zhu, D 94
Zhu, J 237
Zhu, T 56
Zhu, X 139
Zhuang, J 31
Zhuravleva, T 61
Ziermans, T 112
Zimmer, U 78
Zimmerman, B 48, 88
Zimmermann, T 43
Zion Golumbic, E 83

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

263

Red
Lacquer
Room

Grand
Ballroom

Registration

Palmer House - Fourth Floor

Exhibit Hall

Palmer House
Floor Plan

264

Cognitive Neuroscience Society — 2012 Annual Meeting

The MIT Press
The Bodhisattva’s Brain

Plato’s Camera

Open Minds

Buddhism Naturalized

How the Physical Brain Captures a Landscape
of Abstract Universals

The Social Making of Agency and Intentionality

Owen Flanagan
"Buddhist doctrines about meditation, compassion, and well-being have begun to greatly enrich the scientific study of the human mind—
but we have long needed a careful analysis of
the philosophical merits of these ideas. In The
Bodhisattva’s Brain, Flanagan has delivered it in
fine style. This is an unusually wise and useful
book." — Sam Harris, author of the New York
Times best sellers, The Moral Landscape, Letter to
a Christian Nation, and The End of Faith
272 pp., 1 illus., $27.95 cloth

Meditating Selflessly
Practical Neural Zen
James H. Austin, M.D.
“It is a book like no other in the field and is due
to become a classic.” — Roshi Joan Halifax,
Founding Abbot, Upaya Zen Center
256 pp., 1 color illus., 13 b&w illus., $24.95 cloth

The Evolved Apprentice
How Evolution Made Humans Unique
Kim Sterelny
“Casts a sharp philosopher’s eye on rather
contentious ideas about how we evolved into
a highly distinctive species over the last few
million years.” — Peter Richerson, University of
California-Davis
Jean Nicod Lectures • A Bradford Book • 240 pp., $35 cloth

Mind and Brain
A Critical Appraisal of Cognitive Neuroscience
William R. Uttal
“Presents the reader with a remarkably complete
and clear understanding of cognitive neuroscience as a field. . . .It is exceptional.”
— Steven Schandler, Chapman University
488 pp., 24 illus., $55 cloth

320 pp., 12 color illus., 34 b&w illus., $35 cloth

Consciousness
Confessions of a Romantic Reductionist
Christof Koch
“Destined to take its place as a timeless masterpiece in the history of science.”
— Michael Shermer, Publisher of Skeptic magazine, author of The Believing Brain
184 pp., $24.95 cloth

How We Remember
Brain Mechanisms of Episodic Memory
Michael E. Hasselmo
A novel perspective on the biological mechanisms of episodic memory, focusing on the
encoding and retrieval of spatiotemporal
trajectories.

Contemporary Issues in Comparative Cognition
edited by Randolf Menzel and Julia Fischer
Experts from psychology, neuroscience,
philosophy, ecology, and evolutionary biology
assess the field of animal cognition.
416 pp., 12 color illus., 18 b&w illus., $40 cloth

Concepts and Fuzzy Logic
edited by Radim Belohlavek
and George J. Klir
"Stands out as a fundamental contribution to
the foundations of fuzzy logic and, in particular,
to the basic problem of concept formation.
Professors Klir and Belohlavek, the contributors,
and MIT Press deserve loud applause."
— Lofti Zadeh, University of California, Berkeley

Wolfgang Prinz
“Makes a powerful, well-argued and plausible
case for the notion that social interaction, culture
and communication design the very structure
and operation of human minds as well as their
selfhood and subjectivity.” — Radu J. Bogdan,
Tulane University, author of Predicative Minds,
Our Own Minds, and others
352 pp., 7 illus., $40 cloth

Individual and Collective
Memory Consolidation
Analogous Processes on Different Levels
Thomas J. Anastasio, Kristen Ann Ehrenberger, Patrick Watson, and Wenyi Zhang
“Offers an interdisciplinary insight, suggesting
the rules of memory consolidation discovered
in neuroscience can be fruitfully applied to
understand the evolution of collective memory
in societies.” — Howard Eichenbaum, Boston
University
320 pp., 9 illus., $40 cloth

Empathy

336 pp., 8 color plates, 111 b&w illus., $40 cloth

From Bench to Bedside

Nurturing the Older Brain
and Mind

edited by Jean Decety
Recent work on empathy theory, research, and
applications, by scholars from disciplines ranging from neuroscience to psychoanalysis.

Pamela M. Greenwood
and Raja Parasuraman
“[A] wonderful new book that provides stateof-the-science level knowledge and thoughtful
analysis of our understanding of aging brain
and minds.” — Art Kramer, Beckman Institute,
University of Illinois
352 pp., 13 color illus., 23 b&w illus., $40 cloth

The Cognitive Science of Science
Explanation, Discovery, and Conceptual
Change

Animal Thinking

240 pp., 7 illus., $35 cloth

Paul M. Churchland
"A must-read for those interested in the nature
and possibility of human epistemic contact
with the world." — Andy Clark FRSE, University
of Edinburgh

Paul Thagard
“Paul Thagard was among the first philosophers
of science to apply the resources of the cognitive sciences to the study of science itself. This
collection of his recent articles provides a lucid
and timely introduction not only to his own approach to the subject, but also to the cognitive
study of science as a whole.”
— Ronald N. Giere, University of Minnesota
376 pp., 37 illus., $40 cloth

Networks of the Brain

Social Neuroscience series • 336 pp., 10 illus., $40 cloth

Joint Attention
New Developments in Psychology,
Philosophy of Mind, and Social Neuroscience
edited by Axel Seemann
"This excellent volume collects together recent
work by leading researchers on joint attention,
in a wide range of disciplines, in one of the
most fast moving, fascinating and rewarding
areas of interdisciplinary work." — Naomi Eilan,
University of Warwick
488 pp., 22 illus., $45 cloth

Cerebral Plasticity
New Perspectives
edited by Leo M. Chalupa,
Nicoletta Berardi, Matteo Caleo,
Lucia Galli-Resta, and Tommaso Pizzorusso
A survey of the latest research, covering such
topics as plasticity in the adult brain and the
underlying mechanisms of plasticity.
432 pp., 13 color plates, 77 b&w illus., $60 cloth

Olaf Sporns
“Synthesizes two of the most exciting topics
in science today, and links the latest breakthroughs to their deep historical roots. A graceful, authoritative, and fascinating book.”
— Steven Strogatz, Cornell University, author
of Sync
375 pp., 15 color illus., 100 b&w illus., $40 cloth

To order call 800-405-1619 • http://mitpress.mit.edu • Visit our e-books store: http://mitpress-ebooks.mit.edu

Visit our

booth

for a 30%

discount

WORTH PUBLISHERS
NEW!

NEW!
LEARNING AND
MEMORY

From Brain to Behavior,
Second Edition

Mark A. Gluck,

COGNITION

Theory and Practice
RUSSELL REVLIN,

University of California,
Santa Barbara

Rutgers University–Newark

Eduardo Mercado,

University at Buffalo—
The State University of New York

Catherine E. Myers,
Department of Veterans Affairs,
New Jersey Health Care System
and Rutgers University–Newark

An Introduction to
Brain and Behavior,
Third Edition

BrYan Kolb and
Ian Q. Whishaw,

Cognitive
Psychology
and its
implications,
Seventh Edition

John R. Anderson,

Carnegie Mellon University

both at University of Lethbridge,
Alberta

Coming Soon...

Human
Neuropsychology,
Sixth Edition

John Krantz, Hanover College

BrYan Kolb and
Ian Q. Whishaw,

Joseph Morrissey, SUNY–Binghamton, and
Pamela Marek, Kennesaw State University

both at University of Lethbridge,
Alberta

with contributions by

This comprehensive online source offers 45+
simulations of foundational experiments.
The Tool Kit can be used with any cognitive
psychology textbook, and its downloadable
data is compatible with a variety of software
packages.

For more on these and other titles visit Worth Publishers at the
Cognitive Neuroscience Society Meeting
41 Madison Avenue New York, NY 10010 www.worthpublishers.com
2012CNS.indd 1

2/24/12 10:01 AM

w. w. norton

B independent and employee-owned
AVAILABLE FOR SPRING 2013 COURSES

Cognition: Exploring the Science of the Mind
Fifth Edition
DANIEL REISBERG
•	 NEW full-color art program helps bring cognitive psychology to life.
NEW
EDITION
COMING
SOON

•	 NEW streamlined presentation makes Cognition even more user-friendly.
•	 Extremely generous package includes the ZAPS online labs, the Cognition workbook, and

	 the student StudySpace website, all FREE.

Cognitive Neuroscience
Third Edition
MICHAEL S. GAZZANIGA, RICHARD B. IVRY, GEORGE R. MANGUN
•	 Most authoritative textbook for your students
•	 Innovative new chapter on social neuroscience
•	 Over 400 new citations

Psychological Science
Fourth Edition
MICHAEL S. GAZZANIGA, TODD F. HEATHERTON, DIANE F. HALPERN
Makes psychological science accessible, memorable, and relevant.
•	 Pedagogy based on the science of learning increases time on task.
•	 NEW “Psychology: Knowledge You Can Use” essays show students what they can do with
	 the information they learn.
•	 NEW SmartWork Online Homework offers practice and assessment opportunities with
	 24/7 answer-specific feedback.

Research Methods in Psychology: Evaluating a World of Information
BETH MORLING
An engaging text that helps students develop the skills they need for critically
examining their world.
•	 “3 Claims 4 Validities” framework focuses on critical thinking and quantitative reasoning skills.
•	 Four-color illustrations and a clear and lively writing style help to hold readers’ interest.
•	 Author continues the conversation at www.everydayresearchmethods.com.

ZAPS: The Norton Psychology Labs
•	 Interactive online labs allow students to participate in classic psychological studies.
•	 Four-part pedagogy ensures that students understand important concepts.
•	 Individual data help students analyze results; aggregate class data available for lecture

	 presentation.

(800)233-4830 n wwnorton.com

